The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Postnatal Development of Two Broods of
Great Horned Owls, by Donald F. Hoffmeister and Henry W. Setzer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Postnatal Development of Two Broods of Great Horned Owls
       Bubo virginianus

Author: Donald F. Hoffmeister
        Henry W. Setzer

Release Date: January 31, 2011 [EBook #35118]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE POSTNATAL DEVELOPMENT OF ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Josephine Paolucci
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.







THE POSTNATAL DEVELOPMENT OF TWO BROODS OF GREAT HORNED OWLS

(Bubo virginianus)

BY

DONALD F. HOFFMEISTER AND HENRY W. SETZER

University of Kansas Publications

Museum of Natural History

Volume 1, No. 8, pp. 157-173
October 6, 1947

UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
LAWRENCE
1947


UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS PUBLICATIONS, MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY
Editors: E. Raymond Hall, Chairman, Donald S. Farner, H. H. Lane,
Edward H. Taylor

Volume 1, No. 8, pp. 157-173
October 6, 1947

UNIVERSITY OF KANSAS
Lawrence, Kansas

PRINTED BY
FERD VOILAND, JR., STATE PRINTER
TOPEKA, KANSAS
1947

21-6958




The Postnatal Development of Two Broods of Great Horned Owls

(_Bubo virginianus_)

By

DONALD F. HOFFMEISTER AND HENRY W. SETZER


Opportunity regularly to observe at the nest the development of young
Great Horned Owls, _Bubo virginianus_ (Gmelin), under favorable
conditions, was afforded when a pair nested and reared their three
offspring in 1945 and one offspring in 1946 on the vine-covered north
wall of the Museum of Natural History at the University of Kansas. The
observations here reported are based primarily on the three young raised
in 1945 when daily observations were made. These have been supplemented
by other observations made of the one nestling in 1946. Unless otherwise
stated, observations pertain to the nest and three young in 1945.


NEST SITE

In 1945 the nest was situated on a metal-covered cement ledge, two feet
wide and 48 feet above the ground, at the northeast corner of the Museum
Building. The nest was protected on the east by a stone abutment of the
building and on the south by the north wall of the building itself. Here
the nest could be observed at will through a laboratory window without
disturbing the birds. The taking of notes was begun at the time of
egg-laying and extended to the time at which the young left the nest,
February 3 through April 26, 1945. In 1946 the owls nested farther down
the north side of the building, behind two cement pillars, approximately
25 feet above the ground. To examine the nest in 1946 it was necessary
to lower an observer down the side of the building by means of a rope.
Observations of this nest were never made more frequently than every
other day. The adult owls were first seen at the nest on February 3,
1946; careful examination of the nest began when the one egg hatched on
March 7 and continued until April 25, shortly before the young owl left
the nest.

One large cottonwood tree, used by the parent-owls as a landing place
whenever they were forced from the nest, was situated approximately 110
feet to the north and a five-story building was located 80 feet farther
to the north. Numerous smaller trees line the street to the east and
there are some on the lawns around the Museum. Also, there are about two
acres of trees 225 feet west of the nest-site where the parent-owls took
refuge when forced from the cottonwood tree.

The nest, if it can be called a nest, was no more than a few bare
branches of the Virginia creeper, which covers the side of the building,
together with some excrement which the owls tended to push to the
periphery of the nest. For most of the time the three eggs in 1945 lay
directly on the metal which covered the ledge, because there was no
definite floor to the nest. The single egg in 1946 lay on the cement
shelf between the pillars and the wall of the building. This laxity in
nest building by Great Horned Owls apparently is not uncommon (see Bent,
1938:300).


PERIOD OF INCUBATION

Incubation of the eggs probably began, in 1945, on February 5, the day
the first egg was laid. It has usually been assumed that, in birds of
prey, incubation begins when the first egg is laid. The last of the
three eggs was laid February 7. In 1946, the single egg was being
incubated on February 4. Since another egg had been laid two or three
days before this--a broken egg was found beneath the nest and there were
remnants of the egg in the nest--incubation may have started as early as
February 1 or February 2. In comparing these dates of initial incubation
with other recorded dates of nesting, only those from places at, or
near, the latitude of Lawrence, Kansas, in the central United States,
should be expected to be approximately the same since the times of
egg-laying and incubation are progressively later in the year as
approach is made toward the polar region. Baumgartner (1938:279) has
previously pointed this out.

The incubation period for the Great Horned Owl in the central United
States has usually been regarded as 28 to 29 days. In the nest under
observation in 1945, two eggs hatched on March 12 and are assumed to be
the first two eggs laid, with an incubation period for each of 35 and 34
days, respectively, and the third egg hatched on March 14 with an
incubation period of 35 days. In 1946, the single egg hatched on the
33rd day, assuming that incubation began on February 2, for the egg
hatched March 7. In the period of egg-laying and also in incubation, the
parent bird in 1945 was frequently disturbed by persons who peered at it
through the window. Curious observers handled the eggs at least once and
vigorous pounding by carpenters in the room adjacent to the nest
frequently flushed the adult bird but did not cause desertion of the
nest. It may be that such disturbances prolonged the incubation period.
However, in 1946, the brooding birds were undisturbed, yet the
incubation period was nearly as long. If an observer near the nest
exposed himself in the daytime to the incubating bird, the adult flew,
but exposure at 50 feet or more from the nest only caused the incubating
bird to remain alert on the nest. When flushed, the parent usually
returned to the nest within 15 minutes or less after the observer
withdrew. On the thirty-second and thirty-third days of incubation in
1945, the crew of carpenters demolished partitions within the building
on which the owl was nesting, and within 15 feet of the nest itself. At
first the adult would fly from the nest at each outburst of hammering
and, at one time, remained away from the nest for more than two hours.
After a few hours of intermittent hammering, however, the parent bird
remained on the nest despite all the noise produced. These observations
bear out, rather than refute, Baumgartner's statement (1938:281) that
"the horned owl incubates very closely," for a strong stimulus was
necessary to keep the owl from covering the eggs.

The egg hatched on March 14, 1945, and approximately two days later than
the other two, is judged to be the one laid last. This owl, III, was
always 5 to 21 per cent lighter in weight than the older birds when
weights for corresponding ages were compared. Whether this difference
was the result of a lack of food because of dominance of the two older
birds, or because of a sexual difference, we do not know. The owl that
hatched in 1946 was likewise markedly lighter than the first two birds
hatched in 1945 (figure 1). A series of adults from Meade County,
southwestern Kansas, shows a pronounced secondary sexual difference in
weight. In this sample the mean weight of 17 males, 1,208 grams, was 21
per cent less than that of 25 females, 1,531 grams.


GROWTH OF JUVENILES

The principal measurement of growth taken by us was the weight of the
owls. In 1945 each of the three owls was weighed daily, with two or
three exceptions when a 48-hour period was interposed between weighings.
The young were removed from the nest to a nearby balance, weighed, and
examined. The owl last hatched (owl III) was weighed on the first day of
life and on most subsequent days. The other two owls (designated as owls
I and II) were first weighed when they were between 53 and 60 hours
old. On some days the birds were weighed twice, once in the morning and
once in the late afternoon; on most days, they were weighed only in the
late afternoon. The owl hatched in 1946 was weighed when seven days old
and at irregular, but usually two day, intervals thereafter. It was
weighed always slightly before midday.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Growth of four Great Horned Owls as shown by
changes in weight from near the time of hatching until the time of
leaving the nest.]

The growth of the four owls is well shown by the changes in weight
recorded in figure 1. For the period during which the young owls
remained at the nest, growth can be divided into two phases: (1) a
rapid increase in weight during the first 3-1/2 or 4 weeks while the
parent birds are supplying the young with ample food; and (2) a
subsequent period of slower growth, marked by fluctuations (actual
losses as well as gains) in weight resulting from the failure of the
parent birds to provide an ample supply of food. If there is an initial
period of about one week in postnatal development in which there is a
rather slow gain in weight, as suggested by Sumner (1933:284), it was
poorly marked in this instance. Owl IV remained at the nest until the
50th day of age, and on the 47th and 49th days (not shown on chart, fig.
1) weighed 1,011.4 grams and 971.4 grams, respectively. By this age, the
growth curve had definitely flattened out. The fact that owl IV was
consistently heavier than owl III might be accounted for, in part, by
the fact that owl IV was always weighed in the morning when it was
gorged with food. However, Riddle, Charles, and Cauthen (1932) have
pointed out that when there were two or more pigeons in a nest, each
grew less rapidly than if there was only one present.

Within about 12 hours after hatching, the smallest of the three owlets
(III) weighed 48.7 grams. During the first four weeks of postnatal
growth, each owl gained in weight, daily, an average of 33-1/3 grams or
an increase of 11.1 per cent. Owl I gained an average of 36.1 grams each
day, or a daily increase of 10.7 per cent; owl II, 37.8 grams, or 11.2
per cent; and owl III, 26.1 grams, or 11.4 per cent. From the beginning
of the fifth week until the time the young left the nest, the three owls
gained on the average only 12.7 grams or approximately 1.6 per cent in
weight daily. Individually, the daily mean increases were as follows: I,
9.6 grams or 0.93 per cent; II, 12.7 grams or 1.86 per cent; III, 15.8
grams or 1.97 per cent. Prior to the twenty-sixth to twenty-eighth day
of age, there seldom was any loss in weight from day to day, whereas
after this period, approximately one weight in four was less than on the
previous day. These data support the earlier statement that during the
first 3-1/2 or 4 weeks, there is a relatively uniform and rapid increase
in weight whereas after this period weight fluctuates.

Growth as measured by changes in weight in these young Great Horned Owls
parallels growth in some other young birds. For example, nestling
Red-tailed Hawks, as reported upon by Fitch, Swenson, and Tillotson
(1946:215), increase in weight rapidly for about the first three weeks
and then more gradually. Sumner's (1929b) graphs indicate the same
pattern of growth in the Barn and Great Horned owls and Red-tailed and
Cooper hawks. Pigeons, judging from the growth curves for bodily weight
as given by Riddle, Charles, and Cauthen (1932), increase in weight
rapidly until somewhere between the twenty-fourth and thirty-second day
of postnatal development. However, in the Golden Eagle, the early part
of postnatal development is not one of rapid growth, judging from
Sumner's diagram (1929a:164), but after the fourth week there is a rapid
increase in weight. Graphs that Sumner (1929b) gives for Sparrow Hawks,
Long-eared Owls, and Screech Owls, indicate that in these instances also
the increase in weight during the first few days of postnatal
development was not so rapid as it was after the end of the first week.
Stoner (1935) indicates that in the young Barn Swallow, increase in
weight was most rapid between the fourth and tenth days, with the young
remaining at the nest until the twentieth day. Much the same pattern of
weight increase was noted by Stoner (1945) in the Cliff Swallow.
Huggins' (1940:228) sigmoid curve for increase in weight in the House
Wren indicates that the period of rapid growth in this species does not
begin until the second day. Sumner (1934:284) cites other studies which
he believes, for altricial birds, indicate three periods of growth, an
initial period of rather slow gain, a period of maximum increase in
weight, and a final period of fluctuations. As previously indicated, for
the Great Horned Owls under observation, and in some other species as
indicated by published growth curves, the initial period of slow gain is
lacking.

The period of a decelerated rate of growth in the young Great Horned
Owls is correlated with the occasional lack of food. The parent birds,
during this latter period, remain off the nest more of the time during
the day, and their failure to provide the young with food may represent
an attempt to force the young to become proficient in flight or to force
them away from the nest site, which amounts to the same thing. When only
slightly more than a month old, the young began to test their wings,
springing into the air, and, in general, becoming more active and alert.
Sumner (1929b:110) has suggested some other possible reasons for the
period of decelerated rate of growth.

Although there was a daily increase in weight in the early stages of
growth, there was a decided fluctuation in any twenty-four hour period.
On any given day, the young always were heavier in the morning than in
the afternoon (see figure 2); presumably they were gorged with food
early in the morning.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. Morning and afternoon weights of two Great Horned
Owls. Note that in the morning the owls weigh more than in the
afternoon.]

When the young left the nest, they were approximately three-fourths
grown. When owl I on the 44th day and owl II on the 45th day left the
nest, they weighed 1,120 and 1,139 grams, respectively, or 73 and 74 per
cent, respectively, of the average weight of 25 females (1,530.9 grams).
Owl III weighed 943.3 grams on the 43rd day and owl IV weighed 971.4
grams on the 49th day, or 78 and 80 per cent, respectively, of the
average weight of 17 mature males (1,207.7 grams). Owl I left the nest
18 hours before owl II did. Owl III attempted to leave when 43 days old,
but for it coördinated flight was impossible and the bird landed on the
lawn after a 150-foot glide. When attempting to take owl IV from the
nest on the 49th day, it sprang into the air and by gliding, aided by an
occasional flap, sailed more than 300 feet before alighting on the
ground. After we returned the owl to the nest, it immediately sailed
forth for even a longer distance. When attempt was made to pick up owls
III and IV after they had flown down to the ground, they rolled over on
their backs and used both claws and beaks defensively. Such a reaction
never was noted at the nest; there our hands were inspected, and
sometimes bitten by the owls as possible sources of food, but the claws
were rarely used offensively or defensively.

Slightly elevated remiges and rectrices, still in the sheath, were
visible on the ninth day. Some remiges first ruptured the feather sheath
on the 14th day; nearly all of the primaries ruptured the sheaths by the
19th day and the secondaries by the 20th day. The amount of eruption
from the sheath for primaries, secondaries, and rectrices, as given in
table 1, was determined by measuring the one feather of, say, the
secondaries, judged to be near the mean in degree of eruption. The
feathers of the wing at 21 and 47 days of age are shown in figure 5. On
the eighth day, or slightly before, the white nestling down of the newly
hatched bird was replaced by a downy immature plumage, which was more
yellowish than the preceding plumage. The development of the plumage in
the birds under observation was much the same as that recorded by Sumner
(1933) in _Bubo virginianus pacificus_ Cassin.


TABLE 1.--Changes with age in certain parts of a young Great Horned Owl
hatched in 1946.

(Measurements are in millimeters)

==========================+======+======+======+======+======+======+======
Age in days               |  19  |  21  |  26  |  33  |  37  |  39  |  49
--------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------
Length of erupted portion |      |      |      |      |      |      |
of "average" primary      |  6.0 | 10.0 | 26.0 | 93.0 | 87.5 | 99.2 |......
--------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------
Length of erupted portion |      |      |      |      |      |      |
of "average" secondary    |......|  5.0 | 25.0 | 60.0 | 78.0 | 95.0 |......
--------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------
Length of erupted portion |      |      |      |      |      |      |
of "average" rectrix      | 17.0 |......| 16.0 | 28.0 |......|......| 78.0
--------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------
Length of exposed culmen  |      |      |      |      |      |      |
without cere              |......| 19.6 |......| 22.5 |......| 24.0 | 23.7
--------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------
Length of total culmen    |......| 30.4 |......| 36.0 |......| 38.5 | 40.0
--------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------
Length of femur           | 69.0 |......|......| 87.5 |......| 89.5 |......
--------------------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+------

Traces of the egg-tooth were retained until the ninth day in two owls
and until the 11th day in another. In owl IV, the egg-tooth was lost
sometime between the 9th and 14th day. Changes in the length of the
culmen are indicated in Table 1. The length of total culmen of owl IV
when 47 days old is slightly greater than the average for three adult
male owls from Lawrence, Kansas (40.0 mm. as contrasted with 39.2 mm. in
the adults). The length of exposed culmen, without cere, in the same
bird when 47 days old is less than the average of this measurement in
the three adults from Lawrence (23.7 mm. as contrasted with 26.5 mm. in
the adults). The femur was measured on three occasions as accurately as
possible through the skin and flesh. The precise boundaries of the
femur could not be determined and the thickness of the skin and certain
muscle is included. These measurements are not given to indicate actual
length of the femur, but to indicate the relative changes in length of
this bone.

Remnants of the yolk stalk were clearly evident at seven days of age
(see fig. 5) in the owl hatched in 1946 and were still present when the
owl was last examined (49 days of age) just before the young left the
nest. The scablike remnant was not noted in the three young hatched in
1945, but close inspection was not made to see if it was present.

The instinctive reactions of young horned owls shortly after hatching
have been fully described by Sumner (1934). By the third day our owls
could raise their heads, but when a bird was undisturbed its head lay on
the nest floor and the wings were slightly spread. The eyes of owls I
and II opened at about 7-1/2 days, those of owl III on the 6th day, and
those of owl IV sometime between the 7th and 9th days. After the eyes
opened, the head was held erect more of the time. The young responded
with "cries" when disturbed by handling, when stimulated by certain
movements of the parent, or by movements of our hands near their heads,
which suggested to them the possibility of being fed. Cries were evident
but weak in the unhatched, pipped, egg, but soon after hatching
increased in intensity, and beginning at six days of age were replaced,
in part, by the characteristic "bill-snapping" of more mature birds.
These cries of the young may serve, among other things, for recognition,
inasmuch as they were given when the parent was inspecting the young.
When the parent returned to the nest and covered the young, after having
been flushed, it sometimes uttered a special note, "hut, hut, hut," much
like the "cluck" note of the hen of the domestic chicken. The young
responded to these notes with faint cries, in contrast to the loud cries
signifying alarm and possibly hunger, which they gave when the parents
were absent from the nest.

The first definite evidence that the young were attempting to feed
themselves was obtained when they were 23 days old. Frequently
thereafter, fresh blood was found on their beaks and claws, but as late
as the 34th day a parent was seen feeding them. That day, after being
flushed, a parent returned to the nest at 7 p. m., and began tearing
away parts of a cottontail which had previously been brought to the
nest. Bones in the hind leg of the rabbit broke readily under pressure
of the parent's bill, and the three young crowded in close, opening
their bills widely and placing them around that of the parent. Of
cottontails, the only parts consistently uneaten were the upper cheek
teeth and the supporting maxillae and connecting palatal bridge.


FOOD BROUGHT TO THE NEST

In the 45 days that the young remained at the nest site in 1945,
ninety-one individuals of 16 different species of animals were brought
by the parent owls (table 2). Probably a few smaller animals, of which
we saw no traces, were caught and eaten at night. In 1946, two
additional kinds of birds were brought to the nest: 1 Baldpate (_Mareca
americana_) and 1 Pied-billed Grebe (_Podilymbus podiceps_). The large
number of Rock Doves in the list can be explained by their abundance on
the buildings on the University campus, including the Museum building
where some were nesting as close as 100 feet to the owl nest. When the
owls were less than a week old, only small birds and mammals were
brought (young Rock Doves, Robins, Starlings, Grasshopper Sparrow,
meadow mouse, and Norway rat). The first rabbit was brought when the
owls were eight days old.


TABLE 2. Number of food items brought to the nest by the Great Horned
Owls in 1945

    Birds

    Rock Dove (_Columba livia_)                       32
    Robin (_Turdus migratorius_)                       6
    Starling (_Sturnus vulgaris_)                      4
    Mourning Dove (_Zenaidura macroura_)              10
    Meadowlark (_Sturnella sp._)                       3
    Red-wing (_Agelaius phoeniceus_)                   1
    Bronzed Grackle (_Quiscalus versicolor_)           1
    Mockingbird (_Mimus polyglottos_)                  1
    Brown Thrasher (_Toxostoma rufum_)                 1
    Grasshopper Sparrow (_Ammodramus savannarum_)      1
    Coot (_Fulica americana_)                          3
    Sora (_Porzana carolina_)                          1
    Blue-winged Teal (_Anas discors_)                  1

    Mammals

    _Sylvilagus floridanus_                           19
    _Rattus norvegicus_                                6
    _Microtus ochrogaster_                             1

After the 28th day, only 18 food items, or slightly less than 20 per
cent of the total number, were brought to the nest. These last 18 food
items brought after the owls were 4 weeks old were no larger or bulkier
than those brought in the previous 20 days. The beginning of this period
of reduced amount of food corresponds to the beginning of the second
phase of growth characterized by marked fluctuations in weight.

Fox squirrels (_Sciurus niger_) are abundant on the University campus,
yet there were no remains of this mammal at the nest. This may be
explained by the fact that fox squirrels are principally diurnal and
Great Horned Owls feed principally at night. Yet in early February,
1946, when the owls were preparing the nest, they frequently flew on and
off the nest in the early twilight of evening while one or two fox
squirrels fed in the periphery of trees not more than 25 feet away. Yet
the owls flew off to the west and left this source of food unmolested.

Whether both owls regularly attended the young we do not know, for the
adults were not distinctively marked. On March 17, 1945, when weighing
the young, one parent bird started to return to the nest but was
frightened away by the observer who at the same time noted the other
parent perched in an adjacent tree. This was the first time two adults
were seen at the same time near the nest. In 1946, two adult owls
(presumably both were parents) were within sight at one time when the
young owl first sailed forth and landed in a wooded area some 100 yards
away.


SUMMARY

Great Horned Owls (_Bubo virginianus virginianus_) have employed as nest
sites the protruding shelves of the stone wall of the Museum of Natural
History at the University of Kansas for several years. In 1945, daily
observations were made on one such nest and its three young, and in 1946
irregular observations were made on another such nest and the one young
owl. The incubation time for the three owls, hatched in 1945, was 35
days for two of the young and 34 days for the third; for the one owl
hatched in 1946, the incubation time was at least 33 days. Two owls were
consistently smaller; when these smaller two left the nest they were,
respectively, 21 and 17 per cent lighter than the other two. The smaller
two were judged to be males because adult males in Kansas average
smaller by 21 per cent than adult females.

Growth of the nestling young is divisible into (1) a period of rapid
increase in weight during the first 25 to 28 days, and (2) a subsequent
period marked by gains and losses in weight. The fluctuations in this
latter period are correlated with a reduction in food brought to the
nest by the parent birds and with the development of habits of flight.
This second period may be considered to be a period of "weaning." By
the forty-fifth day, the young owls are able to fly short distances and
thus are able to leave the site of the nest permanently. At this time
they are about three-fourths grown.

Ninety-one individuals of 16 species of birds and mammals made up the
food items brought to the nest in 1945. Two factors seem to be concerned
in the acquisition of prey: (1) its availability and (2) appropriate
size of the prey.




LITERATURE CITED

BAUMGARTNER, F. M.

1938. Courtship and nesting of the Great Horned Owls. Wilson Bull.,
50:274-285.


BENT, A. C.

1938. Life histories of North American birds of prey (Part 2), Orders
Falconiformes and Strigiformes. U. S. Nat. Mus., Bull. 170, viii + 482
pp.


FITCH, H. S., SWENSON, F., and TILLOTSON, D. F.

1946. Behavior and food habits of the Red-tailed Hawk. Condor,
48:205-237.


HUGGINS, S. E.

1940. Relative growth in the House Wren. Growth, 4:225-236.


RIDDLE, O., CHARLES, D. R., and CAUTHEN, G. E.

1932. Relative growth rates in large and small races of pigeons. Proc.
Soc. Exp. Biol. and Med., 29:1216-1220.


STONER, D.

1935. Temperature and growth studies on the Barn Swallow. Auk,
52:400-407.

1945. Temperature and growth studies of the Northern Cliff Swallow. Auk,
62:207-216.


SUMNER, E. L., JR.

1929a. Notes on the growth and behavior of young Golden Eagles. Auk,
46:161-169.

1929b. Comparative studies in the growth of young raptores. Condor,
31:85-111.

1933. The growth of some young raptorial birds. Univ. California Publ.
Zoöl., 40:277-307.

1934. The behavior of some young raptorial birds. Univ. California Publ.
Zoöl., 40:331-361.


[Illustration: FIG. 3. Young Great Horned Owls in nest. Two owls are 7,
12, 18, 32, and 36 days of age, respectively; the third owl is about 2
days younger in each instance.]

[Illustration: FIG. 4. Young Great Horned Owl hatched in 1946. The two
lower pictures show the developing facial mask. Photographs by João
Moojen.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5. Young Great Horned Owl hatched in 1946. Upper
row: Ventral views showing scar of yolk sac and ventral side of wing.
Middle row: Ventral (left) and dorsal view of wing at 21 days. Bottom
row: Ventral (left) and dorsal view of wing at 47 days. Photographs by
João Moojen.]


21-6958





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Postnatal Development of Two
Broods of Great Horned Owls, by Donald F. Hoffmeister and Henry W. Setzer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE POSTNATAL DEVELOPMENT OF ***

***** This file should be named 35118-8.txt or 35118-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/1/1/35118/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Josephine Paolucci
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
