The Project Gutenberg eBook, North of Fifty-Three, by Bertrand W.
Sinclair, Illustrated by Anton Otto Fischer


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: North of Fifty-Three


Author: Bertrand W. Sinclair



Release Date: October 9, 2006  [eBook #19510]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORTH OF FIFTY-THREE***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 19510-h.htm or 19510-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/9/5/1/19510/19510-h/19510-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/9/5/1/19510/19510-h.zip)





NORTH OF FIFTY-THREE

by

BERTRAND W. SINCLAIR

Author of
The Land of Frozen Suns, Etc.

With Illustrations by Anton Otto Fischer







[Frontispiece: "Oh!" she gasped. "Why--it's gold!"]




New York
Grosset & Dunlap
Publishers
Copyright, 1914,
by Little, Brown, and Company.
All rights reserved.




CONTENTS


CHAPTERS

      I.  WHICH INTRODUCES A LADY AND TWO GENTLEMEN
     II.  HEART, HAND--AND POCKETBOOK
    III.  "I DO GIVE AND BEQUEATH"
     IV.  AN EXPLANATION DEMANDED
      V.  THE WAY OF THE WORLD AT LARGE
     VI.  CARIBOO MEADOWS
    VII.  A DIFFERENT SORT OF MAN
   VIII.  IN DEEP WATER
     IX.  THE HOUSE THAT JACK BUILT
      X.  A LITTLE PERSONAL HISTORY
     XI.  WINTER--AND A TRUCE
    XII.  THE FIRES OF SPRING
   XIII.  THE OUT TRAIL
    XIV.  THE DRONE OF THE HIVE
     XV.  AN ENDING AND A BEGINNING
    XVI.  A BRIEF TIME OF PLANNING
   XVII.  EN ROUTE
  XVIII.  THE WINTERING PLACE
    XIX.  FOUR WALLS AND A ROOF
     XX.  BOREAS CHANTS HIS LAY
    XXI.  JACK FROST WITHDRAWS
   XXII.  THE STRIKE
  XXIII.  THE STRESS OF THE TRAIL
   XXIV.  NEIGHBORS
    XXV.  THE DOLLAR CHASERS
   XXVI.  A BUSINESS PROPOSITION
  XXVII.  A BUSINESS JOURNEY
 XXVIII.  THE BOMB
   XXIX.  THE NOTE DISCORDANT
    XXX.  THE AFTERMATH
   XXXI.  A LETTER FROM BILL
  XXXII.  THE SPUR
 XXXIII.  HOME AGAIN
  XXXIV.  AFTER MANY DAYS




List of Illustrations


   "Oh!" she gasped. "Why--it's gold!" . . . . . . _Frontispiece_

   Roaring Bill Wagstaff stood within five feet of her, resting one
   hand on the muzzle of his grounded rifle

   "Hurt?  No," he murmured; "I'm just plain scared."

   Bill stood before the fireplace, his shaggy fur cap pushed far
   back on his head




NORTH OF FIFTY-THREE


CHAPTER I

WHICH INTRODUCES A LADY AND TWO GENTLEMEN

Dressed in a plain white shirt waist and an equally plain black cloth
skirt, Miss Hazel Weir, on week days, was merely a unit in the office
force of Harrington & Bush, implement manufacturers.  Neither in
personality nor in garb would a casual glance have differentiated her
from the other female units, occupied at various desks.  A close
observer might have noticed that she was a bit younger than the others,
possessed of a clear skin and large eyes that seemed to hold all the
shades between purple and gray--eyes, moreover, that had not yet begun
to weaken from long application to clerical work.  A business office is
no place for a woman to parade her personal charms.  The measure of her
worth there is simply the measure of her efficiency at her machine or
ledgers.  So that if any member of the firm had been asked what sort of
a girl Miss Hazel Weir might be, he would probably have replied--and
with utmost truth--that Miss Weir was a capable stenographer.

But when Saturday evening released Miss Hazel Weir from the plain brick
office building, she became, until she donned her working clothes at
seven A. M. Monday morning, quite a different sort of a person.  In
other words, she chucked the plain shirt waist and the plain skirt into
the discard, got into such a dress as a normal girl of twenty-two
delights to put on, and devoted a half hour or so to "doing" her hair.
Which naturally effected a more or less complete transformation, a
transformation that was subjective as well as purely objective.  For
Miss Weir then became an entity at which few persons of either sex
failed to take a second glance.

Upon a certain Saturday night Miss Weir came home from an informal
little party escorted by a young man.  They stopped at the front gate.

"I'll be here at ten sharp," said he.  "And you get a good beauty sleep
to-night, Hazel.  That confounded office!  I hate to think of you
drudging away at it.  I wish we were ready to--"

"Oh, bother the office!" she replied lightly.  "I don't think of it out
of office hours.  Anyway, I don't mind.  It doesn't tire me.  I _will_
be ready at ten _this_ time.  Good night, dear."

"Good night, Hazie," he whispered.  "Here's a kiss to dream on."

Miss Weir broke away from him laughingly, ran along the path, and up
the steps, kissed her finger-tips to the lingering figure by the gate,
and went in.

"Bed," she soliloquized, "is the place for me right quickly if I'm
going to be up and dressed and have that lunch ready by ten o'clock.  I
wish I weren't such a sleepyhead--or else that I weren't a 'pore
wurrkin' gurl.'"

At which last conceit she laughed softly.  Because, for a "pore
wurrkin' gurl," Miss Weir was fairly well content with her lot.  She
had no one dependent on her--a state of affairs which, if it
occasionally leads to loneliness, has its compensations.  Her salary as
a stenographer amply covered her living expenses, and even permitted
her to put by a few dollars monthly.  She had grown up in Granville.
She had her own circle of friends.  So that she was comfortable, even
happy, in the present--and Jack Barrow proposed to settle the problem
of her future; with youth's optimism, they two considered it already
settled.  Six months more, and there was to be a wedding, a
three-weeks' honeymoon, and a final settling down in a little cottage
on the West Side; everybody in Granville who amounted to anything lived
on the West Side.  Then she would have nothing to do but make the home
nest cozy, while Jack kept pace with a real-estate business that was
growing beyond his most sanguine expectations.

She threw her light wraps over the back of a chair, and, standing
before her dresser, took the multitude of pins out of her hair and
tumbled it, a cloudy black mass, about her shoulders.  Occupying the
center of the dresser, in a leaning silver frame, stood a picture of
Jack Barrow.  She stood looking at it a minute, smiling absently.  It
was spring, and her landlady's daughter had set a bunch of wild flowers
in a jar beside the picture.  Hazel picked out a daisy and plucked away
the petals one by one.

"He loves me--he loves me not--he loves me--"  Her lips formed the
words inaudibly, as countless lips have formed them in love's history,
and the last petal fluttered away at "not."

She smiled.

"I wonder if that's an omen?" she murmured.  "Pshaw!  What a silly
idea!  I'm going to bed.  Good night, Johnny boy."

She kissed her finger-tips to him again across the rooftops all grimed
with a winter's soot, and within fifteen minutes Miss Weir was sound
asleep.


She gave the lie, for once, to the saying that a woman is never ready
at the appointed time by being on the steps a full ten minutes before
Jack Barrow appeared.  They walked to the corner and caught a car, and
in the span of half an hour got off at Granville Park.

The city fathers, hampered in days gone by with lack of municipal
funds, had left the two-hundred-acre square of the park pretty much as
nature made it; that is to say, there was no ornate parking, no attempt
at landscape gardening.  Ancient maples spread their crooked arms
untrimmed, standing in haphazard groves.  Wherever the greensward
nourished, there grew pink-tipped daisies and kindred flowers of the
wild.  It was gutted in the middle with a ravine, the lower end of
which, dammed by an earth embankment, formed a lake with the inevitable
swans and other water-fowl.  But, barring the lake and a wide drive
that looped and twined through the timber, Granville Park was a bit of
the old Ontario woodland, and as such afforded a pleasant place to loaf
in the summer months.  It was full of secluded nooks, dear to the
hearts of young couples.  And upon a Sunday the carriages of the
wealthy affected the smooth drive.

When Jack Barrow and Hazel had finished their lunch under the trees, in
company with a little group of their acquaintances, Hazel gathered
scraps of bread and cake into a paper bag.

Barrow whispered to her: "Let's go down and feed the swans.  I'd just
as soon be away from the crowd."

She nodded assent, and they departed hastily lest some of the others
should volunteer their company.  It took but a short time to reach the
pond.  They found a log close to the water's edge, and, taking a seat
there, tossed morsels to the birds and chattered to each other.

"Look," said Barrow suddenly; "that's us ten years from now."

A carriage passed slowly, a solemn, liveried coachman on the box, a
handsome, smooth-shaven man of thirty-five and a richly gowned woman
leaning back and looking out over the pond with bored eyes.  And that
last, the half-cynical, half-contemptuous expression on the two faces,
impressed Hazel Weir far more than the showy equipage, the outward
manifestation of wealth.

"I hope not," she returned impulsively.

"Hope not!" Barrow echoed.  "Those people are worth a barrel of money.
Wouldn't you like your own carriage, and servants, and income enough to
have everything you wanted?"

"Of course," Hazel answered.  "But they don't look as if they really
enjoyed it."

"Fiddlesticks!" Barrow smilingly retorted.  "Everybody enjoys luxury."

"Well, one should," Hazel admitted.  But she still held to the
impression that the couple passing got no such pleasure out of their
material possessions as Jack seemed to think.  It was merely an
intuitive divination.  She could not have found any basis from which to
argue the point.  But she was very sure that she would not have changed
places with the woman in the carriage, and her hand stole out and gave
his a shy little squeeze.

"Look," she murmured; "here's another of the plutocrats.  One of my
esteemed employers, if you please.  You'll notice that he's walking and
looking at things just like us ordinary, everyday mortals."

Barrow glanced past her, and saw a rather tall, middle-aged man, his
hair tinged with gray, a fine-looking man, dressed with exceeding
nicety, even to a flower in his coat lapel, walking slowly along the
path that bordered the pond.  He stopped a few yards beyond them, and
stood idly glancing over the smooth stretch of water, his gloved hands
resting on the knob of a silver-mounted cane.

Presently his gaze wandered to them, and the cool, well-bred stare
gradually gave way to a slightly puzzled expression.  He moved a step
or two and seated himself on a bench.  Miss Weir became aware that he
was looking at her most of the time as she sat casting the bits of
bread to the swans and ducks.  It made her self-conscious.  She did not
know why she should be of any particular interest.

"Let's walk around a little," she suggested.  The last of the crumbs
were gone.

"All right," Barrow assented.  "Let's go up the ravine."

They left the log.  Their course up the ravine took them directly past
the gentleman on the bench.  And when they came abreast of him, he rose
and lifted his hat at the very slight inclination of Miss Weir's head.

"How do you do, Miss Weir?" said he.  "Quite a pleasant afternoon."

To the best of Hazel's knowledge, Mr. Andrew Bush was little given to
friendly recognition of his employees, particularly in public.  But he
seemed inclined to be talkative; and, as she caught a slightly
inquiring glance at her escort, she made the necessary introduction.
So for a minute or two the three of them stood there exchanging polite
banalities.  Then Mr. Bush bowed and passed on.

"He's one of the biggest guns in Granville, they say," Jack observed.
"I wouldn't mind having some of his business to handle.  He started
with nothing, too, according to all accounts.  Now, that's what I call
success."

"Oh, yes, in a business way he's a success," Hazel responded.  "But
he's awfully curt most of the time around the office.  I wonder what
made him thaw out so to-day?"

And that question recurred to her mind again in the evening, when Jack
had gone home and she was sitting in her own room.  She wheeled her
chair around and took a steady look at herself in the mirror.  A woman
may never admit extreme plainness of feature, and she may deprecate her
own fairness, if she be possessed of fairness, but she seldom has any
illusions about one or the other.  She knows.  Hazel Weir knew that she
was far above the average in point of looks.  If she had never taken
stock of herself before, the reflection facing her now was sufficient
to leave no room for doubt on the score of beauty.  Her skin was
smooth, delicate in texture, and as delicately tinted.  The tan pongee
dress she wore set off her dark hair and expressive, bluish-gray eyes.

She was smiling at herself just as she had been smiling at Jack Barrow
while they sat on the log and fed the swans.  And she made an amiable
grin at the reflection in the glass.  But even though Miss Weir was
twenty-two and far from unsophisticated, it did not strike her that the
transition of herself from a demure, business-like office person in
sober black and white to a radiant creature with the potent influences
of love and spring brightening her eyes and lending a veiled caress to
her every supple movement, satisfactorily accounted for the sudden
friendliness of Mr. Andrew Bush.




CHAPTER II

HEART, HAND--AND POCKETBOOK

Miss Weir was unprepared for what subsequently transpired as a result
of that casual encounter with the managing partner of the firm.  By the
time she went to work on Monday morning she had almost forgotten the
meeting in Granville Park.  And she was only reminded of it when, at
nine o'clock, Mr. Andrew Bush walked through the office, greeting the
force with his usual curt nod and inclusive "good morning" before he
disappeared behind the ground-glass door lettered "Private."  With the
weekday he had apparently resumed his business manner.

Hazel's work consisted largely of dictation from the shipping manager,
letters relating to outgoing consignments of implements.  She was rapid
and efficient, and, having reached the zenith of salary paid for such
work, she expected to continue in the same routine until she left
Harrington & Bush for good.

It was, therefore, something of a surprise to be called into the office
of the managing partner on Tuesday afternoon.  Bush's private
stenographer sat at her machine in one corner.

Mr. Bush turned from his desk at Hazel's entrance.

"Miss Weir," he said, "I wish you to take some letters."

Hazel went back for her notebook, wondering mildly why she should be
called upon to shoulder a part of Nelly Morrison's work, and a trifle
dubious at the prospect of facing the rapid-fire dictation Mr. Bush was
said to inflict upon his stenographer now and then.  She had the
confidence of long practice, however, and knew that she was equal to
anything in reason that he might give her.

When she was seated, Bush took up a sheaf of letters, and dictated
replies.  Though rapid, his enunciation was perfectly clear, and Hazel
found herself getting his words with greater ease than she had expected.

"That's all, Miss Weir," he said, when he reached the last letter.
"Bring those in for verification and signature as soon as you can get
them done."

In the course of time she completed the letters and took them back.
Bush glanced over each, and appended his signature.

"That's all, Miss Weir," he said politely.  "Thank you."

And Hazel went back to her machine, wondering why she had been
requested to do those letters when Nelly Morrison had nothing better to
do than sit picking at her type faces with a toothpick.

She learned the significance of it the next morning, however, when the
office boy told her that she was wanted by Mr. Bush.  This time when
she entered Nelly Morrison's place was vacant.  Bush was going through
his mail.  He waved her to a chair.

"Just a minute," he said.

Presently he wheeled from the desk and regarded her with disconcerting
frankness--as if he were appraising her, point by point, so to speak.

"My--ah--dictation to you yesterday was in the nature of a try-out,
Miss Weir," he finally volunteered.  "Miss Morrison has asked to be
transferred to our Midland branch.  Mr. Allan recommended you.  You are
a native of Granville, I understand?"

"Yes," Hazel answered, wondering what that had to do with the position
Nelly Morrison had vacated.

"In that case you will not likely be desirous of leaving suddenly," he
went on.  "The work will not be hard, but I must have some one
dependable and discreet, and careful to avoid errors.  I think you will
manage it very nicely if you--ah--have no objection to giving up the
more general work of the office for this.  The salary will be
considerably more."

"If you consider that my work will be satisfactory," Miss Weir began.

"I don't think there's any doubt on that score.  You have a good record
in the office," he interrupted smilingly, and Hazel observed that he
could be a very agreeable and pleasant-speaking gentleman when he
chose--a manner not altogether in keeping with her former knowledge of
him--and she had been with the firm nearly two years.  "Now, let us get
to work and clean up this correspondence."

Thus her new duties began.  There was an air of quiet in the private
office, a greater luxury of appointment, which suited Miss Hazel Weir
to a nicety.  The work was no more difficult than she had been
accustomed to doing--a trifle less in volume, and more exacting in
attention to detail, and necessarily more confidential, for Mr. Andrew
Bush had his finger-tips on the pulsing heart of a big business.

Hazel met Nelly Morrison the next day while on her way home to lunch.

"Well, how goes the new job?" quoth Miss Morrison.

"All right so far," Hazel smiled.  "Mr. Bush said you were going to
Midland."

"Leaving for there in the morning," said Nelly.  "I've been wanting to
go for a month, but Mr. Bush objected to breaking in a new girl--until
just the other day.  I'm sort of sorry to go, too, and I don't suppose
I'll have nearly so good a place.  For one thing, I'll not get so much
salary as I had with Mr. Bush.  But mamma's living in Midland, and two
of my brothers work there.  I'd much rather live at home than room and
live in a trunk.  I can have a better time even on less a week."

"Well, I hope you get along nicely," Hazel proffered.

"Oh, I will.  Leave that to me," Miss Morrison laughed.  "By the way,
what do you think of Mr. Bush, anyway?  But of course you haven't had
much to do with him yet.  You'll find him awfully nice and polite, but,
my, he can be cutting when he gets irritated!  I've known him to do
some awfully mean things in a business way.  I wouldn't want to get him
down on me.  I think he'd hold a grudge forever."

They walked together until Hazel turned into the street which led to
her boarding place.  Nelly Morrison chattered principally of Mr. Bush.
No matter what subject she opened up, she came back to discussion of
her employer.  Hazed gathered that she had found him rather exacting,
and also that she was inclined to resent his curt manner.  Withal,
Hazel knew Nelly Morrison to be a first-class stenographer, and found
herself wondering how long it would take the managing partner to find
occasion for raking _her_ over the coals.

As the days passed, she began to wonder whether Miss Morrison had been
quite correct in her summing up of Mr. Andrew Bush.  She was not a
great deal in his company, for unless attending to the details of
business Mr. Bush kept himself in a smaller office opening out of the
one where she worked.  Occasionally the odor of cigar smoke escaped
therefrom, and in that inner sanctum he received his most important
callers.  Whenever he was in Miss Weir's presence, however, he
manifested none of the disagreeable characteristics that Nelly Morrison
had ascribed to him.

The size of the check which Hazel received in her weekly envelope was
increased far beyond her expectations.  Nelly Morrison had drawn twenty
dollars a week.  Miss Hazel Weir drew twenty-five--a substantial
increase over what she had received in the shipping department.  And
while she wondered a trifle at the voluntary raising of her salary, it
served to make her anxious to competently fill the new position, so
long as she worked for wages.  With that extra money there were plenty
of little things she could get for the home she and Jack Barrow had
planned.

Things moved along in routine channels for two months or more before
Hazel became actively aware that a subtle change was growing manifest
in the ordinary manner of Mr. Andrew Bush.  She shrugged her shoulders
at the idea at first.  But she was a woman; moreover, a woman of
intelligence, her perceptive faculties naturally keen.

The first symptom was flowers, dainty bouquets of which began to appear
on his desk.  Coincident with this, Mr. Bush evinced an inclination to
drift into talk on subjects nowise related to business.  Hazel accepted
the tribute to her sex reluctantly, giving him no encouragement to
overstep the normal bounds of cordiality.  She was absolutely sure of
herself and of her love for Jack Barrow.  Furthermore, Mr. Andrew Bush,
though well preserved, was drawing close to fifty--and she was
twenty-two.  That in itself reassured her.  If he had been thirty, Miss
Weir might have felt herself upon dubious ground.  He admired her as a
woman.  She began to realize that.  And no woman ever blames a man for
paying her that compliment, no matter what she may say to the contrary.
Particularly when he does not seek to annoy her by his admiration.

So long as Mr. Bush confined himself to affable conversation, to sundry
gifts of hothouse flowers, and only allowed his feelings outlet in
certain telltale glances when he thought she could not see.  Hazel felt
disinclined to fly from what was at worst a possibility.

Thus the third month of her tenure drifted by, and beyond the telltale
glances aforesaid, Mr. Bush remained tentatively friendly and nothing
more.  Hazel spent her Sundays as she had spent them for a year
past--with Jack Barrow; sometimes rambling afoot in the country or in
the park, sometimes indulging in the luxury of a hired buggy for a
drive.  Usually they went alone; occasionally with a party of young
people like themselves.

But Mr. Bush took her breath away at a time and in a manner totally
unexpected.  He finished dictating a batch of letters one afternoon,
and sat tapping on his desk with a pencil.  Hazel waited a second or
two, expecting him to continue, her eyes on her notes, and at the
unbroken silence she looked up, to find him staring fixedly at her.
There was no mistaking the expression on his face.  Hazel flushed and
shrank back involuntarily.  She had hoped to avoid that.  It could not
be anything but unpleasant.

She had small chance to indulge in reflection, for at her first
self-conscious move he reached swiftly and caught her hand.

"Hazel," he said bluntly, "will you marry me?"

Miss Weir gasped.  Coming without warning, it dumfounded her.  And
while her first natural impulse was to answer a blunt "No," she was
flustered, and so took refuge behind a show of dignity.

"Mr. Bush!" she protested, and tried to release her hand.

But Mr. Bush had no intention of allowing her to do that.

"I'm in deadly earnest," he said.  "I've loved you ever since that
Sunday I saw you in the park feeding the swans.  I want you to be my
wife.  Will you?"

"I'm awfully sorry," Hazel stammered.  She was just the least bit
frightened.  The man who stared at her with burning eyes and spoke to
her in a voice that quivered with emotion was so different from the
calm, repressed individual she had known as her employer.  "Why,
you're----"  The thing that was uppermost in her mind, and what she
came near saying, was: "You're old enough to be my father."  And beside
him there instantly flashed a vision of Jack Barrow.  Of course it was
absurd--even though she appreciated the honor.  But she did not finish
the sentence that way.  "I don't--oh, it's simply impossible.  I
couldn't think of such a thing."

"Why not?" he asked.  "I love you.  You know that--you can see it,
can't you?"  He leaned a little nearer, and forced her to meet his
gaze.  "I can make you happy; I can make you love me.  I can give you
all that a woman could ask."

"Yes, but--"

He interrupted her quickly.  "Perhaps I've surprised and confused you
by my impulsiveness," he continued.  "But I've had no chance to meet
you socially.  Sitting here in the office, seeing you day after day,
I've had to hold myself in check.  And a man only does that so long,
and no longer.  Perhaps right now you don't feel as I do, but I can
teach you to feel that way.  I can give you everything--money, social
position, everything that's worth having--and love.  I'm not an
empty-headed boy.  I can make you love me."

"You couldn't," Hazel answered flatly.  There was a note of dominance
in that last statement that jarred on her.  Mr. Bush was too sure of
his powers.  "And I have no desire to experiment with my feelings as
you suggest--not for all the wealth and social position in the world.
I would have to love a man to think of marrying him--and I do.  But you
aren't the man.  I appreciate the compliment of your offer, and I'm
sorry to hurt you, but I can't marry you."

He released her hand.  Miss Weir found herself suddenly shaky.  Not
that she was afraid, or had any cause for fear, but the nervous tension
somehow relaxed when she finished speaking so frankly.

His face clouded.  "You are engaged?"

"Yes."

He got up and stood over her.  "To some self-centered cub--some puny
egotist in his twenties, who'll make you a slave to his needs and
whims, and discard you for another woman when you've worn out your
youth and beauty," he cried.  "But you won't marry him.  I won't let
you!"

Miss Weir rose.  "I think I shall go home," she said steadily.

"You shall do nothing of the sort!  There is no sense in your running
away from me and giving rise to gossip--which will hurt yourself only."

"I am not running away, but I can't stay here and listen to such things
from you.  It's impossible, under the circumstances, for me to continue
working here, so I may as well go now."

Bush stepped past her and snapped the latch on the office door.  "I
shan't permit it," he said passionately.  "Girl, you don't seem to
realize what this means to me.  I want you--and I'm going to have you!"

"Please don't be melodramatic, Mr. Bush."

"Melodramatic!  If it is melodrama for a man to show a little genuine
feeling, I'm guilty.  But I was never more in earnest in my life.  I
want a chance to win you.  I value you above any woman I have ever met.
Most women that--"

"Most women would jump at the chance," Hazel interrupted.  "Well, I'm
not most women.  I don't consider myself as a marketable commodity, nor
my looks as an aid to driving a good bargain in a matrimonial way.  I
simply don't care for you as you would want me to--and I'm very sure I
never would.  And, seeing that you do feel that way, it's better that
we shouldn't be thrown together as we are here.  That's why I'm going."

"That is to say, you'll resign because I've told you I care for you and
proposed marriage?" he remarked.

"Exactly.  It's the only thing to do under the circumstances."

"Give me a chance to show you that I can make you happy," he pleaded.
"Don't leave.  Stay here where I can at least see you and speak to you.
I won't annoy you.  And you can't tell.  After you get over this
surprise you might find yourself liking me better."

"That's just the trouble," Hazel pointed out.  "If I were here you
would be bringing this subject up in spite of yourself.  And that can
only cause pain.  I can't stay."

"I think you had better reconsider that," he said; and a peculiar--an
ugly--light crept into his eyes, "unless you desire to lay yourself
open to being the most-talked-of young woman in this town, where you
were born, where all your friends live.  Many disagreeable things might
result."

"That sounds like a threat, Mr. Bush.  What do you mean?"

"I mean just what I say.  I will admit that mine is, perhaps, a selfish
passion.  If you insist on making me suffer, I shall do as much for
you.  I believe in paying all debts in full, even with high interest.
There are two characteristics of mine which may not have come to your
attention: I never stop struggling for what I want.  And I never
forgive or forget an injury or an insult."

"Well?"  Hazel was beginning to see a side of Mr. Andrew Bush hitherto
unsuspected.

"Well?" he repeated.  "If you drive me to it, you will find yourself
drawing the finger of gossip.  Also, you will find yourself unable to
secure a position in Granville.  Also, you may find yourself losing
the--er--regard of this--ah--fortunate individual upon whom you have
bestowed your affections; but you'll never lose mine," he burst out
wildly.  "When you get done butting your head against the wall that
will mysteriously rise in your way, I'll be waiting for you.  That's
how I love.  I've never failed in anything I ever undertook, and I
don't care how I fight, fair or foul, so that I win."

"This isn't the fifteenth century," Hazel let her indignation flare,
"and I'm not at all afraid of any of the things you mention.  Even if
you could possibly bring these things about, it would only make me
despise you, which I'm in a fair way to do now.  Even if I weren't
engaged, I'd never think of marrying a man old enough to be my
father--a man whose years haven't given him a sense of either dignity
or decency.  Wealth and social position don't modify gray hairs and
advancing age.  Your threats are an insult.  This isn't the stone age.
Even if it were," she concluded cuttingly, "you'd stand a poor chance
of winning a woman against a man like--well--"  She shrugged her
shoulders, but she was thinking of Jack Barrow's broad shoulders, and
the easy way he went up a flight of stairs, three steps at a time.
"Well, any _young_ man."

With that thrust, Miss Hazel Weir turned to the rack where hung her hat
and coat.  She was thoroughly angry, and her employment in that office
ended then and there so far as she was concerned.

Bush caught her by the shoulders before she took a second step.

"Gray hairs and advancing age!" he said.  "So I strike you as
approaching senility, do I?  I'll show you whether I'm the worn-out
specimen you seem to think I am.  Do you think I'll give you up just
because I've made you angry?  Why, I love you the more for it; it only
makes me the more determined to win you."

"You can't.  I dislike you more every second.  Take your hands off me,
please.  Be a gentleman--if you can."

For answer he caught her up close to him, and there was no sign of
decadent force in the grip of his arms.  He kissed her; and Hazel, in
blind rage, freed one arm, and struck at him man fashion, her hand
doubled into a small fist.  By the grace of chance, the blow landed on
his nose.  There was force enough behind it to draw blood.  He stood
back and fumbled for his handkerchief.  Something that sounded like an
oath escaped him.

Hazel stared, aghast, astounded.  She was not at all sorry; she was
perhaps a trifle ashamed.  It seemed unwomanly to strike.  But the
humor of the thing appealed to her most strongly of all.  In spite of
herself, she smiled as she reached once more for her hat.  And this
time Mr. Bush did not attempt to restrain her.

She breathed a sigh of relief when she had gained the street, and she
did not in the least care if her departure during business hours
excited any curiosity in the main office.  Moreover, she was doubly
glad to be away from Bush.  The expression on his face as he drew back
and stanched his bleeding nose had momentarily chilled her.

"He looked perfectly devilish," she told herself.  "My, I loathe that
man!  He _is_ dangerous.  Marry him?  The idea!"

She knew that she must have cut him deeply in a man's tenderest
spot--his self-esteem.  But just how well she had gauged the look and
possibilities of Mr. Andrew Bush, Hazel scarcely realized.

"I won't tell Jack," she reflected.  "He'd probably want to thrash him.
And that _would_ stir up a lot of horrid talk.  Dear me, that's one
experience I don't want repeated.  I wonder if he made court to his
first wife in that high-handed, love-me-or-I'll-beat-you-to-death
fashion?"

She laughed when she caught herself scrubbing vigorously with her
handkerchief at the place where his lips had touched her cheek.  She
was primitive enough in her instincts to feel a trifle glad of having
retaliated in what her training compelled her to consider a "perfectly
hoydenish" manner.  But she could not deny that it had proved
wonderfully effective.




CHAPTER III

"I DO GIVE AND BEQUEATH"

When Jack Barrow called again, which happened to be that very evening,
Hazel told him simply that she had left Harrington & Bush, without
entering into any explanation except the general one that she had found
it impossible to get on with Mr. Bush in her new position.  And Jack,
being more concerned with her than with her work, gave the matter scant
consideration.

This was on a Friday.  The next forenoon Hazel went downtown.  When she
returned, a little before eleven, the maid of all work was putting the
last touches to her room.  The girl pointed to an oblong package on a
chair.

"That came for you a little while ago, Miss Weir," she said.  "Mr.
Bush's carriage brought it."

"Mr. Bush's carriage!" Hazel echoed.

"Yes'm.  Regular swell turnout, with a footman in brown livery.  My,
you could see the girls peeking all along the square when it stopped at
our door.  It quite flustered the missus."

The girl lingered a second, curiosity writ large on her countenance.
Plainly she wished to discover what Miss Hazel Weir would be getting in
a package that was delivered in so aristocratic a manner.  But Hazel
was in no mood to gratify any one's curiosity.  She was angry at the
presumption of Mr. Andrew Bush.  It was an excellent way of subjecting
her to remark.  And it did not soothe her to recollect that he had
threatened that very thing.

She drew off her gloves, and, laying aside her hat, picked up a
newspaper, and began to read.  The girl, with no excuse for lingering,
reluctantly gathered up her broom and dustpan, and departed.  When she
was gone, and not till then, Miss Weir investigated the parcel.

Roses--two dozen long-stemmed La Frances--filled the room with their
delicate odor when she removed the pasteboard cover.  And set edgewise
among the stems she found his card.  Miss Weir turned up her small nose.

"I wonder if he sends these as a sort of peace offering?" she snorted.
"I wonder if a few hours of reflection has made him realize just how
exceedingly caddish he acted?  Well, Mr. Bush, I'll return your
unwelcome gift--though they are beautiful flowers."

And she did forthwith, squandering forty cents on a messenger boy to
deliver them to Mr. Bush at his office.  She wished him to labor under
no misapprehension as to her attitude.

The next day--Sunday--she spent with Jack Barrow on a visit to his
cousin in a near-by town.  They parted, as was their custom, at the
door.  It was still early in the evening--eight-thirty, or
thereabout--and Hazel went into the parlor on the first floor.  Mr.
Stout and one of her boarders sat there chatting, and at Hazel's
entrance the landlady greeted her with a startling bit of news:

"Evenin', Miss Weir.  'Ave you 'eard about Mr. Bush, pore gentleman?"
Mrs. Stout was very English.

"Mr. Bush?  No.  What about him?"  Hazel resented Mr. Bush, his name,
and his affairs being brought to her attention at every turn.  She
desired nothing so much since that scene in the office as to ignore his
existence.

"'E was 'urt shockin' bad this awft'noon," Mrs. Stout related.  "Out
'orseback ridin', and 'is 'orse ran away with 'im, and fell on 'im.
Fell all of a 'eap, they say.  Terrible--terrible!  The pore man isn't
expected to live.  'Is back's broke, they say.  W'at a pity!  Shockin'
accident, indeed."

Miss Weir voiced perfunctory sympathy, as was expected of her, seeing
that she was an employee of the firm--or had been lately.  But close
upon that she escaped to her own room.  She did not relish sitting
there discussing Mr. Andrew Bush.  Hazel lacked nothing of womanly
sympathy, but he had forfeited that from her.

Nevertheless she kept thinking of him long after she went to bed.  She
was not at all vindictive, and his misfortune, the fact--if the report
were true--that he was facing his end, stirred her pity.  She could
guess that he would suffer more than some men; he would rebel bitterly
against anything savoring of extinction.  And she reflected that his
love for her was very likely gone by the board now that he was elected
to go the way of all flesh.

The report of his injury was verified in the morning papers.  By
evening it had pretty well passed out of Hazel's mind.  She had more
pleasant concerns.  Jack Barrow dropped in about six-thirty to ask if
she wanted to go with him to a concert during the week.  They were
sitting in the parlor, by a front window, chattering to each other, but
not so engrossed that they failed to notice a carriage drawn by two
splendid grays pull up at the front gate.  The footman, in brown
livery, got down and came to the door.  Hazel knew the carriage.  She
had seen Mr. Andrew Bush abroad in it many a time.  She wondered if
there was some further annoyance in store for her, and frowned at the
prospect.

She heard Mrs. Stout answer the bell in person.  There was a low mumble
of voices.  Then the landlady appeared in the parlor doorway, the
footman behind her.

"This is the lady." Mrs. Stout indicated Hazel.  "A message for you,
Miss Weir."

The liveried person bowed and extended an envelope.  "I was instructed
to deliver this to you personally," he said, and lingered as if he
looked for further instructions.

Hazel looked at the envelope.  She could not understand why, under the
circumstances, any message should come to her through such a medium.
But there was her name inscribed.  She glanced up.  Mrs. Stout gazed
past the footman with an air of frank anticipation.  Jack also was
looking.  But the landlady caught Hazel's glance and backed out the
door, and Hazel opened the letter.

The note was brief and to the point:


MISS WEIR: Mr. Bush, being seriously injured and unable to write, bids
me say that he is very anxious to see you.  He sends his carriage to
convey you here.  His physicians fear that he will not survive the
night, hence he begs of you to come.  Very truly,

ETHEL B. WATSON, Nurse in Waiting.


"The idea!  Of course I won't!  I wouldn't think of such a thing!"
Hazel exclaimed.

"Just a second," she said to the footman.

Over on the parlor mantel lay some sheets of paper and envelopes.  She
borrowed a pencil from Barrow and scribbled a brief refusal.  The
footman departed with her answer.  Hazel turned to find Jack staring
his puzzlement.

"What did he want?" Barrow asked bluntly.  "That was the Bush turnout,
wasn't it?"

"You heard about Mr. Bush getting hurt, didn't you?" she inquired.

"Saw it in the paper.  Why?"

"Nothing, except that he is supposed to be dying--and he wanted to see
me.  At least--well, read the note," Hazel answered.

Barrow glanced over the missive and frowned.

"What do you suppose he wanted to see you for?" he asked.

"How should I know?" Hazel evaded.

She felt a reluctance to enter into any explanations.  That would
necessitate telling the whole story, and she felt some delicacy about
relating it when the man involved lay near to death.  Furthermore, Jack
might misunderstand, might blame her.  He was inclined to jealousy on
slight grounds, she had discovered before now.  Perhaps that, the
natural desire to avoid anything disagreeable coming up between them,
helped constrain her to silence.

"Seems funny," he remarked slowly.

"Oh, let's forget it."  Hazel came and sat down on the couch by him.
"I don't know of any reason why he should want to see me.  I wouldn't
go merely out of curiosity to find out.  It was certainly a peculiar
request for him to make.  But that's no reason why we should let it
bother us.  If he's really so badly hurt, the chances are he's out of
his head.  Don't scowl at that bit of paper so, Johnnie-boy."

Barrow laughed and kissed her, and the subject was dropped forthwith.
Later they went out for a short walk.  In an hour or so Barrow left for
home, promising to have the concert tickets for Thursday night.

Hazel took the note out of her belt and read it again when she reached
her room.  Why should he want to see her?  She wondered at the man's
persistence.  He had insulted her, according to her view of it--doubly
insulted her with threats and an enforced caress.  Perhaps he merely
wanted to beg her pardon; she had heard of men doing such things in
their last moments.  But she could not conceive of Mr. Andrew Bush
being sorry for anything he did.  Her estimate of him was that his only
regret would be over failure to achieve his own ends.  He struck her as
being an individual whose own personal desires were paramount.  She had
heard vague stories of his tenacity of purpose, his disregard of
anything and everybody but himself.  The gossip she had heard and half
forgotten had been recalled and confirmed by her own recent experience
with him.

Nevertheless, she considered that particular episode closed.  She
believed that she had convinced him of that.  And so she could not
grasp the reason for that eleventh-hour summons.  But she could see
that a repetition of such incidents might put her in a queer light.
Other folk might begin to wonder and inquire why Mr. Andrew Bush took
such an "interest" in her--a mere stenographer.  Well, she told
herself, she did not care--so long as Jack Barrow's ears were not
assailed by talk.  She smiled at that, for she could picture the
reception any scandal peddler would get from _him_.

The next day's papers contained the obituary of Mr. Andrew Bush.  He
had died shortly after midnight.  And despite the fact that she held no
grudge, Hazel felt a sense of relief.  He was powerless to annoy or
persecute her, and she could not escape the conviction that he would
have attempted both had he lived.

She had now been idle a matter of days.  Nearly three months were yet
to elapse before her wedding.  She and Barrow had compromised on that
after a deal of discussion.  Manlike, he had wished to be married as
soon as she accepted him, and she had held out far a date that would
permit her to accumulate a trousseau according to her means.

"A girl only gets married once, Johnnie-boy," she had declared.  "I
don't want to get married so--so offhand, like going out and buying a
pair of gloves or something.  Even if I do love you ever so much."

She had gained her point after a lot of argument.  There had been no
thought then of her leaving Harrington & Bush so abruptly.  Jack had
wanted to get the license as soon as he learned that she had thrown up
her job.  But she refused to reset the date.  They had made plans for
October.  There was so sense in altering those plans.

It seemed scarcely worth while to look for another position.  She had
enough money saved to do everything she wanted to do.  It was not so
much lack of money, the need to earn, as the monotony of idleness that
irked her.  She had acquired the habit of work, and that is a thing not
lightly shaken off.  But during that day she gathered together the
different Granville papers, and went carefully over the "want" columns.
Knowing the town as she did, she was enabled to eliminate the unlikely,
undesirable places.  Thus by evening she was armed with a list of firms
and individuals requiring a stenographer.  And in the morning she
sallied forth.

Her quest ended with the first place she sought.  The fact of two
years' service with the biggest firm in Granville was ample
recommendation; in addition to which the office manager, it developed
in their conversation, had known her father in years gone by.  So
before ten o'clock Miss Hazel Weir was entered on the pay-roll of a
furniture-manufacturing house.  It was not a permanent position; one of
their girls had been taken ill and was likely to take up her duties
again in six weeks or two months.  But that suited Hazel all the
better.  She could put in the time usefully, and have a breathing spell
before her wedding.

At noon she telephoned Jack Barrow that she was at work again, and she
went straight from lunch to the office grind.

Three days went by.  Hazel attended the concert with Jack the evening
of the day Mr. Andrew Bush received ostentatious burial.  At ten the
next morning the telephone girl called her.

"Some one wants you on the phone, Miss Weir," she said.

Hazel took up the dangling receiver.

"Hello!"

"That you, Hazel?"

She recognized the voice, half guessing it would be he, since no one
but Jack Barrow would be likely to ring her up.

"Surely.  Doesn't it sound like me?"

"Have you seen the morning papers?"

"No.  What--"

"Look 'em over.  Particularly the _Gazette_."

The harsh rattle of a receiver slammed back on its hook without even a
"good-by" from him struck her like a slap in the face.  She hung up
slowly, and went back to her work.  Never since their first meeting,
and they had not been exempt from lovers' quarrels, had Jack Barrow
ever spoken to her like that.  Even through the telephone the resentful
note in his voice grated on her and mystified her.

Something in the papers lay at the bottom of it, but she could
comprehend nothing, absolutely nothing, she told herself hotly, that
should make Jack snarl at her like that.  His very manner of conveying
the message was maddening, put her up in arms.

She was chained to her work--which, despite her agitation, she managed
to wade through without any radical errors--until noon.  The
twelve-to-one intermission gave her opportunity to hurry up the street
and buy a _Gazette_.  Then, instead of going home to her luncheon, she
entered the nearest restaurant.  She wanted a chance to read, more than
food.  She did not unfold the paper until she was seated.

A column heading on the front page caught her eye.  The caption ran:
"Andrew Bush Leaves Money to Stenographer."  And under it the subhead:
"Wealthy Manufacturer Makes Peculiar Bequest to Miss Hazel Weir."

The story ran a full column, and had to do with the contents of the
will, made public following his interment.  There was a great deal of
matter anent the principal beneficiaries.  But that which formed the
basis of the heading was a codicil appended to the will a few hours
before his death, in which he did "give and bequeath to Hazel Weir,
until lately in my employ, the sum of five thousand dollars in
reparation for any wrong I may have done her."

The _Gazette_ had copied that portion verbatim, and used it as a peg
upon which to hang some adroitly worded speculation as to what manner
of wrong Mr. Andrew Bush could have done Miss Hazel Weir.  Mr. Bush was
a widower of ten years' standing.  He had no children.  There was
plenty of room in his life for romance.  And wealthy business men who
wrong pretty stenographers are not such an unfamiliar type.  The
_Gazette_ inclined to the yellow side of journalism, and it overlooked
nothing that promised a sensation.

Hazel stared at the sheet, and her face burned.  She could understand
now why Jack Barrow had hung up his receiver with a slam.  She could
picture him reading that suggestive article and gritting his teeth.
Her hands clenched till the knuckles stood white under the smooth skin,
and then quite abruptly she got up and left the restaurant even while a
waiter hurried to take her order.  If she had been a man, and versed in
profanity, she could have cursed Andrew Bush till his soul shuddered on
its journey through infinite space.  Being a woman, she wished only a
quiet place to cry.




CHAPTER IV

AN EXPLANATION DEMANDED

Hazel's pride came to her rescue before she was half-way home.
Instinctively she had turned to that refuge, where she could lock
herself in her own room and cry her protest against it all.  But she
had done no wrong, nothing of which to be ashamed, and when the first
shock of the news article wore off, she threw up her head and refused
to consider what the world at large might think.  So she went back to
the office at one o'clock and took up her work.  Long before evening
she sensed that others had read the _Gazette_.  Not that any one
mentioned it, but sundry curious glances made her painfully aware of
the fact.

Mrs. Stout evidently was on the watch, for she appeared in the hall
almost as the front door closed behind Hazel.

"How de do, Miss Weir?" she greeted.  "My, but you fell into quite a
bit of a fortune, ain't you?"

"I only know what the papers say," Hazel returned coldly.

"Just fancy!  You didn't know nothing about it?"  Mrs. Stout regarded
her with frank curiosity.  "There's been two or three gentlemen from
the papers 'ere to-day awskin' for you.  Such terrible fellows to quiz
one, they are."

"Well?" Hazel filled in the pause.

"Oh, I just thought I'd tell you," Mrs. Stout observed, "that they got
precious little out o' _me_.  I ain't the talkin' kind.  I told 'em
nothink whatever, you may be sure."

"They're perfectly welcome to learn all that can be learned about me,"
Hazel returned quietly.  "I don't like newspaper notoriety, but I can't
muzzle the papers, and it's easy for them to get my whole history if
they want it."

She was on the stairs when she finished speaking.  She had just reached
the first landing when she heard the telephone bell, and a second or
two later the land-lady called:

"Oh, Miss Weir!  Telephone."

Barrow's voice hailed her over the line.

"I'll be out by seven," said he.  "We had better take a walk.  We can't
talk in the parlor; there'll probably be a lot of old tabbies there out
of sheer curiosity."

"All right," Hazel agreed, and hung up.  There were one or two
questions she would have liked to ask, but she knew that eager ears
were close by, taking in every word.  Anyway, it was better to wait
until she saw him.

She dressed herself.  Unconsciously the truly feminine asserted its
dominance--the woman anxious to please and propitiate her lover.  She
put on a dainty summer dross, rearranged her hair, powdered away all
trace of the tears that insisted on coming as soon as she reached the
sanctuary of her own room.  And then she watched for Jack from a window
that commanded the street.  She had eaten nothing since morning, and
the dinner bell rang unheeded.  It did not occur to her that she was
hungry; her brain was engrossed with other matters more important by
far than food.

Barrow appeared at last.  She went down to meet him before he rang the
bell.  Just behind him came a tall man in a gray suit.  This individual
turned in at the gate, bestowing a nod upon Barrow and a keen glance at
her as he passed.

"That's Grinell, from the _Times_," Barrow muttered sourly.  "Come on;
let's get away from here.  I suppose he's after you for an interview.
Everybody in Granville's talking about that legacy, it seems to me."

Hazel turned in beside him silently.  Right at the start she found
herself resenting Barrow's tone, his manner.  She had done nothing to
warrant suspicion from him.  But she loved him, and she hoped she could
convince him that it was no more than a passing unpleasantness, for
which she was nowise to blame.

"Hang it!" Barrow growled, before they had traversed the first block.
"Here comes Grinell!  I suppose that old cat of a landlady pointed us
out.  No dodging him now."

"There's no earthly reason why I should dodge him, as you put it,"
Hazel replied stiffly.  "I'm not an escaped criminal."

Barrow shrugged his shoulders in a way that made Hazel bring her teeth
together and want to shake him.

Grinell by then was hurrying up with long strides.  Hat in hand, he
bowed to her.  "Miss Hazel Weir, I believe?" he interrogated.

"Yes," she confirmed.

"I'm on the _Times_, Miss Weir," Grinell went straight to the business
in hand.  "You are aware, I presume, that Mr. Andrew Bush willed you a
sum of money under rather peculiar conditions--that is, the bequest was
worded in a peculiar way.  Probably you have seen a reference to it in
the papers.  It has caused a great deal of interest.  The _Times_ would
be pleased to have a statement from you which will tend to set at rest
the curiosity of the public.  Some of the other papers have indulged in
unpleasant innuendo.  We would be pleased to publish your side of the
matter.  It would be an excellent way for you to quiet the nasty rumors
that are going the rounds."

"I have no statement to make," Hazel said coolly.  "I am not in the
least concerned with what the papers print or what the people say.  I
absolutely refuse to discuss the matter."

Grinell continued to point out--with the persistence and persuasive
logic of a good newspaper man bent on learning what his paper wants to
know--the desirability of her giving forth a statement.  And in the
midst of his argument Hazel bade him a curt "good evening" and walked
on.  Barrow kept step with her.  Grinell gave it up for a bad job
evidently, for he turned back.

They walked five blocks without a word.  Hazel glanced at Barrow now
and then, and observed with an uncomfortable sinking of her heart that
he was sullen, openly resentful, suspicious.

"Johnnie-boy," she said suddenly, "don't look so cross.  Surely you
don't blame me because Mr. Bush wills me a sum of money in a way that
makes people wonder?"

"I can't understand it at all," he said slowly.  "It's very
peculiar--and deucedly unpleasant.  Why should he leave you money at
all?  And why should he word the will as he did?  What wrong did he
ever do you?"

"None," Hazel answered shortly.  His tone wounded her, cut her deep, so
eloquent was it of distrust.  "The only wrong he has done me lies in
willing me that money as he did."

"But there's an explanation for that," Barrow declared moodily.
"There's a key to the mystery, and if anybody has it you have.  What is
it?"

"Jack," Hazel pleaded, "don't take that tone with me.  I can't stand
it--I won't.  I'm not a little child to be scolded and browbeaten.
This morning when you telephoned you were almost insulting, and it hurt
me dreadfully.  You're angry now, and suspicious.  You seem to think I
must have done some dreadful thing.  I know what you're thinking.  The
_Gazette_ hinted at some 'affair' between me and Mr. Bush; that
possibly that was a sort of left-handed reparation for ruining me.  If
that didn't make me angry, it would amuse me--it's so absurd.  Haven't
you any faith in me at all?  I haven't done anything to be ashamed of.
I've got nothing to conceal."

"Don't conceal it, then," Barrow muttered sulkily.  "I've got a right
to know whatever there is to know if I'm going to marry you.  You don't
seem to have any idea what this sort of talk that's going around means
to a man."

Hazel stopped short and faced him.  Her heart pounded sickeningly, and
hurt pride and rising anger choked her for an instant.  But she managed
to speak calmly, perhaps with added calmness by reason of the struggle
she was compelled to make for self-control.

"If you are going to marry me," she repeated, "you have got a right to
know all there is to know.  Have I refused to explain?  I haven't had
much chance to explain yet.  Have I refused to tell you anything?  If
you ever thought of anybody beside yourself, you might be asking
yourself how all this talk would affect a girl like me.  And, besides,
I think from your manner that you've already condemned me--for what?
Would any reasonable explanation make an impression on you in your
present frame of mind?  I don't want to marry you if you can't trust
me.  Why, I couldn't--I _wouldn't_--marry you any time, or any place,
under those conditions, no matter how much I may foolishly care for
you."

"There's just one thing, Hazel," Barrow persisted stubbornly.  "There
must have been something between you and Bush.  He sent flowers to you,
and I myself saw when he was hurt he sent his carriage to bring you to
his house.  And then he leaves you this money.  There was something
between you, and I want to know what it was.  You're not helping
yourself by getting on your dignity and talking about my not trusting
you instead of explaining these things."

"A short time ago," Hazel told him quietly, "Mr. Bush asked me to marry
him.  I refused, of course.  He--"

"You refused!" Barrow interrupted cynically.  "Most girls would have
jumped at the chance."

"Jack!" she protested.

"Well," Barrow defended, "he was almost a millionaire, and I've got
nothing but my hands and my brain.  But suppose you did refuse him.
How does that account for the five thousand dollars?"

"I think," Hazel flung back passionately, "I'll let you find that out
for yourself.  You've said enough now to make me hate you almost.  Your
very manner's an insult."

"If you don't like my manner--" Barrow retorted stormily.  Then he cut
his sentence in two, and glared at her.  Her eyes glistened with
slow-welling tears, and she bit nervously at her under Up.  Barrow
shrugged his shoulders.  The twin devils of jealousy and distrust were
riding him hard, and it flashed over Hazel that in his mind she was
prejudged, and that her explanation, if she made it, would only add
fuel to the flame.  Moreover, she stood in open rebellion at being, so
to speak, put on the rack.

She turned abruptly and left him.  What did it matter, anyway?  She was
too proud to plead, and it was worse than useless to explain.

Even so, womanlike, she listened, expecting to hear Jack's step
hurrying up behind.  She could not imagine him letting her go like
that.  But he did not come, and when, at a distance of two blocks, she
stole a backward glance, he had disappeared.

She returned to the boarding-house.  The parlor door stood wide, and
the curious, quickly averted glance of a girl she knew sent her
quivering up to her room.  Safe in that refuge, she sat down by the
window, with her chin on her palms, struggling with the impulse to cry,
protesting with all her young strength against the bitterness that had
come to her through no fault of her own.  There was only one cheerful
gleam.  She loved Jack Barrow.  She believed that he loved her, and she
could not believe--she could not conceive--him capable of keeping
aloof, obdurate and unforgiving, once he got out of the black mood he
was in.  Then she could snuggle up close to him and tell him how and
why Mr. Andrew Bush had struck at her from his deathbed.

She was still sitting by the window, watching the yellow crimson of the
sunset, when some one rapped at her door.  A uniformed messenger boy
greeted her when she opened it:

"Package for Miss Hazel Weir."

She signed his delivery sheet.  The address on the package was in
Jack's handwriting.  A box of chocolates, or some little peace
offering, maybe.  That was like Jack when he was sorry for anything.
They had quarreled before--over trifles, too.

She opened it hastily.  A swift heart sinking followed.  In the small
cardboard box rested a folded scarf, and thrust in it a small gold
stickpin--the only thing she had ever given Jack Barrow.  There was no
message.  She needed none to understand.

The sparkle of the small diamond on her finger drew her gaze.  She
worked his ring over the knuckle, and dropped it on the dresser, where
the face in the silver frame smiled up at her.  She stared at the
picture for one long minute fixedly, with unchanging expression, and
suddenly she swept it from the dresser with a savage sweep of her hand,
dashed it on the floor, and stamped it shapeless with her slippered
heel.

"Oh, oh!" she gasped.  "I hate you--I hate you!  I despise you!"

And then she flung herself across the bed and sobbed hysterically into
a pillow.




CHAPTER V

THE WAY OF THE WORLD AT LARGE

Through the night Hazel dozed fitfully, waking out of uneasy sleep to
lie staring, wide-eyed, into the dark, every nerve in her body taut,
her mind abnormally active.  She tried to accept things
philosophically, but her philosophy failed.  There was a hurt, the pain
of which she could not ease by any mental process.  Grief and anger by
turns mastered her, and at daybreak she rose, heavy-lidded and
physically weary.

The first thing upon which her gaze alighted was the crumpled photo in
its shattered frame; and, sitting on the side of her bed, she laughed
at the sudden fury in which she had destroyed it; but there was no
mirth in her laughter.

"'Would we not shatter it to little bits--and then,'" she murmured.
"No, Mr. John Barrow, I don't believe I'd want to mold you nearer to my
heart's desire.  Not after yesterday evening.  There's such a thing as
being hurt so badly that one finally gets numb; and one always shrinks
from anything that can deliver such a hurt.  Well, it's another day.
And there'll be lots of other days, I suppose."

She gathered up the bits of broken glass and the bent frame, and put
them in a drawer, dressed herself, and went down to breakfast.  She was
too deeply engrossed in her own troubles to notice or care whether any
subtle change was becoming manifest in the attitude of her fellow
boarders.  The worst, she felt sure, had already overtaken her.  In
reaction to the sensitive, shrinking mood of the previous day, a spirit
of defiance had taken possession of her.  Figuratively she declared
that the world could go to the devil, and squared her shoulders with
the declaration.

She had a little time to spare, and that time she devoted to making up
a package of Barrow's ring and a few other trinkets which he had given
her.  This she addressed to his office and posted while on her way to
work.

She got through the day somehow, struggling against thoughts that would
persist in creeping into her mind and stirring up emotions that she was
determined to hold in check.  Work, she knew, was her only salvation.
If she sat idle, thinking, the tears would come in spite of her, and a
horrible, choky feeling in her throat.  She set her teeth and thumped
away at her machine, grimly vowing that Jack Barrow nor any other man
should make her heart ache for long.

And so she got through the week.  Saturday evening came, and she went
home, dreading Sunday's idleness, with its memories.  The people at
Mrs. Stout's establishment, she plainly saw, were growing a trifle shy
of her.  She had never been on terms of intimacy with any of them
during her stay there, hence their attitude troubled little after the
first supersensitiveness wore off.  But her own friends, girls with
whom she had played in the pinafore-and-pigtail stages of her youth,
young men who had paid court to her until Jack Barrow monopolized
her--she did not know how they stood.  She had seen none of them since
Bush launched his last bolt.  Barrow she had passed on the street just
once, and when he lifted his hat distantly, she looked straight ahead,
and ignored him.  Whether she hurt him as much as she did herself by
the cut direct would be hard to say.

On Saturday evenings and Sunday afternoons ordinarily from two to a
dozen girl friends called her up at the boarding-house, or dropped in
by ones and twos to chat a while, tease her about Jack, or plan some
mild frivolity.  Hazel went home, wondering if they, too, would stand
aloof.

When Sunday noon arrived, and the phone had failed to call her once,
and not one of all her friends had dropped in, Hazel twisted her chair
so that she could stare at the image of herself in the mirror.

"You're in a fair way to become a pariah, it seems," she said bitterly.
"What have you done, I wonder, that you've lost your lover, and that
Alice and May and Hortense and all the rest of them keep away from you?
Nothing--not a thing--except that your looks attracted a man, and the
man threw stones when he couldn't have his way.  Oh, well, what's the
difference?  You've got two good hands, and you're not afraid of work."

She walked out to Granville Park after luncheon, and found a seat on a
shaded bench beside the lake.  People passed and repassed--couples,
youngsters, old people, children.  It made her lonely beyond measure.
She had never been isolated among her own kind before.  She could not
remember a time when she had gone to Granville Park by herself.  But
she was learning fast to stand on her own feet.

A group of young people came sauntering along the path.  Hazel looked
up as they neared her, chattering to each other.  Maud Steele and Bud
Wells, and--why, she knew every one of the party.  They were swinging
an empty picnic basket, and laughing at everything and nothing.  Hazel
caught her breath as they came abreast, not over ten feet away.  The
three young men raised their hats self-consciously.

"Hello, Hazel!" the girl said.

But they passed on.  It seemed to Hazel that they quickened their pace
a trifle.  It made her grit her teeth in resentful anger.  Ten minutes
later she left the park and caught a car home.  Once in her room she
broke down.

"Oh, I'll go mad if I stay here and this sort of thing goes on!" she
cried forlornly.

A sudden thought struck her.

"Why _should_ I stay here?" she said aloud.  "Why?  What's to keep me
here?  I can make my living anywhere."

"But, no," she asserted passionately, "I won't run away.  That would be
running away, and I haven't anything to be ashamed of.  I will _not_
run."

Still the idea kept recurring to her.  It promised relief from the hurt
of averted faces and coolness where she had a right to expect sympathy
and friendship.  She had never been more than two hundred miles from
Granville in her life.  But she knew that a vast, rich land spread
south and west.  She was human and thoroughly feminine; loneliness
appalled her, and she had never suffered as Granville at large was
making her suffer.

The legal notice of the bequest was mailed to her.  She tore up the
letter and threw it in the fire as if it were some poisonous thing.
The idea of accepting his money stirred her to a perfect frenzy.  That
was piling it up.

All during the next week she worked at her machine in the office of the
furniture company, keeping strictly to herself, doing her work
impassively, efficiently, betraying no sign of the feelings that
sometimes rose up, the despairing protest and angry rebellion against
the dubious position she was in through no fault of her own.  She swore
she would not leave Granville, and it galled her to stay.  It was a
losing fight, and she knew it even if she did not admit the fact.  If
she could have poured the whole miserable tale into some sympathetic
ear she would have felt better, and each day would have seemed less
hard.  But there was no such ear.  Her friends kept away.

Saturday of the second week her pay envelope contained a brief notice
that the firm no longer required her services.  There was no
explanation, only perfunctory regrets; and, truth to tell, Hazel cared
little to know the real cause.  Any one of a number of reasons might
have been sufficient.  But she realized how those who knew her would
take it, what cause they would ascribe.  It did not matter, though.
The very worst, she reasoned, could not be so bad as what had already
happened--could be no more disagreeable than the things she had endured
in the past two weeks.  Losing a position was a trifle.  But it set her
thinking again.

"It doesn't seem to be a case of flight," she reflected on her way
home, "so much as a case of being frozen out, compelled to go.  I can't
stay here and be idle.  I have to work in order to live.  Well, I'm not
gone yet."

She stopped at a news stand and bought the evening papers.  Up in the
top rack of the stand the big heads of an assorted lot of Western
papers caught her eye.  She bought two or three on the impulse of the
moment, without any definite purpose except to look them over out of
mere curiosity.  With these tucked under her arm, she turned into the
boarding-house gate, ran up the steps, and, upon opening the door, her
ears were gladdened by the first friendly voice she had heard--it
seemed to her--in ages, a voice withal that she had least expected to
hear.  A short, plump woman rushed out of the parlor, and precipitated
herself bodily upon Hazel.

"Kitty Ryan!  Where in the wide, wide world did you come from?" Hazel
cried.

"From the United States and everywhere," Miss Ryan replied.  "Take me
up to your room, dear, where we can talk our heads off.

"And, furthermore, Hazie, I'll be pleased to have you address me as
Mrs. Brooks, my dear young woman," the plump lady laughed, as she
settled herself in a chair in Hazel's room.

"So you're married?" Hazel said.

"I am that," Mrs. Kitty responded emphatically, "to the best boy that
ever drew breath.  And so should you be, dear girl.  I don't see how
you've escaped so long--a good-looking girl like you.  The boys were
always crazy after you.  There's nothing like having a good man to take
care of you, dear."

"Heaven save me from them!" Hazel answered bitterly.  "If you've got a
good one, you're lucky.  I can't see them as anything but
self-centered, arrogant, treacherous brutes."

"Lord bless us--it's worse than I thought!"  Kitty jumped up and threw
her arms around Hazel.  "There, there--don't waste a tear on them.  I
know all about it.  I came over to see you just as soon as some of the
girls--nasty little cats they are; a woman's always meaner than a man,
dear--just as soon as they gave me an inkling of how things were going
with you.  Pshaw!  The world's full of good, decent fellows--and you've
got one coming."

"I hope not," Hazel protested.

"Oh, yes, you have," Mrs. Brooks smilingly assured her.  "A woman
without a man is only half a human being, anyway, you know--and vice
versa.  I know.  We can cuss the men all we want to, my dear, and some
of us unfortunately have a nasty experience with one now and then.  But
we can't get away from the fundamental laws of being."

"If you'd had my experience of the last two weeks you'd sing a
different tune," Hazel vehemently declared.  "I hate--I--"

And then she gave way, and indulged in the luxury of turning herself
loose on Kitty's shoulder.  Presently she was able to wipe her eyes and
relate the whole story from the Sunday Mr. Bush stopped and spoke to
her in the park down to that evening.

Kitty nodded understandingly.  "But the girls have handed it to you
worse than the men, Hazel," she observed sagely.  "Jack Barrow was just
plain crazy jealous, and a man like that can't help acting as he did.
You're really fortunate, I think, because you'd not be really happy
with a man like that.  But the girls that you and I grew up with--they
should have stood by you, knowing you as they did; yet you see they
were ready to think the worst of you.  They nearly always do when
there's a man in the case.  That's a weakness of our sex, dear.  My,
what a vindictive old Turk that Bush must have been!  Well, you aren't
working.  Come and stay with me.  Hubby's got a two-year contract with
the World Advertising Company.  We'll be located here that long at
least.  Come and stay with us.  We'll show these little-minded folk a
thing or two.  Leave it to us."

"Oh, no, I couldn't think of that, Kitty!" Hazel faltered.  "You know
I'd love to, and it's awfully good of you, but I think I'm just about
ready to go away from Granville."

"Well, come and stop with us till you do go," Kitty insisted.  "We are
going to take a furnished cottage for a while.  Though, between you and
me, dear, knowing people as I do, I can't blame you for wanting to be
where their nasty tongues can't wound you."

But Hazel was obdurate.  She would not inflict herself on the one
friend she had left.  And Kitty, after a short talk, berated her
affectionately for her independence, and rose to go.

"For," said she, "I didn't get hold of this thing till Addie Horton
called at the hotel this afternoon, and I didn't stop to think that it
was near teatime, but came straight here.  Jimmie'll think I've eloped.
So ta-ta.  I'll come out to-morrow about two.  I have to confab with a
house agent in the forenoon.  By-by."

Hazel sat down and actually smiled when Kitty was gone.  Somehow a
grievous burden had fallen off her mind.  Likewise, by some
psychological quirk, the idea of leaving Granville and making her home
elsewhere no longer struck her as running away under fire.  She did not
wish to subject Kitty Brooks to the difficulties, the embarrassment
that might arise from having her as a guest; but the mere fact that
Kitty stood stanchly by her made the world seem less harsh and dreary,
made it seem as if she had, in a measure, justified herself.  She felt
that she could adventure forth among strangers in a strange country
with a better heart, knowing that Kitty Brooks would put a swift
quietus on any gossip that came her way.

So that Hazel went down to the dining-room light-heartedly, and when
the meal was finished came back and fell to reading her papers.  The
first of the Western papers was a Vancouver _World_.  In a real-estate
man's half-page she found a diminutive sketch plan of the city on the
shores of Burrard Inlet, Canada's principal outpost on the far Pacific.

"It's quite a big place," she murmured absently.  "One would be far
enough away there, goodness knows."

Then she turned to the "Help Wanted" advertisements.  The thing which
impressed her quickly and most vividly was the dearth of demand for
clerks and stenographers, and the repeated calls for domestic help and
such.  Domestic service she shrank from except as a last resort.  And
down near the bottom of the column she happened on an inquiry for a
school-teacher, female preferred, in an out-of-the-way district in the
interior of the province.

"Now, that--" Hazel thought.

She had a second-class certificate tucked away among her belongings.
Originally it had been her intention to teach, and she had done so one
term in a backwoods school when she was eighteen.  With the ending of
the term she had returned to Granville, studied that winter, and got
her second certificate; but at the same time she had taken a
business-college course, and the following June found her clacking a
typewriter at nine dollars a week.  And her teacher's diploma had
remained in the bottom of her trunk ever since.

"I could teach, I suppose, by rubbing up a little on one or two
subjects as I went along," she reflected.  "I wonder now--"

What she wondered was how much salary she could expect, and she took up
the paper again, and looked carefully for other advertisements calling
for teachers.  In the _World_ and in a Winnipeg paper she found one or
two vacancies to fill out the fall term, and gathered that Western
schools paid from fifty to sixty dollars a month for "schoolma'ams"
with certificates such as she held.

"Why not?" she asked herself.  "I've got two resources.  If I can't get
office work I can teach.  I can do _anything_ if I have to.  And it's
far enough away, in all conscience--all of twenty-five hundred miles."

Unaccountably, since Kitty Brooks' visit, she found herself itching to
turn her back on Granville and its unpleasant associations.  She did
not attempt to analyze the feeling.  Strange lands, and most of all the
West, held alluring promise.  She sat in her rocker, and could not help
but dream of places where people were a little broader gauge, a little
less prone to narrow, conventional judgments.  Other people had done as
she proposed doing--cut loose from their established environment, and
made a fresh start in countries where none knew or cared whence they
came or who they were.  Why not she?  One thing was certain: Granville,
for all she had been born there, and grown to womanhood there, was now
no place for her.  The very people who knew her best would make her
suffer most.

She spent that evening going thoroughly over the papers and writing
letters to various school boards, taking a chance at one or two she
found in the Manitoba paper, but centering her hopes on the country
west of the Rockies.  Her letters finished, she took stock of her
resources--verified them, rather, for she had not so much money that
she did not know almost where she stood.  Her savings in the bank
amounted to three hundred odd dollars, and cash in hand brought the sum
to a total of three hundred and sixty-five.  At any rate, she had
sufficient to insure her living for quite a long time.  And she went to
bed feeling better than she had felt for two weeks.

Kitty Brooks came again the next afternoon, and, being a young woman of
wide experience and good sense, made no further attempt to influence
Hazel one way or the other.

"I hate to see you go, though," she remarked truthfully.  "But you'll
like the West--if it happens that you go there.  You'll like it better
than the East; there's a different sort of spirit among the people.
I've traveled over some of it, and if Jimmie's business permitted we'd
both like to live there.  And--getting down to strictly practical
things--a girl can make a much better living there.  Wages are high.
And--who knows?--you might capture a cattle king."

Hazel shrugged her shoulders, and Mrs. Kitty forbore teasing.  After
that they gossiped and compared notes covering the two years since they
had met until it was time for Kitty to go home.

Very shortly thereafter--almost, it seemed, by return mail--Hazel got
replies to her letters of inquiry.  The fact that each and every one
seemed bent on securing her services astonished her.

"Schoolma'ams must certainly be scarce out there," she told herself.
"This is an embarrassment of riches.  I'm going somewhere, but which
place shall it be?"

But the reply from Cariboo Meadows, B. C., the first place she had
thought of, decided her.  The member of the school board who replied
held forth the natural beauty of the country as much as he did the
advantages of the position.  The thing that perhaps made the strongest
appeal to Hazel was a little kodak print inclosed in the letter,
showing the schoolhouse.

The building itself was primitive enough, of logs, with a pole-and-sod
roof.  But it was the huge background, the timbered mountains rising to
snow-clad heights against a cloudless sky, that attracted her.  She had
never seen a greater height of land than the rolling hills of Ontario.
Here was a frontier, big and new and raw, holding out to her as she
stared at the print a promise--of what?  She did not know.  Adventure?
If she desired adventure, it was purely a subconscious desire.  But she
had lived in a rut a long time without realizing it more than vaguely,
and there was something in her nature that responded instantly when she
contemplated journeying alone into a far country.  She found herself
hungering for change, for a measure of freedom from petty restraints,
for elbow-room in the wide spaces, where one's neighbor might be ten or
forty miles away.  She knew nothing whatever of such a life, but she
could feel a certain envy of those who led it.

She sat for a long time looking at the picture, thinking.  Here was the
concrete, visible presentment of something that drew her strongly.  She
found an atlas, and looked up Cariboo Meadows on the map.  It was not
to be found, and Hazel judged it to be a purely local name.  But the
letter told her that she would have to stage it a hundred and
sixty-five miles north from Ashcroft, B. C., where the writer would
meet her and drive her to the Meadows.  She located the stage-line
terminal on the map, and ran her forefinger over the route.  Mountain
and lake and stream lined and dotted and criss-crossed the province
from end to end of its seven-hundred-mile length.  Back of where
Cariboo Meadows should be three or four mining camps snuggled high in
the mountains.

"What a country!" she whispered.  "It's wild; really, truly wild; and
everything I've ever seen has been tamed and smoothed down, and made
eminently respectable and conventional long ago.  That's the place.
That's where I'm going, and I'm going it blind.  I'm not going to tell
any one--not even Kitty--until, like a bear, I've gone over the
mountain to see what I can see."

Within an hour of that Miss Hazel Weir had written to accept the terms
offered by the Cariboo Meadow school district, and was busily packing
her trunk.




CHAPTER VI

CARIBOO MEADOWS

A tall man, sunburned, slow-speaking, met Hazel at Soda Creek, the end
of her stage journey, introducing himself as Jim Briggs.

"Pretty tiresome trip, ain't it?" he observed.  "You'll have a chance
to rest decent to-night, and I got a team uh bays that'll yank yuh to
the Meadows in four hours 'n' a half.  My wife'll be plumb tickled to
have yuh.  They ain't much more'n half a dozen white women in ten miles
uh the Meadows.  We keep a boardin'-house.  Hope you'll like the
country."

That was a lengthy speech for Jim Briggs, as Hazel discovered when she
rolled out of Soda Creek behind the "team uh bays."  His conversation
was decidedly monosyllabic.  But he could drive, if he was no talker,
and his team could travel.  The road, albeit rough in spots, a mere
track through timber and little gems of open where the yellowing grass
waved knee-high, and over hills which sloped to deep cañons lined with
pine and spruce, seemed short enough.  And so by eleven o'clock Hazel
found herself at Cariboo Meadows.

"Schoolhouse's over yonder."  Briggs pointed out the place--an
unnecessary guidance, for Hazel had already marked the building set off
by itself and fortified with a tall flagpole.  "And here's where we
live.  Kinda out uh the world, but blame good place to live."

Hazel did like the place.  Her first impression was thankfulness that
her lot had been cast in such a spot.  But it was largely because of
the surroundings, essentially primitive, the clean air, guiltless of
smoke taint, the aromatic odors from the forest that ranged for
unending miles on every hand.  For the first time in her life, she was
beyond hearing of the clang of street cars, the roar of traffic, the
dirt and smells of a city.  It seemed good.  She had no regrets, no
longing to be back.  There was a pain sometimes, when in spite of
herself she would fall to thinking of Jack Barrow.  But that she looked
upon as a closed chapter.  He had hurt her where a woman can be most
deeply wounded--in her pride and her affections--and the hurt was
dulled by the smoldering resentment that thinking of him always fanned
to a flame.  Miss Hazel Weir was neither meek nor mild, even if her
environment had bred in her a repression that had become second nature.

So with the charm of the wild land fresh upon her, she took kindly to
Cariboo Meadows.  The immediate, disagreeable past bade fair to become
as remote in reality as the distance made it seem.  Surely no ghosts
would walk here to make people look askance at her.

Her first afternoon she spent loafing on the porch of the Briggs
domicile, within which Mrs. Briggs, a fat, good-natured person of
forty, toiled at her cooking for the "boarders," and kept a brood of
five tumultuous youngsters in order--the combined tasks leaving her
scant time to entertain her newly arrived guest.  From the vantage
ground of the porch Hazel got her first glimpse of the turns life
occasionally takes when there is no policeman just around the corner.

Cariboo Meadows, as a town, was simply a double row of buildings facing
each other across a wagon road.  Two stores, a blacksmith shop, a feed
stable, certain other nondescript buildings, and a few dwellings,
mostly of logs, was all.  Probably not more than a total of fifty souls
made permanent residence there.  But the teams of ranchers stood in the
street, and a few saddled cow ponies whose listlessness was mostly
assumed.  Before one of the general stores a prospector fussed with a
string of pack horses.  Directly opposite Briggs' boarding-house stood
a building labeled "Regent Hotel."  Hazel could envisage it all with a
half turn of her head.

From this hotel there presently issued a young man dressed in the
ordinary costume of the country--wide hat, flannel shirt, overalls,
boots.  He sat down on a box close by the hotel entrance.  In a few
minutes another came forth.  He walked past the first a few steps,
stopped, and said something.  Hazel could not hear the words.  The
first man was filling a pipe.  Apparently he made no reply; at least,
he did not trouble to look up.  But she saw his shoulders lift in a
shrug.  Then he who had passed turned square about and spoke again,
this time lifting his voice a trifle.  The young fellow sitting on the
box instantly became galvanized into action.  He flung out an oath that
carried across the street and made Hazel's ears burn.  At the same time
he leaped from his seat straight at the other man.  Hazel saw it quite
distinctly, saw him who jumped dodge a vicious blow and close with the
other; and saw, moreover, something which amazed her.  For the young
fellow swayed with his adversary a second or two, then lifted him
bodily off his feet almost to the level of his head, and slammed him
against the hotel wall with a sudden twist.  She heard the thump of the
body on the logs.  For an instant she thought him about to jump with
his booted feet on the prostrate form, and involuntarily she held her
breath.  But he stepped back, and when the other scrambled up, he
side-stepped the first rush, and knocked the man down again with a blow
of his fist.  This time he stayed down.  Then other men--three or four
of them--came out of the hotel, stood uncertainly a few seconds, and
Hazel heard the young fellow say:

"Better take that fool in and bring him to.  If he's still hungry for
trouble, I'll be right handy.  I wonder how many more of you fellers
I'll have to lick before you'll get wise enough not to start things you
can't stop?"

They supported the unconscious man through the doorway; the young
fellow resumed his seat on the box, also his pipe filling.

"Roarin' Bill's goin' to get himself killed one uh these days."

Hazel started, but it was only Jim Briggs in the doorway beside her.

"I guess you ain't much used to seein' that sort of exhibition where
you come from, Miss Weir," Briggs' wife put in over his shoulder.  "My
land, it's disgustin'--men fightin' in the street where everybody can
see 'em.  Thank goodness, it don't happen very often.  'Specially when
Bill Wagstaff ain't around.  You ain't shocked, are you, honey?"

"Why, I didn't have time to be shocked," Hazel laughed.  "It was done
so quickly."

"If them fellers would leave Bill alone," Briggs remarked, "there
wouldn't be no fight.  But he goes off like a hair-trigger gun, and
he'd scrap a dozen quick as one.  I'm lookin' to see his finish one uh
these days."

"What a name!" Hazel observed, caught by the appellation Briggs had
first used.  "Is that Roaring Bill over there?"

"That's him--Roarin' Bill Wagstaff," Briggs answered.  "If he takes a
few drinks, you'll find out to-night how he got the name.  Sings--just
like a bull moose--hear him all over town.  Probably whip two or three
men before mornin'."

His spouse calling him at that moment, Briggs detailed no more
information about Roaring Bill.  And Hazel sat looking across the way
with considerable interest at the specimen of a type which hitherto she
had encountered in the pages of fiction--a fighting man, what the West
called a "bad actor."  She had, however, no wish for closer study of
that particular type.  The men of her world had been altogether
different, and the few frontier specimens she had met at the Briggs'
dinner table had not impressed her with anything except their shyness
and manifest awkwardness in her presence.  The West itself appealed to
her, its bigness, its nearness to the absolutely primeval, but not the
people she had so far met.  They were not wrapped in a glamor of
romance; she was altogether too keen to idealize them.  They were not
her kind, and while she granted their worth, they were more picturesque
about their own affairs than when she came in close contact with them.
Those were her first impressions.  And so she looked at Roaring Bill
Wagstaff, over the way, with a quite impersonal interest.

He came into Briggs' place for supper.  Mrs. Briggs was her own
waitress.  Briggs himself sat beside Hazel.  She heard him grunt, and
saw a mild look of surprise flit over his countenance when Roaring Bill
walked in and coolly took a seat.  But not until Hazel glanced at the
newcomer did she recognize him as the man who had fought in the street.
He was looking straight at her when she did glance up, and the mingled
astonishment and frank admiration in his clear gray eyes made Hazel
drop hers quickly to her plate.  Since Mr. Andrew Bush, she was
beginning to hate men who looked at her that way.  And she could not
help seeing that many did so look.

Roaring Bill ate his supper in silence.  No one spoke to him, and he
addressed no one except to ask that certain dishes be passed.  Among
the others conversation was general.  Hazel noticed that, and wondered
why--wondered if Roaring Bill was taboo.  She had sensed enough of the
Western point of view to know that the West held nothing against a man
who was quick to blows--rather admired such a one, in fact.  And her
conclusions were not complimentary to Mr. Bill Wagstaff.  If people
avoided him in that country, he must be a very hard citizen indeed.
And Hazel no more than formulated this opinion than she was ashamed of
it, having her own recent experience in mind.  Whereupon she dismissed
Bill Wagstaff from her thoughts altogether when she left the table.

Exactly three days later Hazel came into the dining-room at noon, and
there received her first lesson in the truth that this world is a very
small place, after all.  A nattily dressed gentleman seated to one side
of her place at table rose with the most polite bows and extended hand.
Hazel recognized him at a glance as Mr. Howard Perkins, traveling
salesman for Harrington & Bush.  She had met him several times in the
company offices.  She was anything save joyful at the meeting, but
after the first unwelcome surprise she reflected that it was scarcely
strange that a link in her past life should turn up here, for she knew
that in the very nature of things a firm manufacturing agricultural
implements would have its men drumming up trade on the very edge of the
frontier.

Mr. Perkins was tolerably young, good looking, talkative, apparently
glad to meet some one from home.  He joined her on the porch for a
minute when the meal was over.  And he succeeded in putting Hazel
unqualifiedly at her ease so far as he was concerned.  If he had heard
any Granville gossip, if he knew why she had left Granville, it
evidently cut no figure with him.  As a consequence, while she was
simply polite and negatively friendly, deep in her heart Hazel felt a
pleasant reaction from the disagreeable things for which Granville
stood; and, though she nursed both resentment and distrust against men
in general, it did not seem to apply to Mr. Perkins.  Anyway, he was
here to-day, and on the morrow he would be gone.

Being a healthy, normal young person, Hazel enjoyed his company without
being fully aware of the fact.  So much for natural gregariousness.
Furthermore, Mr. Perkins in his business had been pretty much
everywhere on the North American continent, and he knew how to set
forth his various experiences.  Most women would have found him
interesting, particularly in a community isolated as Cariboo Meadows,
where tailored clothes and starched collars seemed unknown, and every
man was his own barber--at infrequent intervals.

So Hazel found it quite natural to be chatting with him on the Briggs'
porch when her school work ended at three-thirty in the afternoon.  It
transpired that Mr. Perkins, like herself, had an appreciation of the
scenic beauties, and also the picturesque phases of life as it ran in
the Cariboo country.  They talked of many things, discussed life in a
city as compared with existence in the wild, and were agreed that both
had desirable features--and drawbacks.  Finally Mr. Perkins proposed a
walk up on a three-hundred-foot knoll that sloped from the back door,
so to speak, of Cariboo Meadows.  Hazel got her hat, and they set out.
She had climbed that hill by herself, and she knew that it commanded a
great sweep of the rolling land to the west.

They reached the top in a few minutes, and found a seat on a dead tree
trunk.  Mr. Perkins was properly impressed with the outlook.  But
before very long he seemed to suffer a relaxation of his interest in
the view and a corresponding increase of attention to his companion.
Hazel recognized the symptoms.  At first it amused, then it irritated
her.  The playful familiarity of Mr. Perkins suddenly got on her nerves.

"I think I shall go down," she said abruptly.

"Oh, I say, now, there's no hurry," Perkins responded smilingly.

But she was already rising from her seat, and Mr. Perkins, very likely
gauging his action according to his experience in other such
situations, did an utterly foolish thing.  He caught her as she rose,
and laughingly tried to kiss her.  Whereupon he discovered that he had
caught a tartar, for Hazel slapped him with all the force she could
muster--which was considerable, judging by the flaming red spot which
the smack of her palm left on his smooth-shaven cheek.  But he did not
seem to mind that.  Probably he had been slapped before, and regarded
it as part of the game.  He attempted to draw her closer.

"Why, you're a regular scrapper," he smiled.  "Now, I'm sure you didn't
cuff Bush that way."

Hazel jerked loose from his grip in a perfect fury, using at the same
time the weapons nature gave her according to her strength, whereby Mr.
Perkins suffered sundry small bruises, which were as nothing to the
bruises his conceit suffered.  For, being free of him, Hazel stood her
ground long enough to tell him that he was a cad, a coward, an ill-bred
nincompoop, and other epithets grievous to masculine vanity.  With that
she fled incontinently down the hill, furious, shamed almost to tears,
and wishing fervently that she had the muscle of a man to requite the
insult as it deserved.  To cap the climax, Mrs. Briggs, who had seen
the two depart, observed her return alone, and, with a curious look,
asked jokingly:

"Did you lose the young man in the timber?"

And Hazel, being keyed to a fearful pitch, unwisely snapped back:

"I hope so."

Which caused Mrs. Briggs' gaze to follow her wonderingly as she went
hastily to her own room.

Like other mean souls of similar pattern, it suited Mr. Perkins to seek
revenge in the only way possible--by confidentially relating to divers
individuals during that evening the Granville episode in the new
teacher's career.  At least, Hazel guessed he must have told the tale
of that ambiguously worded bequest and the subsequent gossip, for as
early as the next day she caught certain of Jim Briggs' boarders
looking at her with an interest they had not heretofore displayed--or,
rather, it should be said, with a _different_ sort of interest.  They
were discussing her.  She could not know it positively, but she felt it.

The feeling grew to certainty after Perkins' departure that day.  There
was a different atmosphere.  Probably, she reflected, he had thrown in
a few embellishments of his own for good measure.  She felt a tigerish
impulse to choke him.  But she was proud, and she carried her head in
the air, and, in effect, told Cariboo Meadows to believe as it pleased
and act as it pleased.  They could do no more than cut her and cause
her to lose her school.  She managed to keep up an air of cool
indifference that gave no hint of the despairing protest that surged
close to the surface.  Individually and collectively, she reiterated to
herself, she despised men.  Her resentment had not yet extended to the
women of Cariboo Meadows.  They were mostly too busy with their work to
be much in the foreground.  She did observe, or thought she observed, a
certain coolness in Mrs. Briggs' manner--a sort of suspended judgment.

In the meantime, she labored diligently at her appointed task of
drilling knowledge into the heads of a dozen youngsters.  From nine
until three-thirty she had that to occupy her mind to the exclusion of
more troublesome things.  When school work for the day ended, she went
to her room, or sat on the porch, or took solitary rambles in the
immediate vicinity, avoiding the male contingent as she would have
avoided contagious disease.  Never, never, she vowed, would she trust
another man as far as she could throw him.

The first Saturday after the Perkins incident, Hazel went for a tramp
in the afternoon.  She avoided the little hill close at hand.  It left
a bad taste in her mouth to look at the spot.  This was foolish, and
she realized that it was foolish, but she could not help the
feeling--the insult was still too fresh in her mind.  So she skirted
its base and ranged farther afield.  The few walks she had taken had
lulled all sense of uneasiness in venturing into the infolding forest.
She felt that those shadowy woods were less sinister than man.  And
since she had always kept her sense of direction and come straight to
the Meadows whenever she went abroad, she had no fear or thought of
losing her way.

A mile or so distant a bare spot high on a wooded ridge struck her as a
likely place to get an unobstructed view.  To reach some height and sit
in peace, staring out over far-spreading vistas, contented her.  She
could put away the unpleasantness of the immediate past, discount the
possible sordidness of the future, and lose herself in dreams.

To reach her objective point, she crossed a long stretch of rolling
land, well timbered, dense in parts with thickets of berry bushes.
Midway in this she came upon a little brook, purring a monotone as it
crawled over pebbled reaches and bathed the tangled roots of trees
along its brink.  By this she sat a while.  Then she idled along,
coming after considerable difficulty to abruptly rising ground.  Though
in the midst of timber the sun failed to penetrate, she could always
see it through the branches and so gauge her line of travel.  On the
hillside it was easier, for the forest thinned out.  Eventually she
gained a considerable height, and while she failed to reach the opening
seen from the Meadows, she found another that served as well.  The sun
warmed it, and the sun rays were pleasant to bask in, for autumn drew
close, and there was a coolness in the shade even at noon.  She could
not see the town, but she could mark the low hills behind it.  At any
rate, she knew where it lay, and the way back.

So she thought.  But the short afternoon fled, and, warned by the low
dip of the sun, she left her nook on the hillside to make her way home.
Though it was near sundown, she felt no particular concern.  The long
northern twilight gave her ample time to cover the distance.

But once down on the rolling land, among the close-ranked trees, she
began to experience a difficulty that had not hitherto troubled her.
With the sun hanging low, she lost her absolute certainty of east and
west, north and south.  The forest seemed suddenly to grow confusingly
dim and gloomier, almost menacing in its uncanny evening silence.  The
birds were hushed, and the wind.

She blundered on, not admitting to herself the possibility of being
unable to find Cariboo Meadows.  As best she could, and to the best of
her belief, she held in a straight line for the town.  But she walked
far enough to have overrun it, and was yet upon unfamiliar ground.  The
twilight deepened.  The sky above showed turquoise blue between the
tall tree-tops, but the woods themselves grew blurred, dusky at a
little distance ahead.  Even to a seasoned woodsman, twilight in a
timbered country that he does not know brings confusion; uncertainty
leads him far wide of his mark.  Hazel, all unused to woods travel,
hurried the more, uneasy with the growing conviction that she had gone
astray.

The shadows deepened until she tripped over roots and stones, and
snagged her hair and clothing on branches she could not see in time to
fend off.  As a last resort, she turned straight for the light patch
still showing in the northwest, hoping thus to cross the wagon road
that ran from Soda Creek to the Meadows--it lay west, and she had gone
northeast from town.  And as she hurried, a fear began to tug at her
that she had passed the Meadows unknowingly.  If she could only cross a
trail--trails always led somewhere, and she was going it blind.  The
immensity of the unpeopled areas she had been looking out over for a
week appalled her.

Presently it was dark, and darkness in the woods is the darkness of the
pit itself.  She found a fallen tree, and climbed on it to rest and
think.  Night in gloomy places brings an eerie feeling sometimes to the
bravest--dormant sense impressions, running back to the cave age and
beyond, become active, harry the mind with subtle, unreasoning
qualms--and she was a girl, brave enough, but out of the only
environment she knew how to grapple with.  All the fearsome tales of
forest beasts she had ever heard rose up to harass her.  She had not
lifted up her voice while it was light because she was not the timid
soul that cries in the face of a threatened danger.  Also because she
would not then admit the possibility of getting lost.  And now she was
afraid to call.  She huddled on the log, shuddering with the growing
chill of the night air, partly with dread of the long, black night
itself that walled her in.  She had no matches to light a fire.

After what seemed an age, she fancied she saw a gleam far distant in
the timber.  She watched the spot fixedly, and thought she saw the
faint reflection of a light.  That heartened her.  She advanced toward
it, hoping that it might be the gleam of a ranch window.  Her progress
was slow.  She blundered over the litter of a forest floor, tripping
over unseen obstacles.  But ten minutes established beyond peradventure
the fact that it was indeed a light.  Whether a house light or the
reflection of a camp fire she was not woodwise enough to tell.  But a
fire must mean human beings of one sort or another, and thereby a means
to reach home.

She kept on.  The wavering gleam came from behind a thicket--an open
fire, she saw at length.  Beyond the fire she heard a horse sneeze.
Within a few yards of the thicket through which wavered the yellow
gleam she halted, smitten with a sudden panic.  This endured but a few
seconds.  All that she knew or had been told of frontier men reassured
her.  She had found them to a man courteous, awkwardly considerate.
And she could not wander about all night.

She moved cautiously, however, to the edge of the thicket, to a point
where she could see the fire.  A man sat humped over the glowing
embers, whereon sizzled a piece of meat.  His head was bent forward, as
if he were listening.  Suddenly he looked up, and she gasped--for the
firelight showed the features of Roaring Bill Wagstaff.

She was afraid of him.  Why she did not know nor stop to reason.  But
her fear of him was greater than her fear of the pitch-black night and
the unknown dangers of the forest.  She turned to retreat.  In the same
instant Roaring Bill reached to his rifle and stood up.

"Hold on there!" he said coolly.  "You've had a look at me--I want a
look at you, old feller, whoever you are.  Come on--show yourself."

He stepped sidewise out of the light as he spoke.  Hazel started to
run.  The crack of a branch under foot betrayed her, and he closed in
before she took three steps.  He caught her rudely by the arm, and
yanked her bodily into the firelight.

"Well--for the--love of--Mike!"

Wagstaff drawled the exclamation out in a rising crescendo of
astonishment.  Then he laid his gun down across a roll of bedding, and
stood looking at her in speechless wonder.




CHAPTER VII

A DIFFERENT SORT OF MAN

"For the love of Mike!" Roaring Bill said again.  "What are you doing
wandering around in the woods at night?  Good Lord!  Your teeth are
chattering.  Sit down here and get warm.  It is sort of chilly."

Even in her fear, born of the night, the circumstances, and partly of
the man, Hazel noticed that his speech was of a different order from
that to which she had been listening the past ten days.  His
enunciation was perfect.  He dropped no word endings, nor slurred his
syllables.  And cast in so odd a mold is the mind of civilized woman
that the small matter of a little refinement of speech put Hazel Weir
more at her ease than a volume of explanation or protest on his part
would have done.  She had pictured him a ruffian in thought, speech,
and deed.  His language cleared him on one count, and she observed that
almost his first thought was for her comfort, albeit he made no sort of
apology for handling her so roughly in the gloom beyond the fire.

"I got lost," she explained, growing suddenly calm.  "I was out
walking, and lost my way."

"Easy thing to do when you don't know timber," Bill remarked.  "And in
consequence you haven't had any supper; you've been scared almost to
death--and probably all of Cariboo Meadows is out looking for you.
Well, you've had an adventure.  That's worth something.  Better eat a
bite, and you'll feel better."

He turned over the piece of meat on the coals while he spoke.  Hazel
saw that it lay on two green sticks, like a steak on a gridiron.  It
was quite simple, but she would never have thought of that.  The meat
exhaled savory odors.  Also, the warmth of the fire seemed good.  But--

"I'd rather be home," she confessed.

"Sure!  I guess you would--naturally.  I'll see that you get there,
though it won't be easy.  It's no snap to travel these woods in the
dark.  You couldn't have been so far from the Meadows.  How did it come
you didn't yell once in a while?"

"I didn't think it was necessary," Hazel admitted, "until it began to
get dark.  And then I didn't like to."

"You got afraid," Roaring Bill supplied.  "Well, it does sound creepy
to holler in the timber after night.  I know how that goes.  I've made
noises after night that scared myself."

He dug some utensils out of his pack layout--two plates, knife, fork,
and spoons, and laid them by the fire.  Opposite the meat a pot of
water bubbled.  Roaring Bill produced a small tin bucket, black with
the smoke of many an open fire, and a package, and made coffee.  Then
he spread a canvas sheet, and laid on that bread, butter, salt, a jar
of preserved fruit.

"How far is it to Cariboo Meadows?" Hazel asked.

Bill looked up from his supper preparations.

"You've got me," he returned carelessly.  "Probably four or five miles.
I'm not positive; I've been running in circles myself this afternoon."

"Good heavens!" Hazel exclaimed.  "But you know the way?"

"Like a book--in the daytime," he replied.  "But night in the timber is
another story, as you've just been finding out for yourself."

"I thought men accustomed to the wilderness could always find their way
about, day or night," Hazel observed tartly.

"They can--in stories," Bill answered dryly.

He resumed his arranging of the food while she digested this.
Presently he sat down beside the fire, and while he turned the meat
with a forked stick, came back to the subject again.

"You see, I'm away off any trail here," he said, "and it's all woods,
with only a little patch of open here and there.  It's pure accident I
happen to be here at all; accident which comes of unadulterated
cussedness on the part of one of my horses.  I left the Meadows at
noon, and Nigger--that's this confounded cayuse of mine--he had to get
scared and take to the brush.  He got plumb away from me, and I had to
track him.  I didn't come up with him till dusk, and then the first
good place I struck, which was here, I made camp.  I was all for
catching that horse, so I didn't pay much attention to where I was
going.  Didn't need to, because I know the country well enough to get
anywhere in daylight, and I'm fixed to camp wherever night overtakes
me.  So I'm not dead sure of my ground.  But you don't need to worry on
that account.  I'll get you home all right.  Only it'll be mean
traveling--and slow--unless we happen to bump into some of those
fellows out looking for you.  They'd surely start out when you didn't
come home at dusk; they know it isn't any joke for a girl to get lost
in these woods.  I've known men to get badly turned round right in this
same country.  Well, sit up and eat a bite."

She had to be satisfied with his assurance that he would see her to
Cariboo Meadows.  And, accepting the situation with what philosophy she
could command, Hazel proceeded to fall to--and soon discovered herself
relishing the food more than any meal she had eaten for a long time.
Hunger is the king of appetizers, and food cooked in the open has a
flavor of its own which no aproned chef can duplicate.  Roaring Bill
put half the piece of meat on her plate, sliced bread for her, and set
the butter handy.  Also, he poured her a cup of coffee.  He had a small
sack of sugar, and his pack boxes yielded condensed milk.

"Maybe you'd rather have tea," he said.  "I didn't think to ask you.
Most Canadians don't drink anything else."

"No, thanks.  I like coffee," Hazel replied.

"You're not a true-blue Canuck, then," Bill observed.

"Indeed, I am," she declared.  "Aren't you a Canadian?"

"Well, I don't know that the mere accident of birth in come particular
locality makes any difference," he answered.  "But I'm a lot shy of
being a Canadian, though I've been in this country a long time.  I was
born in Chicago, the smokiest, windiest old burg in the United States."

"It's a big place, isn't it?"  Hazel kept the conversation going.  "I
don't know any of the American cities, but I have a girl friend working
in a Chicago office."

"Yes, it's big--big and noisy and dirty, and full of wrecks--human
derelicts in an industrial Sargasso Sea--like all big cities the world
over.  I don't like 'em."

Wagstaff spoke casually, as much to himself as to her, and he did not
pursue the subject, but began his meal.

"What sort of meat is this?" Hazel asked after a few minutes of
silence.  It was fine-grained and of a rich flavor strange to her
mouth.  She liked it, but it was neither beef, pork, nor mutton, nor
any meat she knew.

"Venison.  Didn't you ever eat any before?" he smiled.

"Never tasted it," she answered.  "Isn't it nice?  No, I've read of
hunters cooking venison over an open fire, but this is my first taste.
Indeed, I've never seen a real camp fire before."

"Lord--what a lot you've missed!"  There was real pity in his tone.  "I
killed that deer to-day.  In fact, the little circus I had with Mr.
Buck was what started Nigger off into the brush.  Have some more
coffee."

He refilled her tin cup, and devoted himself to his food.  Before long
they had satisfied their hunger.  Bill laid a few dry sticks on the
fire.  The flames laid hold of them and shot up in bright, wavering
tongues.  It seemed to Hazel that she had stepped utterly out of her
world.  Cariboo Meadows, the schoolhouse, and her classes seemed
remote.  She found herself wishing she were a man, so that she could
fare into the wilds with horses and a gun in this capable man fashion,
where routine went by the board and the unexpected hovered always close
at hand.  She looked up suddenly, to find him regarding her with a
whimsical smile.

"In a few minutes," said he, "I'll pack up and try to deliver you as
per contract.  Meantime, I'm going to smoke."

He did not ask her permission, but filled his pipe and lighted it with
a coal.  And for the succeeding fifteen minutes Roaring Bill Wagstaff
sat staring into the dancing blaze.  Once or twice he glanced at her,
and when he did the same whimsical smile would flit across his face.
Hazel watched him uneasily after a time.  He seemed to have forgotten
her.  His pipe died, and he sat holding it in his hand.  She was
uneasy, but not afraid.  There was nothing about him or his actions to
make her fear.  On the contrary, Roaring Bill at close quarters
inspired confidence.  Why she could not and did not attempt to
determine, psychological analysis being rather out of her line.

Physically, however, Roaring Bill measured up to a high standard.  He
was young, probably twenty-seven or thereabouts.  There was
power--plenty of it--in the wide shoulders and deep chest of him, with
arms in proportion.  His hands, while smooth on the backs and well
cared for, showed when he exposed the palms the callouses of ax
handling.  And his face was likable, she decided, full of character,
intensely masculine.  In her heart every woman despises any hint of the
effeminate in man.  Even though she may decry what she is pleased to
term the brute in man, whenever he discards the dominant, overmastering
characteristics of the male she will have none of him.  Miss Hazel Weir
was no exception to her sex.

Consciously or otherwise she took stock of Bill Wagstaff.  She knew him
to be in bad odor with Cariboo Meadows for some unknown reason.  She
had seen him fight in the street, knock a man unconscious with his
fists.  According to her conceptions of behavior that was brutal and
vulgar.  Drinking came under the same head, and she had Jim Briggs'
word that Bill Wagstaff not only got drunk, but was a "holy terror"
when in that condition.  Yet she could not quite associate the twin
traits of brutality and vulgarity with the man sitting close by with
that thoughtful look on his face.  His speech stamped him as a man of
education; every line of him showed breeding in all that the word
implies.

Nevertheless, he was "tough."  And she had gathered enough of the
West's wide liberality of view in regard to personal conduct to know
that Roaring Bill Wagstaff must be a hard citizen indeed to be
practically ostracized in a place like Cariboo Meadows.  She wondered
what Cariboo Meadows would say if it could see her sitting by Bill
Wagstaff's fire at nine in the evening in the heart of the woods.  What
would they say when he piloted her home?

In the midst of her reflections Roaring Bill got up.

"Well, we'll make a move," he said, and disappeared abruptly into the
dark.

She heard him moving around at some distance.  Presently he was back,
leading three horses.  One he saddled.  The other two he rigged with
his pack outfit, storing his varied belongings in two pair of kyaks,
and loading kyaks and bedding on the horses with a deft speed that
bespoke long practice.  He was too busy to talk, and Hazel sat beside
the fire, watching in silence.  When he had tucked up the last rope
end, he turned to her.

"There," he said; "we're ready to hit the trail.  Can you ride?"

"I don't know," Hazel answered dubiously.  "I never have ridden a
horse."

"My, my!" he smiled.  "Your education has been sadly neglected--and you
a schoolma'am, too!"

"My walking education hasn't been neglected," Hazel retorted.  "I don't
need to ride, thank you."

"Yes, and stub your toe and fall down every ten feet," Bill observed.
"No, Miss Weir, your first lesson in horsemanship is now due--if you
aren't afraid of horses."

"I'm not afraid of horses at all," Hazel declared.  "But I don't think
it's a very good place to take riding lessons.  I can just as well
walk, for I'm not in the least afraid." And then she added as an
afterthought: "How do you happen to know my name?"

"In the same way that you know mine," Bill replied, "even if you
haven't mentioned it yet.  Lord bless you, do you suppose Cariboo
Meadows could import a lady school-teacher from the civilized East
without everybody in fifty miles knowing who she was, and where she
came from, and what she looked like?  You furnished them a subject for
conversation and speculation--the same as I do when I drop in there and
whoop it up for a while.  I guess you don't realize what old granny
gossips we wild Westerners are.  Especially where girls are concerned."

Hazel stiffened a trifle.  She did not like the idea of Cariboo Meadows
discussing her with such freedom.  She was becoming sensitive on that
subject--since the coming and going of Mr. Howard Perkins, for she felt
that they were considering her from an angle that she did not relish.
She wondered also if Roaring Bill Wagstaff had heard that gossip.  And
if he had--  At any rate, she could not accuse him of being impertinent
or curious in so far as she was concerned.  After the first look and
exclamation of amazement he had taken her as a matter of course.  If
anything, his personal attitude was tinctured with indifference.

"Well," said he, "we won't argue the point."

He disappeared into the dark again.  This time he came back with the
crown of his hat full of water, which he sprinkled over the dwindling
fire.  As the red glow of the embers faded in a sputter of steam and
ashes, Hazel realized more profoundly the blackness of a cloudy night
in the woods.  Until her eyes accustomed themselves to the transition
from firelight to the gloom, she could see nothing but vague shapes
that she knew to be the horses, and another dim, moving object that was
Bill Wagstaff.  Beyond that the inky canopy above and the forest
surrounding seemed a solid wall.

"It's going to be nasty traveling, Miss Weir," Roaring Bill spoke at
her elbow.  "I'll walk and lead the packs.  You ride Silk.  He's
gentle.  All you have to do is sit still, and he'll stay right behind
the packs.  I'll help you mount."

If Hazel had still been inclined to insist on walking, she had no
chance to debate the question.  Bill took her by the arm and led her up
beside the horse.  It was a unique experience for her, this being
compelled to do things.  No man had ever issued ultimatums to her.
Even Jack Barrow, with all an accepted lover's privileges, had never
calmly told her that she must do thus and so, and acted on the
supposition that his word was final.  But here was Roaring Bill
Wagstaff telling her how to put her foot in the stirrup, putting her
for the first time in her life astride a horse, warning her to duck low
branches.  In his mind there seemed to be no question as whether or not
she would ride.  He had settled that.

Unused to mounting, she blundered at the first attempt, and flushed in
the dark at Bill's amused chuckle.  The next instant he caught her
under the arms, and, with the leverage of her one foot in the stirrup,
set her gently in the seat of the saddle.

"You're such a little person," he said, "these stirrups are a mile too
long.  Put your feet in the leather above--so.  Now play follow your
leader.  Give Silk his head."

He moved away.  The blurred shapes of the pack horses forged ahead,
rustling in the dry grass, dry twigs snapping under foot.  Obedient to
Bill's command, she let the reins dangle, and Silk followed close
behind his mates.  Hazel lurched unsteadily at first, but presently she
caught the swinging motion and could maintain her balance without
holding stiffly to the saddle horn.

They crossed the small meadow and plunged into thick woods again.  For
the greater part of the way Hazel could see nothing; she could tell
that Wagstaff and the pack horses moved before her by the sounds of
their progress, and that was all.  Now and then low-hanging limbs
reached suddenly out of the dark, and touched her with unseen fingers,
or swept rudely across her face and hair.

The night seemed endless as the wilderness itself.  Unused to riding,
she became sore, and then the sore muscles stiffened.  The chill of the
night air intensified.  She grew cold, her fingers numb.  She did not
know where she was going, and she was assailed with doubts of Roaring
Bill's ability to find Cariboo Meadows.

For what seemed to her an interminable length of time they bore slowly
on through timber, crossed openings where the murk of the night thinned
a little, enabling her to see the dim form of Wagstaff plodding in the
lead.  Again they dipped down steep slopes and ascended others as
steep, where Silk was forced to scramble, and Hazel kept a precarious
seat.  She began to feel, with an odd heart sinking, that sufficient
time had elapsed for them to reach the Meadows, even by a roundabout
way.  Then, as they crossed a tiny, gurgling stream, and came upon a
level place beyond, Silk bumped into the other horses and stopped.
Hazel hesitated a second.  There was no sound of movement.

"Mr. Wagstaff!" she called.

"Yours truly," his voice hailed back, away to one side.  "I'll be there
in a minute."

In less time he appeared beside her.

"Will you fall off, or be lifted off?" he said cheerfully.

"Where are we?" she demanded.

"Ask me something easy," he returned.  "I've been going it blind for an
hour, trying to hit the Soda Creek Trail, or any old trail that would
show me where I am.  It's no use.  Too dark.  A man couldn't find his
way over country that he knew to-night if he had a lantern and a
compass."

"What on earth am I going to do?" Hazel cried desperately.

"Camp here till daylight," Roaring Bill answered evenly.  "The only
thing you can do.  Good Lord!"  His hand accidentally rested on hers.
"You're like ice.  I didn't think about you getting cold riding.  I'm a
mighty thoughtless escort, I'm afraid.  Get down and put on a coat, and
I'll have a fire in a minute."

"I suppose if I must, I must; but I can get off without any help, thank
you," Hazel answered ungraciously.

Roaring Bill made no reply, but stood back, and when her feet touched
solid earth he threw over her boulders the coat he had worn himself.
Then he turned away, and Hazel saw him stooping here and there, and
heard the crack of dry sticks broken over his knee.  In no time he was
back to the horses with an armful of dry stuff, and had a small blaze
licking up through dry grass and twigs.  As it grew he piled on larger
sticks till the bright flame waved two feet high, lighting up the
near-by woods and shedding a bright glow on the three horses standing
patiently at hand.  He paid no attention to Hazel until she came
timidly up to the fire.  Then he looked up at her with his whimsical
smile.

"That's right," he said; "come on and get warm.  No use worrying--or
getting cross.  I suppose from your civilized, conventional point of
view it's a terrible thing to be out in the woods all night alone with
a strange man.  But I'm not a bear--I won't eat you."

"I'm sorry if I seemed rude," Hazel said penitently; Roaring Bill's
statement was reassuring in its frankness.  "I can't help thinking of
the disagreeable side of it.  People talk so.  I suppose I'll be a nine
days' wonder in Cariboo Meadows."

Bill laughed softly.

"Let them take it out in wondering," he advised.  "Cariboo Meadows is a
very small and insignificant portion of the world, anyway."

He went to one of the packs, and came back with a canvas cover, which
he spread on the ground.

"Sit on that," he said.  "The earth's always damp in the woods."

Then he stripped the horses of their burdens and tied them out of sight
among the trees.  That task finished, he took his ax and rustled a pile
of wood, dragging dead poles up to the fire and chopping them into
short lengths.  When finally he laid aside his ax, he busied himself
with gathering grass and leaves and pine needles until he had several
armfuls collected and spread in an even pile to serve as a mattress.
Upon this he laid his bedding, two thick quilts, two or three pairs of
woolen blankets, a pillow, the whole inclosed with a long canvas sheet,
the bed tarpaulin of the cattle ranges.

"There," he said; "you can turn in whenever you feel like it."

For himself he took the saddle blankets and laid them close by the fire
within reaching distance of the woodpile, taking for cover a pack
canvas.  He stretched himself full length, filled his pipe, lit it, and
fell to staring into the fire while he smoked.

Half an hour later he raised his head and looked across the fire at
Hazel.

"Why don't you go to bed?" he asked.

"I'm not sleepy," she declared, which was a palpable falsehood, for her
eyelids were even then drooping.

"Maybe not, but you need rest," Bill said quietly.  "Quit thinking
things.  It'll be all the same a hundred years from now.  Go on to bed.
You'll be more comfortable."

Thus peremptorily commanded, Hazel found herself granting instant
obedience.  The bed, as Bill had remarked, was far more comfortable
than sitting by the fire.  She got into the blankets just as she stood,
even to her shoes, and drew the canvas sheet up so that it hid her
face--but did not prevent her from seeing.

In spite of herself, she slept fitfully.  Now and then she would wake
with a start to a half-frightened realization of her surroundings and
plight, and whenever she did wake and look past the fire it was to see
Roaring Bill Wagstaff stretched out in the red glow, his brown head
pillowed on one folded arm.  Once she saw him reach to the wood without
moving his body and lay a stick on the fire.

Then all at once she wakened out of sound slumber with a violent start.
Roaring Bill was shaking the tarpaulin over her and laughing.

"Arise, Miss Sleeping Beauty!" he said boyishly.  "Breakfast's ready."

He went back to the fire.  Hazel sat up, patting her tousled hair into
some semblance of order.  Off in the east a reddish streak spread
skyward into somber gray.  In the west, black night gave ground slowly.

"Well, it's another day," she whispered, as she had whispered to
herself once before.  "I wonder if there will ever be any more like it?"




CHAPTER VIII

IN DEEP WATER

The dawn thrust aside night's somber curtains while they ate, revealing
a sky overcast with slaty clouds.  What with her wanderings of the
night before and the journey through the dark with Roaring Bill, she
had absolutely no idea of either direction or locality.  The infolding
timber shut off the outlook.  Forest-clad heights upreared here and
there, but no landmark that she could place and use for a guide.  She
could not guess whether Cariboo Meadows was a mile distant, or ten, nor
in what direction it might lie.  If she had not done so before, she now
understood how much she had to depend on Roaring Bill Wagstaff.

"Do you suppose I can get home in time to open school?" she inquired
anxiously.

Roaring Bill smiled.  "I don't know," he answered.  "It all depends."

Upon what it depended he did not specify, but busied himself packing
up.  In half an hour or less they were ready to start.  Bill spent a
few minutes longer shortening the stirrups, then signified that she
should mount.  He seemed more thoughtful, less inclined to speech.

"You know where you are now, don't you?" she asked.

"Not exactly," he responded.  "But I will before long--I hope."

The ambiguity of his answer did not escape her.  She puzzled over it
while Silk ambled sedately behind the other horses.  She hoped that
Bill Wagstaff knew where he was going.  If he did not--but she refused
to entertain the alternative.  And she began to watch eagerly for some
sign of familiar ground.

For two hours Roaring Bill tramped through aisles bordered with pine
and spruce and fir, through thickets of berry bush, and across limited
areas of grassy meadow.  Not once did they cross a road or a trail.
With the clouds hiding the sun, she could not tell north from south
after they left camp.  Eventually Bill halted at a small stream to get
a drink.  Hazel looked at her watch.  It was half past eight.

"Aren't we ever going to get there?" she called impatiently.

"Pretty soon," he called back, and struck out briskly again.

Another hour passed.  Ahead of her, leading one pack horse and letting
the other follow untrammeled, Roaring Bill kept doggedly on, halting
for nothing, never looking back.  If he did not know where he was
going, he showed no hesitation.  And Hazel had no choice but to follow.

They crossed a ravine and slanted up a steep hillside.  Presently Hazel
could look away over an area of woodland undulating like a heavy ground
swell at sea.  Here and there ridges stood forth boldly above the
general roll, and distantly she could descry a white-capped mountain
range.  They turned the end of a thick patch of pine scrub, and Bill
pulled up in a small opening.  From a case swinging at his belt he took
out a pair of field glasses, and leisurely surveyed the country.

"Well?" Hazel interrogated.

She herself had cast an anxious glance over the wide sweep below and
beyond, seeing nothing but timber and hills, with the silver thread of
a creek winding serpent-wise through the green.  But of habitation or
trail there was never a sign.  And it was after ten o'clock.  They were
over four hours from their camp ground.

"Nothing in sight, is there?" Bill said thoughtfully.  "If the sun was
out, now.  Funny I can't spot that Soda Creek Trail."

"Don't you know this country at all?" she asked gloomily.

"I thought I did," he replied.  "But I can't seem to get my bearings to
work out correctly.  I'm awfully sorry to keep you in such a pickle.
But it can't be helped."

Thus he disarmed her for the time being.  She could not find fault with
a man who was doing his best to help her.  If Roaring Bill were unable
to bear straight for the Meadows, it was unfortunate for her, but no
fault of his.  At the same time, it troubled her more than she would
admit.

"Well, we won't get anywhere standing on this hill," he remarked at
length.

He took up the lead rope and moved on.  They dropped over the ridge
crest and once more into the woods.  Roaring Bill made his next halt
beside a spring, and fell to unlashing the packs.

"What are you going to do?" Hazel asked.

"Cook a bite, and let the horses graze," he told her.  "Do you realize
that we've been going since daylight?  It's near noon.  Horses have to
eat and rest once in a while, just the same as human beings."

The logic of this Hazel could not well deny, since she herself was
tired and ravenously hungry.  By her watch it was just noon.

Bill hobbled out his horses on the grass below the spring, made a fire,
and set to work cooking.  For the first time the idea of haste seemed
to have taken hold of him.  He worked silently at the meal getting,
fried steaks of venison, and boiled a pot of coffee.  They ate.  He
filled his pipe, and smoked while he repacked.  Altogether, he did not
consume more than forty minutes at the noon halt.  Hazel, now woefully
saddle sore, would fain have rested longer, and, in default of resting,
tried to walk and lead Silk.  Roaring Bill offered no objection to
that.  But he hit a faster gait.  She could not keep up, and he did not
slacken pace when she began to fall behind.  So she mounted awkwardly,
and Silk jolted and shook her with his trotting until he caught up with
his mates.  Bill grinned over his shoulder.

"You're learning fast," he called back.  "You'll be able to run a pack
train by and by."

The afternoon wore on without bringing them any nearer Cariboo Meadows
so far as Hazel could see.  Traveling over a country swathed in timber
and diversified in contour, she could not tell whether Roaring Bill
swung in a circle or bore straight for some given point.

She speculated futilely on the outcome of the strange plight she was
in.  It was a far cry from pounding a typewriter in a city office to
jogging through the wilderness, lost beyond peradventure, her only
company a stranger of unsavory reputation.  Yet she was not frightened,
for all the element of unreality.  Under other circumstances she could
have relished the adventure, taken pleasure in faring gypsy fashion
over the wide reaches where man had left no mark.  As it was--

She called a halt at four o'clock.

"Mr. Wagstaff!"

Bill stopped his horses and came back to her.

"Aren't we _ever_ going to get anywhere?" she asked soberly.

"Sure!  But we've got to keep going.  Got to make the best of a bad
job," he returned.  "Getting pretty tired?"

"I am," she admitted.  "I'm afraid I can't ride much longer.  I could
walk if you wouldn't go so fast.  Aren't there any ranches in this
country at all?"

He shook his head.  "They're few and far between," he said.  "Don't
worry, though.  It isn't a life-and-death matter.  If we were out here
without grub or horses it might be tough.  You're in no danger from
exposure or hunger."

"You don't seem to realize the position it puts me in," Hazel answered.
A wave of despondency swept over her, and her eyes grew suddenly bright
with the tears she strove to keep back.  "If we wander around in the
woods much longer, I'll simply be a sensation when I do get back to
Cariboo Meadows.  I won't have a shred of reputation left.  It will
probably result in my losing the school.  You're a man, and it's
different with you.  You can't know what a girl has to contend with
where no one knows her.  I'm a stranger in this country, and what
little they do know of me--"

She stopped short, on the point of saying that what Cariboo Meadows
knew of her through the medium of Mr. Howard Perkins was not at all to
her credit.

Roaring Bill looked up at her impassively.  "I know," he said, as if he
had read her thought.  "Your friend Perkins talked a lot.  But what's
the difference?  Cariboo Meadows is only a fleabite.  If you're right,
and you know you're right, you can look the world in the eye and tell
it collectively to go to the devil.  Besides, you've got a perverted
idea.  People aren't so ready to give you the bad eye on somebody
else's say-so.  It would take a lot more than a flash drummer's word to
convince me that you're a naughty little girl.  Pshaw--forget it!"

Hazel colored hotly at his mention of Perkins, but for the latter part
of his speech she could have hugged him.  Bill Wagstaff went a long
way, in those brief sentences, toward demolishing her conviction that
no man ever overlooked an opportunity of taking advantage of a woman.
But Bill said nothing further.  He stood a moment longer by her horse,
resting one hand on Silk's mane, and scraping absently in the soft
earth with the toe of his boot.

"Well, let's get somewhere," he said abruptly.  "If you're too saddle
sore to ride, walk a while.  I'll go slower."

She walked, and the exercise relieved the cramping ache in her limbs.
Roaring Bill's slower pace was fast enough at that.  She followed till
her strength began to fail.  And when in spite of her determination she
lagged behind, he stopped at the first water.

"We'll camp here," he said.  "You're about all in, and we can't get
anywhere to-night, I see plainly."

Hazel accepted this dictum as best she could.  She eat down on a mossy
rock while he stripped the horses of their gear and staked them out.
Then Bill started a fire and fixed the roll of bedding by it for her to
sit on.  Dusk crept over the forest while he cooked supper, making a
bannock in the frying pan to take the place of bread; and when they had
finished eating and washed the few dishes, night shut down black as the
pit.

They talked little.  Hazel was in the grip of utter forlornness, moody,
wishful to cry.  Roaring Bill lumped on his side of the fire, staring
thoughtfully into the blaze.  After a long period of abstraction he
glanced at his watch, then arose and silently arranged her bed.  After
that he spread his saddle blankets and lay down.

Hazel crept into the covers and quietly sobbed herself to sleep.  The
huge and silent land appalled her.  She had been chucked neck and crop
into the primitive, and she had not yet been able to react to her
environment.  She was neither faint-hearted nor hysterical.  The grind
of fending for herself in a city had taught her the necessity of
self-control.  But she was worn out, unstrung, and there is a limit to
a woman's endurance.

As on the previous night, she wakened often and glanced over to the
fire.  Roaring Bill kept his accustomed position, flat in the glow.
She had no fear of him now.  But he was something of an enigma.  She
had few illusions about men in general.  She had encountered a good
many of them in one way and another since reaching the age when she
coiled her hair on top of her head.  And she could not recall one--not
even Jack Barrow--with whom she would have felt at ease in a similar
situation.  She knew that there was a something about her that drew
men.  If the presence of her had any such effect on Bill Wagstaff, he
painstakingly concealed it.

And she was duly grateful for that.  She had not believed it a
characteristic of his type--the virile, intensely masculine type of
man.  But she had not once found him looking at her with the same
expression in his eyes that she had seen once over Jim Briggs' dining
table.

Night passed, and dawn ushered in a clearing sky.  Ragged wisps of
clouds chased each other across the blue when they set out again.
Hazel walked the stiffness out of her muscles before she mounted.  When
she did get on Silk, Roaring Bill increased his pace.  He was
long-legged and light of foot, apparently tireless.  She asked no
questions.  What was the use?  He would eventually come out somewhere.
She was resigned to wait.

After a time she began to puzzle, and the old uneasiness came back.
The last trailing banner of cloud vanished, and the sun rode clear in
an opal sky, smiling benignly down on the forested land.  She was thus
enabled to locate the cardinal points of the compass.  Wherefore she
took to gauging their course by the shadows.  And the result was what
set her thinking.  Over level and ridge and swampy hollow, Roaring Bill
drove straight north in an undeviating line.  She recollected that the
point from which she had lost her way had lain northeast of Cariboo
Meadows.  Even if they had swung in a circle, they could scarcely be
pointing for the town in that direction.  For another hour Bill held to
the northern line as a needle holds to the pole.  A swift rush of
misgiving seized her.

"Mr. Wagstaff!" she called sharply.

Roaring Bill stopped, and she rode Silk up past the pack horses.

"Where are you taking me?" she demanded.

"Why, I'm taking you home--or trying to," he answered mildly.

"But you're going _north_," she declared.  "You've been going north all
morning.  I was north of Cariboo Meadows when I got lost.  How can we
get back to Cariboo Meadows by going still farther north?"

"You're more of a woodsman than I imagined," Bill remarked gently.  He
smiled up at her, and drew out his pipe and tobacco pouch.

She looked at him for a minute.  "Do you know where we are now?" she
asked quietly.

He met her keen gaze calmly.  "I do," he made laconic answer.

"Which way is Cariboo Meadows, then, and how far is it?" she demanded.

"General direction south," he replied slowly.  "Fifty miles more or
less.  Rather more than less."

"And you've been leading me straight north!" she cried.  "Oh, what am I
going to do?"

"Keep right on going," Wagstaff answered.

"I won't--I won't!" she flashed.  "I'll find my own way back.  What
devilish impulse prompted you to do such a thing?"

"You'll have a beautiful time of it," he said dryly, completely
ignoring her last question.  "Take you three days to walk there--if you
knew every foot of the way.  And you don't know the way.  Traveling in
timber is confusing, as you've discovered.  You'll never see Cariboo
Meadows, or any other place, if you tackle it single-handed, without
grub or matches or bedding.  It's fall, remember.  A snowstorm is due
any time.  This is a whopping big country.  A good many men have got
lost in it--and other men have found their bones."

He let this sink in while she sat there on his horse choking back a
wild desire to curse him by bell, book, and candle for what he had
done, and holding in check the fear of what he might yet do.  She knew
him to be a different type of man from any she had ever encountered.
She could not escape the conclusion that Roaring Bill Wagstaff was
something of a law unto himself, capable of hewing to the line of his
own desires at any cost.  She realized her utter helplessness, and the
realization left her without words.  He had drawn a vivid picture, and
the instinct of self-preservation asserted itself.

"You misled me."  She found her voice at last.  "Why?"

"Did I mislead you?" he parried.  "Weren't you already lost when you
came to my camp?  And have I mistreated you in any manner?  Have I
refused you food, shelter, or help?"

"My home is in Cariboo Meadows," she persisted.  "I asked you to take
me there.  You led me away from there deliberately, I believe now."

"My trail doesn't happen to lead to Cariboo Meadows, that's all,"
Roaring Bill coolly told her.  "If you must go back there, I shan't
restrain you in any way whatever.  But I'm for home myself.  And that,"
he came close, and smiled frankly up at her, "is a better place than
Cariboo Meadows.  I've got a little house back there in the woods.
There's a big fireplace where the wind plays tag with the snowflakes in
winter time.  There's grub there, and meat in the forest, and fish in
the streams.  It's home for me.  Why should I go back to Cariboo
Meadows?  Or you?"

"Why should _I_ go with you?" she demanded scornfully.

"Because I want you to," he murmured.

They matched glances for a second, Wagstaff smiling, she half horrified.

"Are you clean mad?" she asked angrily.  "I was beginning to think you
a gentleman."

Bill threw back his head and laughed.  Then on the instant he sobered.
"Not a gentleman," he said.  "I'm just plain man.  And lonesome
sometimes for a mate, as nature has ordained to be the way of flesh."

"Get a squaw, then," she sneered.  "I've heard that such people as you
do that."

"Not me," he returned, unruffled.  "I want a woman of my own kind."

"Heaven save _me_ from that classification!" she observed, with
emphasis on the pronoun.

"Yes?" he drawled.  "Well, there's no profit in arguing that point.
Let's be getting on."

He reached for the lead rope of the nearest pack horse.

Hazel urged Silk up a step.  "Mr. Wagstaff," she cried, "I must go
back."

"You can't go back without me," he said.  "And I'm not traveling that
way, thank you."

"Please--oh, please!" she begged forlornly.

Roaring Bill's face hardened.  "I will not," he said flatly.  "I'm
going to play the game my way.  And I'll play fair.  That's the only
promise I will make."

She took a look at the encompassing woods, and her heart sank at facing
those shadowy stretches alone and unguided.  The truth of his statement
that she would never reach Cariboo Meadows forced itself home.  There
was but the one way out, and her woman's wit would have to save her.

"Go on, then," she gritted, in a swift surge of anger.  "I am afraid to
face this country alone.  I admit my helplessness.  But so help me
Heaven, I'll make you pay for this dirty trick!  You're not a man!
You're a cur--a miserable, contemptible scoundrel!"

"Whew!" Roaring Bill laughed.  "Those are pretty names.  Just the same,
I admire your grit.  Well, here we go!"

He took up the lead rope, and went on without even looking back to see
if she followed.  If he had made the slightest attempt to force her to
come, if he had betrayed the least uncertainty as to whether she would
come, Hazel would have swung down from the saddle and set her face
stubbornly southward in sheer defiance of him.  But such is the
peculiar complexity of a woman that she took one longing glance
backward, and then fell in behind the packs.  She was weighted down
with dread of the unknown, boiling over with rage at the man who swung
light-footed in the lead; but nevertheless she followed him.




CHAPTER IX

THE HOUSE THAT JACK BUILT

All the rest of that day they bore steadily northward.  Hazel had no
idea of Bill Wagstaff's destination.  She was too bitter against him to
ask, after admitting that she could not face the wilderness alone.
Between going it alone and accompanying him, it seemed to be a case of
choosing the lesser evil.  Curiously she felt no fear of Bill Wagstaff
in person, and she did have a dread vision of what might happen to her
if she went wandering alone in the woods.  There was one loophole left
to comfort her.  It seemed scarcely reasonable that they could fare on
forever without encountering other frontier folk.  Upon that
possibility she based her hopes of getting back to civilization, not so
much for love of civilization as to defeat Roaring Bill's object, to
show him that a woman had to be courted rather than carried away
against her will by any careless, strong-armed male.  She knew nothing
of the North, but she thought there must be some mode of communication
or transportation.  If she could once get in touch with other
people--well, she would show Roaring Bill.  Of course, getting back to
Cariboo Meadows meant a new start in the world, for she had no hope,
nor any desire, to teach school there after this episode.  She found
herself facing that prospect unmoved, however.  The important thing was
getting out of her present predicament.

Roaring Bill made his camp that night as if no change in their attitude
had taken place.  To all his efforts at conversation she turned a deaf
ear and a stony countenance.  She proposed to eat his food and use his
bedding, because that was necessary.  But socially she would have none
of him.  Bill eventually gave over trying to talk.  But he lost none of
his cheerfulness.  He lay on his own side of the fire, regarding her
with the amused tolerance that one bestows upon the capricious temper
of a spoiled child.

Thereafter, day by day, the miles unrolled behind them.  Always Roaring
Bill faced straight north.  For a week he kept on tirelessly, and a
consuming desire to know how far he intended to go began to take hold
of her.  But she would not ask, even when daily association dulled the
edge of her resentment, and she found it hard to keep up her hostile
attitude, to nurse bitterness against a man who remained serenely
unperturbed, and who, for all his apparent lawlessness, treated her as
a man might treat his sister.

To her unpracticed eye, the character of the country remained unchanged
except for minor variations.  Everywhere the timber stood in serried
ranks, spotted with lakes and small meadows, and threaded here and
there with little streams.  But at last they dropped into a valley
where the woods thinned out, and down the center of which flowed a
sizable river.  This they followed north a matter of three days.  On
the west the valley wall ran to a timbered ridge.  Eastward the jagged
peaks of a snow-capped mountain chain pierced the sky.

Two hours from their noon camp on the fourth day in the valley Hazel
sighted some moving objects in the distance, angling up on the
timber-patched hillside.  She watched them, at first uncertain whether
they were moose, which they had frequently encountered, or domestic
animals.  Accustomed by now to gauging direction at a glance toward the
sun, she observed that these objects traveled south.

Presently, as the lines of their respective travel brought them nearer,
she made them out to be men, mounted, and accompanied by packs.  She
counted the riders--five, and as many pack horses.  One, she felt
certain, was a woman--whether white or red she could not tell.
But--there was safety in numbers.  And they were going south.

Upon her first impulse she swung off Silk, and started for the
hillside, at an angle calculated to intercept the pack train.  There
was a chance, and she was rapidly becoming inured to taking chances.
At a distance of a hundred yards, she looked back, half fearful that
Roaring Bill was at her heels.  But he stood with his hands in his
pockets, watching her.  She did not look again until she was half a
mile up the hill.  Then he and his packs had vanished.

So, too, had the travelers that she was hurrying to meet.  Off the
valley floor, she no longer commanded the same sweeping outlook.  The
patches of timber intervened.  As she kept on, she became more
uncertain.  But she bore up the slope until satisfied that she was
parallel with where they should come out; then she stopped to rest.
After a few minutes she climbed farther, endeavoring to reach a point
whence she could see more of the slope.  In so far had she absorbed
woodcraft that she now began watching for tracks.  There were enough of
these, but they were the slender, triangle prints of the shy deer.
Nothing resembling the hoofmark of a horse rewarded her searching.  And
before long, what with turning this way and that, she found herself on
a plateau where the pine and spruce stood like bristles in a brush, and
from whence she could see neither valley below nor hillside above.

She was growing tired.  Her feet ached from climbing, and she was wet
with perspiration.  She rested again, and tried calling.  But her voice
sounded muffled in the timber, and she soon gave over that.  The
afternoon was on the wane, and she began to think of and dread the
coming of night.  Already the sun had dipped out of sight behind the
western ridges; his last beams were gilding the blue-white pinnacles a
hundred miles to the east.  The shadows where she sat were thickening.
She had given up hope of finding the pack train, and she had cut loose
from Roaring Bill.  It would be just like him to shrug his shoulders
and keep on going, she thought resentfully.

As twilight fell a brief panic seized her, followed by frightened
despair.  The wilderness, in its evening hush, menaced her with huge
emptinesses, utter loneliness.  She worked her way to the edge of the
wooded plateau.  There was a lingering gleam of yellow and rose pink on
the distant mountains, but the valley itself lay in a blur of shade,
out of which rose the faint murmur of running water, a monotone in the
silence.  She sat down on a dead tree, and cried softly to herself.

"Well?"

She started, with an involuntary gasp of fear, it was so unexpected.
Roaring Bill Wagstaff stood within five feet of her, resting one hand
on the muzzle of his grounded rifle, smiling placidly.

[Illustration: Roaring Bill Wagstaff stood within five feet of her,
resting one hand on the muzzle of his grounded rifle.]

"Well," he repeated, "this chasing up a pack train isn't so easy as it
looks, eh?"

She did not answer.  Her pride would not allow her to admit that she
was glad to see him, relieved to be overtaken like a truant from
school.  And Bill did not seem to expect a reply.  He slung his rifle
into the crook of his arm.

"Come on, little woman," he said gently.  "I knew you'd be tired, and I
made camp down below.  It isn't far."

Obediently she followed him, and as she tramped at his heels she saw
why he had been able to come up on her so noiselessly.  He had put on a
pair of moccasins, and his tread gave forth no sound.

"How did you manage to find me?" she asked suddenly--the first
voluntary speech from her in days.

Bill answered over his shoulder:

"Find you?  Bless your soul, your little, high-heeled slices left a
trail a one-eyed man could follow.  I've been within fifty yards of you
for two hours.

"Just the same," he continued, after a minute's interval, "it's bad
business for you to run off like that.  Suppose you played hide and
seek with me till a storm wiped out your track?  You'd be in a deuce of
a fix."

She made no reply.  The lesson of the experience was not lost on her,
but she was not going to tell him so.

In a short time they reached camp.  Roaring Bill had tarried long
enough to unpack.  The horses grazed on picket.  It was borne in upon
her that short of actually meeting other people her only recourse lay
in sticking to Bill Wagstaff, whether she liked it or not.  To strike
out alone was courting self-destruction.  And she began to understand
why Roaring Bill made no effort to watch or restrain her.  He knew the
grim power of the wilderness.  It was his best ally in what he had set
out to do.

Within forty-eight hours the stream they followed merged itself in
another, both wide and deep, which flowed west through a level-bottomed
valley three miles or more in width.  Westward the land spread out in a
continuous roll, marked here and there with jutting ridges and isolated
peaks; but on the east a chain of rugged mountains marked the horizon
as far as she could see.

Roaring Bill halted on the river brink and stripped his horses clean,
though it was but two in the afternoon and their midday fire less than
an hour extinguished.  She watched him curiously.  When his packs were
off he beckoned her.

"Hold them a minute," he said, and put the lead ropes in her hand.

Then he went up the bank into a thicket of saskatoons.  Out of this he
presently emerged, bearing on his shoulders a canoe, old and
weather-beaten, but stanch, for it rode light as a feather on the
stream.  Bill seated himself in the canoe, holding to Silk's lead rope.
The other two he left free.

"Now," he directed, "when I start across, you drive Nigger and Satin in
if they show signs of hanging back.  Bounce a rock or two off them if
they lag."

Her task was an easy one, for Satin and Nigger followed Silk
unhesitatingly.  The river lapped along the sleek sides of them for
fifty yards.  Then they dropped suddenly into swimming water, and the
current swept them downstream slantwise for the opposite shore, only
their heads showing above the surface.  Hazel wondered what river it
might be.  It was a good quarter of a mile wide, and swift.

Roaring Bill did not trouble to enlighten her as to the locality.  When
he got back he stowed the saddle and pack equipment in the canoe.

"All aboard for the north side," he said boyishly.  And Hazel climbed
obediently amidships.

On the farther side, Bill emptied the canoe, and stowed it out of sight
in a convenient thicket, repacked his horses, and struck out again.
They left the valley behind, and camped that evening on a great height
of land that rolled up to the brink of the valley.

Thereafter the country underwent a gradual change as they progressed
north, slanting a bit eastward.  The heavy timber gave way to a sparser
growth, and that in turn dwindled to scrubby thickets, covering great
areas of comparative level.  Long reaches of grassland opened before
them, waving yellow in the autumn sun.  They crossed other rivers of
various degrees of depth and swiftness, swimming some and fording
others.  Hazel drew upon her knowledge of British Columbia geography,
and decided that the big river where Bill hid his canoe must be the
Fraser where it debouched from the mountains.  And in that case she was
far north, and in a wilderness indeed.

Her muscles gradually hardened to the saddle and to walking.  Her
appetite grew in proportion.  The small supply of eatable dainties that
Roaring Bill had brought from the Meadows dwindled and disappeared,
until they were living on bannocks baked à la frontier in his frying
pan, on beans and coffee, and venison killed by the way.  Yet she
relished the coarse fare even while she rebelled against the
circumstances of its partaking.  Occasionally Bill varied the meat diet
with trout caught in the streams beside which they made their various
camps.  He offered to teach her the secrets of angling, but she
shrugged her shoulders by way of showing her contempt for Roaring Bill
and all his works.

"Do you realize," she broke out one evening over the fire, "that this
is simply abduction?"

"Not at all," Bill answered promptly.  "Abduction means to take away
surreptitiously by force, to carry away wrongfully and by violence any
human being, to kidnap.  Now, you can't by any stretch of the
imagination accuse me of force, violence, or kidnaping--not by a long
shot.  You merely wandered into my camp, and it wasn't convenient for
me to turn back.  Therefore circumstances--not my act, remember--made
it advisable for you to accompany me.  Of course I'll admit that,
according to custom and usage, you would expect me to do the polite
thing and restore you to your own stamping ground.  But there's no law
making it mandatory for a fellow to pilot home a lady in distress.
Isn't that right?"

"Anyhow," he went on, when she remained silent, "I didn't.  And you'll
have to lay the blame on nature for making you a wonderfully attractive
woman.  I did honestly try to find the way to Cariboo Meadows that
first night.  It was only when I found myself thinking how fine it
would be to pike through these old woods and mountains with a partner
like you that I decided--as I did.  I'm human--the woman, she tempted
me.  And aren't you better off?  I could hazard a guess that you were
running away from yourself--or something--when you struck Cariboo
Meadows.  And what's Cariboo Meadows but a little blot on the face of
this fair earth, where you were tied to a deadly routine in order to
earn your daily bread?  You don't care two whoops about anybody there.
Here you are free--free in every sense of the word.  You have no
responsibility except what you impose on yourself; no board bills to
pay; nobody to please but your own little self.  You've got the clean,
wide land for a bedroom, and the sky for its ceiling, instead of a
stuffy little ten-by-ten chamber.  Do you know that you look fifty per
cent better for these few days of living in the open--the way every
normal being likes to live?  You're getting some color in your cheeks,
and you're losing that worried, archangel look.  Honest, if I were a
physician, I'd have only one prescription: Get out into the wild
country, and live off the country as your primitive forefathers did.
Of course, you can't do that alone.  I know because I've tried it.  We
humans don't differ so greatly from the other animals.  We're made to
hunt in couples or packs.  There's a purpose, a law, you might say,
behind that, too; only it's terribly obscured by a lot of other
nonessentials in this day and age.

"Is there any comparison between this sort of life, for instance--if it
appeals to one at all--and being a stenographer and bucking up against
the things any good-looking, unprotected girl gets up against in a
city?  You know, if you'd be frank, that there isn't.  Shucks!  Herding
in the mass, and struggling for a mere subsistence, like dogs over a
bone, degenerates man physically, mentally, and morally--all our
vaunted civilization and culture to the contrary notwithstanding.  Eh?"

But she would not take up the cudgels against him, would not seem to
countenance or condone his offense by discussing it from any angle
whatsoever.  And she was the more determined to allow no degree of
friendliness, even in conversation, because she recognized the
masterful quality of the man.  She told herself that she could have
liked Roaring Bill Wagstaff very well if he had not violated what she
considered the rules of the game.  And she had no mind to allow his
personality to sweep her off her feet in the same determined manner
that he had carried her into the wilderness.  She was no longer afraid
of him.  She occasionally forgot, in spite of herself, that she had a
deep-seated grievance against him.  At such times the wild land, the
changing vistas the journey opened up, charmed her into genuine
enjoyment.  She would find herself smiling at Bill's quaint tricks of
speech.  Then she would recollect that she was, to all intents and
purposes, a prisoner, the captive of his bow and spear.  That was
maddening.

After a lapse of time they dropped into another valley, and faced
westward to a mountain range which Bill told her was the Rockies.  The
next day a snowstorm struck them.  At daybreak the clouds were massed
overhead, lowering, and a dirty gray.  An uncommon chill, a rawness of
atmosphere foretold the change.  And shortly after they broke camp the
first snowflakes began to drift down, slowly at first, then more
rapidly, until the grayness of the sky and the misty woods were
enveloped in the white swirl of the storm.  It was not particularly
cold.  Bill wrapped her in a heavy canvas coat, and plodded on.  Noon
passed, and he made no stop.  If anything, he increased his pace.

Suddenly, late in the afternoon, they stepped out of the timber into a
little clearing, in which the blurred outline of a cabin showed under
the wide arms of a leafless tree.

The melting snow had soaked through the coat; her feet were wet with
the clinging flakes, and the chill of a lowering temperature had set
Hazel shivering.

Roaring Bill halted at the door and lifted her down from Silk's back
without the formality of asking her leave.  He pulled the latchstring,
and led her in.  Beside the rude stone fireplace wood and kindling were
piled in readiness for use.  Bill kicked the door shut, dropped on his
knees, and started the fire.  In five minutes a great blaze leaped and
crackled into the wide throat of the chimney.  Then he piled on more
wood, and turned to her.

"This is the house that Jack built," he said, with a sober face and a
twinkle in his gray eyes.  "This is the man that lives in the house
that Jack built.  And this"--he pointed mischievously at her--"is the
woman who's going to love the man that lives in the house that Jack
built."

"That's a lie!" she flashed stormily through her chattering teeth.

"Well, we'll see," he answered cheerfully.  "Get up here close to the
fire and take off those wet things while I put away the horses."

And with that he went out, whistling.




CHAPTER X

A LITTLE PERSONAL HISTORY

Hazel discarded the wet coat, and, drawing a chair up to the fire, took
off her sopping footgear and toasted her bare feet at the blaze.  Her
clothing was also wet, and she wondered pettishly how in the world she
was going to manage with only the garments on her back--and those dirty
and torn from hacking through the brush for a matter of two weeks.
According to her standards, that was roughing it with a vengeance.  But
presently she gave over thinking of her plight.  The fire warmed her,
and, with the chill gone from her body, she bestowed a curious glance
on her surroundings.

Her experience of homes embraced only homes of two sorts--the
middle-class, conventional sort to which she had been accustomed, and
the few poorly furnished frontier dwellings she had entered since
coming to the hinterlands of British Columbia.  She had a vague
impression that any dwelling occupied exclusively by a man must of
necessity be dirty, disordered, and cheerless.  But she had never seen
a room such as the one she now found herself in.  It conformed to none
of her preconceived ideas.

There was furniture of a sort unknown to her, tables and chairs
fashioned by hand with infinite labor and rude skill, massive in
structure, upholstered with the skins of wild beasts common to the
region.  Upon the walls hung pictures, dainty black-and-white prints,
and a water color or two.  And between the pictures were nailed heads
of mountain sheep and goat, the antlers of deer and caribou.   Above
the fireplace spread the huge shovel horns of a moose, bearing across
the prongs a shotgun and fishing rods.  The center of the
floor--itself, as she could see, of hand-smoothed logs--was lightened
with a great black and red and yellow rug of curious weave.  Covering
up the bare surface surrounding it were bearskins, black and brown.
Her feet rested in the fur of a monster silvertip, fur thicker and
softer than the pile of any carpet ever fabricated by man.  All around
the walls ran shelves filled with books.  A guitar stood in one corner,
a mandolin in another.  The room was all of sixteen by twenty feet, and
it was filled with trophies of the wild--and books.

Except for the dust that had gathered lightly in its owner's absence,
the place was as neat and clean as if the housemaid had but gone over
it.  Hazel shrugged her shoulders.  Roaring Bill Wagstaff became, if
anything, more of an enigma than ever, in the light of his dwelling.
She recollected that Cariboo Meadows had regarded him askance, and
wondered why.

He came in while her gaze was still roving from one object to another,
and threw his wet outer clothing, boy fashion, on the nearest chair.

"Well," he said, "we're here."

"Please don't forget, Mr. Wagstaff," she replied coldly, "that I would
much prefer not to be here."

He stood a moment regarding her with his odd smile.  Then he went into
the adjoining room.  Out of this he presently emerged, dragging a small
steamer trunk.  He opened it, got down on his knees, and pawed over the
contents.  Hazel, looking over her shoulder, saw that the trunk was
filled with woman's garments, and sat amazed.

"Say, little person," Bill finally remarked, "it looks to me as if you
could outfit yourself completely right here."

"I don't know that I care to deck myself in another woman's finery,
thank you," she returned perversely.

"Now, see here," Roaring Bill turned reproachfully; "see here--"

He grinned to himself then, and went again into the other room,
returning with a small, square mirror.  He planted himself squarely in
front of her, and held up the glass.  Hazel took one look at her
reflection, and she could have struck Roaring Bill for his audacity.
She had not realized what an altogether disreputable appearance a
normally good-looking young woman could acquire in two weeks on the
trail, with no toilet accessories and only the clothes on her back.
She tried to snatch the mirror from him, but Bill eluded her reach, and
laid the glass on the table.

"You'll feel a whole better able to cope with the situation," he told
her smilingly, "when you get some decent clothes on and your hair
fixed.  That's a woman.  And you don't need to feel squeamish about
these things.  This trunk's got a history, let me tell you.  A bunch of
simon-pure tenderfeet strayed into the mountains west of here a couple
of summers ago.  There were two women in the bunch.  The youngest one,
who was about your age and size, must have had more than her share of
vanity.  I guess she figured on charming the bear and the moose, or the
simple aborigines who dwell in this neck of the woods.  Anyhow, she had
all kinds of unnecessary fixings along, that trunkful of stuff in the
lot.  You can imagine what a nice time their guides had packing that on
a horse, eh?  They got into a deuce of a pickle finally, and had to
abandon a lot of their stuff, among other things the steamer trunk.  I
lent them a hand, and they told me to help myself to the stuff.  So I
did after they were out of the country.  That's how you come to have a
wardrobe all ready to your hand.  Now, you'd be awful foolish to act
like a mean and stiff-necked female person.  You're not going to, are
you?" he wheedled.  "Because I want to make you comfortable.  What's
the use of getting on your dignity over a little thing like clothes?"

"I don't intend to," Hazel suddenly changed front.  "I'll make myself
as comfortable as I can--particularly if it will put you to any
trouble."

"You're bound to scrap, eh?" he grinned.  "But it takes two to build a
fight, and I positively refuse to fight with _you_."

He dragged the trunk back into the room, and came out carrying a great
armful of masculine belongings.  Two such trips he made, piling all his
things onto a chair.

"There!" he said at last.  "That end of the house belongs to you,
little person.  Now, get those wet things off before you catch a cold.
Oh, wait a minute!"

He disappeared into the kitchen end of the house, and came back with a
wash-basin and a pail of water.

"Your room is now ready, madam, an it please you."  He bowed with mock
dignity, and went back into the kitchen.

Hazel heard him rattling pots and dishes, whistling cheerfully the
while.  She closed the door, and busied herself with an inventory of
the tenderfoot lady's trunk.  In it she found everything needful for
complete change, and a variety of garments to boot.  Folded in the
bottom of the trunk was a gray cloth skirt and a short blue silk
kimono.  There was a coat and skirt, too, of brown corduroy.  But the
feminine instinct asserted itself, and she laid out the gray skirt and
the kimono.

For a dresser Roaring Bill had fashioned a wide shelf, and on it she
found a toilet set complete--hand mirror, military brushes, and sundry
articles, backed with silver and engraved with his initials.  Perhaps
with a spice of malice, she put on a few extra touches.  There would be
some small satisfaction in tantalizing Bill Wagstaff--even if she could
not help feeling that it might be a dangerous game.  And, thus arrayed
in the weapons of her sex, she slipped on the kimono, and went into the
living-room to the cheerful glow of the fire.

Bill remained busy in the kitchen.  Dusk fell.  The gleam of a light
showed through a crack in the door.  In the big room only the fire gave
battle to the shadows, throwing a ruddy glow into the far corners.
Presently Bill came in with a pair of candles which he set on the
mantel above the fireplace.

"By Jove!" he said, looking down at her.  "You look good enough to eat!
I'm not a cannibal, however," he continued hastily, when Hazel flushed.
She was not used to such plain speaking.  "And supper's ready.  Come
on!"

The table was set.  Moreover, to her surprise--and yet not so greatly
to her surprise, for she was beginning to expect almost anything from
this paradoxical young man--it was spread with linen, and the cutlery
was silver, the dishes china, in contradistinction to the tinware of
his camp outfit.

As a cook Roaring Bill Wagstaff had no cause to be ashamed of himself,
and Hazel enjoyed the meal, particularly since she had eaten nothing
since six in the morning.  After a time, when her appetite was
partially satisfied, she took to glancing over his kitchen.  There
seemed to be some adjunct of a kitchen missing.  A fire burned on a
hearth similar to the one in the living room.  Pots stood about the
edge of the fire.  But there was no sign of a stove.

Bill finished eating, and resorted to cigarette material instead of his
pipe.

"Well, little person," he said at last, "what do you think of this
joint of mine, anyway?"

"I've just been wondering," she replied.  "I don't see any stove, yet
you have food here that looks as if it were baked, and biscuits that
must have been cooked in an oven."

"You see no stove for the good and sufficient reason," he returned,
"that you can't pack a stove on a horse--and we're three hundred odd
miles from the end of any wagon road.  With a Dutch oven or two--that
heavy, round iron thing you see there--I can guarantee to cook almost
anything you can cook on a stove.  Anybody can if they know how.
Besides, I like things better this way.  If I didn't, I suppose I'd
have a stove--and maybe a hot-water supply, and modern plumbing.  As it
is, it affords me a sort of prideful satisfaction, which you may or may
not be able to understand, that this cabin and everything in it is the
work of my hands--of stuff I've packed in here with all sorts of effort
from the outside.  Maybe I'm a freak.  But I'm proud of this place.
Barring the inevitable lonesomeness that comes now and then, I can be
happier here than any place I've ever struck yet.  This country grows
on one."

"Yes--on one's nerves," Hazel retorted.

Bill smiled, and, rising, began to clear away the dishes.  Hazel
resisted an impulse to help.  She would not work; she would not lift
her finger to any task, she reminded herself.  He had put her in her
present position, and he could wait on her.  So she rested an elbow on
the table and watched him.  In the midst of his work he stopped
suddenly.

"There's oceans of time to do this," he observed.  "I'm just a wee bit
tired, if anybody should ask you.  Let's camp in the other room.  It's
a heap more comfy."

He put more wood on the kitchen fire, and set a pot of water to heat.
Out in the living-room Hazel drew her chair to one side of the hearth.
Bill sprawled on the bearskin robe with another cigarette in his
fingers.

"No," he began, after a long silence, "this country doesn't get on
one's nerves--not if one is a normal human being.  You'll find that.
When I first came up here I thought so, too; it seemed so big and empty
and forbidding.  But the more I see of it the better it compares with
the outer world, where the extremes of luxury and want are always in
evidence.  It began to seem like home to me when I first looked down
into this little basin.  I had a partner then.  I said to him: 'Here's
a dandy, fine place to winter.'  So we wintered--in a log shack sixteen
foot square that Silk and Satin and Nigger have for a stable now.  When
summer came my partner wanted to move on, so I stayed.  Stayed and
began to build for the next winter.  And I've been working at it ever
since, making little things like chairs and tables and shelves, and
fixing up game heads whenever I got an extra good one.  And maybe two
or three times a year I'd go out.  Get restless, you know.  I'm not
really a hermit by nature.  Lord, the things I've packed in here from
the outside!  Books--I hired a whole pack train at Ashcroft once to
bring in just books; they thought I was crazy, I guess.  I've quit this
place once or twice, but I always come back.  It's got that home feel
that I can't find anywhere else.  Only it has always lacked one
important home qualification," he finished softly.  "Do you ever build
air castles?"

"No," Hazel answered untruthfully, uneasy at the trend of his talk.
She was learning that Bill Wagstaff, for all his gentleness and
patience with her, was a persistent mortal.

"Well, I do," he continued, unperturbed.  "Lots of 'em.  But mostly
around one thing--a woman--a dream woman--because I never saw one that
seemed to fit in until I ran across you."

"Mr. Wagstaff," Hazel pleaded, "won't you please stop talking like
that?  It isn't--it isn't--"

"Isn't proper, I suppose," Bill supplied dryly.  "Now, that's merely an
error, and a fundamental error on your part, little person.  Our
emotion and instincts are perfectly proper when you get down to
fundamentals.  You've got an artificial standard to judge by, that's
all.  And I don't suppose you have the least idea how many lives are
spoiled one way and another by the operation of those same artificial
standards in this little old world.  Now, I may seem to you a lawless,
unprincipled individual indeed, because I've acted contrary to your
idea of the accepted order of things.  But here's my side of it: I'm in
search of happiness.  We all are.  I have a few ideals--and very few
illusions.  I don't quite believe in this thing called love at first
sight.  That presupposes a volatility of emotion that people of any
strength of character arc not likely to indulge in.  But--for instance,
a man can have a very definite ideal of the kind of woman he would like
for a mate, the kind of woman he could be happy with and could make
happy.  And whenever he finds a woman who corresponds to that ideal
he's apt to make a strenuous attempt to get her.  That's pretty much
how I felt about you."

"You had no right to kidnap me," Hazel cried.

"You had no business getting lost and making it possible for me to
carry you off," Bill replied.  "Isn't that logic?"

"I'll never forgive you," Hazel flashed.  "It was treacherous and
unmanly.  There are other ways of winning a woman."

"There wasn't any other way open to me."  Bill grew suddenly moody.
"Not with you in Cariboo Meadows.  I'm taboo there.  You'd have got a
history of me that would have made you cut me dead; you may have had
the tale of my misdeeds for all I know.  No, it was impossible for me
to get acquainted with you in the conventional way.  I knew that, and
so I didn't make any effort.  Why, I'd have been at your elbow when you
left the supper table at Jim Briggs' that night if I hadn't known how
it would be.  I went there out of sheer curiosity to take a look at
you--maybe out of a spirit of defiance, too, because I knew that I was
certainly not welcome even if they were willing to take my money for a
meal.  And I came away all up in the air.  There was something about
you--the tone of your voice, the way your proud little head is set on
your shoulders, your make-up in general--that sent me away with a
large-sized grouch at myself, at Cariboo Meadows, and at you for coming
in my way."

"Why?" she asked in wonder.

"Because you'd have believed what they told you, and Cariboo Meadows
can't tell anything about me that isn't bad," he said quietly.  "My
record there makes me entirely unfit to associate with--that would have
been your conclusion.  And I wanted to be with you, to talk to you, to
take you by storm and make you like me as I felt I could care for you.
You can't have grown up, little person, without realizing that you do
attract men very strongly.  All women do, but some far more than
others."

"Perhaps," she admitted coldly.  "Men have annoyed me with their
unwelcome attentions.  But none of them ever dared go the length of
carrying me away against my will.  You can't explain or excuse that."

"I'm not attempting excuses," Bill made answer.  "There are two things
I never do--apologize or bully.  I dare say that's one reason the
Meadows gives me such a black eye.  In the first place, the confounded,
ignorant fools did me a very great injustice, and I've never taken the
trouble to explain to them wherein they were wrong.  I came into this
country with a partner six years ago--a white man, if ever one
lived--about the only real man friend I ever had.  He was known to have
over three thousand dollars on his person.  He took sick and died the
second year, at the head of the Peace, in midwinter.  I buried him;
couldn't take him out.  Somehow the yarn got to going in the Meadows
that I'd murdered him for his money.  The gossip started there because
we had an argument about outfitting while we were there, and roasted
each other as only real pals can.  So they got it into their heads I
killed him, and tried to have the provincial police investigate.  It
made me hot, and so I wouldn't explain to anybody the circumstances,
nor what became of Dave's three thousand, which happened to be five
thousand by that time, and which I sent to his mother and sister in New
York, as he told me to do when he was dying.  When they got to hinting
things the next time I hit the Meadows, I started in to clean out the
town.  I think I whipped about a dozen men that time.  And once or
twice every season since I've been in the habit of dropping in there
and raising the very devil out of sheer resentment.  It's a wonder some
fellow hasn't killed me, for it's a fact that I've thrashed every man
in the blamed place except Jim Briggs--and some of them two or three
times.  And I make them line up at the bar and drink at my expense, and
all that sort of foolishness.

"That may sound to you like real depravity," he concluded, "but it's a
fact in nature that a man has to blow the steam off his chest about
every so often.  I have got drunk in Cariboo Meadows, and I have raised
all manner of disturbances there, partly out of pure animal spirits,
and mostly because I had a grudge against them.  Consequently I really
have given them reason to look askance at any one--particularly a nice
girl from the East--who would have anything to do with me.  If they
weren't a good deal afraid of me, and always laying for a chance to do
me up, they wouldn't let me stay in the town overnight.  So you can see
what a handicap I was under when it came to making your acquaintance
and courting you in the orthodox manner."

"You've made a great mistake," she said bitterly, "if you think you've
removed the handicap.  I've suffered a great deal at the hands of men
in the past six months.  I'm beginning to believe that all men are
brutes at heart."

Roaring Bill sat up and clasped his hands over his knees and stared
fixedly into the fire.

"No," he said slowly, "all men are not brutes--any more than all women
are angels.  I'll convince you of that."

"Take me home, then," she cried forlornly.  "That's the only way you
can convince me or make amends."

"No," Bill murmured, "that isn't the way.  Wait till you know me
better.  Besides, I couldn't take you out now if I wanted to without
exposing you to greater hardships than you'll have to endure here.  Do
you realize that it's fall, and we're in the high latitudes?  This snow
may not go off at all.  Even if it does it will storm again before a
week.  You couldn't wallow through snow to your waist in
forty-below-zero weather."

"People will pass here, and I'll get word out," Hazel asserted
desperately.

"What good would that do you?  You've got too much conventional regard
for what you term your reputation to send word to Cariboo Meadows that
you're living back here with Roaring Bill Wagstaff, and won't some one
please come and rescue you."  He paused to let that sink in, then
continued: "Besides, you won't see a white face before spring; then
only by accident.  No one in the North, outside of a few Indians, has
ever seen this cabin or knows where it stands."

She sat there, dumb, raging inwardly.  For the minute she could have
killed Roaring Bill.  She who had been so sure in her independence
carried, whether or no, into the heart of the wilderness at the whim of
a man who stood a self-confessed rowdy, in ill repute among his own
kind.  There was a slumbering devil in Miss Hazel Weir, and it took
little to wake her temper.  She looked at Bill Wagstaff, and her breast
heaved.  He was responsible, and he could sit coolly talking about it.
The resentment that had smoldered against Andrew Bush and Jack Barrow
concentrated on Roaring Bill as the arch offender of them all.  And
lest she yield to a savage impulse to scream at him, she got up and ran
into the bedroom, slammed the door shut behind her, and threw herself
across the bed to muffle the sound of her crying in a pillow.

After a time she lifted her head.  Outside, the wind whistled gustily
around the cabin corners.  In the hushed intervals she heard a steady
pad, pad, sounding sometimes close by her door, again faintly at the
far end of the room.  A beam of light shone through the generous
latchstring hole in the door.  Stealing softly over, she peeped through
this hole.  From end to end of the big room and back again Roaring Bill
paced slowly, looking straight ahead of him with a fixed, absent stare,
his teeth closed on his nether lip.  Hazel blinked wonderingly.  Many
an hour in the last three months she had walked the floor like that,
biting her lip in mental agony.  And then, while she was looking, Bill
abruptly extinguished the candles.  In the red gleam from the hearth
she saw him go into the kitchen, closing the door softly.  After that
there was no sound but the swirl of the storm brushing at her window.




CHAPTER XI

WINTER--AND A TRUCE

In line with Roaring Bill's forecast, the weather cleared for a brief
span, and then winter shut down in earnest.  Successive falls of snow
overlaid the earth with a three-foot covering, loose and feathery in
the depths of the forest, piled in hard, undulating windrows in the
scattered openings.  Daily the cold increased, till a half-inch layer
of frost stood on the cabin panes.  The cold, intense, unremitting,
lorded it over a vast realm of wood and stream; lakes and rivers were
locked fast under ice, and through the clear, still nights the aurora
flaunted its shimmering banners across the northern sky.

But within the cabin they were snug and warm, Bill's ax kept the
woodpile high.  The two fireplaces shone red the twenty-four hours
through.  Of flour, tea, coffee, sugar, beans, and such stuff as could
only be gotten from the outside he had a plentiful supply.  Potatoes
and certain vegetables that he had grown in a cultivated patch behind
the cabin were stored in a deep cellar.  He could always sally forth
and get meat.  And the ice was no bar to fishing, for he would cut a
hole, sink a small net, and secure overnight a week's supply of trout
and whitefish.  Thus their material wants were provided for.

As time passed Hazel gradually shook off a measure of her depression,
thrust her uneasiness and resentment into the background.  As a matter
of fact, she resigned herself to getting through the winter, since that
was inevitable.  She was out of the world, the only world she knew, and
by reason of the distance and the snows there was scant chance of
getting back to that world while winter gripped the North.  The spring
might bring salvation.  But spring was far in the future, too far ahead
to dwell upon.  As much as possible, she refrained from thinking,
wisely contenting herself with getting through one day after another.

And in so doing she fell into the way of doing little things about the
house, finding speedily that time flew when she busied herself at some
task in the intervals of delving in Roaring Bill's library.

She could cook--and she did.  Her first meal came about by grace of
Roaring Bill's absence.  He was hunting, and supper time drew nigh.
She grew hungry, and, on the impulse of the moment, turned herself
loose in the kitchen--largely in a mood for experiment.  She had
watched Bill make all manner of things in his Dutch ovens, and observed
how he prepared meat over the glowing coals often enough to get the
hang of it.  Wherefore, her first meal was a success.  When Roaring
Bill came in, an hour after dark, he found her with cheeks rosy from
leaning over the fire, and a better meal than he could prepare all
waiting for him.  He washed and sat down.  Hazel discarded her
flour-sack apron and took her place opposite.  Bill made no comment
until he had finished and lighted a cigarette.

"You're certainly a jewel, little person," he drawled then.  "How many
more accomplishments have you got up your sleeve?"

"Do you consider ordinary cooking an accomplishment?" she returned
lightly.

"I surely do," he replied, "when I remember what an awful mess I made
of it on the start.  I certainly did spoil a lot of good grub."

After that they divided the household duties, and Hazel forgot that she
had vowed to make Bill Wagstaff wait on her hand and foot as the only
penalty she could inflict for his misdeeds.  It seemed petty when she
considered the matter, and there was nothing petty about Hazel Weir.
If the chance ever offered, she would make him suffer, but in the
meantime there was no use in being childish.

She did not once experience the drear loneliness that had sat on her
like a dead weight the last month before she turned her back on
Granville and its unhappy associations.  For one thing, Bill Wagstaff
kept her intellectually on the jump.  He was always precipitating an
argument or discussion of some sort, in which she invariably came off
second best.  His scope of knowledge astonished her, as did his
language.  Bill mixed slang, the colloquialisms of the frontier, and
the terminology of modern scientific thought with quaint impartiality.
There were times when he talked clear over her head.  And he was by
turns serious and boyish, with always a saving sense of humor.  So that
she was eternally discovering new sides to him.

The other refuge for her was his store of books.  Upon the shelves she
found many a treasure-trove--books that she had promised herself to
read some day when she could buy them and had leisure.  Roaring Bill
had collected bits of the world's best in poetry and fiction; and last,
but by no means least, the books that stand for evolution and
revolution, philosophy, economics, sociology, and the kindred sciences.
Bill was not orderly.  He could put his finger on any book he wanted,
but on his shelves like as not she would find a volume of Haeckel and
another of Bobbie Burns side by side, or a last year's novel snuggling
up against a treatise on social psychology.  She could not understand
why a man--a young man--with the intellectual capacity to digest the
stuff that Roaring Bill frequently became immersed in should choose to
bury himself in the wilderness.  And once, in an unguarded moment, she
voiced that query.  Bill closed a volume of Nietzsche, marking the
place with his forefinger, and looked at her thoughtfully over the book.

"Well," he said, "there are one or two good and sufficient reasons, to
which you, of course, may not agree.  First, though, I'll venture to
assert that your idea of the nature and purpose of life as we humans
know and experience it is rather hazy.  Have you ever seriously asked
yourself why we exist as entities at all?  And, seeing that we do find
ourselves possessed of this existence, what constrains us to act along
certain lines?"

Hazel shook her head.  That was an abstraction which she had never
considered.  She had been too busy living to make a critical analysis
of life.  She had the average girl's conception of life, when she
thought of it at all, as a state of being born, of growing up, of
marrying, of trying to be happy, and ultimately--very remotely--of
dying.  And she had also the conventional idea that activity in the
world, the world as she knew it, the doing of big things in a public or
semi-public way, was the proper sphere for people of exceptional
ability.  But why this should be so, what law, natural or fabricated by
man, made it so she had never asked herself.  She had found it so, and
taken it for granted.  Roaring Bill Wagstaff was the first man to cross
her path who viewed the struggle for wealth and fame and power as other
than inevitable and desirable.

"You see, little person," he went on, "we have some very definite
requirements which come of the will to live that dominates all life.
We must eat, we must protect our bodies against the elements, and we
need for comfort some sort of shelter.  But in securing these
essentials to self-preservation where is the difference, except in
method, between the banker who manipulates millions and the post-hole
digger on the farm?  Not a darned bit, in reality.  They're both after
exactly the same thing--security against want.  If the post-hole
digger's wants are satisfied by two dollars a day he is getting the
same result as the banker, whose standard of living crowds his big
income.  Having secured the essentials, then, what is the next urge of
life?  Happiness.  That, however, brings us to a more abstract question.

"In the main, though, that's my answer to your question.  Here I can
secure myself a good living--as a matter of fact, I can easily get the
wherewithal to purchase any luxuries that I desire--and it is gotten
without a petty-larceny struggle with my fellow men.  Here I exploit
only natural resources, take only what the earth has prodigally
provided.  Why should I live in the smoke and sordid clutter of a town
when I love the clean outdoors?  The best citizen is the man with a
sound mind and a strong, healthy body; and the only obligation any of
us has to society is not to be a burden on society.  So I live in the
wilds the greater part of the year, I keep my muscles in trim, and I
have always food for myself and for any chance wayfarer--and I can look
everybody in the eye and tell them to go to the fiery regions if I
happen to feel that way.  What business would I have running a grocery
store, or a bank, or a real-estate office, when all my instincts rebel
against it?  What normal being wants to be chained to a desk between
four walls eight or ten hours a day fifty weeks in the year?  I'll bet
a nickel there was many a time when you were clacking a typewriter for
a living that you'd have given anything to get out in the green fields
for a while.  Isn't that so?"

Hazel admitted it.

"You see," Bill concluded, "this civilization of ours, with its
peculiar business ethics, and its funny little air of importance, is a
comparatively recent thing--a product of the last two or three thousand
years, to give it its full historic value.  And mankind has been a
great many millions of years in the making, all of which has been spent
under primitive conditions.  So that we are as yet barbarians, savages
even, with just a little veneer.  Why, man, as such, is only beginning
to get a glimmering of his relation to the universe.  Pshaw, though!  I
didn't set out to deliver a lecture on evolution.  But, believe me,
little person, if I thought that any great good or happiness would
result from my being elsewhere, from scrapping with my fellows in the
world crush, I'd be there with both feet.  Do you think you'd be more
apt to care for me if I were to get out and try to set the world afire
with great deeds?"

"That wasn't the question," she returned distantly, trying, as she
always did, to keep him off the personal note.

"But it is the question with me," he declared.  "I don't know why I let
you go on flouting me."  He reached over and caught her arm with a grip
that made her wince.  The sudden leap of passion into his eyes
quickened the beat of her heart.  "I could break you in two with my
hands without half trying--tame you as the cave men tamed their women,
by main strength.  But I don't--by reason of the same peculiar feeling
that would keep me from kicking a man when he was down, I suppose.
Little person, why can't you like me better?"

"Because you tricked me," she retorted hotly.  "Because I trusted you,
and you used that trust to lead me farther astray.  Any woman would
hate a man for that.  What do you suppose--you, with your knowledge of
life--the world will think of me when I get out of here?"

But Roaring Bill had collected himself, and sat smiling, and made no
reply.  He looked at her thoughtfully for a few seconds, then resumed
his reading of the Mad Philosopher, out of whose essays he seemed to
extract a great deal of quiet amusement.

A day or two after that Hazel came into the kitchen and found Bill
piling towels, napkins, and a great quantity of other soiled articles
on an outspread tablecloth.

"Well," she inquired, "what are you going to do with those?"

"Take 'em to the laundry," he laughed.  "Collect your dirty duds, and
bring them forth."

"Laundry!" Hazel echoed.  It seemed rather a far-fetched joke.

"Sure!  You don't suppose we can get along forever without having
things washed, do you?" he replied.  "I don't mind housework, but I do
draw the line at a laundry job when I don't _have_ to do it.  Go
on--get your clothes."

So she brought out her accumulation of garments, and laid them on the
pile.  Bill tied up the four corners of the tablecloth.

"Now," said he, "let's see if we can't fit you out for a more or less
extended walk.  You stay in the house altogether too much these days.
That's bad business.  Nothing like exercise in the fresh air."

Thus in a few minutes Hazel fared forth, wrapped in Bill's fur coat, a
flap-eared cap on her head, and on her feet several pairs of stockings
inside moccasins that Bill had procured from some mysterious source a
day or two before.

The day was sunny, albeit the air was hazy with multitudes of floating
frost particles, and the tramp through the forest speedily brought the
roses back to her cheeks.  Bill carried the bundle of linen on his
back, and trudged steadily through the woods.  But the riddle of his
destination was soon read to her, for a two-mile walk brought them out
on the shore of a fair-sized lake, on the farther side of which loomed
the conical lodges of an Indian camp.

"You sabe now?" said he as they crossed the ice.  "This bunch generally
comes in here about this time, and stays till spring.  I get the squaws
to wash for me.  Ever see Mr. Indian on his native heath?"

Hazel never had, and she was duly interested, even if a trifle shy of
the red brother who stared so fixedly.  She entered a lodge with Bill,
and listened to him make laundry arrangements in broken English with a
withered old beldame whose features resembled a ham that had hung
overlong in the smokehouse.  Two or three blanketed bucks squatted by
the fire that sent its blue smoke streaming out the apex of the lodge.

"Heap fine squaw!" one suddenly addressed Bill.  "Where you ketchum?"

Bill laughed at Hazel's confusion.  "Away off."  He gestured southward,
and the Indian grunted some unintelligible remark in his own tongue--at
which Roaring Bill laughed again.

Before they started home Bill succeeded in purchasing, after much talk,
a pair of moccasins that Hazel conceded to be a work of art, what with
the dainty pattern of beads and the ornamentation of colored porcupine
quills.  Her feminine soul could not cavil when Bill thrust them in the
pocket of her coat, even if her mind was set against accepting any
peace tokens at his hands.

And so in the nearing sunset they went home through the frost-bitten
woods, where the snow crunched and squeaked under their feet, and the
branches broke off with a pistol-like snap when they were bent aside.

A hundred yards from the cabin Bill challenged her to a race.  She
refused to run, and he picked her up bodily, and ran with her to the
very door.  He held her a second before he set her down, and Hazel's
face whitened.  She could feel his breath on her cheek, and she could
feel his arms quiver, and the rapid beat of his heart.  For an instant
she thought Roaring Bill Wagstaff was about to make the colossal
mistake of trying to kiss her.

But he set her gently on her feet and opened the door.  And by the time
he had his heavy outer clothes off and the fires started up he was
talking whimsically about their Indian neighbors, and Hazel breathed
more freely.  The clearest impression that she had, aside from her
brief panic, was of his strength.  He had run with her as easily as if
she had been a child.

After that they went out many times together.  Bill took her hunting,
initiated her into the mysteries of rifle shooting, and the
manipulation of a six-shooter.  He taught her to walk on snowshoes,
lightly over the surface of the crusted snow, through which otherwise
she floundered.  A sort of truce arose between them, and the days
drifted by without untoward incident, Bill tended to his horses,
chopped wood, carried water.  She took upon herself the care of the
house.  And through the long evenings, in default of conversation, they
would sit with a book on either side of the fireplace that roared
defiance to the storm gods without.

And sometimes Hazel would find herself wondering why Roaring Bill
Wagstaff could not have come into her life in a different manner.  As
it was--she never, _never_ would forgive him.




CHAPTER XII

THE FIRES OF SPRING

There came a day when the metallic brilliancy went out of the sky, and
it became softly, mistily blue.  All that forenoon Hazel prowled
restlessly out of doors without cap or coat.  There was a new feel in
the air.  The deep winter snow had suddenly lost its harshness.  A
tentative stillness wrapped the North as if the land rested a moment,
gathering its force for some titanic effort.

Toward evening a mild breeze freshened from the southwest.  The tender
blue of the sky faded at sundown to a slaty gray.  Long wraiths of
cloud floated up with the rising wind.  At ten o'clock a gale whooped
riotously through the trees.  And at midnight Hazel wakened to a sound
that she had not heard in months.  She rose and groped her way to the
window.  The encrusting frost had vanished from the panes.  They were
wet to the touch of her fingers.  She unhooked the fastening, and swung
the window out.  A great gust of damp, warm wind blew strands of hair
across her face.  She leaned through the casement, and drops of cold
water struck her bare neck.  That which she had heard was the dripping
eaves.  The chinook wind droned its spring song, and the bare boughs of
the tree beside the cabin waved and creaked the time.  Somewhere
distantly a wolf lifted up his voice, and the long, throaty howl
swelled in a lull of the wind.  It was black and ghostly outside, and
strange, murmuring sounds rose and fell in the surrounding forests, as
though all the dormant life of the North was awakening at the seasonal
change.  She closed the window and went back to bed.

At dawn the eaves had ceased their drip, and the dirt roof laid bare to
the cloud-banked sky.  From the southwest the wind still blew strong
and warm.  The thick winter garment of the earth softened to slush, and
vanished with amazing swiftness.  Streams of water poured down every
depression.  Pools stood between the house and stable.  Spring had
leaped strong-armed upon old Winter and vanquished him at the first
onslaught.

All that day the chinook blew, working its magic upon the land.  When
day broke again with a clearing sky, and the sun peered between the
cloud rifts, his beams fell upon vast areas of brown and green, where
but forty-eight hours gone there was the cold revelry of frost sprites
upon far-flung fields of snow.  Patches of earth steamed wherever a
hillside lay bare to the sun.  From some mysterious distance a lone
crow winged his way, and, perching on a near-by tree-top, cawed raucous
greeting.

Hazel cleared away the breakfast things, and stood looking out the
kitchen window.  Roaring Bill sat on a log, shirt-sleeved, smoking his
pipe.  Presently he went over to the stable, led out his horses, and
gave them their liberty.  For twenty minutes or so he stood watching
their mad capers as they ran and leaped and pranced back and forth over
the clearing.  Then he walked off into the timber, his rifle over one
shoulder.

Hazel washed her dishes and went outside.  The cabin sat on a benchlike
formation, a shoulder of the mountain behind, and she could look away
westward across miles and miles of timber, darkly green and merging
into purple in the distance.  It was a beautiful land--and lonely.  She
did not know why, but all at once a terrible feeling of utter
forlornness seized her.  It was spring--and also it was spring in other
lands.  The wilderness suddenly took on the characteristics of a
prison, in which she was sentenced to solitary confinement.  She
rebelled against it, rebelled against her surroundings, against the
manner of her being there, against everything.  She hated the North,
she wished to be gone from it, and most of all she hated Bill Wagstaff
for constraining her presence there.  In six months she had not seen a
white face, nor spoken to a woman of her own blood.  Out beyond that
sea of forest lay the big, active world in which she belonged, of which
she was a part, and she felt that she must get somewhere, do something,
or go mad.

All the heaviness of heart, all the resentment she had felt in the
first few days when she followed him perforce away from Cariboo
Meadows, came back to her with redoubled force that forenoon.  She went
back into the house, now gloomy without a fire, slumped forlornly into
a chair, and cried herself into a condition approaching hysteria.  And
she was sitting there, her head bowed on her hands, when Bill returned
from his hunting.  The sun sent a shaft through the south window, a
shaft which rested on her drooping head.  Roaring Bill walked softly up
behind her and put his hand on her shoulder.

"What is it, little person?" he asked gently.

She refused to answer.

"Say," he bent a little lower, "you know what the Tentmaker said:

  "'Come fill the cup, and in the fire of Spring
  Your Winter garment of Repentance fling;
  The Bird of Time has but a little way
  To flutter--and the Bird is on the Wing.'


"Life's too short to waste any of it in being uselessly miserable.
Come on out and go for a ride on Silk.  I'll take you up on a
mountainside, and show you a waterfall that leaps three hundred feet in
the clear.  The woods are waking up and putting on their Easter
bonnets.  There's beauty everywhere.  Come along!"

She wrenched herself away from him.

"I want to go home!" she wailed.  "I hate you and the North, and
everything in it.  If you've got a spark of manhood left in you, you'll
take me out of here."

Roaring Bill backed away from her.  "Do you mean that?  Honest Injun?"
he asked incredulously.

"I do--I do!" she cried vehemently.  "Haven't I told you often enough?
I didn't come here willingly, and I won't stay.  I will not!  I have a
right to live my life in my own way, and it's not this way."

"So," Roaring Bill began evenly, "springtime with you only means
getting back to work.  You want to get back into the muddled rush of
peopled places, do you?  For what?  To teach a class in school, or to
be some business shark's slave of the typewriter at ten dollars a week?
You want to be where you can associate with fluffy-ruffle, pompadoured
girls, and be properly introduced to equally proper young men.  Lord,
but I seem to have made a mistake!  And, by the same token, I'll
probably pay for it--in a way you wouldn't understand if you lived a
thousand years.  Well, set your mind at rest.  I'll take you out.  I'll
take you back to your stamping-ground if that's what you crave.  Ye
gods and little fishes, but I have sure been a fool!"

He sat down on the edge of the table, and Hazel blinked at him, half
scared, and full of wonder.  She had grown so used to seeing him calm,
imperturbable, smiling cheerfully no matter what she said or did, that
his passionate outbreak amazed her.  She could only sit and look at him.

He got out his cigarette materials.  But his fingers trembled, spilling
the tobacco.  And when he tore the paper in his efforts to roll it, he
dashed paper and all into the fireplace with something that sounded
like an oath, and walked out of the house.  Nor did he return till the
sun was well down toward the tree-rimmed horizon.  When he came back he
brought in an armful of wood and kindling, and began to build a fire.
Hazel came out of her room.  Bill greeted her serenely.

"Well, little person," he said, "I hope you'll perk up now."

"I'll try," she returned.  "Are you really going to take me out?"

Bill paused with a match blazing in his fingers.

"I'm not in the habit of saying things I don't mean,"' he answered
dryly.  "We'll start in the morning."

The dark closed in on them, and they cooked and ate supper in silence.
Bill remained thoughtful and abstracted.  He slouched for a time in his
chair by the fire.  Then from some place among his books he unearthed a
map, and, spreading it on the table, studied it a while.  After that he
dragged in his kyaks from outside, and busied himself packing them with
supplies for a journey--tea and coffee and flour and such things done
up in small canvas sacks.

And when these preparations were complete he got a sheet of paper and a
pencil, and fell to copying something from the map.  He was still at
that, sketching and marking, when Hazel went to bed.

By all the signs and tokens, Roaring Bill Wagstaff slept none that
night.  Hazel herself tossed wakefully, and during her wakeful moments
she could hear him stir in the outer room.  And a full hour before
daylight he called her to breakfast.




CHAPTER XIII

THE OUT TRAIL

"This time last spring," Bill said to her, "I was piking away north of
those mountains, bound for the head of the Naas to prospect for gold."

They were camped in a notch on the tiptop of a long divide, a thousand
feet above the general level.  A wide valley rolled below, and from the
height they overlooked two great, sinuous lakes and a multitude of
smaller ones.  The mountain range to which Bill pointed loomed seventy
miles distance, angling northwest.  The sun glinted on the snow-capped
peaks, though they themselves were in the shadow.

"I've been wondering," Hazel said.  "This country somehow seems
different.  You're not going back to Cariboo Meadows, are you?"

Bill bestowed a look of surprise on her.

"I should say not!" he drawled.  "Not that it would make any difference
to me.  But I'm very sure you don't want to turn up there in my
company."

"That's true," she observed.  "But all the clothes and all the money I
have in the world are there."

"Don't let money worry you," he said briefly.  "I have got plenty to
see you through.  And you can easily buy clothes."

They were now ten days on the road.  Their course had lain across low,
rolling country, bordered by rugged hills, spotted with lakes, and cut
here and there by streams that put Bill Wagstaff to many strange shifts
in crossing.  But upon leaving this camp they crossed a short stretch
of low country, and then struck straight into the heart of a
mountainous region.  Steadily they climbed, reaching up through gloomy
cañons where foaming cataracts spilled themselves over sheer walls of
granite, where the dim and narrow pack trail was crossed and recrossed
with the footprints of bear and deer and the snowy-coated mountain
goat.  The spring weather held its own, and everywhere was the pleasant
smell of growing things.  Overhead the wild duck winged his way in
aerial squadrons to the vast solitudes of the North.

Roaring Bill lighted his evening fire at last at the apex of the pass.
He had traveled long after sundown, seeking a camp ground where his
horses could graze.  The fire lit up huge firs, and high above the fir
tops the sky was studded with stars, brilliant in the thin atmosphere.
They ate, and, being weary, lay down to sleep.  At sunrise Hazel sat up
and looked about her in silent, wondering appreciation.  All the world
spread east and west below.  Bill squatted by the fire, piling on wood,
and he caught the expression on her face.

"Isn't it great?" he said.  "I ran across some verses in a magazine a
long time ago.  They just fit this, and they've been running in my head
ever since I woke up:

  "'All night long my heart has cried
    For the starry moors
  And the mountain's ragged flank
    And the plunge of oars.

  'Oh, to feel the Wind grow strong
    Where the Trail leaps down.
  I could never learn the way
    And wisdom of the town.

  'Where the hill heads split the Tide
    Of green and living air
  I would press Adventure hard
    To her deepest lair.'


"The last verse is the best of all," he said thoughtfully.  "It has
been my litany ever since I first read it:

  "'I would let the world's rebuke
    Like a wind go by,
  With my naked soul laid bare
    To the naked Sky.'


"And here you are," he murmured, "hotfooting it back to where the
world's rebuke is always in evidence, always ready to sting you like a
hot iron if you should chance to transgress one of its petty-larceny
dictums.  Well, you'll soon be there.  Can you see a glint of blue away
down there?  No?  Take the glasses."

She adjusted the binoculars and peered westward from the great height
where the camp sat.  Distantly, and far below, the green of the forest
broke down to a hazy line of steel-blue that ran in turn to a huge fog
bank, snow-white in the rising sun.

"Yes, I can see it now," she said.  "A lake?"

"No.  Salt water--a long arm of the Pacific," he replied.  "That's
where you and I part company--to your very great relief, I dare say.
But look off in the other direction.  Lord, you can see two hundred
miles!  If it weren't for the Babine Range sticking up you could look
clear to where my cabin stands.  What an outlook!  Tens of thousands of
square miles of timber and lakes and rivers!  Sunny little valleys;
fish and game everywhere; soil that will grow anything.  And scarcely a
soul in it all, barring here and there a fur post or a stray
prospector.  Yet human beings by the million herd in filthy tenements,
and never see a blade of green grass the year around.

"I told you, I think, about prospecting on the head of the Naas last
spring.  I fell in with another fellow up there, and we worked
together, and early in the season made a nice little clean-up on a
gravel bar.  I have another place spotted, by the way, that would work
out a fortune if a fellow wanted to spend a couple of thousand putting
in some simple machinery.  However, when the June rise drove us off our
bar, I pulled clear out of the country.  Just took a notion to see the
bright lights again.  And I didn't stop short of New York.  Do you
know, I lasted there just one week by the calendar.  It seems funny,
when you think of it, that a man with three thousand dollars to spend
should get lonesome in a place like New York.  But I did.  And at the
end of a week I flew.  The sole memento of that trip was a couple of
Russell prints--and a very bad taste in my mouth.  I had all that money
burning my pockets--and, all told, I didn't spend five hundred.  Fancy
a man jumping over four thousand miles to have a good time, and then
running away from it.  It was very foolish of me, I think now.  If I
had stuck and got acquainted with somebody, and taken in all the good
music, the theaters, and the giddy cafés I wouldn't have got home and
blundered into Cariboo Meadows at the psychological moment to make a
different kind of fool of myself.  Well, the longer we live the more we
learn.  Day after to-morrow you'll be in Bella Coola.  The cannery
steamships carry passengers on a fairly regular schedule to Vancouver.
How does that suit you?"

"Very well," she answered shortly.

"And you haven't the least twinge of regret at leaving all this?"  He
waved his hand in a comprehensive sweep.

"I don't happen to have your peculiar point of view," she returned.
"The circumstances connected with my coming into this country and with
my staying here are such as to make me anxious to get away."

"Same old story," Bill muttered under his breath.

"What is it?" she asked sharply.

"Oh, nothing," he said carelessly, and went on with his breakfast
preparations.

They finished the meal.  Bill got his horses up beside the fire,
loading on the packs.  Hazel sat on the trunk of a winter-broken fir,
waiting his readiness to start.  She heard no sound behind her.  But
she did see Roaring Bill stiffen and his face blanch under its tan.
Twenty feet away his rifle leaned against a tree; his belt and
six-shooter hung on a limb above it.  He was tucking a keen-edged
hatchet under the pack lashing.  And, swinging this up, he jumped--it
seemed--straight at her.  But his eyes were fixed on something beyond.

Before she could move, or even turn to look, so sudden was his
movement, Bill was beside her.  The sound of a crunching blow reached
her ears.  In the same instant a heavy body collided with her, knocking
her flat.  A great weight, a weight which exhaled a rank animal odor,
rolled over her.  Her clutching hands briefly encountered some hairy
object.  Then she was slammed against the fallen tree with a force that
momentarily stunned her.

When she opened her eyes again Roaring Bill had her head in his lap,
peering anxiously down.  She caught a glimpse of the unsteady hand that
held a cup of water, and she struggled to a sitting posture with a
shudder.  Bill's shirt was ripped from the neckband to the wrist,
baring his sinewy arm.  And hand, arm, and shoulder were spattered with
fresh blood.  His face was spotted where he had smeared it with his
bloody hand.  Close by, so close that she could almost reach it, lay
the grayish-black carcass of a bear, Bill's hatchet buried in the
skull, as a woodsman leaves his ax blade stuck in a log.

"Feel all right?" Bill asked.  His voice was husky.

"Yes, yes," she assured him.  "Except for a sort of sickening feeling.
Are you hurt?"

He shook his head.

"I thought you were broken in two," he muttered..  "We both fell right
on top of you.  Ugh!"

He sat down on the tree and rested his head on his bloodstained hands,
and Hazel saw that he was quivering from head to foot.  She got up and
went over to him.

"Are you sure you aren't hurt?" she asked again.

He looked up at her; big sweat drops were gathering on his face.

"Hurt?  No," he murmured; "I'm just plain scared.  You looked as if you
were dead, lying there so white and still."

[Illustration: "Hurt?  No," he murmured; "I'm just plain scared."]

He reached out one long arm and drew her up close to him.

"Little person," he whispered, "if you just cared one little bit as
much as I do, it would be all right.  Look at me.  Just the thought of
what might have happened to you has set every nerve in my body jumping.
I'm Samson shorn.  Why can't you care?  I'd be gooder than gold to
_you_."

She drew herself away from him without answering--not in fear, but
because her code of ethics, the repressive conventions of her whole
existence urged her to do so in the face of a sudden yearning to draw
his bloody face up close to her and kiss it.  The very thought, the
swift surge of the impulse frightened her, shocked her.  She could not
understand it, and so she took refuge behind the woman instinct to hold
back, that strange feminine paradox which will deny and shrink from the
dominant impulses of life.  And Roaring Bill made no effort to hold
her.  He let her go, and fumbled for a handkerchief to wipe his
glistening face.  And presently he went over to where a little stream
bubbled among the tree roots and washed his hands and face.  Then he
got a clean shirt out of his war bag and disappeared into the brush to
change.  When he came out he was himself again, if a bit sober in
expression.

He finished his packing without further words.  Not till the pack
horses were ready, and Silk saddled for her, did he speak again.  Then
he cast a glance at the dead bear.

"By Jove!" he remarked.  "I'm about to forget my tomahawk."

He poked tentatively at the furry carcass with his toe.  Hazel came up
and took a curious survey of fallen Bruin.  Bill laid hold of the
hatchet and wrenched it loose.

"I've hunted more or less all my life," he observed, "and I've seen
bear under many different conditions.  But this is the first time I
ever saw a bear tackle anybody without cause or warning.  I guess this
beggar was strictly on the warpath, looking for trouble on general
principles."

"Was he after me?" Hazel asked.

"Well, I don't know whether he had a grudge against you," Bill smiled.
"But he was sure coming with his mouth open and his arms spread wide.
You notice I didn't take time to go after my rifle, and I'm not a
foolhardy person as a rule.  I don't tackle a grizzly with a hatchet
unless I'm cornered, believe me.  It was lucky he wasn't overly big.
At that, I can feel my hair stand up when I think how he would have
mussed us up if I'd missed that first swing at his head.  You'll never
have a closer call.  And the same thing might not happen again if you
lived in a bear country for thirty years.

"It's a pity to let that good skin rot here," Bill concluded slowly;
"but I guess I will.  I don't want his pelt.  It would always be a
reminder of things--things I'd just as soon forget."

He tucked the hatchet in its place on the pack.  Hazel swung up on
Silk.  They tipped over the crest of the mountain, and began the long
descent.

The evening of the third day from there Bill traveled till dusk.  When
camp was made and the fire started, he called Hazel to one side, up on
a little rocky knoll, and pointed out a half dozen pin points of yellow
glimmering distantly in the dark.

"That's Bella Coola," he told her.  "And unless they've made a radical
change in their sailing schedules there should be a boat clear
to-morrow at noon."




CHAPTER XIV

THE DRONE OF THE HIVE

A black cloud of smoke was rolling up from the funnel of the _Stanley
D._ as Bill Wagstaff piloted Hazel from the grimy Bella Coola hotel to
the wharf.

"There aren't many passengers," he told her.  "They're mostly cannery
men.  But you'll have the captain's wife to chaperon you.  She happens
to be making the trip."

When they were aboard and the cabin boy had shown them to what was
dignified by the name of stateroom, Bill drew a long envelope from his
pocket.

"Here," he said, "is a little money.  I hope you won't let any foolish
pride stand in the way of using it freely.  It came easy to me.  I dug
it out of Mother Earth, and there's plenty more where it came from.
Seeing that I deprived you of access to your own money and all your
personal belongings, you are entitled to this any way you look at it.
And I want to throw in a bit of gratuitous advice--in case you should
conclude to go back to the Meadows.  They probably looked high and low
for you.  But there is no chance for them to learn where you actually
did get to unless you yourself tell them.  The most plausible
explanation--and if you go there you must make some explanation--would
be for you to say that you got lost--which is true enough--and that you
eventually fell in with a party of Indians, and later on connected up
with a party of white people who were traveling coastward.  That you
wintered with them, and they put you on a steamer and sent you to
Vancouver when spring opened.

"That, I guess, is all," he concluded slowly.  "Only I wish"--he caught
her by the shoulders and shook her gently--"I sure do wish it could
have been different, little person.  Maybe you'll have a kindlier
feeling for this big old North when you get back into your cities and
towns, with their smoke and smells and business sharks, where it's
everybody for himself and the devil take the hindmost.  Maybe some time
when I get restless for human companionship and come out to cavort in
the bright lights for a while, I may pass you on a street somewhere.
This world is very small.  Oh, yes--when you get to Vancouver go to the
Ladysmith.  It's a nice, quiet hotel in the West End.  Any hack driver
knows the place."

He dropped his hands, and looked steadily at her for a few seconds,
steadily and longingly.

"Good-by!" he said abruptly--and walked out, and down the gangplank
that was already being cast loose, and away up the wharf without a
backward glance.

The _Stanley D.'s_ siren woke the echoes along the wooded shore.  A
throbbing that shook her from stem to stern betokened the first
turnings of the screw.  And slowly she backed into deep water and swung
wide for the outer passage.

Hazel went out to the rail.  Bill Wagstaff had disappeared, but
presently she caught sight of him standing on the shore end of the
wharf, his hands thrust deep in his coat pockets, staring after the
steamer.  Hazel waved the envelope that she still held in her hand.
Now that she was independent of him, she felt magnanimous,
forgiving--and suddenly very much alone, as if she had dropped back
into the old, depressing Granville atmosphere.  But he gave no
answering sign save that he turned on the instant and went up the hill
to where his horses stood tied among the huddled buildings.  And within
twenty minutes the _Stanley D._ turned a jutting point, and Bella Coola
was lost to view.

Hazel went back into her stateroom and sat down on the berth.
Presently she opened the envelope.  There was a thick fold of bills,
her ticket, and both were wrapped in a sheet of paper penciled with
dots and crooked lines.  She laid it aside and counted the money.

"Heavens!" she whispered.  "I wish he hadn't given me so much.  I
didn't need all that."

For Roaring Bill had tucked a dozen one-hundred-dollar notes in the
envelope.  And, curiously enough, she was not offended, only wishful
that he had been less generous.  Twelve hundred dollars was a lot of
money, far more than she needed, and she did not know how she could
return it.  She sat a long time with the money in her lap, thinking.
Then she took up the map, recognizing it as the sheet of paper Bill had
worked over so long their last night at the cabin.

It made the North more clear--a great deal more clear--to her, for he
had marked Cariboo Meadows, the location of his cabin, and Bella Coola,
and drawn dotted lines to indicate the way he had taken her in and
brought her out.  The Fraser and its tributaries, some of the crossings
that she remembered were sketched in, the mountains and the lakes by
which his trail had wound.

"I wonder if that's a challenge to my vindictive disposition?" she
murmured.  "I told him so often that I'd make him sweat for his
treachery if ever I got a chance.  Ah well--"

She put away the money and the map, and bestowed a brief scrutiny upon
herself in the cabin mirror.  Six months in the wild had given her a
ruddy color, the glow of perfect physical condition.  But her garments
were tattered and sadly out of date.  The wardrobe of the steamer-trunk
lady had suffered in the winter's wear.  She was barely presentable in
the outing suit of corduroy.  So that she was inclined to be diffident
about her appearance, and after a time when she was not thinking of the
strange episodes of the immediate past, her mind, womanlike, began to
dwell on civilization and decent clothes.

The _Stanley D._ bore down Bentick Arm and on through Burke Channel to
the troubled waters of Queen Charlotte Sound, where the blue Pacific
opens out and away to far Oriental shores.  After that she plowed south
between Vancouver Island and the rugged foreshores where the Coast
Range dips to the sea, past pleasant isles, and through narrow passes
where the cliffs towered sheer on either hand, and, upon the evening of
the third day, she turned into Burrard Inlet and swept across a harbor
speckled with shipping from all the Seven Seas to her berth at the dock.

So Hazel came again to a city--a city that roared and bellowed all its
manifold noises in her ears, long grown accustomed to a vast and
brooding silence.  Mindful of Bill's parting word, she took a hack to
the Ladysmith.  And even though the hotel was removed from the business
heart of the city, the rumble of the city's herculean labors reached
her far into the night.  She lay wakefully, staring through her open
window at the arc lights winking in parallel rows, listening to the
ceaseless hum of man's activities.  But at last she fell asleep, and
dawn of a clear spring day awakened her.

She ate her breakfast, and set forth on a shopping tour.  To such
advantage did she put two of the hundred-dollar bills that by noon she
was arrayed in a semi-tailored suit of gray, spring hat, shoes, and
gloves to match.  She felt once more at ease, less conscious that
people stared at her frayed and curious habiliments.  With a complete
outfit of lingerie purchased, and a trunk in which to store it
forwarded to her hotel, her immediate activity was at an end, and she
had time to think of her next move.

And, brought face to face with that, she found herself at something of
a loss.  She had no desire to go back to Cariboo Meadows, even to get
what few personal treasures she had left behind.  Cariboo Meadows was
wiped off the slate as far as she was concerned.  Nevertheless, she
must make her way.  Somehow she must find a means to return the unused
portion of the--to her--enormous sum Roaring Bill had placed in her
hands.  She must make her own living.  The question that troubled her
was: How, and where?  She had her trade at her finger ends, and the
storied office buildings of Vancouver assured her that any efficient
stenographer could find work.  But she looked up as she walked the
streets at the high, ugly walls of brick and steel and stone, and her
heart misgave her.

So for the time being she promised herself a holiday.  In the afternoon
she walked the length of Hastings Street, where the earth trembled with
the roaring traffic of street cars, wagons, motors, and where folk
scuttled back and forth across the way in peril of their lives.  She
had seen all the like before, but now she looked upon it with different
eyes; it possessed somehow a different significance, this bustle and
confusion which had seemingly neither beginning nor end, only sporadic
periods of cessation.

She sat in a candy parlor and watched people go by, swarming like bees
along the walk.  She remembered having heard or read somewhere the
simile of a human hive.  The shuffle of their feet, the hum of their
voices droned in her cars, confusing her, irritating her, and she
presently found herself hurrying away from it, walking rapidly eastward
toward a thin fringe of trees which showed against a distant sky-line
over a sea of roofs.  She walked fast, and before long the jar of solid
heels on the concrete pavement bred an ache in her knees.  Then she
caught a car passing in that direction, and rode to the end of the
line, where the rails ran out in a wilderness of stumps.

Crossing through these, she found a rudely graded highway, which in
turn dwindled to a mere path.  It led her through a pleasant area of
second-growth fir, slender offspring of the slaughtered forest
monarchs, whose great stumps dotted the roll of the land, and up on a
little rise whence she could overlook the city and the inlet where rode
the tall-masted ships and sea-scarred tramps from deep salt water.  And
for the time being she was content.

But a spirit of restlessness drove her back into the city.  And at
nightfall she went up to her room and threw herself wearily on the bed.
She was tired, body and spirit, and lonely.  Nor was this lightened by
the surety that she would be lonelier still before she found a niche to
fit herself in and gather the threads of her life once more into some
orderly pattern.

In the morning she felt better, even to the point of going over the
newspapers and jotting down several advertisements calling for office
help.  Her brief experience in Cariboo Meadows had not led her to look
kindly on teaching as a means of livelihood.  And stenographers seemed
to be in demand.  Wherefore, she reasoned that wages would be high.
With the list in her purse, she went down on Hastings--which runs like
a huge artery through the heart of the city, with lesser streets
crossing and diverging.

But she made no application for employment.  For on the corner of
Hastings and Seymour, as she gathered her skirt in her hand to cross
the street, some one caught her by the arm, and cried:

"Well, forevermore, if it isn't Hazel Weir!"

And she turned to find herself facing Loraine Marsh--a Granville school
chum--and Loraine's mother.  Back of them, with wide and startled eyes,
loomed Jack Barrow.

He pressed forward while the two women overwhelmed Hazel with a flood
of exclamations and questions, and extended his hand.  Hazel accepted
the overture.  She had long since gotten over her resentment against
him.  She was furthermore amazed to find that she could meet his eye
and take his hand without a single flutter of her pulse.  It seemed
strange, but she was glad of it.  And, indeed, she was too much taken
up with Loraine Marsh's chatter, and too genuinely glad to hear a
friendly voice again, to dwell much on ghosts of the past.

They stood a few minutes on the corner; then Mrs. Marsh proposed that
they go to the hotel, where they could talk at their leisure and in
comfort.  Loraine and her mother took the lead.  Barrow naturally fell
into step with Hazel.

"I've been wearing sackcloth and ashes, Hazel," he said humbly.  "And I
guess you've got about a million apologies coming from everybody in
Granville for the shabby way they treated you.  Shortly after you left,
somebody on one of the papers ferreted out the truth of that Bush
affair, and the vindictive old hound's reasons for that compromising
legacy were set forth.  It seems this newspaper fellow connected up
with Bush's secretary and the nurse.  Also, Bush appears to have kept a
diary--and kept it posted up to the day of his death--poured out all
his feelings on paper, and repeatedly asserted that he would win you or
ruin you.  And it seems that that night after you refused to come to
him when he was hurt, he called in his lawyer and made that
codicil--and spent the rest of the time till he died gloating over the
chances of it besmirching your character."

"I've grown rather indifferent about it," Hazel replied impersonally.
"But he succeeded rather easily.  Even you, who should have known me
better, were ready to believe the very worst."

"I've paid for it," Barrow pleaded.  "You don't know how I've hated
myself for being such a cad.  But it taught me a lesson--if you'll not
hold a grudge against me.  I've wondered and worried about you,
disappearing the way you did.  Where have you been, and how have you
been getting on?  You surely look well."  He bent an admiring glance on
her.

"Oh, I've been every place, and I can't complain about not getting on,"
she answered carelessly.

For the life of her, she could not help making comparisons between the
man beside her and another who she guessed would by now be bearing up
to the crest of the divide that overlooked the green and peaceful vista
of forest and lake, with the Babine Range lying purple beyond.  She
wondered if Roaring Bill Wagstaff would ever, under any circumstances,
have looked on her with the scornful, angry distrust that Barrow had
once betrayed.  And she could not conceive of Bill Wagstaff ever being
humble or penitent for anything he had done.  Barrow's attitude was
that of a little boy who had broken some plaything in a fit of anger
and was now woefully trying to put the pieces together again.  It
amused her.  Indeed, it afforded her a distinctly un-Christian
satisfaction, since she was not by nature of a meek or forgiving
spirit.  He had made her suffer; it was but fitting that he should know
a pang or two himself.

Hazel visited with the three of them in the hotel parlor for a matter
of two hours, went to luncheon with them, and at luncheon Loraine Marsh
brought up the subject of her coming home to Granville with them.  The
Bush incident was discussed and dismissed.  On the question of
returning, Hazel was noncommittal.  The idea appealed strongly to her.
Granville was home.  She had grown up there.  There were a multitude of
old ties, associations, friends to draw her back.  But whether her home
town would seem the same, whether she would feel the same toward the
friends who had held aloof in the time when she needed a friend the
most, even if they came flocking back to her, was a question that she
thought of if she did not put it in so many words.  On the other hand,
she knew too well the drear loneliness that would close upon her in
Vancouver when the Marshes left.

"Of course you'll come!  We won't hear of leaving you behind.  So you
can consider that settled."  Loraine Marsh declared at last.  "We're
going day after to-morrow.  So is Mr. Barrow."

Jack walked with her out to the Ladysmith, and, among other things,
told her how he happened to be in the coast city.

"I've been doing pretty well lately," he said.  "I came out here on a
deal that involved about fifty thousand dollars.  I closed it up just
this morning--and the commission would just about buy us that little
house we had planned once.  Won't you let bygones be bygones, Hazie?"

"It might be possible, Jack," she answered slowly, "if it were not for
the fact that you took the most effective means a man could have taken
to kill every atom of affection I had for you.  I don't feel bitter any
more--I simply don't feel at all."

"But you will," he said eagerly.  "Just give me a chance.  I was a
hot-headed, jealous fool, but I never will be again.  Give me a chance,
Hazel."

"You'll have to make your own chances," she said deliberately.  "I
refuse to bind myself in any way.  Why should I put myself out to make
you happy when you destroyed all the faith I had in you?  You simply
didn't trust me.  You wouldn't trust me again.  If slander could turn
you against me once it might a second time.  Besides, I don't care for
you as a man wants a woman to care for him.  And I don't think I'm
going to care--except, perhaps, in a friendly way."

And with that Barrow had to be content.

He called for her the next day, and took her, with the Marshes, out for
a launch ride, and otherwise devoted himself to being an agreeable
cavalier.  On the launch excursion it was settled definitely that Hazel
should accompany them East.  She had no preparations to make.  The only
thing she would like to have done--return Roaring Bill's surplus
money--she could not do.  She did not know how or where to reach him
with a letter.  So far as Granville was concerned, she could always
leave it if she desired, and she was a trifle curious to know how all
her friends would greet her now that the Bush mystery was cleared up
and the legacy explained.

So that at dusk of the following day she and Loraine Marsh sat in a
Pullman, flattening their noses against the car window, taking a last
look at the environs of Vancouver as the train rolled through the
outskirts of the city.  Hazel told herself that she was going home.
Barrow smiled friendly assurance over the seat.

Even so, she was restless, far from content.  There was something
lacking.  She grew distrait, monosyllabic, sat for long intervals
staring absently into the gloom beyond the windowpane.  The Limited was
ripping through forested land.  She could see now and then tall
treetops limned against the starlit sky.  The ceaseless roar of the
trucks and the buzz of conversation in the car irritated her.  At half
after eight she called the porter and had him arrange her section for
the night.  And she got into bed, thankful to be by herself, depressed
without reason.

She slept for a time, her sleep broken into by morbid dreams, and
eventually she wakened to find her eyes full of tears.  She did not
know why she should cry, but cry she did till her pillow grew
moist--and the heavy feeling in her breast grew, if anything, more
intense.

She raised on one elbow and looked out the window.  The train slowed
with a squealing of brakes and the hiss of escaping air to a station.
On the signboard over the office window she read the name of the place
and the notation: "Vancouver, 180 miles."

Her eyes were still wet.  When the Limited drove east again she
switched on the tiny electric bulb over her head, and fumbled in her
purse for another handkerchief.  Her fingers drew forth, with the bit
of linen, a folded sheet of paper, which seemed to hypnotize her, so
fixedly did she remain looking at it.  A sheet of plain white paper,
marked with dots and names and crooked lines that stood for rivers,
with shaded patches that meant mountain ranges she had seen--Bill
Wagstaff's map.

She stared at it a long time.  Then she found her time-table, and ran
along the interminable string of station names till she found Ashcroft,
from whence northward ran the Appian Way of British Columbia, the
Cariboo Road, over which she had journeyed by stage.  She noted the
distance, and the Limited's hour of arrival, and looked at her watch.
Then a feverish activity took hold of her.  She dressed, got her suit
case from under the berth, and stuffed articles into it, regardless of
order.  Her hat was in a paper bag suspended from a hook above the
upper berth.  Wherefore, she tied a silk scarf over her head.

That done, she set her suit case in the aisle, and curled herself in
the berth, with her face pressed close against the window.  A whimsical
smile played about her mouth, and her fingers tap-tapped steadily on
the purse, wherein was folded Bill Wagstaff's map.

And then out of the dark ahead a cluster of lights winked briefly, the
shriek of the Limited's whistle echoed up and down the wide reaches of
the North Thompson, and the coaches came to a stop.  Hazel took one
look to make sure.  Then she got softly into the aisle, took up her
suit case, and left the car.  At the steps she turned to give the car
porter a message.

"Tell Mrs. Marsh--the lady in lower five," she said, with a dollar to
quicken his faculties, "that Miss Weir had to go back.  Say that I will
write soon and explain."

She stood back in the shadow of the station for a few seconds.  The
Limited's stop was brief.  When the red lights went drumming down the
track, she took up her suit case and walked uptown to the hotel where
she had tarried overnight once before.

The clerk showed her to a room.  She threw her suit case on the bed and
turned the key in the lock.  Then she went over, and, throwing up the
window to its greatest height, sat down and looked steadily toward the
north, smiling to herself.

"I can find him," she suddenly said aloud.  "Of course I can find him!"

And with that she blew a kiss from her finger-tips out toward the dark
and silent North, pulled down the shade, and went quietly to bed.




CHAPTER XV

AN ENDING AND A BEGINNING

Unconsciously, by natural assimilation, so to speak, Hazel Weir had
absorbed more woodcraft than she realized in her over-winter stay in
the high latitudes.  Bill Wagstaff had once told her that few people
know just what they can do until they are compelled to try, and upon
this, her second journey northward, the truth of that statement grew
more patent with each passing day.  Little by little the vast central
interior of British Columbia unfolded its orderly plan of watercourses,
mountain ranges, and valleys.  She passed camping places, well
remembered of that first protesting journey.  And at night she could
close her eyes beside the camp fires and visualize the prodigious
setting of it all--eastward the pyramided Rockies, westward lesser
ranges, the Telegraph, the Babine; and through the plateau between the
turbulent Frazer, bearing eastward from the Rockies and turning
abruptly for its long flow south, with its sinuous doublings and
turnings that were marked in bold lines on Bill Wagstaff's map.

So trailing north with old Limping George, his fat _klootch_, and two
half-grown Siwash youths, Hazel bore steadily across country, driving
as straight as the rolling land allowed for the cabin that snuggled in
a woodsy basin close up to the peaks that guard Pine River Pass.

There came a day when brief uncertainty became sure knowledge at sight
of an L-shaped body of water glimmering through the fire-thinned
spruce.  Her heart fluttered for a minute.  Like a homing bird, by
grace of the rude map and Limping George, she had come to the lake
where the Indians had camped in the winter, and she could have gone
blindfolded from the lake to Roaring Bill's cabin.

On the lake shore, where the spruce ran out to birch and cottonwood,
she called a halt.

"Make camp," she instructed.  "Cabin over there," she waved her hand.
"I go.  Byemby come back."

Then she urged her pony through the light timber growth and across the
little meadows where the rank grass and strange varicolored flowers
were springing up under the urge of the warm spring sun.  Twenty
minutes brought her to the clearing.  The grass sprang lush there, and
the air was pleasant with odors of pine and balsam wafted down from the
mountain height behind.  But the breath of the woods was now a matter
of small moment, for Silk and Satin and Nigger loafing at the sunny end
of the stable pricked up their ears at her approach, and she knew that
Roaring Bill was home again.  She tied her horse to a sapling and drew
nearer.  The cabin door stood wide.

A brief panic seized her.  She felt a sudden shrinking, a wild desire
for headlong flight.  But it passed.  She knew that for good or ill she
would never turn back.  And so, with her heart thumping tremendously
and a tentative smile curving her lips, she ran lightly across to the
open door.

On the soft turf her footsteps gave forth no sound.  She gained the
doorway as silently as a shadow.  Roaring Bill faced the end of the
long room, but he did not see her, for he was slumped in the big chair
before the fireplace, his chin sunk on his breast, staring straight
ahead with absent eyes.

In all the days she had been with him she had never seen him look like
that.  It had been his habit, his defense, to cover sadness with a
smile, to joke when he was hurt.  That weary, hopeless expression, the
wry twist of his lips, wrung her heart and drew from her a yearning
little whisper:

"Bill!"

He came out of his chair like a panther.  And when his eyes beheld her
in the doorway he stiffened in his tracks, staring, seeing, yet
reluctant to believe the evidence of his vision.  His brows wrinkled.
He put up one hand and absently ran it over his cheek.

"I wonder if I've got to the point of seeing things," he said slowly.
"Say, little person, is it your astral body, or is it really you?"

"Of course it's me," she cried tremulously, and with fine disregard for
her habitual preciseness of speech.

He came up close to her and pinched her arm with a gentle pressure, as
if he had to feel the material substance of her before he could
believe.  And then he put his hands on her shoulders, as he had done on
the steamer that day at Bella Coola, and looked long and earnestly at
her--looked till a crimson wave rose from her neck to the roots of her
dark, glossy hair.  And with that Roaring Bill took her in his arms,
cuddled her up close to him, and kissed her, not once but many times.

"You really and truly came back, little person," he murmured.  "Lord,
Lord--and yet they say the day of miracles is past."

"You didn't think I would, did you?" she asked, with her blushing face
snuggled against his sturdy breast.  "Still, you gave me a map so that
I could find the place?"

"That was just taking a desperate chance.  No, I never expected to see
you again, unless by accident," he said honestly.  "And I've been
crying the hurt of it to the stars all the way back from the coast.  I
only got here yesterday.  I pretty near passed up coming back at all.
I didn't see how I could stay, with everything to remind me of you.
Say, but it looked like a lonesome hole.  I used to love this
place--but I didn't love it last night.  It seemed about the most
cheerless and depressing spot I could have picked.  I think I should
have ended up by touching a match to the whole business and hitting the
trail to some new country.  I don't know.  I'm not weak.  But I don't
think I could have stayed here long."

They stood silent in the doorway for a long interval, Bill holding her
close to him, and she blissfully contented, careless and unthinking of
the future, so filled was she with joy of the present.

"Do you love me much, little person?" Bill asked, after a little.

She nodded vigorous assent.

"Why?" he desired to know.

"Oh, just because--because you're a man, I suppose," she returned
mischievously.

"The world's chuck-full of men," Bill observed.

"Surely," she looked up at him.  "But they're not like you.  Maybe it's
bad policy to start in flattering you, but there aren't many men of
your type, Billy-boy; big and strong and capable, and at the same time
kind and patient and able to understand things, things a woman can't
always put into words.  Last fall you hurt my pride and nearly scared
me to death by carrying me off in that lawless, headlong fashion of
yours.  But you seemed to know just how I felt about it, and you played
fairer than any man I ever knew would have done under the same
circumstances.  I didn't realize it until I got back into the civilized
world.  And then all at once I found myself longing for you--and for
these old forests and the mountains and all.  So I came back."

"Wise girl," he kissed her.  "You'll never be sorry, I hope.  It took
some nerve, too.  It's a long trail from here to the outside.  But this
North country--it gets in your blood--if your blood's red--and I don't
think there's any water in your veins, little person.  Lord!  I'm
afraid to let go of you for fear you'll vanish into nothing, like a
Hindu fakir stunt."

"No fear," Hazel laughed.  "I've got a pony tied to a tree out there,
and four Siwashes and a camp outfit over by Crooked Lake.  If I should
vanish I'd leave a plain trail for you to follow."

"Well," Bill said, after a short silence, "it's a hundred and forty
miles to a Hudson's Bay post where there's a mission and a preacher.
Let's be on our way and get married.  Then we'll come back here and
spend our honeymoon.  Eh?"

She nodded assent.

"Are you game to start in half an hour?" he asked, holding her off at
arm's length admiringly.

"I'm game for anything, or I wouldn't be here," she retorted.

"All right.  You just watch an exhibition of speedy packing," Bill
declared--and straightway fell to work.

Hazel followed him about, helping to get the kyaks packed with food.
They caught the three horses, and Bill stripped the pony of Hazel's
riding gear and placed a pack on him.  Then he put her saddle on Silk.

"He's your private mount henceforth," Bill told her laughingly.
"You'll ride him with more pleasure than you did the first time, won't
you?"

Presently they were ready to start, planning to ride past Limping
George's camp and tell him whither they were bound.  Hazel was already
mounted.  Roaring Bill paused, with his toe in the stirrup, and smiled
whimsically at her over his horse's back.

"I forgot something," said he, and went back into the cabin--whence he
shortly emerged, bearing in his hand a sheet of paper upon which
something was written in bold, angular characters.  This he pinned on
the door.  Hazel rode Silk close to see what it might be, and laughed
amusedly, for Bill had written:

"Mr. and Mrs. William Wagstaff will be at home to their friends on and
after June the twentieth."

He swung up into his saddle, and they jogged across the open.  In the
edge of the first timber they pulled up and looked backward at the
cabin drowsing silently under its sentinel tree.  Roaring Bill reached
out one arm and laid it across Hazel's shoulders.

"Little person," he said soberly, "here's the end of one trail, and the
beginning of another--the longest trail either of us has ever faced.
How does it look to you?"

She caught his fingers with a quick, hard pressure.

"All trails look alike to me," she said, with shining eyes, "just so we
hit them together."




CHAPTER XVI

A BRIEF TIME OF PLANNING

"What day of the month is this, Bill?" Hazel asked.

"Haven't the least idea," he answered lazily.  "Time is of no
consequence to me at the present moment."

They were sitting on the warm earth before their cabin, their backs
propped comfortably against a log, watching the sun sink behind a
distant sky-line all notched with purple mountains upon which snow
still lingered.  Beside them a smudge dribbled a wisp of smoke
sufficient to ward off a pestilential swarm of mosquitoes and black
flies.  In the clear, thin air of that altitude the occasional voices
of what bird and animal life was abroad in the wild broke into the
evening hush with astonishing distinctness--a lone goose winged above
in wide circles, uttering his harsh and solitary cry.  He had lost his
mate, Bill told her.  Far off in the bush a fox barked.  The evening
flight of the wild duck from Crooked Lake to a chain of swamps passed
intermittently over the clearing with a sibilant whistle of wings.  To
all the wild things, no less than to the two who watched and listened
to the forest traffic, it was a land of peace and plenty.

"We ought to go up to the swamps to-morrow and rustle some duck eggs,"
Bill observed irrelevantly--his eyes following the arrow flight of a
mallard flock.  But his wife was counting audibly, checking the days
off on her fingers.

"This is July the twenty-fifth, Mr. Roaring Bill Wagstaff," she
announced.  "We've been married exactly one month."

"A whole month?" he echoed, in mock astonishment.  "A regular calendar
month of thirty-one days, huh?  You don't say so?  Seems like it was
only day before yesterday, little person."

"I wonder," she snuggled up a little closer to him, "if any two people
were ever as happy as we've been?"

Bill put his arm across her shoulders and tilted her head back so that
he could smile down into her face.

"They have been a bunch of golden days, haven't they?" he whispered.
"We haven't come to a single bump in the road yet.  You won't forget
this joy time if we ever do hit real hard going, will you, Hazel?"

"The bird of ill omen croaks again," she reproved.  "Why should we come
to hard going, as you call it?"

"We shouldn't," he declared.  "But most people do.  And we might.  One
never can tell what's ahead.  Life takes queer and unexpected turns
sometimes.  We've got to live pretty close to each other, depend
absolutely on each other in many ways--and that's the acid test of
human companionship.  By and by, when the novelty wears off--maybe
you'll get sick of seeing the same old Bill around and nobody else.
You see I've always been on my good behavior with you.  Do you like me
a lot?"

His arm tightened with a quick and powerful pressure, then suddenly
relaxed to let her lean back and stare up at him tenderly.

"I ought to punish you for saying things like that," she pouted.  "Only
I can't think of any effective method.  Sufficient unto the day is the
evil thereof--and there is no evil in _our_ days."

"Amen," he whispered softly--and they fell to silent contemplation of
the rose and gold that spread in a wonderful blazon over all the
western sky.

"Twenty-fifth of July, eh?" he mused presently.  "Summer's half gone
already.  I didn't realize it.  We ought to be stirring pretty soon,
lady."

"Let's stir into the house, then," she suggested.  "These miserable
little black flies have found a tender place on me.  My, but they're
bloodthirsty insects."

Bill laughed, and they took refuge in the cabin, the doorways and
windows of which were barricaded with cotton mosquito net against the
winged swarms that buzzed hungrily without.  Ensconced in the big chair
by the fireplace, with Bill sprawled on the bearskin at her feet, Hazel
came back to his last remark.

"Why did you say it was time for us to be stirring, Billum?"

"Because these Northern seasons are so blessed short," he answered.
"We ought to try and do a little good for ourselves--make hay while the
sun shines.  We'll needa da mon'."

"Needa fiddlesticks," she laughed.  "What do we need money for?  It
costs practically nothing to live up here.  Why this sudden desire to
pursue the dollar?  Besides, how are you going to pursue it?"

"Go prospecting," he replied promptly.  "Hit the trail for a place I
know where there's oodles of coarse gold, if you can get to it at low
water.  How'd you like to go into the Upper Naas country this fall,
trap all winter, work the sand bars in the spring, and come out next
fall with a sack of gold it would take a horse to pack?"

Hazel clapped her hands.

"Oh, Bill, wouldn't that be fine?" she cried.  Across her mind flashed
a vivid picture of the journey, pregnant with adventure, across the
wild hinterlands--they two together.  "I'd love to."

"It won't be all smooth sailing," he warned.  "It's a long trip and a
hard one, and the winter will be longer and harder than the trip.  We
won't have the semi-luxuries we've got here in this cabin.  Not by a
long shot.  Still, there's a chance for a good big stake, right in that
one trip."

"But why the necessity for making a stake?" she inquired thoughtfully,
after a lapse of five minutes.  "I thought you didn't care anything
about money so long as you had enough to get along on?  And we surely
have that.  We've got over two thousand dollars in real money--and no
place to spend it--so we're compelled to save."

Bill blew a smoke ring over his head and watched it vanish up toward
the dusky roof beams before he answered.

"Well, little person," said he, "that's very true, and we can't
truthfully say that stern necessity is treading on our heels.  The
possession of money has never been a crying need with me.  But I hadn't
many wants when I was playing a lone hand, and I generally let the
future take care of itself.  It was always easy to dig up money enough
to buy books and grub or anything I wanted.  Now that I've assumed a
certain responsibility, it has begun to dawn on me that we'd enjoy life
better if we were assured of a competence.  We can live on the country
here indefinitely.  But we won't stay here always.  I'm pretty much
contented just now.  So are you.  But I know from past experience that
the outside will grow more alluring as time passes.  You'll get
lonesome for civilization.  It's the most natural thing in the world.
And when we go out to mix with our fellow humans we want to meet them
on terms of worldly equality.  Which is, to say with good clothes on,
and a fat bank roll in our pocket.  The best is none too good for us,
lady.  And the best costs money.  Anyway, I'll plead guilty to
changing, or, rather, modifying my point of view--getting married has
opened up new vistas of pleasure for us that call for dollars.  And
last, but not least, old girl, while I love to loaf, I can only loaf
about so long in contentment.  Sabe?  I've got to be doing _something_;
whether it was profitable or not has never mattered, just so it was
action."

"I sabe, as you call it," Hazel smiled.  "Of course I do.  Only lazy
people like to loaf all the time.  I love this place, and we might stay
here for years and be satisfied.  But--"

"But we'd be better satisfied to stay if we knew that we could leave it
whenever we wanted to," he interrupted.  "That's the psychology of the
human animal, all right.  We don't like to be coerced, even by
circumstances.  Well, granted health, one can be boss of old Dame
Circumstance, if one has the price in cold cash.  It's a melancholy
fact that the good things of the world can only be had for a
consideration."

"If you made a lot of money mining, we could travel--one could do lots
of things," she reflected.  "I don't think I'd want to live in a city
again.  But it would be nice to go there sometimes."

"Yes, dear girl, it would," Bill agreed.  "With a chum to help you
enjoy things.  I never got much fun out of the bright lights by
myself--it was too lonesome.  I used to prowl around by myself with an
analytical eye upon humanity, and I was always bumping into a lot of
sordidness and suffering that I couldn't in the least remedy, and it
often gave me a bad taste in my mouth.  Then I'd beat it for the
woods--and they always looked good to me.  The trouble was that I had
too much time to think, and nothing to do when I hit a live town.  It
would be different now.  We can do things together that I couldn't do
alone, and you couldn't do alone.  Remains only to get the wherewithal.
And since I know how to manage that with a minimum amount of effort,
I'd like to be about it before somebody else gets ahead of me.  Though
there's small chance of that."

"We'll be partners," said she.  "How will we divide the profits,
Billum?"

"We'll split even," he declared.  "That is, I'll make the money, and
you'll spend it."

They chuckled over this conceit, and as the dusk closed in slowly they
fell to planning the details.  Hazel lit the lamp, and in its yellow
glow pored over maps while Bill idly sketched their route on a sheet of
paper.  His objective lay east of the head of the Naas proper, where
amid a wild tangle of mountains and mountain torrents three turbulent
rivers, the Stikine, the Skeena, and the Naas, took their rise.  A
God-forsaken region, he told her, where few white men had penetrated.
The peaks flirted with the clouds, and their sides were scarred with
glaciers.  A lonesome, brooding land, the home of a vast and
seldom-broken silence.

"But there's all kinds of game and fur in there," Bill remarked
thoughtfully.  "And gold.  Still, it's a fierce country for a man to
take his best girl into.  I don't know whether I ought to tackle it."

"We couldn't be more isolated than we are here," Hazel argued, "if we
were in the arctic.  Look at that poor woman at Pelt House.  Three
babies born since she saw a doctor or another woman of her own color!
What's a winter by ourselves compared to that.  And _she_ didn't think
it so great a hardship.  Don't you worry about me, Mr. Bill.  I think
it will be fun.  I'm a real pioneer at heart.  The wild places look
good to me--when you're along."

She received her due reward for that, and then, the long twilight
having brought the hour to a lateness that manifested itself by sundry
yawns on their part, they went to bed.

With breakfast over, Bill put a compass in his pocket, after having
ground his ax blade to a keen edge.

"Come on," said he, then; "I'm going to transact some important
business."

"What is it?" she promptly demanded with much curiosity.

"This domicile of ours, girl," he told her, while he led the way
through the surrounding timber, "is ours only by grace of the
wilderness.  It's built on unsurveyed government land--land that I have
no more legal claim to than any passing trapper.  I never thought of it
before--which goes to show that this double-harness business puts a
different face on 'most everything.  But I'm going to remedy that.  Of
course, it may be twenty years before this country begins to settle up
enough so that some individual may cast a covetous eye on this
particular spot--but I'm not going to take any chances.  I'm going to
formally stake a hundred and sixty acres of this and apply for its
purchase.  Then we'll have a cinch on our home.  We'll always have a
refuge to fly to, no matter where we go."

She nodded appreciation of this.  The cabin in the clearing stood for
some of those moments that always loom large and unforgettable in every
woman's experience.  She had come there once in hot, shamed anger, and
she had come again as a bride.  It was the handiwork of a man she loved
with a passion that sometimes startled her by its intensity.  She had
plumbed depths of bitterness there, and, contrariwise, reached a point
of happiness she had never believed possible.  Just the mere
possibility of that place being given over to others roused in her a
pang of resentment.  It was theirs, hers and Bill's, and, being a
woman, she viewed its possession jealously.

So she watched with keen interest what he did.  Which, in truth, was
simple enough.  He worked his way to a point southeast of the clearing
till they gained a little rise whence through the treetops they could
look back and see the cabin roof.  There Bill cut off an eight-inch
jack pine, leaving the stump approximately four feet high.  This he
hewed square, the four flat sides of the post facing respectively the
cardinal points of the compass.  On one smoothed surface Bill set to
work with his pocketknife.  Hazel sat down and watched while he busied
himself at this.  And when he had finished she read, in deep-carved
letters:

  W. WAGSTAFF'S S. E. CORNER.


Then he penned on a sheet of letter paper a brief notice to the effect
that he, William Wagstaff, intended to apply for the purchase of the
land embraced in an area a half mile square, of which the post was the
south-east corner mark.  This notice he fastened to the stump with a
few tacks, and sat down to rest from his labors.

"How long do you suppose that will stay there, and who is there to read
it, if it does?" Hazel observed.

"Search me.  The moose and the deer and the timber wolves, I guess,"
Bill grinned.  "The chances are the paper won't last long, with winds
and rains.  But it doesn't matter.  It's simply a form prescribed by
the Land Act of British Columbia, and, so long as I go through the
legal motions, that lets me out.  Matter of form, you know."

"Then what else do you have to do?"

"Nothing but furnish the money when the land department gets around to
accept my application," he said.  "I can get an agent to attend to all
the details.  Oh, I have to furnish a description of the land by
natural boundaries, to give them an idea of about where it's situated.
Well, let's take a look at our estate from another corner."

This, roughly ascertained by sighting a line with the compass and
stepping off eight hundred and eighty yards, brought them up on a knoll
that commanded the small basin of which the clearing was practically in
the center.

"Aha;" Bill exclaimed.  "Look at our ranch, would you; our widespread
acres basking in the sun.  A quarter section is quite a chunk.  Do you
know I never thought much about it before, but there's a piece of the
finest land that lies outdoors.  I wasn't looking for land when I
squatted there.  It was a pretty place, and there was hay for our
horses in that meadow, and trout in the creek back of the cabin.  So I
built the old shack largely on the conveniences and the natural beauty
of the spot.  But let me tell you, if this country should get a
railroad and settle up, that quarter section might produce all the
income we'd need, just out of hay and potatoes.  How'd you like to be a
farmer's wife, huh?"

"Fine," she smiled.  "Look at the view--it isn't gorgeous.  It's--it's
simply peaceful and quiet and soothing.  I hate to leave it."

"Better be sorry to leave a place than glad to get away," he answered
lightly.  "Come on, let's pike home and get things in order for the
long trail, woman o' mine.  I'll teach you how to be a woodland
vagabond."




CHAPTER XVII

EN ROUTE

Long since Hazel had become aware that whatsoever her husband set about
doing he did swiftly and with inflexible purpose.  There was no
malingering or doubtful hesitation.  Once his mind was made up, he
acted, Thus, upon the third day from the land staking they bore away
eastward from the clearing, across a trackless area, traveling by the
sun and Bill's knowledge of the country.

"Some day there'll be trails blazed through here by a paternal
government," he laughed over his shoulder, "for the benefit of the
public.  But _we_ don't need 'em, thank goodness."

The buckskin pony Hazel had bought for the trip in with Limping George
ambled sedately under a pack containing bedding, clothes, and a light
shelter tent.  The black horse, Nigger, he of the cocked ear and the
rolling eye, carried in a pair of kyaks six weeks' supply of food.
Bill led the way, seconded by Hazel on easy-gaited Silk.  Behind her
trailed the pack horses like dogs well broken to heel, patient under
their heavy burdens.  Off in the east the sun was barely clear of the
towering Rockies, and the woods were still cool and shadowy, full of
aromatic odors from plant and tree.

Hazel followed her man contentedly.  They were together upon the big
adventure, just as she had seen it set forth in books, and she found it
good.  For her there was no more diverging of trails, no more problems
looming fearsomely at the journey's end.  To jog easily through woods
and over open meadows all day, and at night to lie with her head
pillowed on Bill's arm, peering up through interlocked branches at a
myriad of gleaming stars--that was sufficient to fill her days.  To
live and love and be loved, with all that had ever seemed hateful and
sordid and mean thrust into a remote background.  It was almost too
good to be true, she told herself.  Yet it was indubitably true.  And
she was grateful for the fact.  Touches of the unavoidable bitterness
of life had taught her the worth of days that could be treasured in the
memory.

Occasionally she would visualize the cabin drowsing lifeless in its
emerald setting, haunted by the rabbits that played timidly about in
the twilight, or perhaps a wandering deer peering his wide-eyed
curiosity from the timber's edge.  The books and rugs and curtains were
stowed in boxes and bundles and hung by wires to the ridge log to keep
them from the busy bush-tailed rats.  Everything was done up carefully
and put away for safekeeping, as became a house that is to be long
untenanted.

The mother instinct to keep a nest snug and cozy gave her a tiny pang
over the abandoned home.  The dust of many months would gather on the
empty chairs and shelves.  Still it was only a passing absence.  They
would come back, with treasure wrested from the strong box of the wild.
Surely Fortune could not forbear smiling on a mate like hers?

There was no monotony in the passing days.  Rivers barred their way.
These they forded or swam, or ferried a makeshift raft of logs, as
seemed most fit.  Once their raft came to grief in the maw of a
snarling current, and they laid up two days to dry their saturated
belongings.  Once their horses, impelled by some mysterious home
yearning, hit the back trail in a black night of downpour, and they
trudged half a day through wet grass and dripping scrub to overtake the
truants.  Thunderstorms drove up, shattering the hush of the land with
ponderous detonations, assaulting them with fierce bursts of rain.
Haps and mishaps alike they accepted with an equable spirit and the
true philosophy of the trail--to take things as they come.  When rain
deluged them, there was always shelter to be found and fire to warm
them.  If the flies assailed too fiercely, a smudge brought easement of
that ill.  And when the land lay smiling under a pleasant sun, they
rode light-hearted and care-free, singing or in silent content, as the
spirit moved.  If they rode alone, they felt none of that loneliness
which is so integral a part of the still, unpeopled places.  Each day
was something more than a mere toll of so many miles traversed.  The
unexpected, for which both were eager-eyed, lurked on the shoulder of
each mountain, in the hollow of every cool cañon, or met them boldly in
the open, naked and unafraid.

Bearing up to where the Nachaco debouches from Fraser Lake, with a
Hudson's Bay fur post and an Indian mission on its eastern fringe, they
came upon a blazed line in the scrub timber.  Roaring Bill pulled up,
and squinted away down the narrow lane fresh with ax marks.

"Well," said he, "I wonder what's coming off now?  That looks like a
survey line of some sort.  It isn't a trail--too wide.  Let's follow it
a while.

"I'll bet a nickel," he asserted next, "that's a railroad survey."
They had traversed two miles more or less, and the fact was patent that
the blazed line sought a fairly constant level across country.  "A land
survey runs all same latitude and longitude.  Huh!"

Half an hour of easy jogging set the seal of truth on his assertion.
They came upon a man squinting through a brass instrument set on three
legs, directing, with alternate wavings of his outspread hands, certain
activities of other men ahead of him.

"Well, I'll be--" he bit off the sentence, and stared a moment in frank
astonishment at Hazel.  Then he took off his hat and bowed.  "Good
morning," he greeted politely.

"Sure," Bill grinned.  "We have mornings like this around here all the
time.  What all are you fellows doing in the wilderness, anyway?
Railroad?"

"Cross-section work for the G. T. P.," the surveyor replied.

"Huh," Bill grunted.  "Is it a dead cinch, or is it something that may
possibly come to pass in the misty future?"

"As near a cinch as anything ever is," the surveyor answered.
"Construction has begun--at both ends.  I thought the few white folks
in this country kept tab on anything as important as a new railroad."

"We've heard a lot, but none of 'em has transpired yet; not in my time,
anyway," Bill replied dryly.  "However, the world keeps right on
moving.  I've heard more or less talk of this, but I didn't know it had
got past the talking stage.  What's their Pacific terminal?"

"Prince Rupert--new town on a peninsula north of the mouth of the
Skeena," said the surveyor.  "It's a rush job all the way through, I
believe.  Three years to spike up the last rail.  And that's going some
for a transcontinental road.  Both the Dominion and B. C. governments
have guaranteed the company's bonds away up into millions."

"Be a great thing for this country--say, where does it cross the
Rockies?--what's the general route?" Bill asked abruptly.

"Goes over the range through Yellowhead Pass.  From here it follows the
Nachaco to Fort George, then up the Fraser by Tete Juan Cache, through
the pass, then down the Athabasca till it switches over to strike
Edmonton."

"Uh-huh," Bill nodded.  "One of the modern labors of Hercules.  Well,
we've got to peg.  So long."

"Our camp's about five miles ahead.  Better stop in and noon," the
surveyor invited, "if it's on your road."

"Thanks.  Maybe we will," Bill returned.

The surveyor lifted his hat, with a swift glance of admiration at
Hazel, and they passed with a mutual "so long."

"What do you think of that, old girl?" Bill observed presently.  "A
real, honest-to-God railroad going by within a hundred miles of our
shack.  Three years.  It'll be there before we know it.  We'll have
neighbors to burn."

"A hundred miles!" Hazel laughed.  "Is that your idea of a neighborly
distance?"

"What's a hundred miles?" he defended.  "Two days' ride, that's all.
And the kind of people that come to settle in a country like this don't
stick in sight of the cars.  They're like me--need lots of elbow room.
There'll be hardy souls looking for a location up where we are before
very long.  You'll see."

They passed other crews of men, surveyors with transits, chainmen,
stake drivers, ax gangs widening the path through the timber.  Most of
them looked at Hazel in frank surprise, and stared long after she
passed by.  And when an open bottom beside a noisy little creek showed
the scattered tents of the survey camp, Hazel said:

"Let's not stop, Bill."

He looked back over his shoulder with a comprehending smile.

"Getting shy?  Make you uncomfortable to have all these boys look at
you, little person?" he bantered.  "All right, we won't stop.  But all
these fellows probably haven't seen a white woman for months.  You
can't blame them for admiring.  You do look good to other men besides
me, you know."

So they rode through the camp with but a nod to the aproned cook, who
thrust out his head, and a gray-haired man with glasses, who humped
over a drafting board under an awning.  Their noon fire they built at a
spring five miles beyond.

Thereafter they skirted three lakes in succession, Fraser, Burns, and
Decker, and climbed over a low divide to drop into the Bulkley
Valley--a pleasant, rolling country, where the timber was interspersed
with patches of open grassland and set with small lakes, wherein
schools of big trout lived their finny lives unharried by anglers--save
when some wandering Indian snared one with a primitive net.

Far down this valley they came upon the first sign of settlement.
Hardy souls, far in advance of the coming railroad, had built here and
there a log cabin and were hard at it clearing and plowing and getting
the land ready for crops.  Four or five such lone ranches they passed,
tarrying overnight at one where they found a broad-bosomed woman with a
brood of tow-headed children.  Her husband was out after supplies--a
week's journey.  She kept Hazel from her bed till after midnight,
talking.  They had been there over winter, and Hazel Wagstaff was the
first white woman she had bespoken in seven months.  There were other
women in the valley farther along; but fifty or sixty miles leaves
scant opportunity for visiting when there is so much work to be done
ere wild acres will feed hungry mouths.

At length they fared into Hazleton, which is the hub of a vast area
over which men pursue gold and furs.  Some hundred odd souls were
gathered there, where the stern-wheel steamers that ply the turgid
Skeena reach the head of navigation.  A land-recording office and a
mining recorder Hazleton boasted as proof of its civic importance.  The
mining recorder, who combined in himself many capacities besides his
governmental function, undertook to put through Bill's land deal.  He
knew Bill Wagstaff.

"Wise man," he nodded, over the description.  "If some more uh these
boys that have blazed trails through this country would do the same
thing, they'd be better off.  A chunk of land anywhere in this country
is a good bet now.  We'll have rails here from the coast in a year.
Better freeze onto a couple uh lots here in Hazleton, while they're
low.  Be plumb to the skies in ten years.  Natural place for a city,
Bill.  It's astonishin' how the settlers is comin'."

There was ocular evidence of this last, for they had followed in a road
well rutted from loaded wagons.  But Bill invested in no real estate,
notwithstanding the positive assurance that Hazleton was on the ragged
edge of a boom.

"Maybe, maybe," he admitted.  "But I've got other fish to fry.  That
one piece up by Pine River will do me for a while."

Here where folk talked only of gold and pelts and railroads and
settlement and the coming boom that would make them all rich, Bill
Wagstaff added two more ponies to his pack train.  These he loaded down
with food, staples only, flour, sugar, beans, salt, tea and coffee, and
a sack of dried fruit.  Also he bestowed upon Nigger a further burden
of six dozen steel traps.  And in the cool of a midsummer morning,
before Hazleton had rubbed the sleep out of its collective eyes and
taken up the day's work of discussing its future greatness, Roaring
Bill and his wife draped the mosquito nets over their heads and turned
their faces north.

They bore out upon a wagon road.  For a brief distance only did this
endure, then dwindled to a path.  A turn in this hid sight of the
clustered log houses and tents, and the two steamers that lay up
against the bank.  The river itself was soon lost in the far stretches
of forest.  Once more they rode alone in the wilderness.  For the first
time Hazel felt a quick shrinking from the North, an awe of its huge,
silent spaces, which could so easily engulf thousands such as they and
still remain a land untamed.

But this feeling passed, and she came again under the spell of the
trail, riding with eyes and ears alert, sitting at ease in the saddle,
and taking each new crook in the way with quickened interest.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE WINTERING PLACE

On the second day they crossed the Skeena, a risky and tedious piece of
business, for the river ran deep and strong.  And shortly after this
crossing they came to a line of wire strung on poles.  Originally a
fair passageway had been cleared through low brush and dense timber
alike.  A pathway of sorts still remained, though dim and little
trodden and littered with down trees of various sizes.  Bill followed
this.

"What is the wire?  A rural telephone?  Oh, I remember you told me
once--that Yukon telegraph," Hazel remarked.

"Uh-huh.  That's the famous Telegraph Trail," Bill answered.  "Runs
from Ashcroft clear to Dawson City, on the Yukon; that is, the line
does.  There's a lineman's house every twenty miles or so, and an
operator every forty miles.  The best thing about it is that it
furnishes us with a sort of a road.  And that's mighty lucky, for
there's some tough going ahead of us."

So long as they held to the Telegraph Trail the way led through fairly
decent country.  In open patches there was ample grazing for their
horses.  Hills there were, to be sure; all the land rolled away in
immense forested billows, but the mountains stood off on the right and
left, frowning in the distance.  A plague of flies harassed them
continually, Hazel's hands suffering most, even though she kept
religiously to thick buckskin gloves.  The poisonous bites led to
scratching, which bred soreness.  And as they gained a greater
elevation and the timbered bottoms gave way to rocky hills over which
she must perforce walk and lead her horse, the sweat of the exertion
stung and burned intolerably, like salt water on an open wound.

Minor hardships, these; scarcely to be dignified by that name, more in
the nature of aggravated discomforts they were.  But they irked, and,
like any accumulation of small things, piled up a disheartening total.
By imperceptible degrees the glamour of the trail, the lure of
gypsying, began to lessen.  She found herself longing for the Pine
River cabin, for surcease from this never-ending journey.  But she
would not have owned this to Roaring Bill; not for the world.  It
savored of weakness, disloyalty.  She felt ashamed.  Still--it was no
longer a pleasure jaunt.  The country they bore steadily up into grew
more and more forbidding.  The rugged slopes bore no resemblance to the
kindly, peaceful land where the cabin stood.  Swamps and reedy lakes
lurked in low places.  The hills stood forth grim and craggy, gashed
with deep-cleft gorges, and rising to heights more grim and desolate at
the uttermost reach of her vision.  And into the heart of this, toward
a far-distant area where she could faintly distinguish virgin snow on
peaks that pierced the sky, they traveled day after day.

Shortly before reaching Station Six they crossed the Naas, foaming down
to the blue Pacific.  And at Station Seven, Bill turned squarely off
the Telegraph Trail and struck east by north.  It had been a break in
the monotony of each day's travel to come upon the lonely men in their
little log houses.  When they turned away from the single wire that
linked them up with the outer world, it seemed to Hazel as if the
profound, disquieting stillness of the North became intensified.

Presently the way grew rougher.  If anything, Roaring Bill increased
his pace.  He himself no longer rode.  When the steepness of the hills
and cañons made the going hard the packs were redivided, and henceforth
Satin bore on his back a portion of the supplies.  Bill led the way
tirelessly.  Through flies, river crossings, camp labor, and all the
petty irritations of the trail he kept an unruffled spirit, a fine,
enduring patience that Hazel marveled at and admired.  Many a time,
wakening at some slight stir, she would find him cooking breakfast.  In
every way within his power he saved her.

"I got to take good care of you, little person," he would say.  "I'm
used to this sort of thing, and I'm tough as buckskin.  But it sure
isn't proving any picnic for you.  It's a lot worse in this way than I
thought it would be.  And we've got to get in there before the snow
begins to fly, or it will play the dickens with us."

Many a strange shift were they put to.  Once Bill had to fell a great
spruce across a twenty-foot crevice.  It took him two days to hew it
flat so that his horses could be led over.  The depth was bottomless to
the eye, but from far below rose the cavernous growl of rushing water,
and Hazel held her breath as each animal stepped gingerly over the
narrow bridge.  One misstep--

Once they climbed three weary days up a precipitous mountain range,
and, turned back in sight of the crest by an impassable cliff, were
forced to back track and swing in a fifty-mile detour.

In an air line Roaring Bill's destination lay approximately two hundred
miles north--almost due north--of Hazleton.  By the devious route they
were compelled to take the distance was doubled, more than doubled.
And their rate of progress now fell short of a ten-mile average.
September was upon them.  The days dwindled in length, and the nights
grew to have a frosty nip.

Early and late he pushed on.  Two camp necessities were fortunately
abundant, grass and water.  Even so, the stress of the trail told on
the horses.  They lost flesh.  The extreme steepness of succeeding
hills bred galls under the heavy packs.  They grew leg weary, no longer
following each other with sprightly step and heads high.  Hazel pitied
them, for she herself was trail weary beyond words.  The vagabond
instinct had fallen asleep.  The fine aura of romance no longer hovered
over the venture.

Sometimes when dusk ended the day's journey and she swung her stiffened
limbs out of the saddle, she would cheerfully have foregone all the
gold in the North to be at her ease before the fireplace in their
distant cabin, with her man's head nesting in her lap, and no toll of
weary miles looming sternly on the morrow's horizon.  It was all work,
trying work, the more trying because she sensed a latent uneasiness on
her husband's part, an uneasiness she could never induce him to embody
in words.  Nevertheless, it existed, and she resented its existence--a
trouble she could not share.  But she could not put her finger on the
cause, for Bill merely smiled a denial when she mentioned it.

Nor did she fathom the cause until upon a certain day which fell upon
the end of a week's wearisome traverse of the hardest country yet
encountered.  Up and up and still higher he bore into a range of
beetling crags, and always his gaze was fixed steadfastly and dubiously
on the serrated backbone toward which they ascended with infinite toil
and hourly risk, skirting sheer cliffs on narrow rock ledges, working
foot by foot over declivities where the horses dug their hoofs into a
precarious toe hold, and where a slip meant broken bones on the ragged
stones below.  But win to the uppermost height they did, where an early
snowfall lay two inches deep in a thin forest of jack pine.

They broke out of a cañon up which they had struggled all day onto a
level plot where the pine stood in somber ranks.  A spring creek split
the flat in two.  Beside this tiny stream Bill unlashed his packs.  It
still lacked two hours of dark.  But he made no comment, and Hazel
forbore to trouble him with questions.  Once the packs were off and the
horses at liberty.  Bill caught up his rifle.

"Come on, Hazel," he said.  "Let's take a little hike."

The flat was small, and once clear of it the pines thinned out on a
steep, rocky slope so that westward they could overlook a vast network
of cañons and mountain spurs.  But ahead of them the mountain rose to
an upstanding backbone of jumbled granite, and on this backbone Bill
Wagstaff bent an anxious eye.  Presently they sat down on a bowlder to
take a breathing spell after a stiff stretch of climbing.  Hazel
slipped her hand in his and whispered:

"What is it, Billy-boy?"

"I'm afraid we can't get over here with the horses," he answered
slowly.  "And if we can't find a pass of some kind--well, come on!  It
isn't more than a quarter of a mile to the top."

He struck out again, clambering over great bowlders, clawing his way
along rocky shelves, with a hand outstretched to help her now and then.
Her perceptions quickened by the hint he had given, Hazel viewed the
long ridge for a possible crossing, and she was forced to the reluctant
conclusion that no hoofed beast save mountain sheep or goat could cross
that divide.  Certainly not by the route they were taking.  And north
and south as far as she could see the backbone ran like a solid wall.

It was a scant quarter mile to the top, beyond which no farther
mountain crests showed--only clear, blue sky.  But it was a stretch
that taxed her endurance to the limit for the next hour.  Just short of
the top Bill halted, and wiped the sweat out of his eyes.  And as he
stood his gaze suddenly became fixed, a concentrated stare at a point
northward.  He raised his glasses.

"By thunder!" he exclaimed.  "I believe--it's me for the top."

He went up the few remaining yards with a haste that left Hazel panting
behind.  Above her he stood balanced on a bowlder, cut sharp against
the sky, and she reached him just as he lowered the field glasses with
a long sigh of relief.  His eyes shone with exultation.

"Come on up on the perch," he invited, and reached forth a long,
muscular arm, drawing her up close betide him on the rock.

"Behold the Promised Land," he breathed, "and the gateway thereof,
lying a couple of miles to the north."

They were, it seemed to Hazel, roosting precariously on the very summit
of the world.  On both sides the mountain pitched away sharply in
rugged folds.  Distance smoothed out the harsh declivities, blurred
over the tremendous cañons.  Looking eastward, she saw an ample basin,
which gave promise of level ground on its floor.  True, it was ringed
about with sky-scraping peaks, save where a small valley opened to the
south.  Behind them, between them and the far Pacific rolled a sea of
mountains, snow-capped, glacier-torn, gigantic.

"Down there," Roaring Bill waved his hand, "there's a little meadow,
and turf to walk on.  Lord, I'll be glad to get out of these rocks!
You'll never catch me coming in this way again.  It's sure tough going.
And I've been scared to death for a week, thinking we couldn't get
through."

"But we can?"

"Yes, easy," he assured.  "Take the glasses and look.  That flat we
left our outfit in runs pretty well to the top, about two miles along.
Then there's a notch in the ridge that you can't get with the naked
eye, and a wider cañon running down into the basin.  It's the only
decent break in the divide for fifty miles so far as I can see.  This
backbone runs to high mountains both north and south of us--like the
great wall of China.  We're lucky to hit this pass."

"Suppose we couldn't get over here?" Hazel asked.  "What if there
hadn't been a pass?"

"That was beginning to keep me awake nights," he confessed.  "I've been
studying this rock wall for a week.  It doesn't look good from the east
side, but it's worse on the west, and I couldn't seem to locate the gap
I spotted from the basin one time.  And if we couldn't get through, it
meant a hundred miles or more back south around that white peak you
see.  Over a worse country than we've come through--and no cinch on
getting over at that.  Do you realize that it's getting late in the
year?  Winter may come--bing!--inside of ten days.  And me caught in a
rock pile, with no cabin to shelter my best girl, and no hay up to feed
my horses!  You bet it bothered me."

She hugged him sympathetically, and Bill smiled down at her.

"But it's plain sailing now," he continued.  "I know that basin and all
the country beyond it.  It's a pretty decent camping place, and there's
a fairly easy way out."

He bestowed a reassuring kiss upon her.  They sat on the bowlder for a
few minutes, then scrambled downhill to the jack-pine flat, and built
their evening fire.  And for the first time in many days Roaring Bill
whistled and lightly burst into snatches of song in the deep, bellowing
voice that had given him his name back in the Cariboo country.  His
humor was infectious.  Hazel felt the gods of high adventure smiling
broadly upon them once more.

Before daybreak they were up and packed.  In the dim light of dawn Bill
picked his way up through the jack-pine flat.  With easy traveling they
made such time as enabled them to cross through the narrow gash--cut in
the divide by some glacial offshoot when the Klappan Range was
young--before the sun, a ball of molten fire, heaved up from behind the
far mountain chain.

At noon, two days later, they stepped out of a heavy stand of spruce
into a sun-warmed meadow, where ripe, yellow grasses waved to their
horses' knees.  Hazel came afoot, a fresh-killed deer lashed across
Silk's back.

Bill hesitated, as if taking his bearings, then led to where a rocky
spur of a hill jutted into the meadow's edge.  A spring bubbled out of
a pebbly basin, and he poked about in the grass beside it with his
foot, presently stooping to pick up something which proved to be a
short bit of charred stick.

"The remains of my last camp fire," he smiled reminiscently.  "Packs
off, old pal.  We're through with the trail for a while."




CHAPTER XIX

FOUR WALLS AND A ROOF

To such as view with a kindly eye the hushed areas of virgin forest and
the bold cliffs and peaks of mountain ranges, it is a joy to tread
unknown trails, camping as the spirit moves, journeying leisurely and
in decent comfort from charming spot to spots more charming.  With no
spur of need to drive, such inconsequential wandering gives to each day
and incident an added zest.  Nature appears to have on her best bib and
tucker for the occasion.  The alluring finger of the unknown beckons
alluringly onward, so that if one should betimes strain to physical
exhaustion in pursuit, that is a matter of no moment whatever.

But it is a different thing to face the wilderness for a purpose, to
journey in haste toward a set point, with a penalty swift and sure for
failure to reach that point in due season.  Especially is this so in
the high latitudes.  Natural barriers uprear before the traveler,
barriers which he must scale with sweat and straining muscles.  He must
progress by devious ways, seeking always the line of least resistance.
The season of summer is brief, a riot of flowers and vegetation.  A
certain number of weeks the land smiles and flaunts gay flowers in the
shadow of the ancient glaciers.  Then the frost and snow come back to
their own, and the long nights shut down like a pall.

Brought to it by a kindlier road, Hazel would have found that nook in
the Klappan Range a pleasant enough place.  She could not deny its
beauty.  It snuggled in the heart of a wild tangle of hills all
turreted and battlemented with ledge and pinnacle of rock, from which
ran huge escarpments clothed with spruce and pine, scarred and gashed
on every hand with slides and deep-worn watercourses, down which
tumultuous streams rioted their foamy way.  And nestled amid this, like
a precious stone in its massive setting, a few hundred acres of level,
grassy turf dotted with trees.  Southward opened a narrow valley, as if
pointing the road to a less rigorous land.  No, she could not deny its
beauty.  But she was far too trail weary to appreciate the grandeur of
the Klappan Range.  She desired nothing so much as rest and comfort,
and the solemn mountains were neither restful nor soothing.  They stood
too grim and aloof in a lonely land.

There was so much to be done, work of the hands; a cabin to build, and
a stable; hay to be cut and stacked so that their horses might live
through the long winter--which already heralded his approach with
sharp, stinging frosts at night, and flurries of snow along the higher
ridges.

Bill staked the tent beside the spring, fashioned a rude fork out of a
pronged willow, and fitted a handle to the scythe he had brought for
the purpose.  From dawn to dark he swung the keen blade in the heavy
grass which carpeted the bottom.  Behind him Hazel piled it in little
mounds with the fork.  She insisted on this, though it blistered her
hands and brought furious pains to her back.  If her man must strain
every nerve she would lighten the burden with what strength she had.
And with two pair of hands to the task, the piles of hay gathered thick
on the meadow.  When Bill judged that the supply reached twenty tons,
he built a rude sled with a rack on it, and hauled in the hay with a
saddle horse.

"Amen!" said Bill, when he had emptied the rack for the last time, and
the hay rose in a neat stack.  "That's another load off my mind.  I can
build a cabin and a stable in six feet of snow if I have to, but there
would have been a slim chance of haying once a storm hit us.  And the
caballos need a grubstake for the winter worse than we do, because they
can't eat meat.  _We_ wouldn't go hungry--there's moose enough to feed
an army ranging in that low ground to the south."

"There's everything that one needs, almost, in the wilderness, isn't
there?" Hazel observed reflectively.  "But still the law of life is
awfully harsh, don't you think, Bill?  Isolation is a terrible thing
when it is so absolutely complete.  Suppose something went wrong?
There's no help, and no mercy--absolutely none.  You could die here by
inches and the woods and mountains would look calmly on, just as they
have looked on everything for thousands of years.  It's like prison
regulations.  You _must_ do this, and you _must_ do that, and there's
no excuse for mistakes.  Nature, when you get close to her, is so
inexorable."

Bill eyed her a second.  Then he put his arms around her, and patted
her hair tenderly.

"Is it getting on your nerves already, little person?" he asked.
"Nothing's going to go wrong.  I've been in wild country too often to
make mistakes or get careless.  And those are the two crimes for which
the North--or any wilderness--inflicts rather serious penalties.  Life
isn't a bit harsher here than in the human ant heaps.  Only everything
is more direct; cause and effect are linked up close.  There are no
complexities.  It's all done in the open, and if you don't play the
game according to the few simple rules you go down and out.  That's all
there is to it.  There's no doctor in the next block, nor a grocer to
take your order over the phone, and you can't run out to a café and
take dinner with a friend.  But neither is the air swarming with
disease germs, nor are there malicious gossips to blast you with their
tongues, nor rent and taxes to pay every time you turn around.  Nor am
I at the mercy of a job.  And what does the old, settled country do to
you when you have neither money nor job?  It treats you worse than the
worst the North can do; for, lacking the price, it denies you access to
the abundance that mocks you in every shop window, and bars you out of
the houses that line the streets.  Here, everything needful is yours
for the taking.  If one is ignorant, or unable to convert wood and
water and game to his own uses, he must learn how, or pay the penalty
of incompetence.  No, little person, I don't think the law of life is
nearly so harsh here as it is where the mob struggles for its daily
bread.  It's more open and aboveboard here; more up to the individual.
But it's lonely sometimes.  I guess that's what ails you."

"Oh, pouf!" she denied.  "I'm not lonely, so long as I've got you.  But
sometimes I think of something happening to you--sickness and
accidents, and all that.  One can't help thinking what might happen."

"Forget it!" Bill exhorted.  "That's the worst of living in this big,
still country--it makes one introspective, and so confoundedly
conscious of what puny atoms we human beings are, after all.  But
there's less chance of sickness here than any place.  Anyway, we've got
to take a chance on things now and then, in the course of living our
lives according to our lights.  We're playing for a stake--and things
that are worth having are never handed to us on a silver salver.
Besides, I never had worse than a stomachache in my life and you're a
pretty healthy specimen yourself.  Wait till I get that cabin built,
with a big fireplace at one end.  We'll be more comfortable, and things
will look a little rosier.  This thing of everlasting hurry and hard
work gets on anybody's nerves."

The best of the afternoon was still unspent when the haystacking
terminated, and Bill declared a holiday.  He rigged a line on a limber
willow wand, and with a fragment of venison for bait sought the pools
of the stream which flowed out the south opening.  He prophesied that
in certain black eddies plump trout would be lurking, and he made his
prophecy good at the first pool.  Hazel elected herself gun-bearer to
the expedition, but before long Bill took up that office while she
snared trout after trout from the stream--having become something of an
angler herself under Bill's schooling.  And when they were frying the
fish that evening he suddenly observed:

"Say, they were game little fellows, these, weren't they?  Wasn't that
better sport than taking a street car out to the park and feeding the
swans?"

"What an idea!" she laughed.  "Who wants to feed swans in a park?"

But when the fire had sunk to dull embers, and the stars were peeping
shyly in the open flap of their tent, she whispered in his ear:

"You mustn't think I'm complaining or lonesome or anything, Billy-boy,
when I make remarks like I did to-day.  I love you a heap, and I'd be
happy anywhere with you.  And I'm really and truly at home in the
wilderness.  Only--only sometimes I have a funny feeling; as if I were
afraid.  It seems silly, but this is all so different from our little
cabin.  I look up at these big mountains, and they seem to be
scowling--as if we were trespassers or something."

"I know."  Bill drew her close to him.  "But that's just mood.  I've
felt that same sensation up here--a foolish, indefinable foreboding.
All the out-of-the-way places of the earth produce that effect, if one
is at all imaginative.  It's the bigness of everything, and the eternal
stillness.  I've caught myself listening--when I knew there was nothing
to hear.  Makes a fellow feel like a small boy left by himself in some
big, gloomy building--awesome.  Sure, I know it.  It would be hard on
the nerves to live here always.  But we're only after a stake--then all
the pleasant places of the earth are open to us; with that little, old
log house up by Pine River for a refuge whenever we get tired of the
world at large.  Cuddle up and go to sleep.  You're a dead-game sport,
or you'd have hollered long ago."

And, next day, to Hazel, sitting by watching him swing the heavy,
double-bitted ax on the foundation logs of their winter home, it all
seemed foolish, that heaviness of heart which sometimes assailed her.
She was perfectly happy.  In each of them the good, red blood of youth
ran full and strong, offering ample security against illness.  They had
plenty of food.  In a few brief months Bill would wrest a sack of gold
from the treasure house of the North, and they would journey home by
easy stages.  Why should she brood?  It was sheer folly--a mere ebb of
spirit.

Fortune favored them to the extent of letting the October storms remain
in abeyance until Bill finished his cabin, with a cavernous fireplace
of rough stone at one end.  He split planks for a door out of raw
timber, and graced his house with two windows--one of four small panes
of glass carefully packed in their bedding all the way from Hazleton,
the other a two-foot square of deerskin scraped parchment thin; opaque
to the vision, it still permitted light to enter.  The floor was plain
earth, a condition Bill promised to remedy with hides of moose, once
his buildings were completed.  Rudely finished, and lacking much that
would have made for comfort, still it served its purpose, and Hazel
made shift contentedly.

Followed then the erection of a stable to shelter the horses.  Midway
of its construction a cloud bank blew out of the northeast, and a foot
of snow fell.  Then it cleared to brilliant days of frost.  Bill
finished his stable.  At night he tied the horses therein.  By day they
were turned loose to rustle their fodder from under the crisp snow.  It
was necessary to husband the stock of hay, for spring might be late.

After that they went hunting.  The third day Bill shot two moose in an
open glade ten miles afield.  It took them two more days to haul in the
frozen meat on a sled.

"Looks like one side of a butcher shop," Bill remarked, viewing the
dressed meat where it hung on a pole scaffolding beyond reach of the
wolves.

"It certainly does," Hazel replied.  "We'll never eat all that."

"Probably not," he smiled.  "But there's nothing like having plenty.
The moose might emigrate, you know.  I think I'll add a deer to that
lot for variety--if I can find one."

He managed this in the next few days, and also laid in a stock of
frozen trout by the simple expedient of locating a large pool, and
netting the speckled denizens thereof through a hole in the ice.

So their larder was amply supplied.  And, as the cold rigidly tightened
its grip, and succeeding snows deepened the white blanket till
snowshoes became imperative, Bill began to string out a line of traps.




CHAPTER XX

BOREAS CHANTS HIS LAY

December winged by, the days succeeding each other like glittering
panels on a black ground of long, drear nights.  Christmas came.  They
mustered up something of the holiday spirit, dining gayly off a roast
of caribou.  For the occasion Hazel had saved the last half dozen
potatoes.  With the material at her command she evolved a Christmas
pudding, serving it with brandy sauce.  And after satisfying appetites
bred of a morning tilt with Jack Frost along Bill's trap line, they
spent a pleasant hour picturing their next Christmas.  There would be
holly and bright lights and music--the festival spirit freed of all
restraint.

The new year was born in a wild smother of flying snow, which died at
dawn to let a pale, heatless sun peer tentatively over the southern
mountains, his slanting beams setting everything aglitter.  Frost
particles vibrated in the air, coruscating diamond dust.  Underfoot, on
the path beaten betwixt house and stable, the snow crunched and
complained as they walked, and in the open where the mad winds had
piled it in hard, white windrows.  But in the thick woods it lay as it
had fallen, full five foot deep, a downy wrapping for the slumbering
earth, over which Bill Wagstaff flitted on his snowshoes as silently as
a ghost--a fur-clad ghost, however, who bore a rifle on his shoulder,
and whose breath exhaled in white, steamy puffs.

Gold or no gold, the wild land was giving up its treasure to them.
Already the catch of furs totaled ninety marten, a few mink, a dozen
wolves--and two pelts of that rara avis, the silver fox.  Around twelve
hundred dollars, Bill estimated, with four months yet to trap.  And the
labor of tending the trap lines, of skinning and stretching the catch,
served to keep them both occupied--Hazel as much as he, for she went
out with him on all but the hardest trips.  So that their isolation in
the hushed, white world where the frost ruled with an iron hand had not
so far become oppressive.  They were too busy to develop that dour
affliction of the spirit which loneliness and idleness breed through
the long winters of the North.

A day or two after the first of the year Roaring Bill set out to go
over one of the uttermost trap lines.  Five minutes after closing the
door he was back.

"Easy with that fire, little person," he cautioned.  "She's blowing out
of the northwest again.  The sparks are sailing pretty high.  Keep your
eye on it, Hazel."

"All right, Billum," she replied.  "I'll be careful."

Not more than fifty yards separated the house and stable.  At the
stable end stood the stack of hay, a low hummock above the surrounding
drift.  Except for the place where Bill daily removed the supply for
his horses there was not much foothold for a spark, since a thin coat
of snow overlaid the greater part of the top.  But there was that
chance of catastrophe.  The chimney of their fireplace yawned wide to
the sky, vomiting sparks and ash like a miniature volcano when the fire
was roughly stirred, or an extra heavy supply of dry wood laid on.
When the wind whistled out of the northwest the line of flight was fair
over the stack.  It behooved them to watch wind and fire.  By keeping a
bed of coals and laying on a stick or two at a time a gale might roar
across the chimney-top without sucking forth a spark large enough to
ignite the hay.  Hence Bill's warning.  He had spoken of it before.

Hazel washed up her breakfast dishes, and set the cabin in order
according to her housewifely instincts.  Then she curled up in the
chair which Bill had painstakingly constructed for her especial comfort
with only ax and knife for tools.  She was working up a pair of
moccasins after an Indian pattern, and she grew wholly absorbed in the
task, drawing stitch after stitch of sinew strongly and neatly into
place.  The hours flicked past in unseemly haste, so completely was she
engrossed.  When at length the soreness of her fingers warned her that
she had been at work a long time, she looked at her watch.

"Goodness me!  Bill's due home any time, and I haven't a thing ready to
eat," she exclaimed.  "And here's my fire nearly out."

She piled on wood, and stirring the coals under it, fanned them with
her husband's old felt hat, forgetful of sparks or aught but that she
should be cooking against his hungry arrival.  Outside, the wind blew
lustily, driving the loose snow across the open in long, wavering
ribbons.  But she had forgotten that it was in the dangerous quarter,
and she did not recall that important fact even when she sat down again
to watch her moose steaks broil on the glowing coals raked apart from
the leaping blaze.  The flames licked into the throat of the chimney
with the purr of a giant cat.

No sixth sense warned her of impending calamity.  It burst upon her
with startling abruptness only when she opened the door to throw out
some scraps of discarded meat, for the blaze of the burning stack shot
thirty feet in the air, and the smoke rolled across the meadow in a
sooty manner.

Bareheaded, in a thin pair of moccasins, without coat or mittens to
fend her from the lance-toothed frost.  Hazel ran to the stable.  She
could get the horses out, perhaps, before the log walls became their
crematory.  But Bill, coming in from his traps, reached the stable
first, and there was nothing for her to do but stand and watch with a
sickening self-reproach.  He untied and clubbed the reluctant horses
outside.  Already the stable end against the hay was shooting up
tongues of flame.  As the blaze lapped swiftly over the roof and ate
into the walls, the horses struggled through the deep drift, lunging
desperately to gain a few yards, then turned to stand with ears pricked
up at the strange sight, shivering in the bitter northwest wind that
assailed their bare, unprotected bodies.

Bill himself drew back from the fire, and stared at it fixedly.  He
kept silence until Hazel timidly put her hand on his arm.

"You watched that fire all right, didn't you?" he said then.

"Bill, Bill!" she cried.  But he merely shrugged his shoulders, and
kept his gaze fixed on the burning stable.

To Hazel, shivering with the cold, even close as she was to the intense
heat, it seemed an incredibly short time till a glowing mound below the
snow level was all that remained; a black-edged pit that belched smoke
and sparks.  That and five horses humped tail to the driving wind,
stolidly enduring.  She shuddered with something besides the cold.  And
then Bill spoke absently, his eyes still on the smoldering heap.

"Five feet of caked snow on top of every blade of grass," she heard him
mutter.  "They can't browse on trees, like deer.  Aw, hell!"

He had stuck his rifle butt first in the snow.  He walked over to it;
Hazel followed.  When he stood, with the rifle slung in the crook of
his arm, she tried again to break through this silent aloofness which
cut her more deeply than any harshness of speech could have done.

"Bill, I'm so sorry!" she pleaded.  "It's terrible, I know.  What can
we do?"

"Do?  Huh!" he snorted.  "If I ever have to die before my time, I hope
it will be with a full belly and my head in the air--and mercifully
swift."

Even then she had no clear idea of his intention.  She looked up at him
pleadingly, but he was staring at the horses, his teeth biting
nervously at his under lip.  Suddenly he blinked, and she saw his eyes
moisten.  In the same instant he threw up the rifle.  At the thin,
vicious crack of it, Silk collapsed.

She understood then.  With her hand pressed hard over her mouth to keep
back the hysterical scream that threatened, she fled to the house.
Behind her the rifle spat forth its staccato message of death.  For a
few seconds the mountains flung whiplike echoes back and forth in a
volley.  Then the sibilant voice of the wind alone broke the stillness.

Numbed with the cold, terrified at the elemental ruthlessness of it
all, she threw herself on the bed, denied even the relief of tears.
Dry-eyed and heavy-hearted, she waited her husband's coming, and
dreading it--for the first time she had seen her Bill look on her with
cold, critical anger.  For an interminable time she lay listening for
the click of the latch, every nerve strung tight.

He came at last, and the thump of his rifle as he stood it against the
wall had no more than sounded before he was bending over her.  He sat
down on the edge of the bed, and putting his arm across her shoulders,
turned her gently so that she faced him.

"Never mind, little person," he whispered.  "It's done and over.  I'm
sorry I slashed at you the way I did.  That's a fool man's way--if he's
hurt and sore he always has to jump on somebody else."

Then by some queer complexity of her woman's nature the tears forced
their way.  She did not want to cry--only the weak and mushy-minded
wept.  She had always fought back tears unless she was shaken to the
roots of her soul.  But it was almost a relief to cry with Bill's arm
holding her close.  And it was brief.  She sat up beside him presently.
He held her hand tucked in between his own two palms, but he looked
wistfully at the window, as if he were seeing what lay beyond.

"Poor, dumb devils!" he murmured.  "I feel like a murderer.  But it was
pure mercy to them.  They won't suffer the agony of frost, nor the slow
pain of starvation.  That's what it amounted to--they'd starve if they
didn't freeze first.  I've known men I would rather have shot.  I
bucked many a hard old trail with Silk and Satin.  Poor, dumb devils!"

"D-don't, Bill!" she cried forlornly.  "I know it's my fault.  I let
the fire almost go out, and then built it up big without thinking.  And
I know being sorry doesn't make any difference.  But please--I don't
want to be miserable over it.  I'll never be careless again."

"All right; I won't talk about it, hon," he said.  "I don't think you
will ever be careless about such things again.  The North won't let us
get away with it.  The wilderness is bigger than we are, and it's
merciless if we make mistakes."

"I see that."  She shuddered involuntarily.  "It's a grim country.  It
frightens me."

"Don't let it," he said tenderly.  "So long as we have our health and
strength we can win out, and be stronger for the experience.  Winter's
a tough proposition up here, but you want to fight shy of morbid
brooding over things that can't be helped.  This ever-lasting frost and
snow will be gone by and by.  It'll be spring.  And everything looks
different when there's green grass and flowers, and the sun is warm.
Buck up, old girl--Bill's still on the job."

"How can you prospect in the spring without horses to pack the outfit?"
she asked, after a little.  "How can we get out of here with all the
stuff we'll have?"

"We'll manage it," he assured lightly.  "We'll get out with our furs
and gold, all right, and we won't go hungry on the way, even if we have
no pack train.  Leave it to me."




CHAPTER XXI

JACK FROST WITHDRAWS

All through the month of January each evening, as dusk folded its
somber mantle about the meadow, the wolves gathered to feast on the
dead horses, till Hazel's nerves were strained to the snapping point.
Continually she was reminded of that vivid episode, of which she had
been the unwitting cause.  Sometimes she would open the door, and from
out the dark would arise the sound of wolfish quarrels over the feast,
disembodied snappings and snarlings.  Or when the low-swimming moon
shed a misty glimmer on the open she would peer through a thawed place
on the window-pane, and see gray shapes circling about the half-picked
skeletons.  Sometimes, when Bill was gone, and all about the cabin was
utterly still, one, bolder or hungrier than his fellows, would trot
across the meadow, drawn by the scent of the meat.  Two or three of
these Hazel shot with her own rifle.

But when February marked another span on the calendar the wolves came
no more.  The bones were clean.

There was no impending misfortune or danger that she could point to or
forecast with certitude.  Nevertheless, struggle against it as she
might, knowing it for pure psychological phenomena arising out of her
harsh environment.  Hazel suffered continual vague forebodings.  The
bald, white peaks seemed to surround her like a prison from which there
could be no release.  From day to day she was harassed by dismal
thoughts.  She would wake in the night clutching at her husband.  Such
days as he went out alone she passed in restless anxiety.  Something
would happen.  What it would be she did not know, but to her it seemed
that the bleak stage was set for untoward drama, and they two the
puppets that must play.

She strove against this impression with cold logic; but reason availed
nothing against the feeling that the North had but to stretch forth its
mighty hand and crush them utterly.  But all of this she concealed from
Bill.  She was ashamed of her fears, the groundless uneasiness.  Yet it
was a constant factor in her daily life, and it sapped her vitality as
surely and steadily as lack of bodily nourishment could have done.

Had there been in her make-up any inherent weakness of mentality, Hazel
might perhaps have brooded herself into neurasthenia.  Few save those
who have actually experienced complete isolation for extended periods
can realize the queer, warped outlook such an existence imposes on the
human mind, if that mind is a trifle more than normally sensitive to
impressions, and a nature essentially social both by inclination and
habit.  In the first months of their marriage she had assured herself
and him repeatedly that she could be perfectly happy and contented any
place on earth with Bill Wagstaff.

Emotion has blinded wiser folk, and perhaps that is merely a little
device of nature's, for if one could look into the future with too
great a clarity of vision there would be fewer matings.  In the main
her declaration still held true.  She loved her husband with the same
intensity; possibly even more, for she had found in him none of the
flaws which every woman dreads that time and association may bring to
light in her chosen mate.

When Bill drew her up close in his arms, the intangible menace of the
wilderness and all the dreary monotony of the days faded into the
background.  But they, no more than others who have tried and failed
for lack of understanding, could not live their lives with their heads
in an emotional cloud.  For every action there must be a corresponding
reaction.  They who have the capacity to reach the heights must
likewise, upon occasion, plumb the depths.  Life, she began to realize,
resolved itself into an unending succession of little, trivial things,
with here and there some great event looming out above all the rest for
its bestowal of happiness or pain.

Bill knew.  He often talked about such things.  She was beginning to
understand that he had a far more comprehensive grasp of the
fundamentals of existence that she had.  He had explained to her that
the individual unit was nothing outside of his group affiliations, and
she applied that to herself in a practical way in an endeavor to
analyze herself.  She was a group product, and only under group
conditions could her life flow along nonirritant lines.  Such being the
case, it followed that if Bill persisted in living out of the world
they would eventually drift apart, in spirit if not in actuality.  And
that was an absurd summing-up.

She rejected the conclusion decisively.  For was not their present
situation the net result of a concrete endeavor to strike a balance
between the best of what both the wilderness and the humming cities had
to offer them?  It seemed treason to Bill to long for other voices and
other faces.  Yet she could not help the feeling.  She wondered if he,
too, did not sometimes long for company besides her own.  And the
thought stirred up a perverse jealousy.  They two, perfectly mated in
all things, should be able to make their own little world complete--but
they could not, she knew.  Life was altogether too complex an affair to
be solved in so primitive a fashion.  She felt that continued living
under such conditions would drive her mad; that if she stayed long
enough under the somber shadow of the Klappan Range she would hate the
North and all it contained.

That would have been both unjust and absurd, so she set herself
resolutely to overcome that feeling of oppression.  She was too
well-balanced to drift unwittingly along this perilous road of thought.
She schooled herself to endure and to fight off introspection.  She had
absorbed enough of her husband's sturdy philosophy of life to try and
make the best of a bad job.  After all, she frequently assured herself,
the badness of the job was mostly a state of mind.  And she had a
growing conviction that Bill sensed the struggle, and that it hurt him.
For that reason, if for no other, she did her best to make light of the
grim environment, and to wait patiently for spring.

February and March stormed a path furiously across the calendar.
Higher and higher the drifts piled about the cabin, till at length it
was banked to the eaves with snow save where Bill shoveled it away to
let light to the windows.  Day after day they kept indoors, stoking up
the fire, listening to the triumphant whoop of the winds.

"Snow, snow!" Hazel burst out one day.  "Frost that cuts you like a
knife.  I wonder if there's ever going to be an end to it?  I wish we
were home again--or some place."

"So do I, little person," Bill said gently.  "But spring's almost at
the door.  Hang on a little longer.  We've made a fair stake, anyway,
if we don't wash an ounce of gold."

Hazel let her gaze wander over the pelts hanging thick from ridge log
and wall.  Bill had fared well at his trapping.  Over two thousand
dollars he estimated the value of his catch.

"How are we going to get it all out?"  She voiced a troublesome thought.

"Shoulder pack to the Skeena," he answered laconically.  "Build a
dugout there, and float downstream.  Portage the rapids as they come."

"Oh, Bill!" she came and leaned her head against him contritely.  "Our
poor ponies!  And it was all my carelessness."

"Never mind, hon," he comforted.  "They blinked out without suffering.
And we'll make it like a charm.  Be game--it'll soon be spring."

As if in verification of his words, with the last breath of that
howling storm came a sudden softening of the atmosphere.  The sharp
teeth of the frost became swiftly blunted, and the sun, swinging daily
in a wider arc, brought the battery of his rays into effective play on
the mountainsides.  The drifts lessened, shrunk, became moisture
sodden.  For ten days or more the gradual thaw increased.  Then a
lusty-lunged chinook wind came booming up along the Klappan Range, and
stripped it to a bare, steaming heap.  Overhead whistled the first
flight of the wild goose, bound for the nesting grounds.  Night and day
the roar of a dozen cataracts droned on all sides of the basin, as the
melting snow poured down in the annual spring flood.

By April the twentieth the abdication of Jack Frost was complete.  A
kindlier despot ruled the land, and Bill Wagstaff began to talk of gold.




CHAPTER XXII

THE STRIKE

  ". . . that precious yellow metal sought by men
  In regions desolate.
    Pursued in patient hope or furious toil;
  Breeder of discord, wars, and murderous hate;
    The victor's spoil."


So Hazel quoted, leaning over her husband's shoulder.  In the bottom of
his pan, shining among a film of black sand, lay half a dozen bright
specks, varying from pin-point size to the bigness of a grain of wheat.

"That's the stuff," Bill murmured.  "Only it seems rather far-fetched
for your poet to blame inanimate matter for the cussedness of humanity
in general.  I suppose, though, he thought he was striking a highly
dramatic note.  Anyway, it looks as if we'd struck it pretty fair.
It's time, too--the June rise will hit us like a whirlwind one of these
days."

"About what is the value of those little pieces?" Hazel asked.

"Oh, fifty or sixty cents," he answered.  "Not much by itself.  But it
seems to be uniform over the bar--and I can wash a good many pans in a
day's work."

"I should think so," she remarked.  "It didn't take you ten minutes to
do that one."

"Whitey Lewis and I took out over two hundred dollars a day on that
other creek last spring--no, a year last spring, it was," he observed
reminiscently.  "This isn't as good, but it's not to be sneezed at,
either.  I think I'll make me a rocker.  I've sampled this bend quite a
lot, and I don't think I can do any better than fly at this while the
water stays low."

"I can help, can't I?" she said eagerly.

"Sure," he smiled.  "You help a lot, little person, just sitting around
keeping me company."

"But I want to work," she declared.  "I've sat around now till I'm
getting the fidgets."

"All right; I'll give you a job," he returned good-naturedly.
"Meantime, let's eat that lunch you packed up here."

In a branch of the creek which flowed down through the basin.  Bill had
found plentiful colors as soon as the first big run-off of water had
fallen.  He had followed upstream painstakingly, panning colors always,
and now and then a few grains of coarse gold to encourage him in the
quest.  The loss of their horses precluded ranging far afield to that
other glacial stream which he had worked with Whitey Lewis when he was
a free lance in the North.  He was close to his base of supplies, and
he had made wages--with always the prospector's lure of a rich strike
on the next bar.

And now, with May well advanced, he had found definite indications of
good pay dirt.  The creek swung in a hairpin curve, and in the neck
between the two sides of the loop the gold was sifted through wash
gravel and black sand, piled there by God only knew how many centuries
of glacial drift and flood.  But it was there.  He had taken panfuls at
random over the bar, and uniformly it gave up coarse gold.  With a
rocker he stood a fair chance of big money before the June rise.

"In the morning," said he, when lunch was over, "I'll bring along the
ax and some nails and a shovel, and get busy."

That night they trudged down to the cabin in high spirits.  Bill had
washed out enough during the afternoon to make a respectable showing on
Hazel's outspread handkerchief.  And Hazel was in a gleeful mood over
the fact that she had unearthed a big nugget by herself.  Beginner's
luck, Bill said teasingly, but that did not diminish her elation.  The
old, adventurous glamour, which the long winter and moods of depression
had worn threadbare, began to cast its pleasant spell over her again.
The fascination of the gold hunt gripped her.  Not for the stuff
itself, but for what it would get.  She wondered if the men who dared
the impassive solitudes of the North for weary, lonesome years saw in
every morsel of the gold they found a picture of what that gold would
buy them in kindlier lands.  And some never found any, never won the
stake that would justify the gamble.  It was a gamble, in a sense--a
pure game of chance; but a game that took strength, and nerve, a sturdy
soul, to play.

Still, the gold was there, locked up in divers storing places in the
lap of the earth, awaiting those virile enough to find and take.  And
out beyond, in the crowded places of the earth, were innumerable
gateways to comfort and pleasure which could be opened with gold.  It
remained only to balance the one against the other.  Just as she had
often planned according to her opportunities when she was a wage slave
in the office of Bush and Company, so now did she plan for the future
on a broader scale, now that the North promised to open its treasure
vault to them--an attitude which Bill Wagstaff encouraged and abetted
in his own whimsical fashion.  There was nothing too good for them, he
sometimes observed, provided it could be got.  But there was one
profound difference in their respective temperaments, Hazel sometimes
reflected.  Bill would shrug his wide shoulders, and forget or forego
the unattainable, where she would chafe and fume.  She was quite
positive of this.

But as the days passed there seemed no question of their complete
success.  Bill fabricated his rocker, a primitive, boxlike device with
a blanket screen and transverse slats below.  It was faster than the
pan, even rude as it was, and it caught all but the finer particles of
gold.  Hazel helped operate the rocker, and took her turn at shoveling
or filling the box with water while Bill rocked.  Each day's end sent
her to her bed healthily tired, but happily conscious that she had
helped to accomplish something.

A queer twist of luck put the cap-sheaf on their undertaking.  Hazel
ran a splinter of wood into her hand, thus putting a stop to her
activities with shovel and pail.  Until the wound lost its soreness she
was forced to sit idle.  She could watch Bill ply his rocker while she
fought flies on the bank.  This grew tiresome, particularly since she
had the sense to realize that a man who works with sweat streaming down
his face and a mind wholly absorbed in the immediate task has no desire
to be bothered with inconsequential chatter.  So she rambled along the
creek one afternoon, armed with hook and line on a pliant willow in
search of sport.

The trout were hungry, and struck fiercely at the bait.  She soon had
plenty for supper and breakfast.  Wherefore she abandoned that
diversion, and took to prying tentatively in the lee of certain
bowlders on the edge of the creek--prospecting on her own initiative,
as it were.  She had no pan, and only one hand to work with, but she
knew gold when she saw it--and, after all, it was but an idle method of
killing time.

She noticed behind each rock and in every shallow, sheltered place in
the stream a plentiful gathering of tiny red stones.  They were of a
pale, ruby cast, and mostly flawed; dainty trifles, translucent and
full of light when she held them to the sun.  She began a search for a
larger specimen.  It might mount nicely into a stickpin for Bill, she
thought; a memento of the Klappan Range.

And in this search she came upon a large, rusty pebble, snuggled on the
downstream side of an over-hanging rock right at the water's edge.  It
attracted her first by its symmetrical form, a perfect oval; then, when
she lifted it, by its astonishing weight.  She continued her search for
the pinkish-red stones, carrying the rusty pebble along.  Presently she
worked her way back to where Roaring Bill labored prodigiously.

"I feel ashamed to be loafing while you work so hard, Billy-boy," she
greeted.

"Give me a kiss and I'll call it square," he proposed cheerfully.  "Got
to work like a beaver, kid.  This hot weather'll put us to the bad
before long.  There'll be ten feet of water roaring down here one of
these days."

"Look at these pretty stones I found," she said.  "What are they, Bill?"

"Those?"  He looked at her outstretched palm.  "Garnets."

"Garnets?  They must be valuable, then," she observed.  "The creek's
full of them."

"Valuable?  I should say so," he grinned.  "I sent a sample to a
Chicago firm once.  They replied to the effect that they would take all
I could deliver, and pay thirty-six dollars a ton, f. o. b., my nearest
railroad station."

"Oh!" she protested.  "But they're pretty."

"Yes, if you can find one of any size.  What's the other rock?" he
inquired casually.  "You making a collection of specimens?"

"That's just a funny stone I found," she returned.  "It must be iron or
something.  It's terribly heavy for its size."

"Eh?  Let me see it," he said.

She handed it over.

He weighed it in his palm, scrutinized it closely, turning it over and
over.  Then he took out his knife and scratched the rusty surface
vigorously for a few minutes.

"Huh!" he grunted.  "Look at your funny stone."

He held it out for her inspection.  The blade of his knife had left a
dull, yellow scar.

"Oh!" she gasped.  "Why--it's gold!"

"It is, woman," he declaimed, with mock solemnity.  "Gold--glittering
gold!

"Say, where did you find this?" he asked, when Hazel stared at the
nugget, dumb in the face of this unexpected stroke of fortune.

"Just around the second bend," she cried.  "Oh, Bill, do you suppose
there's any more there?"

"Lead me to it with my trusty pan and shovel, and we'll see," Bill
smiled.

Forthwith they set out.  The overhanging bowlder was a scant ten
minute's walk up the creek.

Bill leaned on his shovel, and studied the ground.  Then, getting down
on his knees at the spot where the marks of Hazel's scratching showed
plain enough, he began to paw over the gravel.

Within five minutes his fingers brought to light a second lump, double
the size of her find.  Close upon that he winnowed a third.  Hazel
leaned over him, breathless.  He sifted the gravel and sand through his
fingers slowly, picking out and examining all that might be the
precious metal, and as he picked and clawed the rusty, brown nuggets
came to light.  At last he reached bottom.  The bowlder thrust out
below in a natural shelf.  From this Bill carefully scraped the
accumulation of black sand and gravel, gleaning as a result of his
labor a baker's dozen of assorted chunks--one giant that must have
weighed three pounds.  He sat back on his haunches, and looked at his
wife, speechless.

"Is that truly _all_ gold, Bill?" she whispered incredulously.

"It certainly is--as good gold as ever went into the mint," he assured.
"All laid in a nice little nest on this shelf of rock.  I've heard of
such things up in this country, but I never ran into one before--and
I've always taken this pocket theory with a grain of salt.  But there
you are.  That's a real, honest-to-God pocket.  And a well-lined one,
if you ask me.  This rusty-colored outside is oxidized iron--from the
black sand, I guess.  Still, it might be something else.  But I know
what the inside is, all right, all right."

"My goodness!" she murmured.  "There might be wagonloads of it in this
creek."

"There might, but it isn't likely." Bill shook his head.  "This is a
simon-pure pocket, and it would keep a graduate mineralogist guessing
to say how it got here, because it's a different proposition from the
wash gold in the creek bed.  I've got all that's here, I'm pretty sure.
And you might prospect this creek from end to end and never find
another nugget bigger than a pea.  It's rich placer ground, at
that--but this pocket's almost unbelievable.  Must be forty pounds of
gold there.  And you found it.  You're the original mascot, little
person."

He bestowed a bearlike hug upon her.

"Now what?" she asked.  "It hardly seems real to pick up several
thousand dollars in half an hour or so like this.  What will we do?"

"Do?  Why, bless your dear soul," he laughed.  "We'll just consider
ourselves extra lucky, and keep right on with the game till the high
water makes us quit."

Which was a contingency nearer at hand than even Bill, with a firsthand
knowledge of the North's vagaries in the way of flood, quite
anticipated.

Three days after the finding of the pocket the whole floor of the creek
was awash.  His rocker went downstream overnight.  To the mouth of the
cañon where the branch sought junction with the parent stream they
could ascend, and no farther.  And when Bill saw that he rolled himself
a cigarette, and, putting one long arm across his wife's shoulders,
said whimsically:

"What d'you say we start home?"




CHAPTER XXIII

THE STRESS OF THE TRAIL

Roaring Bill dumped his second pack on the summit of the Klappan, and
looked away to where the valley that opened out of the basin showed its
blurred hollow in the distance.  But he uttered no useless regrets.
With horses they could have ridden south through a rolling country,
where every stretch of timber gave on a grass-grown level.  Instead
they were forced back over the rugged route by which they had crossed
the range the summer before.  Grub, bedding, furs, and gold totaled two
hundred pounds.  On his sturdy shoulders Bill could pack half that
weight.  For his wife the thing was a physical impossibility, even had
he permitted her to try.  Hence every mile advanced meant that he
doubled the distance, relaying from one camp to the next.  They cut
their bedding to a blanket apiece, and that was Hazel's load--all he
would allow her to carry.

"You're no pack mule, little person," he would say.  "It don't hurt me.
I've done this for years."

But even with abnormal strength and endurance, it was killing work to
buck those ragged slopes with a heavy load.  Only by terrible,
unremitting effort could he advance any appreciable distance.  From
daybreak till noon they would climb and rest alternately.  Then, after
a meal and a short breathing spell, he would go back alone after the
second load.  They were footsore, and their bodies ached with weariness
that verged on pain when they gained the pass that cut the summit of
the Klappan Range.

"Well, we're over the hump," Bill remarked thankfully.  "It's a
downhill shoot to the Skeena.  I don't think it's more than fifty or
sixty miles to where we can take to the water."

They made better time on the western slope, but the journey became a
matter of sheer endurance.  Summer was on them in full blaze.  The
creeks ran full and strong.  Thunderstorms blew up out of a clear sky
to deluge them.  Food was scanty--flour and salt and tea; with meat and
fish got by the way.  And the black flies and mosquitoes swarmed about
them maddeningly day and night.

So they came at last to the Skeena, and Hazel's heart misgave her when
she took note of its swirling reaches, the sinuous eddies--a deep,
swift, treacherous stream.  But Bill rested overnight, and in the
morning sought and felled a sizable cedar, and began to hew.  Slowly
the thick trunk shaped itself to the form of a boat under the steady
swing of his ax.  Hazel had seen the type in use among the coast
Siwashes, twenty-five feet in length, narrow-beamed, the sides cut to a
half inch in thickness, the bottom left heavier to withstand scraping
over rock, and to keep it on an even keel.  A rude and tricky craft,
but one wholly efficient in capable hands.

In a week it was finished.  They loaded the sack of gold, the bundle of
furs, their meager camp outfit amidships, and swung off into the stream.

The Skeena drops fifteen hundred feet in a hundred miles.  Wherefore
there are rapids, boiling stretches of white water in which many a good
canoe has come to grief.  Some of these they ran at imminent peril.
Over the worst they lined the canoe from the bank.  One or two short
cañons they portaged, dragging the heavy dugout through the brush by
main strength.  Once they came to a wall-sided gorge that ran away
beyond any attempt at portage, and they abandoned the dugout, to build
another at the lower end.  But between these natural barriers they
clicked off the miles in hot haste, such was the swiftness of the
current.  And in the second week of July they brought up at the head of
Kispiox Cañon.  Hazleton lay a few miles below.  But the Kispiox stayed
them, a sluice box cut through solid stone, in which the waters raged
with a deafening roar.  No man ventured into that wild gorge.  They
abandoned the dugout.  Bill slung the sack of gold and the bale of furs
on his back.

"It's the last lap, Hazel," said he.  "We'll leave the rest of it for
the first Siwash that happens along."

So they set out bravely to trudge the remaining distance.  And as the
fortunes of the trail sometimes befall, they raised an Indian camp on
the bank of the river at the mouth of the cañon.  A ten-dollar bill
made them possessors of another canoe, and an hour later the roofs of
Hazleton cropped up above the bank.

"Oh, Bill," Hazel called from the bow.  "Look!  There's the same old
steamer tied to the same old bank.  We've been gone a year, and yet the
world hasn't changed a mite.  I wonder if Hazleton has taken a Rip van
Winkle sleep all this time?"

"No fear," he smiled.  "I can see some new houses--quite a few, in
fact.  And look--by Jiminy!  They're working on the grade.  That
railroad, remember?  See all those teams?  Maybe I ought to have taken
up old Hackaberry on that town-lot proposition, after all."

"Fiddlesticks!" she retorted, with fine scorn of Hazleton's real-estate
possibilities.  "You could buy the whole town with this."

She touched the sack with her toe.

"Not quite," Bill returned placidly.  "I wouldn't, anyway.  We'll get a
better run for our money than that.  I hope old Hack didn't forget to
attend to that ranch business for me."

He drove the canoe alongside a float.  A few loungers viewed them with
frank curiosity.  Bill set out the treasure sack and the bale of furs,
and tied the canoe.

"A new hotel, by Jove!" he remarked, when upon gaining the level of the
town a new two-story building blazoned with a huge sign its function as
a hostelry.  "Getting quite metropolitan in this neck of the woods.
Say, little person, do you think you can relish a square meal?  Planked
steak and lobster salad--huh?  I wonder if they _could_ rustle a salad
in this man's town?  Say, do you know I'm just beginning to find out
how hungry I am for the flesh-pots.  What's the matter with a little
variety?--as Lin MacLean said.  Aren't you, hon?"

She was; frankly so.  For long, monotonous months she had been
struggling against just such cravings, impossible of realization, and
therefore all the more tantalizing.  She had been a year in the
wilderness, and the wilderness had not only lost its glamour, but had
become a thing to flee from.  Even the rude motley of Hazleton was a
welcome change.  Here at least--on a minor scale, to be sure--was that
which she craved, and to which she had been accustomed--life, stir,
human activity, the very antithesis of the lonely mountain fastnesses.
She bestowed a glad pressure on her husband's arm as they walked up the
street, Bill carrying the sack of gold perched carelessly on one
shoulder.

"Say, their enterprise has gone the length of establishing a branch
bank here, I see."

He called her attention to a square-fronted edifice, its new-boarded
walls as yet guiltless of paint, except where a row of black letters
set forth that it was the Bank of British North America.

"That's a good place to stow this bullion," he remarked.  "I want to
get it off my hands."

So to the bank they bent their steps.  A solemn, horse-faced Englishman
weighed the gold, and issued Bill a receipt, expressing a polite regret
that lack of facility to determine its fineness prevented him from
converting it into cash.

"That means a trip to Vancouver," Bill remarked outside.  "Well, we can
stand that."

From the bank they went to the hotel, registered, and were shown to a
room.  For the first time since the summit of the Klappan Range, where
her tiny hand glass had suffered disaster, Hazel was permitted a clear
view of herself in a mirror.

"I'm a perfect fright!" she mourned.

"Huh!" Bill grunted.  "You're all right.  Look at me."

The trail had dealt hardly with both, in the matter of their personal
appearance.  Tanned to an abiding brown, they were, and Hazel's
one-time smooth face was spotted with fly bites and marked with certain
scratches suffered in the brush as they skirted the Kispiox.  Her hair
had lost its sleek, glossy smoothness of arrangement.  Her hands were
reddened and rough.  But chiefly she was concerned with the sad state
of her apparel.  She had come a matter of four hundred miles in the
clothes on her back--and they bore unequivocal evidence of the journey.

"I'm a perfect fright," she repeated pettishly.  "I don't wonder that
people lapse into semi-barbarism in the backwoods.  One's manners,
morals, clothing, and complexion all suffer from too close contact with
your beloved North, Bill."

"Thanks!" he returned shortly.  "I suppose I'm a perfect fright, too.
Long hair, whiskers, grimy, calloused hands, and all the rest of it.  A
shave and a hair cut, a bath and a new suit of clothes will remedy
that.  But I'll be the same personality in every essential quality that
I was when I sweated over the Klappan with a hundred pounds on my back."

"I hope so," she retorted.  "I don't require the shave, thank goodness,
but I certainly need a bath--and clothes.  I wish I had the gray suit
that's probably getting all moldy and moth-eaten at the Pine River
cabin.  I wonder if I can get anything fit to wear here?"

"Women live here," Bill returned quietly, "and I suppose the stores
supply 'em with duds.  Unlimber that bank roll of yours, and do some
shopping."

She sat on the edge of the bed, regarding her reflection in the mirror
with extreme disfavor.  Bill fingered his thick stubble of a beard for
a thoughtful minute.  Then he sat down beside her.

"Wha's a mollah, hon?" he wheedled.  "What makes you such a crosser
patch all at once?"

"Oh, I don't know," she answered dolefully.  "I'm tired and hungry, and
I look a fright--and--oh, just everything."

"Tut, tut!" he remonstrated good-naturedly.  "That's just mood again.
We're out of the woods, literally and figuratively.  If you're hungry,
let's go and see what we can make this hotel produce in the way of
grub, before we do anything else."

"I wouldn't go into their dining-room looking like this for the world,"
she said decisively.  "I didn't realize how dirty and shabby I was."

"All right; you go shopping, then," he proposed, "while I take these
furs up to old Hack's place and turn them into money.  Then we'll
dress, and make this hotel feed us the best they've got.  Cheer up.
Maybe it was tough on you to slice a year out of your life and leave it
in a country where there's nothing but woods and eternal silence--but
we've got around twenty thousand dollars to show for it, Hazel.  And
one can't get something for nothing.  There's a price mark on it
somewhere, always.  We've got all our lives before us, little person,
and a better chance for happiness than most folks have.  Don't let
little things throw you into the blues.  Be my good little pal--and see
if you can't make one of these stores dig up a white waist and a black
skirt, like you had on the first time I saw you."

He kissed her, and went quickly out.  And after a long time of sober
staring at her image in the glass Hazel shook herself impatiently.

"I'm a silly, selfish, incompetent little beast," she whispered.  "Bill
ought to thump me, instead of being kind.  I can't do anything, and I
don't know much, and I'm a scarecrow for looks right now.  And I
started out to be a real partner."

She wiped an errant tear away, and made her way to a store--a new place
sprung up, like the bank and the hotel, with the growing importance of
the town.  The stock of ready-made clothing drove her to despair.  It
seemed that what women resided in Hazleton must invariably dress in
Mother Hubbard gowns of cheap cotton print with other garments to
match.  But eventually they found for her undergarments of a sort, a
waist and skirt, and a comfortable pair of shoes.  Hats, as a milliner
would understand the term, there were none.  And in default of such she
stuck to the gray felt sombrero she had worn into the Klappan and out
again--which, in truth, became her very well, when tilted at the proper
angle above her heavy black hair.  Then she went back to the hotel, and
sought a bathroom.

Returning from this she found Bill, a Bill all shaved and shorn,
unloading himself of sundry packages of new attire.

"Aha, everything is lovely," he greeted enthusiastically.  "Old Hack
jumped at the pelts, and paid a fat price for the lot.  Also the ranch
deal has gone through.  He's a prince, old Hack.  Sent up a man and had
it surveyed and classified and the deed waiting for me.  And--oh, say,
here's a letter for you."

"For me?  Oh, yes," as she looked at the hand-writing and postmark.  "I
wrote to Loraine Marsh when we were going north.  Good heavens, look at
the date--it's been here since last September!"

"Hackaberry knew where we were," Bill explained.  "Sometimes in camps
like this they hold mail two or three years for men that have gone into
the interior."

She put aside the letter, and dressed while Bill had his bath.  Then,
with the smoke and grime of a hard trail obliterated, and with decent
clothes upon them, they sought the dining-room.  There, while they
waited to be served, Hazel read Loraine Marsh's letter, and passed it
to Bill with a self-conscious little laugh.

"There's an invitation there we might accept," she said casually.

Bill read.  There were certain comments upon her marriage, such as the
average girl might be expected to address to her chum who has forsaken
spinsterhood, a lot of chatty mention of Granville people and Granville
happenings, which held no particular interest for Bill since he knew
neither one nor the other, and it ended with an apparently sincere hope
that Hazel and her husband would visit Granville soon as the Marshes'
guests.

He returned the letter as the waitress brought their food.

"Wouldn't it be nice to take a trip home?" Hazel suggested
thoughtfully.  "I'd love to."

"We are going home," Bill reminded gently.

"Oh, of course," she smiled.  "But I mean to Granville.  I'd like to go
back there with you for a while, just to--just to--"

"To show 'em," he supplied laconically.

"Oh, Bill!" she pouted.

Nevertheless, she could not deny that there was a measure of truth in
his brief remark.  She did want to "show 'em."  Bill's vernacular
expressed it exactly.  She had compassed success in a manner that
Granville--and especially that portion of Granville which she knew and
which knew her--could appreciate and understand and envy according to
its individual tendencies.

She looked across the table at her husband, and thought to herself with
proud satisfaction that she had done well.  Viewed from any angle
whatsoever, Bill Wagstaff stood head and shoulders above all the men
she had ever known.  Big, physically and mentally, clean-minded and
capable--indubitably she had captured a lion, and, though she might
have denied stoutly the imputation, she wanted Granville to see her
lion and hear him roar.

Whether they realize the fact or not, to the average individual, male
or female, reflected glory is better than none at all.  And when two
people stand in the most intimate relation to each other, the success
of one lends a measure of its luster to the other.  Those who had been
so readily impressed by Andrew Bush's device to singe her social wings
with the flame of gossip had long since learned their mistake.  She had
the word of Loraine Marsh and Jack Barrow that they were genuinely
sorry for having been carried away by appearances.  And she could nail
her colors to the mast if she came home the wife of a man like Bill
Wagstaff, who could wrest a fortune from the wilderness in a briefer
span of time than it took most men to make current expenses.  Hazel was
quite too human to refuse a march triumphal if it came her way.  She
had left Granville in bitterness of spirit, and some of that bitterness
required balm.

"Still thinking Granville?" Bill queried, when they had finished an
uncommonly silent meal.

Hazel flushed slightly.  She was, and momentarily she felt that she
should have been thinking of their little nest up by Pine River Pass
instead.  She knew that Bill was homing to the cabin.  She herself
regarded it with affection, but of a different degree from his.  Her
mind was more occupied with another, more palpitating circle of life
than was possible at the cabin, much as she appreciated its green and
peaceful beauty.  The sack of gold lying in the bank had somehow opened
up far-flung possibilities.  She skipped the interval of affairs which
she knew must be attended to, and betook herself and Bill to Granville,
thence to the bigger, older cities, where money shouted in the voice of
command, where all things were possible to those who had the price.

She had had her fill of the wilderness--for the time being, she put it.
It loomed behind her--vast, bleak, a desolation of loneliness from
which she must get away.  She knew now, beyond peradventure, that her
heart had brought her back to the man in spite of, rather than because
of, his environment.  And secure in the knowledge of his love for her
and her love for him, she was already beginning to indulge a dream of
transplanting him permanently to kindlier surroundings, where he would
have wider scope for his natural ability and she less isolation.

But she was beginning to know this husband of hers too well to propose
anything of the sort abruptly.  Behind his tenderness and patience she
had sometimes glimpsed something inflexible, unyielding as the
wilderness he loved.  So she merely answered:

"In a way, yes."

"Let's go outside where I can smoke a decent cigar on top of this
fairly decent meal," he suggested.  "Then we'll figure on the next
move.  I think about twenty-four hours in Hazleton will do me.  There's
a steamer goes down-river to-morrow."




CHAPTER XXIV

NEIGHBORS

Four days later they stood on the deck of a grimy little steamer
breasting the outgoing tide that surged through the First Narrows.
Wooded banks on either hand spread dusky green in the hot August sun.
On their left glinted the roofs and white walls of Hollyburn, dear to
the suburban heart.  Presently they swung around Brockton Point, and
Vancouver spread its peninsular clutter before them.  Tugs and launches
puffed by, about their harbor traffic.  A ferry clustered black with
people hurried across the inlet.  But even above the harbor noises,
across the intervening distance they could hear the vibrant hum of the
industrial hive.

"Listen to it," said Bill.  "Like surf on the beaches.  And, like the
surf, it's full of treacherous undercurrents, a bad thing to get into
unless you can swim strong enough to keep your head above water."

"You're a thoroughgoing pessimist," she smiled.

"No," he shook his head.  "I merely know that it's a hard game to buck,
under normal conditions.  We're of the fortunate few, that's all."

"You're not going to spoil the pleasure that's within your reach by
pondering the misfortunes of those who are less lucky, are you?" she
inquired curiously.

"Not much," he drawled.  "Besides, that isn't my chief objection to
town.  I simply can't endure the noise and confusion and the manifold
stinks, and the universal city attitude--which is to gouge the other
fellow before he gouges you.  Too much like a dog fight.  No, I haven't
any mission to remedy social and economic ills.  I'm taking the
egotistic view that it doesn't concern me, that I'm perfectly justified
in enjoying myself in my own way, seeing that I'm in a position to do
so.  We're going to take our fun as we find it.  Just the same," he
finished thoughtfully, "I'd as soon be pulling into that ranch of ours
on the hurricane deck of a right good horse as approaching Vancouver's
water front.  This isn't any place to spend money or to see anything.
It's a big, noisy, over-grown village, overrun with business exploiters
and real-estate sharks.  It'll be a city some day.  At present it's
still in the shambling stage of civic youth."

In so far as Hazel had observed upon her former visit, this, if a
trifle sweeping, was in the main correct.  So she had no regrets when
Bill confined their stay to the time necessary to turn his gold into a
bank account, and allow her to buy a trunkful, more or less, of pretty
clothes.  Then they bore on eastward and halted at Ashcroft.  Bill had
refused to commit himself positively to a date for the eastern
pilgrimage.  He wanted to see the cabin again.  For that matter she
did, too--so that their sojourn there did not carry them over another
winter.  That loomed ahead like a vague threat.  Those weary months in
the Klappan Range had filled her with the subtle poison of discontent,
for which she felt that new scenes and new faces would prove the only
antidote.

"There's a wagon road to Fort George," he told her.  "We could go in
there by the B. X. steamers, but I'm afraid we couldn't buy an outfit
to go on.  I guess a pack outfit from the end of the stage line will be
about right."

From Ashcroft an auto stage whirled them swiftly into the heart of the
Cariboo country--to Quesnelle, where Bill purchased four head of horses
in an afternoon, packed, saddled, and hit the trail at daylight in the
morning.

It was very pleasant to loaf along a passable road mounted on a
light-footed horse, and Hazel enjoyed it if for no more than the
striking contrast to that terrible journey in and out of the Klappan.
Here were no heartbreaking mountains to scale.  The scourge of flies
was well-nigh past.  They took the road in easy stages,
well-provisioned, sleeping in a good bed at nights, camping as the
spirit moved when a likely trout stream crossed their trail, venison
and grouse all about them for variety of diet and the sport of hunting.

So they fared through the Telegraph Range, crossed the Blackwater, and
came to Fort George by way of a ferry over the Fraser.

"This country is getting civilized," Bill observed that evening.  "They
tell me the G. T. P. has steel laid to a point three hundred miles east
of here.  This bloomin' road'll be done in another year.  They're
grading all along the line.  I bought that hundred and sixty acres on
pure sentiment, but it looks like it may turn out a profitable business
transaction.  That railroad is going to flood this country with
farmers, and settlement means a network of railroads and skyrocketing
ascension of land values."

The vanguard of the land hungry had already penetrated to Fort George.
Up and down the Nachaco Valley, and bordering upon the Fraser, were the
cabins of the preëmptors.  The roads were dotted with the teams of the
incoming.  A sizable town had sprung up around the old trading post.

"They come like bees when the rush starts," Bill remarked.

Leaving Fort George behind, they bore across country toward Pine River.
Here and there certain landmarks, graven deep in Hazel's recollection,
uprose to claim her attention.  And one evening at sunset they rode up
to the little cabin, all forlorn in its clearing.

The grass waved to their stirrups, and the pigweed stood rank up to the
very door.

Inside, a gray film of dust had accumulated on everything, and the
rooms were oppressive with the musty odors that gather in a closed,
untenanted house.  But apart from that it stood as they had left it
thirteen months before.  No foot had crossed the threshold.  The pile
of wood and kindling lay beside the fireplace as Bill had placed it the
morning they left.

"'Be it ever so humble,'" Bill left the line of the old song
unfinished, but his tone was full of jubilation.  Between them they
threw wide every door and window.  The cool evening wind filled the
place with sweet, pine-scented air.  Then Bill started a blaze roaring
in the black-mouthed fireplace--to make it look natural, he said--and
went out to hobble his horses for the night.

In the morning they began to unpack their household goods.  Rugs and
bearskins found each its accustomed place upon the floor.  His books
went back on the shelves.  With magical swiftness the cabin resumed its
old-home atmosphere.  And that night Bill stretched himself on the
grizzly hide before the fireplace, and kept his nose in a book until
Hazel, who was in no humor to read, fretted herself into something
approaching a temper.

"You're about as sociable as a clam," she broke into his absorption at
last.

He looked up in surprise, then chucked the volume carelessly aside, and
twisted himself around till his head rested in her lap.

"Vot iss?" he asked cheerfully.  "Lonesome?  Bored with yourself?
Ain't I here?"

"Your body is," she retorted.  "But your spirit is communing with those
musty old philosophers."

"Oh, be good--go thou and do likewise," he returned impenitently.  "I'm
tickled to death to be home.  And I'm fairly book-starved.  It's fierce
to be deprived of even a newspaper for twelve months.  I'll be a year
getting caught up.  Surely you don't feel yourself neglected because I
happen to have my nose stuck in a book?"

"Of course not!" she denied vigorously.  The childish absurdity of her
attitude struck her with sudden force.  "Still, I'd like you to talk to
me once in a while."

"'Of shoes and ships and sealing wax; of cabbages and kings,'" he flung
at her mischievously.  "I'll make music; that's better than mere words."

He picked up his mandolin and tuned the strings.  Like most things
which he set out to do, Bill had mastered his instrument, and could
coax out of it all the harmony of which it was capable.  He seemed to
know music better than many who pass for musicians.  But he broke off
in the midst of a bar.

"Say, we could get a piano in here next spring," he said.  "I just
recollected it.  We'll do it."

Now, this was something that she had many a time audibly wished for.
Yet the prospect aroused no enthusiasm.

"That'll be nice," she said--but not as she would have said it a year
earlier.  Bill's eyes narrowed a trifle, but he still smiled.  And
suddenly he stepped around behind her chair, put both hands under her
chin, and tilted her head backward.

"Ah, you're plumb sick and tired to death of everything, aren't you?"
he said soberly.  "You've been up here too long.  You sure need a
change.  I'll have to take you out and give you the freedom of the
cities, let you dissipate and pink-tea, and rub elbows with the mob for
a while.  Then you'll be glad to drift back to this woodsy hiding-place
of ours.  When do you want to start?"

"Why, Bill!" she protested.

But she realized in a flash that Bill could read her better than she
could read herself.  Few of her emotions could remain long hidden from
that keenly observing and mercilessly logical mind.  She knew that he
guessed where she stood, and by what paths she had gotten there.  Trust
him to know.  And it made her very tender toward him that he was so
quick to understand.  Most men would have resented.

"I want to stack a few tons of hay," he went on, disregarding her
exclamation.  "I'll need it in the spring, if not this winter.  Soon as
that's done we'll hit the high spots.  We'll take three or four
thousand dollars, and while it lasts we'll be a couple of--of
high-class tramps.  Huh?  Does it sound good?"

She nodded vigorously.

"High-class tramps," she  repeated musingly.

"That sounds fine."

"Perk up, then," he wheedled.

"Bill-boy," she murmured, "you mustn't take me too seriously."

"I took you for better or for worse," he answered, with a kiss.  "I
don't want it to turn out worse.  I want you to be contented and happy
here, where I've planned to make our home.  I know you love me quite a
lot, little person.  Nature fitted us in a good many ways to be mates.
But you've gone through a pretty drastic siege of isolation in this
rather grim country, and I guess it doesn't seem such an alluring place
as it did at first.  I don't want you to nurse that feeling until it
becomes chronic.  Then we would be out of tune, and it would be good-by
happiness.  But I think I know the cure for your malady."

That was his final word.  He deliberately switched the conversation
into other channels.

In the morning he began his hay cutting.  About eleven o'clock he threw
down his scythe and stalked to the house.

"Put on your hat, and let's go investigate a mystery," said he.  "I
heard a cow bawl in the woods a minute ago.  A regular barnyard bellow."

"A cow bawling?" she echoed.  "Sure?  What would cattle be doing away
up here?"

"That's what I want to know?" Bill laughed.  "I've never seen a cow
north of the Frazer--not this side of the Rockies, anyway."

They saddled their horses, and rode out in the direction from whence
had arisen the bovine complaint.  The sound was not repeated, and Hazel
had begun to chaff Bill about a too-vivid imagination when within a
half mile of the clearing he pulled his horse up short in the middle of
a little meadow.

"Look!"

The track of a broad-tired wagon had freshly crushed the thick grass.
Bill squinted at the trail, then his gaze swept the timber beyond.

"Well!"

"What is it, Bill?" Hazel asked.

"Somebody has been cutting timber over there," he enlightened.  "I can
see the fresh ax work.  Looks like they'd been hauling poles.  Let's
follow this track a ways."

The tiny meadow was fringed on the north by a grove of poplars.  Beyond
that lay another clear space of level land, perhaps forty acres in
extent.  They broke through the belt of poplars--and pulled up again.

On one side of the meadow stood a cabin, the fresh-peeled log walls
glaring yellow in the sun, and lifting an earth-covered roof to the
autumn sky.  Bill whistled softly.

"I'll be hanged," he uttered, "if there isn't the cow!"

Along the west side of the meadow ran a brown streak of sod, and down
one side of this a man guided the handles of a plow drawn by the
strangest yokemates Hazel's eyes had seen for many a day.

"For goodness' sake!" she exclaimed.

"That's the true pioneer spirit for you," Bill spoke absently.  "He has
bucked his way into the heart of a virgin country, and he's breaking
sod with a mule and a cow.  That's adaptation to environment with a
vengeance--and grit."

"There's a woman, too, Bill.  And see--she's carrying a baby!"  Hazel
pointed excitedly.  "Oh, Bill!"

"Let's go over."  He stirred up his horse.  "What did I tell you about
folk that hanker for lots of elbow-room?  They're coming."

The man halted his strangely assorted team to watch them come.  The
woman stood a step outside the door, a baby in her arms, another
toddler holding fast to her skirt.  A thick-bodied, short,
square-shouldered man was this newcomer, with a round, pleasant face.

"Hello, neighbor!" Bill greeted.

The plowman lifted his old felt hat courteously.  His face lit up.

"_Ach_!" said he.  "Neighbor.  Dot iss a goot vord in diss country vere
dere iss no neighbor.  But I am glat to meet you.  Vill you come do der
house und rest a v'ile?"

"Sure!" Bill responded.  "But we're neighbors, all right.  Did you
notice a cabin about half a mile west of here?  That's our place--when
we're at home."

"So?"  The word escaped with the peculiar rising inflection of the
Teuton.  "I haf saw dot cabin veil ve come here.  But I dink it vass
abandon.  Und I pick dis place mitout hope off a neighbor.  Id iss goot
lant.  Veil, let us to der house go.  Id vill rest der mule--und
Gretchen, der cow.  Hah!"

He rolled a blue eye on his incongruous team, and grinned widely.

"Come," he invited; "mine vife vill be glat."

They found her a matron of thirty-odd; fresh-cheeked, round-faced like
her husband, typically German, without his accent of the Fatherland.
Hazel at once appropriated the baby.  It lay peacefully in her arms,
staring wide-eyed, making soft, gurgly sounds.

"The little dear!" Hazel murmured.

"Lauer, our name iss," the man said casually, when they were seated.

"Wagstaff, mine is," Bill completed the informal introduction.

"So?" Lauer responded.  "Id hass a German sount, dot name, yes."

"Four or five generations back," Bill answered.  "I guess I'm as
American as they make 'em."

"I am from Bavaria," Lauer told him.  "Vill you shmoke?  I light mine
bibe--mit your vife's permission."

"Yes," he continued, stuffing the bowl of his pipe with a stubby
forefinger, "I am from Bavaria.  Dere I vass upon a farm brought oop.
I serf in der army my dime.  Den Ameriga.  Dere I marry my vife, who is
born in Milvaukee.  I vork in der big brreweries.  Afder dot I learn to
be a carpenter.  Now I am a kink, mit a castle all mine own, I am no
more a vage slafe."

He laughed at his own conceit, a great, roaring bellow that filled the
room.

"You're on the right track," Bill nodded.  "It's a pity more people
don't take the same notion.  What do you think of this country, anyway?"

"It iss goot," Lauer answered briefly, and with unhesitating certainty.
"It iss goot.  Vor der boor man it iss--it iss salfation.  Mit fife
huntret tollars und hiss two hants he can himself a home make--und a
lifing be sure off."

Beside Hazel Lauer's wife absently caressed the blond head of her
four-year-old daughter.

"No, I don't think I'll ever get lonesome," she said.  "I'm too glad to
be here.  And I've got lots of work and my babies.  Of course, it's
natural I'd miss a woman friend running in now and then to chat.  But a
person can't have it all.  And I'd do anything to have a roof of our
own, and to have it some place where our livin' don't depend on a pay
envelope.  Oh, a city's dreadful, I think, when your next meal almost
depends on your man holdin' his job.  I've lived in town ever since I
was fifteen.  I lost three babies in Milwaukee--hot weather, bad air,
bad milk, bad everything, unless you have plenty of money.  Many a time
I've sat and cried, just from thinkin' how bad I wanted a little place
of our own, where there was grass and trees and a piece of ground for a
garden.  And I knew we'd never be able to buy it.  We couldn't get
ahead enough."

"Und so," her husband took up the tale, "I hear off diss country, vere
lant can be for noddings got.  Und so we scrape und pinch und safe
nickels und dimes for fife year.  Und here ve are.  All der vay from
Visconsin in der vaigon, yes.  Mit two mules.  In Ashcroft I buy der
cow, so dot ve haf der fresh milk.  Und dot iss lucky.  For von mule
iss die on der road.  So I am plow oop der lant und haul my vaigon mit
von mule und Gretchen, der cow."

Hazel had a momentary vision of unrelated hardships by the way, and she
wondered how the man could laugh and his wife smile over it.  She knew
the stifling heat of narrow streets in mid-summer, and the hungry
longing for cool, green shade.  She had seen something of a city's
poverty.  But she knew also the privations of the trail.  Two thousand
miles in a wagon!  And at the journey's end only a rude cabin of
logs--and years of steady toil.  Isolation in a huge and lonely land.
Yet these folk were happy.  She wondered briefly if her own viewpoint
were possibly askew.  She knew that she could not face such a prospect
except in utter rebellion.  Not now.  The bleak peaks of the Klappan
rose up before her mind's eye, the picture of five horses dead in the
snow, the wolves that snapped and snarled over their bones.  She
shuddered.  She was still pondering this when she and Bill dismounted
at home.




CHAPTER XXV

THE DOLLAR CHASERS

Granville took them to its bosom with a haste and earnestness that made
Hazel catch her breath.  The Marshes took possession of them upon their
arrival, and they were no more than domiciled under the Marsh roof than
all her old friends flocked to call.  Tactfully none so much as
mentioned Andrew Bush, nor the five-thousand-dollar legacy--the
disposition of which sum still perplexed that defunct gentleman's
worthy executors.  And once more in a genial atmosphere Hazel concluded
to let sleeping dogs lie.  Many a time in the past two years she had
looked forward to cutting them all as dead as they had cut her during
that unfortunate period.  But once among them, and finding them
willing, nay, anxious, to forget that they had ever harbored unjust
thoughts of her, she took their proffered friendship at its face value.
It was quite gratifying to know that many of them envied her.  She
learned from various sources that Bill's fortune loomed big, had grown
by some mysterious process of Granville tattle, until it had reached
the charmed six figures of convention.

That in itself was sufficient to establish their prestige.  In a
society that lived by and for the dollar, and measured most things with
its dollar yardstick, that murmured item opened--indeed, forced
open--many doors to herself and her husband which would otherwise have
remained rigid on their fastenings.  It was pleasant to be sought out
and made much of, and it pleased her to think that some of her quondam
friends were genuinely sorry that they had once stood aloof.  They
attempted to atone, it would seem.  For three weeks they lived in an
atmosphere of teas and dinners and theater parties, a giddy little
whirl that grew daily more attractive, so far as Hazel was concerned.

There had been changes.  Jack Barrow had consoled himself with a bride.
Moreover, he was making good, in the popular phrase, at the real-estate
game.  The Marshes, as she had previously known them, had been
tottering on the edge of shabby gentility.  But they had come into
money.  And as Bill slangily put it, they were using their pile to cut
a lot of social ice.  Kitty Brooks' husband was now the head of the
biggest advertising agency in Granville.  Hazel was glad of that mild
success.  Kitty Brooks was the one person for whom she had always kept
a warm corner in her heart.  Kitty had stood stoutly and unequivocally
by her when all the others had viewed her with a dubious eye.  Aside
from these there were scores of young people who revolved in their same
old orbits.  Two years will upon occasion make profound changes in some
lives, and leave others untouched.  But change or no change, she found
herself caught up and carried along on a pleasant tide.

She was inordinately proud of Bill, when she compared him with the
average Granville male--yet she found herself wishing he would adopt a
little more readily the Granville viewpoint.  He fell short of it, or
went beyond it, she could not be sure which; she had an uneasy feeling
sometimes that he looked upon Granville doings and Granville folk with
amused tolerance, not unmixed with contempt.  But he attracted
attention.  Whenever he was minded to talk he found ready listeners.
And he did not seem to mind being dragged to various functions,
matinées, and the like.  He fell naturally into that mode of existence,
no matter that it was in profound contrast to his previous manner of
life, as she knew it.  She felt a huge satisfaction in that.  Anything
but a well-bred man would have repelled her, and she had recognized
that quality in Bill Wagstaff even when he had carried her bodily into
the wilderness against her explicit desire that memorable time.  And he
was now exhibiting an unsuspected polish.  She used to wonder amusedly
if he were possibly the same Roaring Bill whom she had with her eyes
seen hammer a man insensible with his fists, who had kept "tough"
frontiersmen warily side-stepping him in Cariboo Meadows.  Certainly he
was a many-sided individual.

Once or twice she conjured up a vision of his getting into some
business there, and utterly foregoing the North--which for her was
already beginning to take on the aspect of a bleak and cheerless region
where there was none of the things which daily whetted her appetite for
luxury, nothing but hardships innumerable--and gold.  The gold had been
their reward--a reward well earned, she thought.  Still--they had been
wonderfully happy there at the Pine River cabin, she remembered.

They came home from a theater party late one night.  Bill sat down by
their bedroom window, and stared out at the street lights, twin rows of
yellow beads stretching away to a vanishing point in the pitch-black of
a cloudy night.  Hazel kicked off her slippers, and gratefully toasted
her silk-stockinged feet at a small coal grate.  Fall had come, and
there was a sharp nip to the air.

"Well, what do you think of it as far as you've gone?" he asked
abruptly.

"Of what?" she asked, jarred out of meditation upon the play they had
just witnessed.

"All this."  He waved a hand comprehensively.  "This giddy swim we've
got into."

"I think it's fine," she candidly admitted.  "I'm enjoying myself.  I
like it.  Don't you?"

"As a diversion," he observed thoughtfully, "I don't mind it.  These
people are all very affable and pleasant, and they've rather gone out
of their way to entertain us.  But, after all, what the dickens does it
amount to?  They spend their whole life running in useless circles.  I
should think they'd get sick of it.  You will."

"Hardly, Billum," she smiled.  "We're merely making up for two years of
isolation.  I think we must be remarkable people that we didn't fight
like cats and dogs.  For eighteen months, you know, there wasn't a soul
to talk to, and not much to think about except what you could do if you
were some place else."

"You're acquiring the atmosphere," he remarked--sardonically, she
thought.

"No; just enjoying myself," she replied lightly.

"Well, if you really are," he answered slowly, "we may as well settle
here for the winter--and get settled right away.  I'm rather weary of
being a guest in another man's house, to tell you the truth."

"Why, I'd love to stay here all winter," she said.  "But I thought you
intended to knock around more or less."

"But don't you see, you don't particularly care to," he pointed out;
"and it would spoil the fun of going any place for me if you were not
interested.  And when it comes to a show-down I'm not aching to be a
bird of passage.  One city is pretty much like another to me.  You seem
to have acquired a fairly select circle of friends and acquaintances,
and you may as well have your fling right here.  We'll take a run over
to New York.  I want to get some books and things.  Then we'll come
back here and get a house or a flat.  I tell you right now," he laughed
not unpleasantly, "I'm going to renig on this society game.  You can
play it as hard as you like, until spring.  I'll be there with bells on
when it comes to a dance.  And I'll go to a show--when a good play
comes along.  But I won't mix up with a lot of silly women and equally
silly she-men, any more than is absolutely necessary."

"Why, Bill!" she exclaimed, aghast.

"Well, ain't it so?" he defended lazily.  "There's Kitty Brooks--she
has certainly got intelligence above the average.  That Lorimer girl
has brains superimposed on her artistic temperament, and she uses 'em
to advantage.  Practically all the rest that I've met are intellectual
nonentities--strong on looks and clothes and amusing themselves, and
that lets them out.  And they have no excuse, because they've had
unlimited advantages.  The men divide themselves into two types.  One
that chases the dollar, talks business, thinks business, knows nothing
outside of business, and their own special line of business at that;
the other type, like these Arthur fellows, and Dave Allan and T.
Fordham Brown, who go in for afternoon teas and such gentlemanly
pastimes, and whose most strenuous exercise is a game of billiards.
Shucks, there isn't a real man in the lot.  Maybe I'll run across some
people who don't take a two-by-four view of life if I stay around here
long enough, but it hasn't happened to me yet.  I hope I'm not an
intellectual snob, little person, any more than I'm puffed up over
happening to be a little bigger and stronger than the average man, but
I must say that the habitual conversation of these people gives me a
pain.  That platitudinous discussion of the play to-night, for
instance."

"That _was_ droll."  Hazel chuckled at the recollection, and she
recalled the weary look that had once or twice flitted over Bill's face
during that after-theater supper.

But she herself could see only the humor of it.  She was fascinated by
the social niceties and the surroundings of the set she had drifted
into.  The little dinners, the impromptu teas, the light chatter and
general atmosphere of luxury more than counterbalanced any other lack.
She wanted only to play, and she was prepared to seize avidly on any
form of pleasure, no matter if in last analysis it were utterly
frivolous.  She could smile at the mental vacuity she encountered, and
think nothing of it, if with that vacuity went those material factors
which made for ease and entertainment.  The physical side of her was
all alert.  Luxury and the mild excitements of a social life that took
nothing seriously, those were the things she craved.  For a long time
she had been totally deprived of them.  Nor had such unlimited
opportunities ever before been in her grasp.

"Yes, that was droll," she repeated.

Bill snorted.

"Droll?  Perhaps," he said.  "Blatant ignorance, coupled with a desire
to appear the possessor of culture, is sometimes amusing.  But as a
general thing it simply irritates."

"You're hard to please," she replied.  "Can't you enjoy yourself, take
things as they come, without being so critical?"

He shrugged his shoulders, and remained silent.

"Well," he said presently, "we'll take that jaunt to New York day after
to-morrow."

He was still sitting by the window when Hazel was ready to go to bed.
She came back into the room in a trailing silk kimono, and, stealing
softly up behind him, put both hands on his shoulders.

"What are you thinking so hard about, Billy-boy?" she whispered.

"I was thinking about Jake Lauer, and wondering how he was making it
go," Bill answered.  "I was also picturing to myself how some of these
worthy citizens would mess things up if they had to follow in his
steps.  Hang it, I don't know but we'd be better off if we were pegging
away for a foothold somewhere, like old Jake."

"If we had to do that," she argued, "I suppose we would, and manage to
get along.  But since we don't have to, why wish for it?  Money makes
things pleasanter."

"If money meant that we would be compelled to lead the sort of
existence most of these people do," he retorted, "I'd take measures to
be broke as soon as possible.  What the deuce is there to it?  The
women get up in the morning, spend the forenoon fixing themselves up to
take in some innocuous gabblefest after luncheon.  Then they get into
their war paint for dinner, and after dinner rush madly off to some
other festive stunt.  Swell rags and a giddy round.  If it were just
fun, it would be all right.  But it's the serious business of life with
them.  And the men are in the same boat.  All of 'em collectively don't
amount to a pinch of snuff.  This thing that they call business is
mostly gambling with what somebody else has sweated to produce.
They're a soft-handed, soft-bodied lot of incompetent egotists, if you
ask me.  Any of 'em would lick your boots in a genteel sort of way if
there was money in it; and they'd just as cheerfully chisel their best
friend out of his last dollar, if it could be done in a business way.
They haven't even the saving grace of physical hardihood."

"You're awful!" Hazel commented.

Bill snorted again.

"To-morrow, you advise our hostess that we're traveling," he
instructed.  "When we come back we'll make headquarters at a hotel
until we locate a place of our own--if you are sure you want to winter
here."

Her mind was quite made up to spend the winter there, and she frankly
said so--provided he had no other choice.  They had to winter
somewhere.  They had set out to spend a few months in pleasant
idleness.  They could well afford that.  And, unless he had other plans
definitely formed, was not Granville as good as any place?  Was it not
better, seeing that they did know some one there?  It was big enough to
afford practically all the advantages of any city.

"Oh, yes, I suppose so.  All right; we'll winter here," Bill
acquiesced.  "That's settled."

And, as was his habit when he had come to a similar conclusion, he
refused to talk further on that subject, but fell to speculating idly
on New York.  In which he was presently aided and abetted by Hazel, who
had never invaded Manhattan, nor, for that matter, any of the big
Atlantic cities.  She had grown up in Granville, with but brief
journeys to near-by points.  And Granville could scarcely be classed as
a metropolis.  It numbered a trifle over three hundred thousand souls.
Bill had termed it "provincial."  But it meant more to her than any
other place in the East, by virtue of old associations and more recent
acquaintance.  One must have a pivotal point of such a sort, just as
one cannot forego the possession of a nationality.

New York, she was constrained to admit, rather overwhelmed her.  She
traversed Broadway and other world-known arteries, and felt a trifle
dubious amid the unceasing crush.  Bill piloted her to famous cafés,
and to equally famous theaters.  She made sundry purchases in
magnificent shops.  The huge conglomeration of sights and sounds made
an unforgettable impression upon her.  She sensed keenly the colossal
magnitude of it all.  But she felt a distinct wave of relief when they
were Granville bound once more.

In a week they were settled comfortably in a domicile of their
own--five rooms in an up-to-date apartment house.  And since the social
demands on Mrs. William Wagstaff's time grew apace, a capable maid and
a cook were added to the Wagstaff establishment.  Thus she was relieved
of the onus of housework.  Her time was wholly her own, at her own
disposal or Bill's, as she elected.

But by imperceptible degrees they came to take diverse roads in the
swirl of life which had caught them up.  There were so many little
woman affairs where a man was superfluous.  There were others which
Bill flatly refused to attend.  "Hen parties," he dubbed them.  More
and more he remained at home with his books.  Invariably he read
through the daytime, and unless to take Hazel for a walk or a drive, or
some simple pleasure which they could indulge in by themselves, he
would not budge.  If it were night, and a dance was to the fore, he
would dress and go gladly.  At such, and upon certain occasions when a
certain little group would take supper at some café, he was apparently
in his element.  But there was always a back fire if Hazel managed to
persuade him to attend anything in the nature of a formal affair.  He
drew the line at what he defined as social tommyrot, and he drew it
more and more sharply.

Sometimes Hazel caught herself wondering if they were getting as much
out of the holiday as they should have gotten, as they had planned to
get when they were struggling through that interminable winter.  _She_
was.  But not Bill.  And while she wished that he could get the same
satisfaction out of his surroundings and opportunities as she conceived
herself to be getting, she often grew impatient with his sardonic,
tolerant contempt toward the particular set she mostly consorted with.
If she ventured to give a tea, he fled the house as if from the plague.
He made acquaintances of his own, men from God only knew where,
individuals who occasionally filled the dainty apartment with
malodorous tobacco fumes, and who would cheerfully sit up all night
discoursing earnestly on any subject under the sun.  But so long as
Bill found Granville habitable she did not mind.

Above all, as the winter and the winter gayety set in together with
equal vigor, she thought with greater reluctance of the ultimate return
to that hushed, deep-forested area that surrounded the cabin.

She wished fervently that Bill would take up some business that would
keep him in touch with civilization.  He had the capital, she
considered, and there was no question of his ability.  Her faith in his
power to encompass whatever he set about was strong.  Other men, less
gifted, had acquired wealth, power, even a measure of fame, from a less
auspicious beginning.  Why not he?

It seemed absurd to bury one's self in an uninhabited waste, when life
held forth so much to be grasped.  Her friends told her so--thus
confirming her own judgment.  But she could never quite bring herself
to put it in so many words to Bill.




CHAPTER XXVI

A BUSINESS PROPOSITION

The cycle of weeks brought them to January.  They had dropped into
something of a routine in their daily lives.  Bill's interest and
participation in social affairs became negligible.  Of Hazel's circle
he classed some half dozen people as desirable acquaintances, and saw
more or less of them--Kitty Brooks and her husband; Vesta Lorimer, a
keen-witted young woman upon whom nature had bestowed a double portion
of physical attractiveness and a talent akin to genius for the painting
of miniatures; her Brother Paul, who was the silent partner in a
brokerage firm; Doctor Hart, a silent, grim-visaged physician, whose
vivacious wife was one of Hazel's new intimates.  Of that group Bill
was always a willing member.  The others he met courteously when he was
compelled to meet them; otherwise he passed them up entirely.

When he was not absorbed in a book or magazine, he spent his time in
some downtown haunt, having acquired membership in a club as a
concession to their manner of life.  Once he came home with flushed
face and overbright eyes, radiating an odor of whisky.  Hazel had never
seen him drink to excess.  She was correspondingly shocked, and took no
pains to hide her feelings.  But Bill was blandly undisturbed.

"You don't need to look so horrified," he drawled.  "I won't beat you
up nor wreck the furniture.  Inadvertently took a few too many, that's
all.  Nothing else to do, anyhow.  Your friend Brooks' Carlton Club is
as barren a place as one of your tea fights.  They don't do anything
much but sit around and drink Scotch and soda, and talk about the
market.  I'm drunk, and glad of it.  If I were in Cariboo Meadows,
now," he confided owlishly, "I'd have some fun with the natives.  You
can't turn yourself loose here.  It's too blame civilized and proper.
I had half a notion to lick a Johnnie or two, just for sport, and then
I thought probably they'd have me up for assault and battery.  Just
recollected our social reputation--long may she wave--in time."

"_Your_ reputation certainly won't be unblemished if any one saw you
come in in that condition," she cried, in angry mortification.  "Surely
you could find something better to do than to get drunk."

"I'm going straight to bed, little person," he returned.  "Scold not,
nor fret.  William will be himself again ere yet the morrow's sun shall
clear the horizon.  Let us avoid recrimination.  The tongue is, or
would seem to be, the most vital weapon of modern society.  Therefore
let us leave the trenchant blade quiescent in its scabbard.  _I'd_
rather settle a dispute with my fists, or even a gun.  Good night."

He made his unsteady way to their extra bedroom, and he was still there
with the door locked when Hazel returned from a card party at the
Krones'.  It was the first night they had spent apart since their
marriage, and Hazel was inclined to be huffed when he looked in before
breakfast, dressed, shaved, and smiling, as if he had never had even a
bowing acquaintance with John Barleycorn.  But Bill refused to take her
indignation seriously, and it died for lack of fuel.

A week or so later he became suddenly and unexpectedly active.  He left
the house as soon as his breakfast was eaten, and he did not come home
to luncheon--a circumstance which irritated Hazel, since it was one of
those rare days when she herself lunched at home.  Late in the
afternoon he telephoned briefly that he would dine downtown.  And when
he did return, at nine or thereabouts in the evening, he clamped a
cigar between his teeth, and fell to work covering a sheet of paper
with interminable rows of figures.

Hazel had worried over the possibility of his having had another tilt
with the Scotch and sodas.  He relieved her of that fear, and she
restrained her curiosity until boredom seized her.  The silence and the
scratching of his pen began to grate on her nerves.

"What is all the clerical work about?" she inquired.  "Reckoning your
assets and liabilities?"

Bill smiled and pushed aside the paper.

"I'm going to promote a mining company," he told her, quite casually.
"It has been put up to me as a business proposition--and I've got to
the stage where I have to do _something_, or I'll sure have the
Willies."

She overlooked the latter statement; it conveyed no special
significance at the time.  But his first statement opened up
possibilities such as of late she had sincerely hoped would come to
pass, and she was all interest.

"Promote a mining company?" she repeated.  "That sounds extremely
businesslike.  How--when--where?"

"Now--here in Granville," he replied.  "The how is largely Paul
Lorimer's idea.  You see," he continued, warming up a bit to the
subject, "when I was prospecting that creek where we made the clean-up
last summer, I ran across a well-defined quartz lead.  I packed out a
few samples in my pockets, and I happened to show them as well as one
or two of the nuggets to some of these fellows at the club a while
back.  Lorimer took a piece of the quartz and had it assayed.  It looms
up as something pretty big.  So he and Brooks and a couple of other
fellows want me to go ahead and organize and locate a group of claims
in there.  Twenty or thirty thousand dollars capital might make 'em all
rich.  Of course, the placer end of it will be the big thing while the
lode is being developed.  It should pay well from the start.  Getting
the start is easy.  As a matter of fact, you could sell any old wildcat
that has the magic of gold about it.  Men seem to get the fever as soon
as they finger the real yellow stuff.  These fellows I've talked to are
dead anxious to get in."

"But"--her knowledge of business methods suggested a difficulty--"you
can't sell stock in a business that has no real foundation--yet.  Don't
you have to locate those claims first?"

"Wise old head; you have the idea, all right."  He smiled.  "But this
is not a stock-jobbing proposition.  I wouldn't be in on it if it were,
believe me.  It's to be a corporation, where not to exceed six men will
own all the stock that's issued.  And so far as the claims are
concerned, I've got Whitey Lewis located in Fort George, and I've been
burning the wires and spending a bundle of real money getting him
grub-staked.  He has got four men besides himself all ready to hit the
trail as soon as I give the word."

"You won't have to go?" she put in quickly.

"No," he murmured.  "It isn't necessary, at this particular stage of
the game.  But I wouldn't mind popping a whip over a good string of
dogs, just the same."

"B-r-r-r!" she shivered involuntarily.  "Four hundred miles across that
deep snow, through that steady, flesh-searing cold.  I don't envy them
the journey."

Bill relapsed into unsmiling silence, sprawling listless in his chair,
staring absently at the rug, as if he had lost all interest in the
matter.

"If you stay here and manage this end of it," she pursued lightly, "I
suppose you'll have an office downtown."

"I suppose so," he returned laconically.

She came over and stood by him, playfully rumpling his brown hair with
her fingers.

"I'm glad you've found something to loose that pent-up energy of yours
on, Billy-boy," she said.  "You'll make a success of it, I know.  I
don't see why you shouldn't make a success of any kind of business.
But I didn't think you'd ever tackle business.  You have such peculiar
views about business and business practice."

"I despise the ordinary business ethic," he returned sharply.  "It's a
get-something-for-nothing proposition all the way through; it is based
on exploiting the other fellow in one form or another.  I refuse to
exploit my fellows along the accepted lines--or any lines.  I don't
have to; there are too many other ways of making a living open to me.
I don't care to live fat and make some one else foot the bill.  But I
can exploit the resources of nature.  And that is my plan.  If we make
money it won't be filched by a complex process from the other fellow's
pockets; it won't be wealth created by shearing lambs in the market, by
sweatshop labor, or adulterated food, or exorbitant rental of filthy
tenements.  And I have no illusions about the men I'm dealing with.  If
they undertake to make a get-rich-quick scheme of it I'll knock the
whole business in the head.  I'm not overly anxious to get into it with
them.  But it promises action of some sort--and I have to do something
till spring."

In the spring!  That brief phrase set Hazel to sober thinking.  With
April or May Bill would spread his wings for the North.  There would be
no more staying him than the flight of the wild goose to the reedy
nesting grounds could be stayed.  Well, a summer in the North would not
be so bad, she reflected.  But she hated to think of the isolation.  It
grieved her to contemplate exchanging her beautifully furnished
apartment for a log cabin in the woods.  There would be a dreary
relapse into monotony after months of association with clever people,
the swift succession of brilliant little functions.  It all delighted
her; she responded to her present surroundings as naturally as a grain
of wheat responds to the germinating influences of warmth and moisture.
It did not occur to her that saving Bill Wagstaff's advent into her
life she might have been denied all this.  Indeed she felt a trifle
resentful that he should prefer the forested solitudes to the pleasant
social byways of Granville.

Still she had hopes.  If he plunged into business associations with
Jimmie Brooks and Paul Lorimer and others of that group, there was no
telling what might happen.  His interests might become permanently
identified with Granville.  She loved her big, wide-shouldered man,
anyway.  So she continued to playfully rumple his hair and kept her
thoughts to herself.

Bill informed her from time to time as to the progress of his venture.
Brooks and Lorimer put him in touch with two others who were ready to
chance money on the strength of Bill's statements.  The company was
duly incorporated, with an authorized capital of one hundred thousand
dollars, five thousand dollars' worth of stock being taken out by each
on a cash basis--the remaining seventy-five thousand lying in the
company treasury, to be held or sold for development purposes as the
five saw fit when work began to show what the claims were capable of
producing.

Whitey Lewis set out.  Bill stuck a map on their living-room wall and
pointed off each day's journey with a pin.  Hazel sometimes studied the
map, and pitied them.  So many miles daily in a dreary waste of snow;
nights when the frost thrust its keen-pointed lances into their tired
bodies; food cooked with numbed fingers; the dismal howling of wolves;
white frost and clinging icicles upon their beards as they trudged
across trackless areas; and over all that awesome hush which she had
learned to dread--breathless, brooding silence.  Gold madness or trail
madness, or simply adventurous unrest?  She could not say.  She knew
only that a certain type of man found pleasure in such mad
undertakings, bucked hard trails and plunged headlong into vast
solitudes, and permitted no hardship nor danger to turn him back.

Bill was tinged with that madness for unbeaten trails.  But surely when
a man mated, and had a home and all that makes home desirable, he
should forsake the old ways?  Once when she found him studying the map,
traversing a route with his forefinger and muttering to himself, she
had a quick catch at her heart--as if hers were already poised to go.
And she could not follow him.  Once she had thought to do that, and
gloried in the prospect.  But his trail, his wilderness trail, and his
trail gait, were not for any woman to follow.  It was too big a job for
any woman.  And she could not let him go alone.  He might never come
back.

Not so long since she and Kitty Brooks had been discussing a certain
couple who had separated.  Vesta Lorimer sat by, listening.

"How could they help but fail in mutual flight?" the Lorimer girl had
demanded.  "An eagle mated to a domestic fowl!"

And, watching Bill stare at the map, his body there but the soul of him
tramping the wild woods, she recalled Vesta Lorimer's characterization
of that other pair.  Surely this man of hers was of the eagle brood.
But there, in her mind, the simile ended.

In early March came a telegram from Whitey Lewis saying that he had
staked the claims, both placer and lode; that he was bound out by the
Telegraph Trail to file at Hazleton.  Bill showed her the
message--wired from Station Six.

"I wish I could have been in on it--that was some trip," he said--and
there was a trace of discontent in his tone.  "I don't fancy somebody
else pawing my chestnuts out of the coals for me.  It was sure a man's
job to cross the Klappan in the dead of winter."

The filing completed, there was ample work in the way of getting out
and whipsawing timber to keep the five men busy till spring--the five
who were on the ground.  Lewis sent word that thirty feet of snow lay
in the gold-bearing branch.  And that was the last they heard from him.
He was a performer, Bill said, not a correspondent.

So in Granville the affairs of the Free Gold Mining Company remained at
a standstill until the spring floods should peel off the winter blanket
of the North.  Hazel was fully occupied, and Bill dwelt largely with
his books, or sketched and figured on operations at the claims.  Their
domestic affairs moved with the smoothness of a perfectly balanced
machine.  To the very uttermost Hazel enjoyed the well-appointed
orderliness of it all, the unruffled placidity of an existence where
the unexpected, the disagreeable, the uncouth, was wholly eliminated,
where all the strange shifts and struggles of her two years beyond the
Rockies were altogether absent and impossible.  Bill's views he kept
largely to himself.  And Hazel began to nurse the idea that he was
looking upon civilization with a kindlier eye.

Ultimately, spring overspread the eastern provinces.  And when the
snows of winter successively gave way to muddy streets and then to
clean pavements in the city of Granville, a new gilt sign was lettered
across the windows of the brokerage office in which Paul Lorimer was
housed.


  FREE GOLD MINING COMPANY

  P. H. Lorimer, Pres.            J. L. Brooks, Sec.-Treas.

  William Wagstaff, Manager.


So it ran.  Bill was commissioned in the army of business at last.




CHAPTER XXVII

A BUSINESS JOURNEY

"I have to go to the Klappan," Bill apprised his wife one evening.
"Want to come along?"

Hazel hesitated.  Her first instinctive feeling was one of reluctance
to retrace that nerve-trying trail.  But neither did she wish to be
separated from him.

"I see you don't," he observed dryly.  "Well, I can't say that I blame
you.  It's a stiff trip.  If your wind and muscle are in as poor shape
as mine, I guess it would do you up--the effort would be greater than
any possible pleasure."

"I'm sorry I can't feel any enthusiasm for such a journey," she
remarked candidly.  "I could go as far as the coast with you, and meet
you there when you come out.  How long do you expect to be in there?"

"I don't know exactly," he replied.  "I'm not going in from the coast,
though.  I'm taking the Ashcroft-Fort George Trail.  I have to take in
a pack train and more men and get work started on a decent scale."

"But you won't have to stay there all summer and oversee the work, will
you?" she inquired anxiously.

"I should," he said.

For a second or two he drummed on the table top.

"I should do that.  It's what I had in mind when I started this thing,"
he said wistfully.  "I thought we'd go in this spring and rush things
through the good weather, and come out ahead of the snow.  We could
stay a while at the ranch, and break up the winter with a jaunt here or
some place."

"But is there any real necessity for you to stay on the ground?"  She
pursued her own line of thought.  "I should think an undertaking of
this size would justify hiring an expert to take charge of the actual
mining operations.  Won't you have this end of it to look after?"

"Lorimer and Brooks are eminently capable of upholding the dignity and
importance of that sign they've got smeared across the windows
downtown," he observed curtly.  "The chief labor of the office they've
set up will be to divide the proceeds.  The work will be done and the
money made in the Klappan Range.  You sabe that, don't you?"

"I'm not stupid," she pouted.

"I know you're not, little person," he said quietly.  "But you've
changed a heap in the last few months.  You don't seem to be my pal any
more.  You've fallen in love with this butterfly life.  You appear to
like me just as much as ever, but if you could you'd sentence me to
this kid-glove existence for the rest of my natural life.  Great
Caesar's ghost!" he burst out.  "I've laid around like a well-fed
poodle for seven months.  And look at me--I'm mush!  Ten miles with a
sixty-pound pack would make my tongue hang out.  I'm thick-winded, and
twenty pounds over-weight--and you talk calmly about my settling down
to office work!"

His semi-indignation, curiously enough, affected Hazel as being
altogether humorous.  She had a smile-compelling vision of that
straight, lean-limbed, powerful body developing a protuberant waistline
and a double chin.  That was really funny, so far-fetched did it seem.
And she laughed.  Bill froze into rigid silence.

"I'm going to-morrow," he said suddenly.  "I think, on the whole, it'll
be just as well if you don't go.  Stay here and enjoy yourself.  I'll
transfer some more money to your account.  I think I'll drop down to
the club."

She followed him out into the hall, and, as he wriggled into his coat,
she had an impulse to throw her arms around his neck and declare, in
all sincerity, that she would go to the Klappan or to the north pole or
any place on earth with him, if he wanted her.  But by some peculiar
feminine reasoning she reflected in the same instant that if Bill were
away from her in a few weeks he would be all the more glad to get back.
That closed her mouth.  She felt too secure in his affection to believe
it could be otherwise.  And then she would cheerfully capitulate and go
back with him to his beloved North, to the Klappan or the ranch or
wherever he chose.  It was not wise to be too meek or obedient where a
husband was concerned.  That was another mite of wisdom she had
garnered from the wives of her circle.

So she kissed Bill good-by at the station next day with perfect good
humor and no parting emotion of any particular keenness.  And if he
were a trifle sober he showed no sign of resentment, nor uttered any
futile wishes that she could accompany him.

"So long," he said from the car steps.  "I'll keep in touch--all I can."

Then he was gone.

Somehow, his absence made less difference than Hazel had anticipated.
She had secretly expected to be very lonely at first.  And she was not.
She began to realize that, unconsciously, they had of late so arranged
their manner of life that separation was a question of degree rather
than kind.  It seemed that she could never quite forego the impression
that Bill was near at hand.  She always thought of him as downtown or
in the living-room, with his feet up on the mantel and a cigar in his
mouth.  Even when in her hand she held a telegram dated at a point five
hundred or a thousand miles or double that distance away she did not
experience the feeling of complete bodily absence.  She always felt as
if he were near.  Only at night, when there was no long arm to pillow
her head, no good-night kiss as she dozed into slumber, she missed him,
realized that he was far away.  Even when the days marched past,
mustering themselves in weekly and monthly platoons and Bill still
remained in the Klappan, she experienced no dreary leadenness of soul.
Her time passed pleasantly enough.

Early in June came a brief wire from Station Six.  Three weeks later
the Free Gold Mining Company set up a mild ripple of excitement along
Broad Street by exhibiting in their office window a forty-pound heap of
coarse gold; raw, yellow gold, just as it had come from the sluice.
Every day knots of men stood gazing at the treasure.  The Granville
papers devoted sundry columns to this remarkably successful enterprise
of its local business men.  Bill had forwarded the first clean-up.

And close on the heels of this--ten days later, to be exact--he came
home.




CHAPTER XXVIII

THE BOMB

"You great bear," Hazel laughed, in the shelter of his encircling arms.
"My, it's good to see you again."

She pushed herself back a little and surveyed him admiringly, with a
gratified sense of proprietorship.  The cheeks of him were tanned to a
healthy brown, his eyes clear and shining.  The offending flesh had
fallen away on the strenuous paths of the Klappan.  He radiated
boundless vitality, strength, alertness, that perfect co-ordination of
mind and body that is bred of faring resourcefully along rude ways.
Few of his type trod the streets of Granville.  It was a product solely
of the outer places.  And for the time being the old, vivid emotion
surged strong within her.  She thrilled at the touch of his hand, was
content to lay her head on his shoulder and forget everything in the
joy of his physical nearness.  But the maid announced dinner, and her
man must be fed.  He had missed luncheon on the train, he told her, by
reason of an absorbing game of whist.

"Come, then," said she.  "You must be starving."

They elected to spend the evening quietly at home, as they used to do.
To Hazel it seemed quite like old times.  Bill told her of the Klappan
country, and their prospects at the mine.

"It's going to be a mighty big thing," he declared.

"I'm so glad," said Hazel.

"We've got a group of ten claims.  Whitey Lewis and the original
stakers hold an interest in their claims.  I, acting as agent for these
other fellows in the company, staked five more.  I took in eight more
men--and, believe me, things were humming when I left.  Lewis is a
great rustler.  He had out lots of timber, and we put in a wing dam
three hundred feet long, so she can flood and be darned; they'll keep
the sluice working just the same.  And that quartz lead will justify a
fifty-thousand-dollar mill.  So I'm told by an expert I took in to look
it over.  And, say, I went in by the ranch.  Old Jake has a fine
garden.  He's still pegging away with the mule 'und Gretchen, der cow.'
I offered him a chance to make a fat little stake at the mine, but he
didn't want to leave the ranch.  Great old feller, Jake.  Something of
a philosopher in his way.  Pretty wise old head.  He'll make good, all
right."

In the morning, Bill ate his breakfast and started downtown.

"That's the dickens of being a business man," he complained to Hazel,
in the hallway.  "It rides a man, once it gets hold of him.  I'd rather
get a machine and go joy riding with you than anything else.  But I
have to go and make a long-winded report; and I suppose those fellows
will want to talk gold by the yard.  Adios, little person.  I'll get
out for lunch, business or no business."

Eleven-thirty brought him home, preoccupied and frowning.  And he
carried his frown and his preoccupation to the table.

"Whatever is the matter, Bill?" Hazel anxiously inquired.

"Oh, I've got a nasty hunch that there's a nigger in the woodpile," he
replied.

"What woodpile?" she asked.

"I'll tell you more about it to-night," he said bluntly.  "I'm going to
pry something loose this afternoon or know the reason why."

"Is something the matter about the mine?" she persisted.

"No," he answered grimly.  "There's nothing the matter with the mine.
It's the mining company."

And that was all he vouchsafed.  He finished his luncheon and left the
house.  He was scarcely out of sight when Jimmie Brooks' runabout drew
up at the curb.  A half minute later he was ushered into the
living-room.

"Bill in?" was his first query.

"No, he left just a few minutes ago," Hazel told him.

Mr. Brooks, a short, heavy-set, neatly dressed gentleman, whose rather
weak blue eyes loomed preternaturally large and protuberant behind
pince-nez that straddled an insignificant snub nose, took off his
glasses and twiddled them in his white, well-kept fingers.

"Ah, too bad!" he murmured.  "Thought I'd catch him.

"By the way," he continued, after a pause, "you--ah--well, frankly, I
have reason to believe that you have a good deal of influence with your
husband in business matters, Mrs. Wagstaff.  Kitty says so, and she
don't make mistakes very often in sizing up a situation."

"Well, I don't know; perhaps I have."  Hazel smiled noncommittally.
She wondered what had led Kitty Brooks to that conclusion.  "Why?"

"Well--ah--you see," he began rather lamely.  "The fact is--I hope
you'll regard this as strictly confidential, Mrs. Wagstaff.  I wouldn't
want Bill to think I, or any of us, was trying to bring pressure on
him.  But the fact is, Bill's got a mistaken impression about the way
we're conducting the financial end of this mining proposition.  You
understand?  Very able man, your husband, but headstrong as the deuce.
I'm afraid--to speak frankly--he'll create a lot of unpleasantness.
Might disrupt the company, in fact, if he sticks to the position he
took this morning.  Thought I'd run in and talk it over with him.
Fellow's generally in a good humor, you know, when he's lunched
comfortably at home."

"I'm quite in the dark," Hazel confessed.  "Bill seemed a trifle put
out about something.  He didn't say what it was about."

"Shall I explain?" Mr. Brooks suggested.  "You'd understand--and you
might be able to help.  I don't as a rule believe in bringing business
into the home, but this bothers me.  I hate to see a good thing go
wrong."

"Explain, by all means," Hazel promptly replied.  "If I can help, I'll
be glad to."

"Thank you."  Mr. Brooks polished his glasses industriously for a
second and replaced them with painstaking exactitude.  "Now--ah--this
is the situation: When the company was formed, five of us, including
your husband, took up enough stock to finance the preliminary work of
the undertaking.  The remaining stock, seventy-five thousand dollars in
amount, was left in the treasury, to be held or put on the market as
the situation warranted.  Bill was quite conservative in his first
statements concerning the property, and we all felt inclined to go
slow.  But when Bill got out there on the ground and the thing began to
pay enormously right from the beginning, we--that is, the four of us
here, decided we ought to enlarge our scope.  With the first clean-up,
Bill forwarded facts and figures to show that we had a property far
beyond our greatest expectations.  And, of course, we saw at once that
the thing was ridiculously undercapitalized.  By putting the balance of
the stock on the market, we could secure funds to work on a much larger
scale.  Why, this first shipment of gold is equal to an annual dividend
of ten per cent on four hundred thousand dollars capital.  It's
immense, for six weeks' work.

"So we held a meeting and authorized the secretary to sell stock.
Naturally, your husband wasn't cognizant of this move, for the simple
reason that there was no way of reaching him--and his interests were
thoroughly protected, anyway.  The stock was listed on Change.  A good
bit was disposed of privately.  We now have a large fund in the
treasury.  It's a cinch.  We've got the property, and it's rich enough
to pay dividends on a million.  The decision of the stockholders is
unanimously for enlargement of the capital stock.  The quicker we get
that property to its maximum output the more we make, you see.  There's
a fine vein of quartz to develop, expensive machinery to install.  It's
no more than fair that these outsiders who are clamoring to get aboard
should pay their share of the expense of organization and promotion.
You understand?  You follow me?"

"Certainly," Hazel answered.  "But what is the difficulty with Bill?"

Mr. Brooks once more had recourse to polishing his pince-nez.

"Bill is opposed to the whole plan," he said, pursing up his lips with
evident disapproval of Bill Wagstaff and all his works.  "He seems to
feel that we should not have taken this step.  He declares that no more
stock must be sold; that there must be no enlargement of capital.  In
fact, that we must peg along in the little one-horse way we started.
And that would be a shame.  We could make the Free Gold Mining Company
the biggest thing on the map, and put ourselves all on Easy Street."

He spread his hands in a gesture of real regret.

"Bill's a fine fellow," he said, "and one of my best friends.  But he's
a hard man to do business with.  He takes a very peculiar view of the
matter.  I'm afraid he'll queer the company if he stirs up trouble over
this.  That's why I hope you'll use whatever influence you have, to
induce him to withdraw his opposition."

"But," Hazel murmured, in some perplexity, "from what little I know of
corporations, I don't see how he can set up any difficulty.  If a
majority of the stock-holders decide to do anything, that settles it,
doesn't it?  Bill is a minority of one, from what you say.  And I don't
see what difference his objections make, anyway.  How can he stop you
from taking any line of action whatever?"

"Oh, not that at all," Brooks hastily assured.  "Of course, we can
outvote him, and put it through.  But we want him with us, don't you
see?  We've a high opinion of his ability.  He's the sort of man who
gets results; practical, you know; knows mining to a T.  Only he shies
at our financial method.  And if he began any foolish litigation, or
silly rumors got started about trouble among the company officers, it's
bound to hurt the stock.  It's all right, I assure you.  We're not
foisting a wildcat on the market.  We've got the goods.  Bill admits
that.  It's the regular method, not only legitimate, but good finance.
Every dollar's worth of stock sold has the value behind it.
Distributes the risk a little more, that's all, and gives the company a
fund to operate successfully.

"If Bill mentions it, you might suggest that he look into the matter a
little more fully before he takes any definite action," Brooks
concluded, rising.  "I must get down to the office.  It's his own
interests I'm thinking of, as much as my own.  Of course, he couldn't
block a reorganization--but we want to satisfy him in every particular,
and, at the same time, carry out these plans.  It's a big thing for all
of us.  A big thing, I assure you."

He rolled away in his car, and Hazel watched him from the window, a
trifle puzzled.  She recalled Bill's remark at luncheon.  In the light
of Brooks' explanation, she could see nothing wrong.  On the other
hand, she knew Bill Wagstaff was not prone to jump at rash conclusions.
It was largely his habit to give others the benefit of the doubt.  If
he objected to certain manipulations of the Free Gold Mining Company,
his objection was likely to be based on substantial grounds.  But then,
as Brooks had observed, or, rather, inferred, Bill was not exactly an
expert on finance, and this new deal savored of pure finance--a term
which she had heard Bill scoff at more than once.  At any rate, she
hoped nothing disagreeable would come of it.

So she put the whole matter out of her mind.  She had an engagement
with a dressmaker, and an invitation to afternoon tea following on
that.  She dressed, and went whole-heartedly about her own affairs.

Dinner time was drawing close when she returned home.  She sat down by
a window that overlooked the street to watch for Bill.  As a general
thing he was promptness personified, and since he was but twenty-four
hours returned from a three months' absence, she felt that he would not
linger--and Granville's business normally ceased at five o'clock.

Six passed.  The half-hour chime struck on the mantel clock.  Hazel
grew impatient, petulant, aggrieved.  Dinner would be served in twenty
minutes.  Still there was no sign of him.  And for lack of other
occupation she went into the hall and got the evening paper, which the
carrier had just delivered.

A staring headline on the front page stiffened her to scandalized
attention.  Straight across the tops of two columns it ran, a facetious
caption:

WILLIAM WAGSTAFF IS A BEAR


Under that the subhead:

Husky Mining Man Tumbles Prices and Brokers.  Whips Four men in Broad
Street Office.  Slugs Another on Change.  His Mighty Fists Subdue
Society's Finest.  Finally Lands in Jail.


The body of the article Hazel read in what a sob sister would describe
as a state of mingled emotions.


William Wagstaff is a mining gentleman from the northern wilds of
British Columbia.  He is a big man, a natural-born fighter.  To prove
this he inflicted a black eye and a split lip on Paul Lorimer, a broken
nose and sundry bruises on James L. Brooks.  Also Allen T. Bray and
Edward Gurney Parkinson suffered certain contusions in the mêlèe.  The
fracas occurred in the office of the Free Gold Mining Company, 1546
Broad Street, at three-thirty this afternoon.  While hammering the
brokers a police officer arrived on the scene and Wagstaff was duly
escorted to the city bastile.  Prior to the general encounter in the
Broad Street office Wagstaff walked into the Stock Exchange, and made
statements about the Free Gold Mining Company which set all the brokers
by the ears.  Lorimer was on the floor, and received his discolored
optic there.

Lorimer is a partner in the brokerage firm of Bray, Parkinson & Co.,
and is president of the Free Gold Mining Company.  Brooks is manager of
the Acme Advertisers, and secretary of Free Gold.  Bray and Parkinson
are stockholders, and Wagstaff is a stockholder and also manager of the
Free Gold properties in B. C.  All are well known about town.

A reporter was present when Wagstaff walked on the floor of the Stock
Exchange.  He strode up to the post where Lorimer was transacting
business.

"I serve notice on you right now," he said loudly and angrily, "that if
you sell another dollar's worth of Free Gold stock, I'll put you out of
business."

Lorimer appeared to lose his temper.  Some word was passed which
further incensed Wagstaff.  He smote the broker and the broker smote
the floor.  Wagstaff's punch would do credit to a champion pugilist,
from the execution it wrought.  He immediately left the Stock Exchange,
and not long afterward Broad Street was electrified by sounds of combat
in the Free Gold office.  It is conceded that Wagstaff had the
situation and his three opponents well in hand when the cop arrived.

None of the men concerned would discuss the matter.  From the remarks
dropped by Wagstaff, however, it appears that the policy of marketing
Free Gold stock was inaugurated without his knowledge or consent.

Be that as it may, all sorts of rumors are in circulation, and Free
Gold stock, which has been sold during the past week as high as a
dollar forty, found few takers at par when Change closed.  There has
been a considerable speculative movement in the stock, and the
speculators are beginning to wonder if there is a screw loose in the
company affairs.

Wagstaff's case will come up to-morrow forenoon.  A charge of
disturbing the peace was placed against him.  He gave a cash bond and
was at once released.  When the hearing comes some of the parties to
the affair may perchance divulge what lay at the bottom of the row.

Any fine within the power of the court to impose is a mere bagatelle,
compared to the distinction of scientifically man-handling four of
society's finest in one afternoon.  As one bystander remarked in the
classic phraseology of the street:

"Wagstaff's a bear!"

The brokers concerned might consider this to have a double meaning.


Hazel dropped the paper, mortified and wrathful.  The city jail seemed
the very Pit itself to her.  And the lurid publicity, the lifted
eyebrows of her friends, maddened her in prospect.  Plain street
brawling, such as one might expect from a cabman or a taxi mahout, not
from a man like her husband.  She involuntarily assigned the blame to
him.  Not for the cause--the cause was of no importance whatever to
her--but for the act itself.  Their best friends!  She could hardly
realize it.  Jimmie Brooks, jovial Jimmie, with a broken nose and
sundry bruises!  And Paul Lorimer, distinguished Paul, who had the
courtly bearing which was the despair of his fellows, and the manner of
a dozen generations of culture wherewith to charm the women of his
acquaintance.  He with a black eye and a split lip!  So the paper
stated.  It was vulgar.  Brutal!  The act of a cave man.

She was on the verge of tears.

And just at that moment the door opened, and in walked Bill.




CHAPTER XXIX

THE NOTE DISCORDANT

Bill had divested himself of the scowl.  He smiled as a man who has
solved some knotty problem to his entire satisfaction.  Moreover, he
bore no mark of conflict, none of the conventional scars of a
rough-and-tumble fight.  His clothing was in perfect order, his tie and
collar properly arranged, as a gentleman's tie and collar should be.
For a moment Hazel found herself believing the _Herald_ story a pure
canard.  But as he walked across the room her searching gaze discovered
that the knuckles of both his hands were bruised and bloody, the skin
broken.  She picked up the paper.

"Is this true?" she asked tremulously, pointing to the offending
headlines.

Bill frowned.

"Substantially correct," he answered coolly.

"Bill, how could you?" she cried.  "It's simply disgraceful.  Brawling
in public like any saloon loafer, and getting in jail and all.  Haven't
you any consideration for me--any pride?"

His eyes narrowed with an angry glint.

"Yes," he said deliberately.  "I have.  Pride in my word as a man.  A
sort of pride that won't allow any bunch of lily-fingered crooks to
make me a party to any dirty deal.  I don't propose to get the worst of
it in that way.  I won't allow myself to be tarred with their stick."

"But they're not trying to give you the worst of it," she burst out.
Visions of utter humiliation arose to confront and madden her.  "You've
insulted and abused our best friends--to say nothing of giving us all
the benefit of newspaper scandal.  We'll be notorious!"

"Best friends?  God save the mark!" he snorted contemptuously.  "Our
best friends, as you please to call them, are crooks, thieves, and
liars.  They're rotten.  They stink with their moral rottenness.  And
they have the gall to call it good business."

"Just because their business methods don't agree with your peculiar
ideas is no reason why you should call names," she flared.  "Mr. Brooks
called just after you left at noon.  _He_ told me something about this,
and assured me that you would find yourself mistaken if you'd only take
pains to think it over.  I don't believe such men as they are would
stoop to anything crooked.  Even if the opportunity offered, they have
too much at stake in this community.  They couldn't afford to be
crooked."

"So Brooks came around to talk it over with you, eh?" Bill sneered.
"Told you it was all on the square, did he?  Explained it all very
plausibly, I suppose.  Probably suggested that you try smoothing me
down, too.  It would be like 'em."

"He did explain about this stock-selling business," Hazel replied
defensively.  "And I can't see why you find it necessary to make a
fuss.  I don't see where the cheating and crookedness comes in.
Everybody who buys stock gets their money's worth, don't they?  But I
don't care anything about your old mining deal.  It's this fighting and
quarreling with people who are not used to that sort of brute
action--and the horrid things they'll say and think about us."

"About you, you mean--as the wife of such a boor--that's what's rubbing
you raw," Bill flung out passionately.  "You're acquiring the class
psychology good and fast.  Did you ever think of anybody but yourself?
Have I ever betrayed symptoms of idiocy?  Do you think it natural or
even likely for me to raise the devil in a business affair like this
out of sheer malice?  Don't I generally have a logical basis for any
position I take?  Yet you don't wait or ask for any explanation from
_me_.  You stand instinctively with the crowd that has swept you off
your feet in the last six months.  You take another man's word that
it's all right and I'm all wrong, without waiting to hear my side of
it.  And the petty-larceny incident of my knocking down two or three
men and being under arrest as much as thirty minutes looms up before
you as the utter depths of disgrace.  Disgrace to you!  It's all
you--you!  How do you suppose it strikes me to have my wife take sides
against me on snap judgment like that?  It shows a heap of faith and
trust and loyalty, doesn't it?  Oh, it makes me real proud and glad of
my mate.  It does.  By thunder, if Granville had ever treated me as it
tried to treat you one time, according to your own account, I'd wipe my
feet on them at every opportunity."

"If you'd explain," Hazel began hesitatingly.  She was thoroughly
startled at the smoldering wrath that flared out in this speech of his.
She bitterly resented being talked to in that fashion.  It was unjust.
Particularly that last fling.  And she was not taking sides.  She
refused to admit that--even though she had a disturbing consciousness
that her attitude could scarcely be construed otherwise.

"I'll explain nothing," Bill flashed stormily.  "Not at this stage of
the game.  I'm through explaining.  I'm going to act.  I refuse to be
raked over the coals like a naughty child, and then asked to tell why I
did it.  I'm right, and when I know I'm right I'll go the limit.  I'm
going to take the kinks out of this Free Gold deal inside of
forty-eight hours.  Then I'm through with Granville.  Hereafter I
intend to fight shy of a breed of dogs who lose every sense of square
dealing when there is a bunch of money in sight.  I shall be ready to
leave here within a week.  And I want you to be ready, too."

"I won't," she cried, on the verge of hysterics.  "I won't go back to
that cursed silence and loneliness.  You made this trouble here, not I.
I won't go back to Pine River, or the Klappan.  I won't, I tell you!"

Bill stared at her moodily for a second.

"Just as you please," he said quietly.

He walked into the spare bedroom.  Hazel heard the door close gently
behind him, heard the soft click of a well-oiled lock.  Then she
slumped, gasping, in the wide-armed chair by the window, and the hot
tears came in a blinding flood.




CHAPTER XXX

THE AFTERMATH

They exchanged only bare civilities at the breakfast table, and Bill at
once went downtown.  When he was gone, Hazel fidgeted uneasily about
the rooms.  She had only a vague idea of legal processes, having never
seen the inside of a courtroom.  She wondered what penalty would be
inflicted on Bill, whether he would be fined or sent to prison.  Surely
it was a dreadful thing to batter men like Brooks and Lorimer and
Parkinson.  They might even make it appear that Bill had tried to
murder them.  Her imagination magnified and distorted the incident out
of all proportion.

And brooding over these things, she decided to go and talk it over with
Kitty Brooks.  Kitty would not blame her for these horrid man troubles.

But she was mistaken there.  Kitty was all up in arms.  She was doubly
injured.  Her husband had suffered insult and brutal injury.  Moreover,
he was threatened with financial loss.  Perhaps that threatened wound
in the pocketbook loomed larger than the physical hurt.  At any rate,
she vented some of her spleen on Hazel.

"Your husband started this mining thing," she declared heatedly.
"Jimmie says that if he persists in trying to turn things upside down
it will mean a loss of thousands.  And we haven't any money to
lose--I'm sure Jimmie has worked hard for what he's got.  I'm simply
sick over it.  It's bad enough to have one's husband brought home
looking as if he'd been slugged by footpads, and to have the papers go
on about it so.  But to have a big loss inflicted on us just when we
were really beginning to get ahead, is too much.  I wish you'd never
introduced your miner to us."

That speech, of course, obliterated friendship on the spot, as far as
Hazel was concerned.  Even though she was quite prepared to have Bill
blamed for the trouble, did in fact so blame him herself, she could not
stomach Kitty's language nor attitude.  But the humiliation of the
interview she chalked up against Bill.  She went home with a red spot
glowing on either cheekbone.  A rather incoherent telephone
conversation with Mrs. Allen T. Bray, in which that worthy matron
declared her husband prostrated from his injuries, and in the same
breath intimated that Mr. Wagstaff would be compelled to make ample
reparation for his ruffianly act, did not tend to soothe her.

Bill failed to appear at luncheon.  During the afternoon an uncommon
number other acquaintances dropped in.  In the tactful manner of their
kind they buzzed with the one absorbing topic.  Some were vastly
amused.  Some were sympathetic.  One and all they were consumed with
curiosity for detailed inside information on the Free Gold squabble.
One note rang consistently in their gossipy song: The Free Gold Company
was going to lose a pot of money in some manner, as a consequence of
the affair.  Mr. Wagstaff had put some surprising sort of spoke in the
company's wheel.  They had that from their husbands who trafficked on
Broad Street.  By what power he had accomplished this remained a
mystery to the ladies.  Singly and collectively they drove Hazel to the
verge of distraction.  When the house was at last clear of them she
could have wept.  Through no fault of her own she had given Granville
another choice morsel to roll under its gossipy tongue.

So that when six o'clock brought Bill home, she was coldly disapproving
of him and his affairs in their entirety, and at no pains to hide her
feelings.  He followed her into the living-room when the uncomfortable
meal--uncomfortable by reason of the surcharged atmosphere--was at an
end.

"Let's get down to bed rock, Hazel," he said gently.  "Doesn't it seem
rather foolish to let a bundle of outside troubles set up so much
friction between us two?  I don't want to stir anything up; I don't
want to quarrel.  But I can't stand this coldness and reproach from
you.  It's unjust, for one thing.  And it's so unwise--if we value our
happiness as a thing worth making some effort to save."

"I don't care to discuss it at all," she flared up.  "I've heard
nothing else all day but this miserable mining business and your
ruffianly method of settling a dispute.  I'd rather not talk about it."

"But we must talk about it," he persisted patiently.  "I've got to show
you how the thing stands, so that you can see for yourself where your
misunderstanding comes in.  You can't get to the bottom of anything
without more or less talk."

"Talk to yourself, then," she retorted ungraciously.  And with that she
ran out of the room.

But she had forgotten or underestimated the catlike quickness of her
man.  He caught her in the doorway, and the grip of his fingers on her
arm brought a cry of pain.

"Forgive me.  I didn't mean to hurt," he said contritely.  "Be a good
girl, Hazel, and let's get our feet on earth again.  Sit down and put
your arm around my neck and be my pal, like you used to be.  We've got
no business nursing these hard feelings.  It's folly.  I haven't
committed any crime.  I've only stood for a square deal.  Come on; bury
the hatchet, little person."

"Let me go," she sobbed, struggling to be free.  "I h-hate you!"

"Please, little person.  I can't eat humble pie more than once or
twice."

"Let me go," she panted.  "I don't want you to touch me."

"Listen to me," he said sternly.  "I've stood about all of your
nonsense I'm able to stand.  I've had to fight a pack of business
wolves to keep them from picking my carcass, and, what's more important
to me, to keep them from handing a raw deal to five men who wallowed
through snow and frost and all kinds of hardship to make these sharks a
fortune.  I've got down to their level and fought them with their own
weapons--and the thing is settled.  I said last night I'd be through
here inside a week.  I'm through now--through here.  I have business in
the Klappan; to complete this thing I've set my hand to.  Then I'm
going to the ranch and try to get the bad taste out of my mouth.  I'm
going to-morrow.  I've no desire or intention to coerce you.  You're my
wife, and your place is with me, if you care anything about me.  And I
want you.  You know that, don't you?  I wouldn't be begging you like
this if I didn't.  I haven't changed, nor had my eyes dazzled by any
false gods.  But it's up to you.  I don't bluff.  I'm going, and if I
have to go without you I won't come back.  Think it over, and just ask
yourself honestly if it's worth while."

He drew her up close to him and kissed her on one anger-flushed cheek,
and then, as he had done the night before, walked straight away to the
bedroom and closed the door behind him.

Hazel slept little that night.  A horrid weight seemed to rest
suffocatingly upon her.  More than once she had an impulse to creep in
there where Bill lay and forget it all in the sweep of that strong arm.
But she choked back the impulse angrily.  She would not forgive him.
He had made her suffer.  For his high-handedness she would make him
suffer in kind.  At least, she would not crawl to him begging
forgiveness.

When sunrise laid a yellow beam, all full of dancing motes, across her
bed, she heard Bill stir, heard him moving about the apartment with
restless steps.  After a time she also heard the unmistakable sound of
a trunk lid thrown back, and the movements of him as he gathered his
clothes--so she surmised.  But she did not rise till the maid rapped on
her door with the eight-o'clock salutation:

"Breakfast, ma'am."

They made a pretense of eating.  Hazel sought a chair in the
living-room.  A book lay open in her lap.  But the print ran into
blurred lines.  She could not follow the sense of the words.  An
incessant turmoil of thought harassed her.  Bill passed through the
room once or twice.  Determinedly she ignored him.  The final snap of
the lock on his trunk came to her at last, the bumping sounds of its
passage to the hall.  Then a burly expressman shouldered it into his
wagon and drove away.

A few minutes after that Bill came in and took a seat facing her.

"What are you going to do, Hazel?" he asked soberly.

"Nothing," she curtly replied.

"Are you going to sit down and fold your hands and let our air castles
come tumbling about our ears, without making the least effort to
prevent?" he continued gently.  "Seems to me that's not like you at
all.  I never thought you were a quitter."

"I'm not a quitter," she flung back resentfully.  "I refuse to be
browbeaten, that's all.  There appears to be only one choice--to follow
you like a lamb.  And I'm not lamblike.  I'd say that you are the
quitter.  You have stirred up all this trouble here between us.  Now
you're running away from it.  That's how it looks to me.  Go on!  I can
get along."

"I dare say you can," he commented wearily.  "Most of us can muddle
along somehow, no matter what happens.  But it seems a pity, little
person.  We had all the chance in the world.  You've developed an
abnormal streak lately.  If you'd just break away and come back with
me.  You don't know what good medicine those old woods are.  Won't you
try it a while?"

"I am not by nature fitted to lead the hermit existence," she returned
sarcastically.

And even while her lips were uttering these various unworthy little
bitternesses she inwardly wondered at her own words.  It was not what
she would have said, not at all what she was half minded to say.  But a
devil of perverseness spurred her.  She was full of protest against
everything.

"I wish we'd had a baby," Bill murmured softly.  "You'd be different.
You'd have something to live for besides this frothy, neurotic
existence that has poisoned you against the good, clean, healthy way of
life.  I wish we'd had a kiddie.  We'd have a fighting chance for
happiness now; something to keep us sane, something outside of our own
ego to influence us."

"Thank God there isn't one!" she muttered.

"Ah, well," Bill sighed, "I guess there is no use.  I guess we can't
get together on anything.  There doesn't seem to be any give-and-take
between us any longer."

He rose and walked to the door.  With his hand on the knob, he turned.

"I have fixed things at the bank for you," he said abruptly.

Then he walked out, without waiting for an answer.

She heard the soft whir of the elevator.  A minute later she saw him on
the sidewalk.  He had an overcoat on his arm, a suit case in his hand.
She saw him lift a finger to halt a passing car.

It seemed incredible that he should go like that.  Surely he would come
back at noon or at dinner time.  She had always felt that under his
gentleness there was iron.  But deep in her heart she had never
believed him so implacable of purpose where she was concerned.

She waited wearily, stirring with nervous restlessness from room to
room.

Luncheon passed.  The afternoon dragged by to a close.  Dusk fell.  And
when the night wrapped Granville in its velvet mantle, and the street
lights blinked away in shining rows, she cowered, sobbing, in the big
chair by the window.

He was gone.

Gone, without even saying good-by!




CHAPTER XXXI

A LETTER FROM BILL

All through the long night she lay awake, struggling with the
incredible fact that Bill had left her; trying to absolve herself from
blame; flaring up in anger at his unyielding attitude, even while she
was sorely conscious that she herself had been stubbornly unyielding.
If he had truly loved her, she reiterated, he would never have made it
an issue between them.  But that was like a man--to insist on his own
desires being made paramount; to blunder on headlong, no matter what
antagonisms he aroused.  And he was completely in the wrong, she
reasserted.

She recapitulated it all.  Through the winter he had consistently
withdrawn into his shell.  For her friends and for most of her
pleasures he had at best exhibited only tolerance.  And he had ended by
outraging both them and her, and on top of that demanded that she turn
her back at twenty-four hours' notice, on Granville and all its
associations and follow him into a wilderness that she dreaded.  She
had full right to her resentment.  As his partner in the chancy
enterprise of marriage were not her feelings and desires entitled to
equal consideration?  He had assumed the role of dictator.  And she had
revolted.  That was all.  She was justified.

Eventually she slept.  At ten o'clock, heavy-eyed, suffering an
intolerable headache, she rose and dressed.

Beside her plate lay a thick letter addressed in Bill's handwriting.
She drank her coffee and went back to the bedroom before she opened the
envelope.  By the postmark she saw that it had been mailed on a train.


DEAR GIRL: I have caught my breath, so to speak, but I doubt if ever a
more forlorn cuss listened to the interminable clicking of car wheels.
I am tempted at each station to turn back and try again.  It seems so
unreal, this parting in hot anger, so miserably unnecessary.  But when
I stop to sum it up again, I see no use in another appeal.  I could
come back--yes.  Only the certain knowledge that giving in like that
would send us spinning once more in a vicious circle prevents me.  I
didn't believe it possible that we could get so far apart.  Nor that a
succession of little things could cut so weighty a figure in our lives.
And perhaps you are very sore and resentful at me this morning for
being so precipitate.

I couldn't help it, Hazel.  It seemed the only way.  It seems so yet to
me.  There was nothing more to keep me in Granville--everything to make
me hurry away.  If I had weakened and temporized with you it would only
mean the deferring of just what has happened.  When you declared
yourself flatly and repeatedly it seemed hopeless to argue further.  I
am a poor pleader, perhaps; and I do not believe in compulsion between
us.  Whatever you do you must do of your own volition, without pressure
from me.  We couldn't be happy otherwise.  If I compelled you to follow
me against your desire we should only drag misery in our train.

I couldn't even say good-by.  I didn't want it to be good-by.  I didn't
know if I could stick to my determination to go unless I went as I did.
And my reason told me that if there must be a break it would better
come now than after long-drawn-out bickerings and bitterness.  If we
are so diametrically opposed where we thought we stood together we have
made a mistake that no amount of adjusting, nothing but separate roads,
will rectify.  Myself I refuse to believe that we have made such a
mistake.  I don't think that honestly and deliberately you prefer an
exotic, useless, purposeless, parasitic existence to the normal,
wholesome life we happily planned.  But you are obsessed,
intoxicated--I can't put it any better--and nothing but a shock will
sober you.  If I'm wrong, if love and Bill's companionship can't lure
you away from these other things--why, I suppose you will consider it
an ended chapter.  In that case you will not suffer.  The situation as
it stands will be a relief to you.  If, on the other hand, it's merely
a stubborn streak, that won't let you admit that you've carried your
proud little head on an over-stiff neck, do you think it's worth the
price?  I don't.  I'm not scolding, little person.  I'm sick and sore
at the pass we've come to.  No damn-fool pride can close my eyes to the
fact or keep me from admitting freely that I love you just as much and
want you as longingly as I did the day I put you aboard the _Stanley
D._ at Bella Coola.  I thought you were stepping gladly out of my life
then.  And I let you go freely and without anything but a dumb protest
against fate, because it was your wish.  I can step out of your life
again--if it is your wish.  But I can't imprison myself in your cities.
I can't pretend, even for your sake, to play the game they call
business.  I'm neither an idler nor can I become a legalized buccaneer.
I have nothing but contempt for those who are.  Mind you, this is not
so sweeping a statement as it sounds.  No one has a keener appreciation
of what civilization means than I.  Out of it has arisen culture and
knowledge, much of what should make the world a better place for us
all.  But somehow this doesn't apply to the mass, and particularly not
to the circles we invaded in Granville.  With here and there a solitary
exception that class is hopeless in its smug self-satisfaction--its
narrowness of outlook, and unblushing exploitation of the less
fortunate, repels me.

And to dabble my hands in their muck, to settle down and live my life
according to their bourgeois standards, to have grossness of soft flesh
replace able sinews, to submerge mentality in favor of a specious
craftiness of mind which passes in the "city" for brains--well, I'm on
the road.  And, oh, girl, girl, I wish you were with me.

I must explain this mining deal--that phase of it which sent me on the
rampage in Granville.  I should have done so before, should have
insisted on making it clear to you.  But a fellow doesn't always do the
proper thing at the proper time.  All too frequently we are dominated
by our emotions rather than by our judgment.  It was so with me.  The
other side had been presented to you rather cleverly at the right time.
And your ready acceptance of it angered me beyond bounds.  You were
prejudiced.  It stirred me to a perfect fury to think you couldn't be
absolutely loyal to your pal.  When you took that position I simply
couldn't attempt explanations.  Do you think I'd ever have taken the
other fellow's side against you, right or wrong?

Anyway, here it is: You got the essentials, up to a certain point, from
Brooks.  But he didn't tell it all--his kind never does, not by a long
shot.  They, the four of them, it seems, held a meeting as soon as I
shipped out that gold and put through that stock-selling scheme.  That
was legitimate.  I couldn't restrain them from that, being a hopeless
minority of one.  Their chief object, however, was to let two or three
friends in on the ground floor of a good thing; also, they wanted each
a good bundle of that stock while it was cheap--figuring that with the
prospects I had opened up it would sell high.  So they had it on the
market, and in addition had everything framed up to reorganize with a
capitalization of two hundred and fifty thousand dollars.  This all cut
and dried before I got there.  Now, as it originally stood, the five of
us would each have made a small fortune on these Klappan claims.
They're good.  But with a quarter of a million in outstanding
stock--well, it would be all right for the fellow with a big block.
But you can see where I would get off with a five-thousand-dollar
interest.  To be sure, a certain proportion of the money derived from
the sale of this stock should be mine.  But it goes into the treasury,
and they had it arranged to keep it in the treasury, as a fund for
operations, with them doing the operating.  They had already indicated
their bent by voting an annual stipend of ten thousand and six thousand
dollars to Lorimer and Brooks as president and secretary respectively.
Me, they proposed to quiet with a manager's wage of a mere five
thousand a year--after I got on the ground and began to get my back up.

Free Gold would have been a splendid Stock Exchange possibility.  They
had it all doped out how they could make sundry clean-ups irrespective
of the mine's actual product.  That was the first thing that made me
dubious.  They were stock-market gamblers, manipulators pure and
simple.  But I might have let it go at that, seeing it was their game
and not one that I or anybody I cared about would get fleeced at.  I
didn't approve of it, you understand.  It was their game.

But they capped the climax with what I must cold-bloodedly characterize
as the baldest attempt at a dirty fraud I ever encountered.  And they
had the gall to try and make me a party to it.  To make this clear you
must understand that I, on behalf of the company and acting as the
company's agent, grubstaked Whitey Lewis and four others to go in and
stake those claims.  I was empowered to arrange with these five men
that if the claims made a decent showing each should receive five
thousand dollars in stock for assigning their claims to the company,
and should have employment at top wages while the claims were operated.

They surely earned it.  You know what the North is in the dead of
winter.  They bucked their way through a hell of frost and snow and
staked the claims.  If ever men were entitled to what was due them,
they were.  And not one of them stuttered over his bargain, even though
they were taking out weekly as much gold as they were to get for their
full share.  They'd given their word, and they were white men.  They
took me for a white man also.  They took my word that they would get
what was coming to them, and gave me in the company's name clear title
to every claim.  I put those titles on record in Hazleton, and came
home.

Lorimer and Brooks deliberately proposed to withhold that stock, to
defraud these men, to steal--oh, I can't find words strong enough.
They wanted to let the matter stand; wanted me to let it be adjusted
later; anything to serve as an excuse for delay.  Brooks said to me,
with a grin; "The property's in the company's name--let the roughnecks
sweat a while.  They've got no come-back, anyhow."

That was when I smashed him.  Do you blame me?  I'd taken over those
fellows' claims in good faith.  Could I go back there and face those
men and say: "Boys, the company's got your claims, and they won't pay
for them."  Do you think for a minute I'd let a bunch of lily-fingered
crooks put anything like that over on simple, square-dealing fellows
who were too honest to protect their own interests from sharp practice?
A quartet of soft-bodied mongrels who sat in upholstered office chairs
while these others wallowed through six feet of snow for three weeks,
living on bacon and beans, to grab a pot of gold for them!  It makes my
fist double up when I think about it.

And I wouldn't be put off or placated by a chance to fatten my own bank
roll.  I didn't care if I broke the Free Gold Mining Company and myself
likewise.  A dollar doesn't terrify nor yet fascinate me--I hope it
never will.  And while, perhaps, it was not what they would call good
form for me to lose my temper and go at them with my fists, I was
fighting mad when I thoroughly sensed their dirty project.  Anyway, it
helped bring them to time.  When you take a man of that type and cuff
him around with your two hands he's apt to listen serious to what you
say.  And they listened when I told them in dead earnest next day that
Whitey Lewis and his partners must have what was due them, or I'd wreck
the bunch of them if it took ten years and every dollar I had to do it.
And I could have put them on the tramp, too--they'd already dipped
their fingers in where they couldn't stand litigation.  I'm sure of
that--or they would never have come through; which they did.

But I'm sorry I ever got mixed up with them.  I'm going to sell my
stock and advise Lewis and the others to do the same while we can get
full value for it.  Lorimer and that bunch will manipulate the outfit
to death, no matter how the mine produces.  They'll have a quarter of a
million to work on pretty soon, and they'll work it hard.  They're
shysters--but it's after all only a practical demonstration of the
ethics of the type--"Do everybody you can--if you can do 'em so there's
no come-back."

That's all of that.  I don't care two whoops about the money.  There is
still gold in the Klappan Range and other corners of the North,
whenever I need it.  But it nauseated me.  I can't stand that cutthroat
game.  And Granville, like most other cities of its kind, lives by and
for that sort of thing.  The pressure of modern life makes it
inevitable.  Anyway, a town is no place for me.  I can stomach it about
so long, and no longer.  It's too cramped, too girded about with
petty-larceny conventions.  If once you slip and get down, every one
walks on you.  Everything's restricted, priced, tinkered with.  There
is no real freedom of body or spirit.  I wouldn't trade a comfy log
cabin in the woods with a big fireplace and a shelf of books for the
finest home on Maple Drive--not if I had to stay there and stifle in
the dust and smoke and smells.  That would be a sordid and impoverished
existence.  I cannot live by the dog-eat-dog code that seems to prevail
wherever folk get jammed together in an unwieldy social mass.

I have said the like to you before.  By nature and training I'm
unfitted to live in these crowded places.  I love you, little person, I
don't think you realize how much, but I can't make you happy by making
myself utterly miserable.  That would only produce the inevitable
reaction.  But I still think you are essentially enough like me to meet
me on common ground.  You loved me and you found contentment and joy at
our little cabin once.  Don't you think it might be waiting there again?

If you really care, if I and the old North still mean anything to you,
a few days or weeks, or even months of separation won't matter.  An
affection that can't survive six months is too fragile to go through
life on.  I don't ask you to jump the next train and follow me.  I
don't ask you to wire me, "Come back, Bill."  Though I would come quick
enough if you called me.  I merely want you to think it over soberly
and let your heart decide.  You know where I stand, don't you, Hazel,
dear?  I haven't changed--not a bit--I'm the same old Bill.  But I'd
rather hit the trail alone than with an unwilling partner.  Don't
flounder about in any quicksand of duty.  There is no "I ought to"
between us.

So it is up to you once more, little person.  If my way is not to be
your way I will abide by your decision without whining.  And whenever
you want to reach me, a message to Felix Courvoiseur, Fort George, will
eventually find me.  I'll fix it that way.

I don't know what I'll do after I make that Klappan trip.  I'm too
restless to make plans.  What's the use of planning when there's nobody
but myself to plan for?

So long, little person.  I like you a heap, for all your cantankerous
ways.

BILL.


She laid aside the letter, with a lump in her throat.  For a brief
instant she was minded to telegraph the word that would bring him
hurrying back.  But--some of the truths he had set down in cold black
and white cut her deep.  Of a surety she had drawn her weapon on the
wrong side in the mining trouble.  Over-hasty?--yes.  And shamefully
disloyal.  Perhaps there was something in it, after all; that is to
say, it might be they had made a mistake.  She saw plainly enough that
unless she could get back some of the old enthusiasm for that
wilderness life, unless the fascination of magnificent distances, of
silent, breathless forests, of contented, quiet days on trail and
stream, could lay fast hold of her again, they would only defer the day
of reckoning, as Bill had said.

And she was not prepared to go that far.  She still harbored a
smoldering grudge against him for his volcanic outburst in Granville,
and too precipitate departure.  He had given her no time to think, to
make a choice.  The flesh-pots still seemed wholly desirable--or,
rather, she shrank from the alternative.  When she visualized the North
it uprose always in its most threatening presentment, indescribably
lonely, the playground of ruthless, elemental forces, terrifying in its
vast emptinesses.  It appalled her in retrospect, loomed unutterably
desolate in contrast to her present surroundings.

No, she would not attempt to call him back.  She doubted if he would
come.  And she would not go--not yet.  She must have time to think.

One thing pricked her sorely.  She could not reconcile the roguery of
Brooks and Lorimer with the men as she knew them.  Not that she doubted
Bill's word.  But there must be a mistake somewhere.  Ruthless
competition in business she knew and understood.  Only the fit
survived--just as in her husband's chosen field only the peculiarly fit
could hope to survive.  But she rather resented the idea that pleasant,
well-bred people could be guilty of coarse, forthright fraud.  Surely
not!

Altogether, as the first impression of Bill's letter grew less vivid to
her she considered her grievances more.  And she was minded to act as
she had set out to do--to live her life as seemed best to her, rather
than pocket her pride and rejoin Bill.  The feminine instinct to compel
the man to capitulate asserted itself more and more strongly.

Wherefore, she dressed carefully and prepared to meet a luncheon
engagement which she recalled as being down for that day.  No matter
that her head ached woefully.  Thought maddened her.  She required
distraction, craved change.  The chatter over the tea-cups, the
cheerful nonsense of that pleasure-seeking crowd might be a tonic.
Anything was better than to sit at home and brood.




CHAPTER XXXII

THE SPUR.

A month passed.

During that thirty-day period she received a brief note from Bill.
Just a few lines to say:


Hit the ranch yesterday, little person.  Looks good to me.  Have had
Lauer do some work on it this summer.  Went fishing last night about
sundown.  Trout were rising fine.  Nailed a two-pounder.  He jumped a
foot clear of the water after my fly, and gave me a hot time for about
ten minutes.  Woke up this morning at daylight and found a buck deer
with two lady friends standing in the middle of the clearing.  I loafed
a fews days in Fort George, sort of thinking I might hear from you.  Am
sending this out by Jake.  Will start for the Klappan about day after
to-morrow.


She had not answered his first letter.  She had tried to.  But somehow
when she tried to set pen to paper the right words would not come.  She
lacked his facility of expression.  There was so much she wanted to
say, so little she seemed able to say.  As the days passed she felt
less sure of her ground, less sure that she had not sacrificed
something precious to a vagary of self, an obsession of her own ego.

Many things took on a different complexion now that she stood alone.
No concrete evidence of change stood forth preëminent.  It was largely
subjective, atmospheric, intangible impressions.

Always with a heart sinking she came back to the empty apartment,
knowing that it would be empty.  During Bill's transient absence of the
spring she had missed him scarcely at all.  She could not say that now.

And slowly but surely she began to view all her activities of her
circle with a critical eye.  She was brought to this partly in
self-defense.  Certain of her friends had become tentative enemies.
Kitty Brooks and the Bray womenfolk, who were a numerous and
influential tribe, not only turned silent faces when they met, but they
made war on her in the peculiar fashion of women.  A word here, a
suggestive phrase there, a shrug of the shoulders.  It all bore fruit.
Other friends conveyed the avid gossip.  Hazel smiled and ignored it.
But in her own rooms she raged unavailingly.

Her husband had left her.  There was a man in the case.  They had lost
everything.  The first count was sufficiently maddening because it was
a half truth.  And any of it was irritating--even if few
believed--since it made a choice morsel to digest in gossipy corners,
and brought sundry curious stares on Hazel at certain times.  Also Mr.
Wagstaff had caused the stockholders of Free Gold a heavy loss--which
was only offset by the fact that the Free Gold properties were
producing richly.  None of this was even openly flung at her.  She
gathered it piecemeal.  And it galled her.  She could not openly defend
either Bill or herself against the shadowy scandalmongers.

Slowly it dawned upon her, with a bitterness born of her former
experience with Granville, that she had lost something of the standing
that certain circles had accorded her as the wife of a successful
mining man.  It made her ponder.  Was Bill so far wrong, after all, in
his estimate of them?  It was a disheartening conclusion.  She had come
of a family that stood well in Granville; she had grown up there; if
life-time friends blew hot and cold like that, was the game worth
playing?

In so far as she could she gave the lie to some of the petty gossip.
Whereas at first she had looked dubiously on spending Bill's money to
maintain the standard of living they had set up, she now welcomed that
deposit of five thousand dollars as a means to demonstrate that even in
his absence he stood behind her financially--which she began to
perceive counted more than anything else.  So long as she could dress
in the best, while she could ride where others walked, so long as she
betrayed no limitation of resources, the doors stood wide.  Not what
you are, but what you've got--she remembered Bill saying that was their
holiest creed.

It repelled her.  And sometimes she was tempted to sit down and pour it
all out in a letter to him.  But she could not quite bring herself to
the point.  Always behind Bill loomed the vast and dreary Northland,
and she shrank from that.

On top of this, she began to suffer a queer upset of her physical
condition.  All her life she had been splendidly healthy; her body a
perfect-working machine, afflicted with no weaknesses.  Now odd
spasmodic pains recurred without rhyme or reason in her head, her back,
her limbs, striking her with sudden poignancy, disappearing as suddenly.

She was stretched on the lounge one afternoon wrestling nervously with
a particularly acute attack, when Vesta Lorimer was ushered in.

"You're almost a stranger," Hazel remarked, after the first greetings.
"Your outing must have been pleasant, to hold you so long."

"It would have held me longer," Vesta returned, "if I didn't have to be
in touch with my market.  I could live quite happily on my island eight
months in the year.  But one can't get people to come several hundred
miles to a sitting.  And I feel inclined to acquire a living income
while my vogue lasts."

"You're rather a wilderness lover, aren't you?" Hazel commented.  "I
don't think you'd love it as dearly if you were buried alive in it."

"That would all depend on the circumstances," Vesta replied.  "One
escapes many disheartening things in a country that is still
comparatively primitive.  The continual grind of keeping one's end up
in town gets terribly wearisome.  I'm always glad to go to the woods,
and sorry when I have to leave.  But I suppose it's largely in one's
point of view."

They chatted of sundry matters for a few minutes.

"By the way, is there any truth in the statement that this Free Gold
row has created trouble between you and your husband?" Vesta asked
abruptly.  "I dare say it's quite an impertinent question, and you'd be
well within your rights to tell me it's none of my business.  But I
should like to confound some of these petty tattlers.  I haven't been
home forty-eight hours; yet I've heard tongues wagging.  I hope there's
nothing in it.  I warned Mr. Wagstaff against Paul."

"Warned him?  Why?"  Hazel neglected the question entirely.  The
bluntness of it took her by surprise.  Frank speech was not a
characteristic of Vesta Lorimer's set.

The girl shrugged her shoulders.

"He is my brother, but that doesn't veil my eyes," she said coolly.
"Paul is too crooked to lie straight in bed.  I'm glad Mr. Wagstaff
brought the lot of them up with a round turn--which he seems to have
done.  If he had used a club instead of his fists it would have been
only their deserts.  I suppose the fuss quite upset you?"

"It did," Hazel admitted grudgingly.  "It did more than upset me."

"I thought as much," Vesta said slowly.  "It made you inflict an
undeserved hurt on a man who should have had better treatment at your
hands; not only because he loves you, but because he is one of the few
men who deserve the best that you or any woman can give."

Hazel straightened up angrily.

"Where do you get your astonishing information, pray?" she asked hotly.
"And where do you get your authority to say such things to me?"

Vesta tucked back a vagrant strand of her tawny hair.  Her blue eyes
snapped, and a red spot glowed on each smooth, fair cheek.

"I don't get it; I'm taking it," she flung back.  "I have eyes and
ears, and I have used them for months.  Since you inquire, I happened
to be going over the Lake Division on the same train that carried your
husband back to the North.  You can't knife a man without him bearing
the marks of it; and I learned in part why he was going back alone.
The rest I guessed, by putting two and two together.  You're a silly,
selfish, shortsighted little fool, if my opinion is worth having."

"You've said quite enough," Hazel cried.  "If you have any more
insults, please get rid of them elsewhere.  I think you are--"

"Oh, I don't care what you think of me," the girl interrupted
recklessly.  "If I did I wouldn't be here.  I'd hide behind the
conventional rules of the game and let you blunder along.  But I can't.
I'm not gifted with your blind egotism.  Whatever you are, that Bill of
yours loves you, and if you care anything for him, you should be with
him.  I would, if I were lucky enough to stand in your shoes.  I'd go
with him down into hell itself gladly if he wanted me to!"

"Oh!" Hazel gasped.  "Are you clean mad?"

"Shocked to death, aren't you?" Vesta fleered.  "You can't understand,
can you?  I love him--yes.  I'm not ashamed to own it.  I'm no
sentimental prude to throw up my hands in horror at a perfectly natural
emotion.  But he is not for me.  I dare say I couldn't give him an
added heartbeat if I tried.  And I have a little too much
pride--strange as it may seem to you--to try, so long as he is chained
hand and foot to your chariot.  But you're making him suffer.  And I
care enough to want him to live all his days happily.  He is a man, and
there are so few of them, real men.  If you can make him happy I'd
compel you to do so, if I had the power.  You couldn't understand that
kind of a love.  Oh, I could choke you for your stupid disloyalty.  I
could do almost anything that would spur you to action.  I can't rid
myself of the hopeless, reckless mood he was in.  There are so few of
his kind, the patient, strong, loyal, square-dealing men, with a
woman's tenderness and a lion's courage.  Any woman should be proud and
glad to be his mate, to mother his children.  And you--"

She threw out her hands with a sudden, despairing gesture.  The blue
eyes grew misty, and she hid her face in her palms.  Before that
passionate outburst Hazel sat dumbly amazed, staring, uncertain.  In a
second Vesta lifted her head defiantly.

"I had no notion of breaking out like this when I came up," she said
quietly.  "I was going to be very adroit.  I intended to give you a
friendly boost along the right road, if I could.  But it has all been
bubbling inside me for a long time.  You perhaps think it very
unwomanly--but I don't care much what you think.  My little heartache
is incidental, one of the things life deals us whether we will or not.
But if you care in the least for your husband, for God's sake make some
effort, some sacrifice of your own petty little desires, to make his
road a little pleasanter, a little less gray than it must be now.
You'll be well repaid--if you are the kind that must always be paid in
full.  Don't be a stiff-necked idiot.  That's all I wanted to say.
Good-by!"

She was at the door when she finished.  The click of the closing catch
stirred Hazel to speech and action.

"Vesta, Vesta!" she cried, and ran out into the corridor.

But Vesta Lorimer neither heeded nor halted.  And Hazel went back to
her room, quivering.  Sometimes the truth is bitter and stirs to wrath.
And mingled with other emotions was a dull pang of jealousy--the first
she had ever known.  For Vesta Lorimer was beautiful beyond most women;
and she had but given ample evidence of the bigness of her soul.  With
shamed tears creeping to her eyes, Hazel wondered if _she_ could love
even Bill so intensely that she would drive another woman to his arms
that he might win happiness.

But one thing stood out clear above that painful meeting.  She was done
fighting against the blankness that seemed to surround her since Bill
went away.  Slowly but steadily it had been forced upon her that much
which she deemed desirable, even necessary, was of little weight in the
balance with him.  Day and night she longed for him, for his cheery
voice, the whimsical good humor of him, his kiss and his smile.
Indubitably Vesta Lorimer was right to term her a stiff-necked, selfish
fool.  But if all folk were saturated with the essence of wisdom--well,
there was but one thing to be done.  Silly pride had to go by the
board.  If to face gayly a land she dreaded were the price of easing
his heartache--and her own--that price she would pay, and pay with a
grace but lately learned.

She lay down on the lounge again.  The old pains were back.  And as she
endured, a sudden startling thought flashed across her mind.  A
possibility?--Yes.  She hurried to dress, wondering why it had not
before occurred to her, and, phoning up a taxi, rolled downtown to the
office of Doctor Hart.  An hour or so later she returned.  A picture of
her man stood on the mantel.  She took it down and stared at it with a
tremulous smile.

"Oh, Billy-boy, Billy-boy, I wish you knew," she whispered.  "But I was
coming, anyway, Bill!"

That evening, stirring about her preparations for the journey, she
paused, and wondered why, for the first time since Bill left, she felt
so utterly at peace.




CHAPTER XXXIII

HOME AGAIN

Twelve months works many a change on a changing frontier.  Hazel found
this so.  When she came to plan her route she found the G. T. P.
bridging the last gap in a transcontinental system, its trains
westbound already within striking distance of Fort George.  She could
board a sleeping car at Granville and detrain within a hundred miles of
the ancient trading post--with a fast river boat to carry her the
remaining distance.

Fort George loomed up a jumbled area of houses and tents, log
buildings, frame structures yellow in their newness, strangers to paint
as yet.  On every hand others stood in varying stages of erection.
Folks hurried about the sturdy beginning of a future greatness.  And as
she left the boat and followed a new-laid walk of planks toward a
hotel, Jake Lauer stepped out of a store, squarely into her path.

His round face lit up with a smile of recognition.  And Hazel, fresh
from the long and lonesome journey, was equally glad to set eyes on a
familiar, a genuinely friendly face.

"I am pleased to welgome you back to Gott's country, Mrs. Vagstaff," he
said.  "Und let me carry dot suid case alretty."

They walked two blocks to the King's Hotel, where Lauer's family was
housed.  He was in for supplies, he told her, and, of course, his wife
and children accompanied him.

"Not dat Gredda iss afraid.  She iss so goot a man as I on der ranch
ven I am gone," he explained.  "But for dem it iss a change.  Und I
bring by der town a vaigonloat off bodadoes.  By cosh, dem bodadoes iss
sell high."

It flashed into Hazel's mind that here was a Heaven-sent opportunity to
reach the cabin without facing that hundred miles in the company of
chance-hired strangers.  But she did not broach the subject at once.
Instead, she asked eagerly of Bill.  Lauer told her that Bill had
tarried a few days at the cabin, and then struck out alone for the
mines.  And he had not said when he would be back.

Mrs. Lauer, unchanged from a year earlier, welcomed her with pleased
friendliness.  And Jake left the two of them and the chubby kiddies in
the King's office while he betook himself about his business.  Hazel
haled his wife and the children to her room as soon as one was assigned
to her.  And there, almost before she knew it, she was murmuring
brokenly her story into an ear that listened with sympathy and
understanding.  Only a woman can grasp some of a woman's needs.  Gretta
Lauer patted Hazel's shoulder with a motherly hand, and bade her cheer
up.

"Home's the place for you, dear," she said smilingly.  "You just come
right along with us.  Your man will come quick enough when he gets
word.  And we'll take good care of you in the meantime.  La, I'm all
excited over it.  It's the finest thing could happen for you both.
Take it from me, dearie.  I know.  We've had our troubles, Jake and I.
And, seeing I'm only six months short of being a graduate nurse, you
needn't fear.  Well, well!"

"I'll need to have food hauled in," Hazel reflected.  "And some things
I brought with me.  I wish Bill were here.  I'm afraid I'll be a lot of
bother.  Won't you be heavily loaded, as it is?"

She recalled swiftly the odd, makeshift team that Lauer depended
on--the mule, lop-eared and solemn, "und Gretchen, der cow."  She had
cash and drafts for over three thousand dollars on her person.  She
wondered if it would offend the sturdy independence of these simple,
kindly neighbors, if she offered to supply a four-horse team and wagon
for their mutual use?  But she had been forestalled there, she learned
in the next breath.

"Oh, bother nothing," Mrs. Lauer declared.  "Why, we'd be ashamed if we
couldn't help a little.  And far's the load goes, you ought to see the
four beautiful horses your husband let Jake have.  You don't know how
much Jake appreciates it, nor what a fine man he thinks your husband
is.  We needed horses so bad, and didn't have the money to buy.  So Mr.
Wagstaff didn't say a thing but got the team for us, and Jake's paying
for them in clearing and plowing and making improvements on your land.
Honest, they could pull twice the load we'll have.  There's a good
wagon road most of the way now.  Quite a lot of settlers, too, as much
as fifty or sixty miles out.  And we've got the finest garden you ever
saw.  Vegetables enough to feed four families all winter.  Oh, your old
cities!  I never want to live in one again.  Never a day have the
kiddies been sick.  Suppose it is a bit out of the world?  You're all
the more pleased when somebody does happen along.  Folks is so
different in a new country like this.  There's plenty for
everybody--and everybody helps, like neighbors ought to."

Lauer came up after a time, and Hazel found herself unequivocally in
their hands.  With the matter of transporting herself and supplies thus
solved, she set out to find Felix Courvoiseur--who would know how to
get word to Bill.  He might come back to the cabin in a month or so; he
might not come back at all unless he heard from her.  She was smitten
with a great fear that he might give her up as lost to him, and plunge
deeper into the wilderness in some mood of recklessness.  And she
wanted him, longed for him, if only so that she could make amends.

She easily found Courvoiseur, a tall, spare Frenchman, past middle age.
Yes, he could deliver a message to Bill Wagstaff; that is, he could
send a man.  Bill Wagstaff was in the Klappan Range.

"But if he should have left there?" Hazel suggested uneasily.

"'E weel leave weeth W'itey Lewees word of w'ere 'e go," Courvoiseur
reassured her.  "An' my man, w'ich ees my bruzzer-law, w'ich I can mos'
fully trus', 'e weel follow 'eem.  So Beel 'e ees arrange.  'E ees say
mos' parteecular if madame ees come or weesh for forward message, geet
heem to me queeck.  _Oui_.  Long tam Beel ees know me.  I am for depend
always."

Courvoiseur kept a trader's stock of goods in a weather-beaten old log
house which sprawled a hundred feet back from the street.  Thirty
years, he told her, he had kept that store in Fort George.  She guessed
that Bill had selected him because he was a fixture.  She sat down at
his counter and wrote her message.  Just a few terse lines.  And when
she had delivered it to Courvoiseur she went back to the hotel.  There
was nothing now to do but wait.  And with the message under way she
found herself impatient to reach the cabin, to spend the waiting days
where she had first found happiness.  She could set her house in order
against her man's coming.  And if the days dragged, and the great, lone
land seemed to close in and press inexorably upon her, she would have
to be patient, very patient.

Jake was held up, waiting for supplies.  Fort George suffered a sugar
famine.  Two days later, the belated freight arrived.  He loaded his
wagon, a ton of goods for himself, a like weight of Hazel's supplies
and belongings.  A goodly load, but he drove out of Fort George with
four strapping bays arching their powerful necks, and champing on the
bit.

"Four days ve vill make it by der ranch," Jake chuckled.  "Mit der mule
und Gretchen, der cow, von veek it take me, mit half der loat."

Four altogether pleasant and satisfying days they were to Hazel.  The
worst of the fly pests were vanished for the season.  A crisp touch of
frost sharpened the night winds.  Indian summer hung its mellow haze
over the land.  The clean, pungent air that sifted through the forests
seemed doubly sweet after the vitiated atmosphere of town.  Fresh from
a gridiron of dusty streets and stone pavements, and but stepped, as
one might say, from days of imprisonment in the narrow confines of a
railway coach, she drank the winey air in hungry gulps, and joyed in
the soft yielding of the turf beneath her feet, the fern and pea-vine
carpet of the forest floor.

It was her pleasure at night to sleep as she and Bill had slept, with
her face bared to the stars.  She would draw her bed a little aside
from the camp fire and from the low seclusion of a thicket lie watching
the nimble flames at their merry dance, smiling lazily at the grotesque
shadows cast by Jake and his frau as they moved about the blaze.  And
she would wake in the morning clear-headed, alert, grateful for the
pleasant woodland smells arising wholesomely from the fecund bosom of
the earth.

Lauer pulled up before his own cabin at mid-afternoon of the fourth
day, unloaded his own stuff, and drove to his neighbor's with the rest.

"I'll walk back after a little," Hazel told him, when he had piled her
goods in one corner of the kitchen.

The rattle of the wagon died away.  She was alone--at home.  Her eyes
filled as she roved restlessly from kitchen to living-room and on into
the bedroom at the end.  Bill had unpacked.  The rugs were down, the
books stowed in familiar disarray upon their shelves, the bedding
spread in semi-disorder where he had last slept and gone away without
troubling to smooth it out in housewifely fashion.

She came back to the living-room and seated herself in the big chair.
She had expected to be lonely, very lonely.  But she was not.  Perhaps
that would come later.  For the present it seemed as if she had reached
the end of something, as if she were very tired, and had gratefully
come to a welcome resting place.  She turned her gaze out the open door
where the forest fell away in vast undulations to a range of
snow-capped mountains purple in the autumn haze, and a verse that Bill
had once quoted came back to her:

  "Oh, to feel the Wind grow strong
    Where the Trail leaps down.
  I could never learn the way
    And wisdom of the Town."


She blinked.  The town--it seemed to have grown remote, a fantasy in
which she had played a puppet part.  But she was home again.  If only
the gladness of it endured strong enough to carry her through whatever
black days might come to her there alone.

She would gladly have cooked her supper in the kitchen fireplace, and
laid down to sleep under her own roof.  It seemed the natural thing to
do.  But she had not expected to find the cabin livably arranged, and
she had promised the Lauers to spend the night with them.  So presently
she closed the door and walked away through the woods.




CHAPTER XXXIV

AFTER MANY DAYS

September and October trooped past, and as they marched the willow
thickets and poplar groves grew yellow and brown, and carpeted the
floor of the woods with fallen leaves.  Shrub and tree bared gaunt
limbs to every autumn wind.  Only the spruce and pine stood forth in
their year-round habiliments of green.  The days shortened steadily.
The nights grew long, and bitter with frost.  Snow fell, blanketing
softly the dead leaves.  Old Winter cracked his whip masterfully over
all the North.

Day by day, between tasks, and often while she worked, Hazel's eyes
would linger on the edges of the clearing.  Often at night she would
lift herself on elbow at some unexpected sound, her heart leaping wild
with expectation.  And always she would lie down again, and sometimes
press her clenched hand to her lips to keep back the despairing cry.
Always she adjured herself to be patient, to wait doggedly as Bill
would have waited, to make due allowance for immensity of distance for
the manifold delays which might overtake a messenger faring across
those silent miles or a man hurrying to his home.  Many things might
hold him back.  But he would come.  It was inconceivable that he might
not come.

Meantime, with only a dim consciousness of the fact, she underwent a
marvelous schooling in adaptation, self-restraint.  She had work of a
sort, tasks such as every housewife finds self-imposed in her own home.
She was seldom lonely.  She marveled at that.  It was unique in her
experience.  All her old dread of the profound silence, the pathless
forests which infolded like a prison wall, distances which seemed
impossible of span, had vanished.  In its place had fallen over her an
abiding sense of peace, of security.  The lusty storm winds whistling
about the cabin sang a restful lullaby.  When the wolves lifted their
weird, melancholy plaint to the cold, star-jeweled skies, she listened
without the old shudder.  These things, which were wont to oppress her,
to send her imagination reeling along morbid ways, seemed but a natural
aspect of life, of which she herself was a part.

Often, sitting before her glowing fireplace, watching a flame kindled
with her own hands with wood she herself had carried from the pile
outside, she pondered this.  It defied her powers of self-analysis.
She could only accept it as a fact, and be glad.  Granville and all
that Granville stood for had withdrawn to a more or less remote
background.  She could look out over the frost-spangled forests and
feel that she lacked nothing--nothing save her mate.  There was no
impression of transient abiding; no chafing to be elsewhere, to do
otherwise.  It was home, she reflected; perhaps that was why.

A simple routine served to fill her days.  She kept her house shining,
she cooked her food, carried in her fuel.  Except on days of forthright
storm she put on her snowshoes, and with a little rifle in the crook of
her arm prowled at random through the woods--partly because it gave her
pleasure to range sturdily afield, partly for the physical brace of
exertion in the crisp air.  Otherwise she curled comfortably before the
fire-place, and sewed, or read something out of Bill's catholic
assortment of books.

It was given her, also, to learn the true meaning of neighborliness,
that kindliness of spirit which is stifled by stress in the crowded
places, and stimulated by like stress amid surroundings where life is
noncomplex, direct, where cause and effect tread on each other's heels.
Every day, if she failed to drop into their cabin, came one of her
neighbors to see if all were well with her.  Quite as a matter of
course Jake kept steadily replenished for her a great pile of firewood.
Or they would come, babies and all, bundled in furs of Jake's trapping,
jingling up of an evening behind the frisky bays.  And while the bays
munched hay in Roaring Bill Wagstaff's stable, they would cluster about
the open hearth, popping corn for the children, talking, always with
cheerful optimism.

Behind Lauer's mild blue eyes lurked a mind that burrowed incessantly
to the roots of things.  He had lived and worked and read, and,
pondering it all, he had summed up a few of the verities.

"Life, it iss giffen us, und ve must off it make der best ve can," he
said once to Hazel, fondling a few books he had borrowed to read at
home.  "Life iss goot, yust der liffing off life, if only ve go not
astray afder der voolish dings--und if der self-breservation struggle
vears us not out so dot ve gannot enjoy being alife.  So many iss
struggle und slave under terrible conditions.  Und it iss largely
because off ignorance.  Ve know not vot ve can do--und ve shrink vrom
der unknown.  Here iss acres by der dousand vree to der man vot can off
it make use--und dousands vot liffs und dies und neffer hass a home.
Here iss goot, glean air--und in der shmoke und shmells und dirty
streets iss a ravage of tuberculosis.  Der balance iss not true.  Und
in der own vay der rich iss full off drouble--drunk mit eggcitement,
veary mit bleasures.  Ach, der voods und mountains und streams, blenty
off food, und a kindly neighbor--iss not dot enough?  Only der abnormal
vants more as dot.  Und I dink der drouble iss largely dot der modern,
high-bressure cifilization makes for der abnormal, vedder a man iss a
millionaire or vorks in der brewery, contentment iss a state off der
mind--und if der mind vorks mit logic it vill content find in der
simple dings."

It sounded like a pronouncement of Bill's.  But Lauer did not often
grow serious.  Mostly he was jovially cheerful, and his wife likewise.
The North had emancipated them, and they were loyal to the source of
their deliverance.  And Hazel understood, because she herself had found
the wild land a benefactor, kindly in its silence, restful in its
forested peace, a cure for sickness of soul.  Twice now it had rescued
her from herself.

November and December went their appointed way--and still no word of
Bill.  If now and then her pillow was wet she struggled mightily
against depression.  She was not lonely in the dire significance of the
word--but she longed passionately for him.  And she held fast to her
faith that he would come.

The last of the old year she went little abroad, ventured seldom beyond
the clearing.  And on New Year's Eve Jake Lauer's wife came to the
cabin to stay.


Hazel sat up, wide awake, on the instant.  There was not the slightest
sound.  She had been deep in sleep.  Nevertheless she felt, rather than
knew, that some one was in the living-room.  Perhaps the sound of the
door opening had filtered through her slumber.  She hesitated an
instant, not through fear, because in the months of living alone fear
had utterly forsaken her; but hope had leaped so often, only to fall
sickeningly, that she was half persuaded it must be a dream.  Still the
impression strengthened.  She slipped out of bed.  The door of the
bedroom stood slightly ajar.

Bill stood before the fireplace, his shaggy fur cap pushed far back on
his head, his gauntlets swinging from the cord about his neck.  She had
left a great bed of coals on the hearth, and the glow shone redly on
his frost-scabbed face.  But the marks of bitter trail bucking, the
marks of frostbite, the stubby beard, the tiny icicles that still
clustered on his eyebrows; while these traces of hardship tugged at her
heart they were forgotten when she saw the expression that overshadowed
his face.  Wonder and unbelief and longing were all mirrored there.
She took a shy step forward to see what riveted his gaze.  And despite
the choking sensation in her throat she smiled--for she had taken off
her little, beaded house moccasins and left them lying on the bearskin
before the fire, and he was staring down at them like a man
fresh-wakened from a dream, unbelieving and bewildered.

[Illustration: Bill stood before the fireplace, his shaggy fur cap
pushed far back on his head.]

With that she opened the door and ran to him.  He started, as if she
had been a ghost.  Then he opened his arms and drew her close to him.

"Bill, Bill, what made you so long?" she whispered.  "I guess it served
me right, but it seemed a never-ending time."

"What made me so long?" he echoed, bending his rough cheek down against
the warm smoothness of hers.  "Lord, _I_ didn't know you wanted me.  I
ain't no telepathist, hon.  You never yeeped one little word since I
left.  How long you been here?"

"Since last September."  She smiled up at him.  "Didn't Courvoiseur's
man deliver a message from me to the mine?  Didn't you come in answer
to my note?"

"Great Caesar's ghost--since September--alone!  You poor little girl!"
he murmured.  "No, if you sent word to me through Courvoiseur I never
got it.  Maybe something happened his man.  I left the Klappan with the
first snow.  Went poking aimlessly over around the Finlay River with a
couple of trappers.  Couldn't settle down.  Never heard a word from
you.  I'd given you up.  I just blew in this way by sheer accident.
Girl, girl, you don't know how good it is to see you again, to have
this warm body of yours cuddled up to me again.  And you came right
here and planted yourself to wait till I turned up?"

"Sure!"  She laughed happily.  "But I sent you word, even if you never
got it.  Oh, well, it doesn't matter.  Nothing matters now.  You're
here, and I'm here, and--  Oh, Billy-boy, I was an awful pig-headed
idiot.  Do you think you can take another chance with me?"

"Say"--he held her off at arm's length admiringly--"do you want to know
how strong I am for taking a chance with you?  Well, I was on my way
out to flag the next train East, just to see--just to see if you still
cared two pins; to see if you still thought your game was better than
mine."

"Well, you don't have to take any eastbound train to find that out,"
she cried gayly.  "I'm here to tell you I care a lot more than any
number of pins.  Oh, I've learned a lot in the last six months, Bill.
I had to hurt myself, and you, too.  I had to get a jolt to jar me out
of my self-centered little orbit.  I got it, and it did me good.  And
it's funny.  I came back here because I thought I ought to, because it
was our home, but rather dreading it.  And I've been quite contented
and happy--only hungry, oh, so dreadfully hungry, for you."

Bill kissed her.

"I didn't make any mistake in you, after all," he said.  "You're a real
partner.  You're the right stuff.  I love you more than ever.  If you
made a mistake you paid for it, like a dead-game sport.  What's a few
months?  We've all our life before us, and it's plain sailing now we've
got our bearings again."

"Amen!" she whispered.  "I--but, say, man of mine, you've been on the
trail, and I know what the trail is.  You must be hungry.  I've got all
kinds of goodies cooked in the kitchen.  Take off your clothes, and
I'll get you something to eat."

"I'll go you," he said.  "I am hungry.  Made a long mush to get here
for the night.  I got six huskies running loose outside, so if you hear
'em scuffing around you'll know it's not the wolves.  Say, it was some
welcome surprise to find a fire when I came in.  Thought first somebody
traveling through had put up.  Then I saw those slippers lying there.
That was sure making me take notice when you stepped out."

He chuckled at the recollection.  Hazel lit the lamp, and stirred up
the fire, plying it with wood.  Then she slipped a heavy bath-robe over
her nightgown and went into the chilly kitchen, emerging therefrom
presently with a tray of food and a kettle of water to make coffee.
This she set on the fire.  Wherever she moved Bill's eyes followed her
with a gleam of joy, tinctured with smiling incredulousness.  When the
kettle was safely bestowed on the coals, he drew her on his knee.
There for a minute she perched in rich content.  Then she rose.

"Come very quietly with me, Bill," she whispered, with a fine air of
mystery.  "I want to show you something."

"Sure!  What is it?" he asked.

"Come and see," she smiled, and took up the lamp.  Bill followed
obediently.

Close up beside her bed stood a small, square crib.  Hazel set the lamp
on a table, and turning to the bundle of blankets which filled this new
piece of furniture, drew back one corner, revealing a round,
puckered-up infant face.

"For the love of Mike!" Bill muttered.  "Is it--is it--"

"It's our son," she whispered proudly.  "Born the tenth of
January--three weeks ago to-day.  Don't, don't--you great bear--you'll
wake him."

For Bill was bending down to peer at the tiny morsel of humanity, with
a strange, abashed smile on his face, his big, clumsy fingers touching
the soft, pink cheeks.  And when he stood up he drew a long breath, and
laid one arm across her shoulders.

"Us two and the kid," he said whimsically.  "It should be the hardest
combination in the world to bust.  Are you happy, little person?"

She nodded, clinging to him, wordlessly happy.  And presently she
covered the baby's face, and they went back to sit before the great
fireplace, where the kettle bubbled cheerfully and the crackling blaze
sent forth its challenge to the bevy of frost sprites that held high
revel outside.

And, after a time, the blaze died to a heap of glowing embers, and the
forerunning wind of a northeast storm soughed and whistled about a
house deep wrapped in contented slumber, a house no longer divided
against itself.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORTH OF FIFTY-THREE***


******* This file should be named 19510-8.txt or 19510-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/5/1/19510



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
