Project Gutenberg's The Pilgrim's Progress by John Bunyan, by John Bunyan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Pilgrim's Progress by John Bunyan

Author: John Bunyan

Editor: Jesse Lyman Hurlbut

Release Date: April 14, 2012 [EBook #39452]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS ***




Produced by Julia Neufeld and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)





Transcriber's note:

Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).
Small capital text has been replaced with all capitals.


[Illustration: Christian Confides in His Wife.
                                   See page 13]




  THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS

  BY JOHN BUNYAN

  EVERY CHILD CAN READ

  EDITED BY REV. JESSE LYMAN HURLBUT, D.D.

  ILLUSTRATED

  EVERY CHILD'S LIBRARY

  THE JOHN C. WINSTON CO. PHILADELPHIA COPYRIGHT, 1909, BY THE JOHN C.
  WINSTON CO.




PREFACE


It may seem a very bold undertaking to change even a word of the book
which, next to the Bible, has been read by more people, old and young,
than any other book in the English language.

But, it must be remembered that, although the Pilgrim's Progress has
come to be a children's book, and is read more often by young people
than by those who are older, it was not in the purpose of John Bunyan to
write a book for children or even for the young.

The Pilgrim's Progress was a book for men and women; and it was aimed to
teach the great truths of the gospel. Hence while most of it is written
in a simple style,--as all books should be written,--it contains much
that a child cannot understand; not often in the story, but in the
conversations and discussions between the different persons. Some of
these conversations are in reality short sermons on doctrines and
teachings which Bunyan believed to be of great importance. But these are
beyond the minds of children and give them great trouble when the book
is read. They do not like to have them left out of the reading, thinking
that they may lose something interesting. Many a young person has
stumbled through the dull, doctrinal parts of the book, without
understanding them; and even grown people find them in our time somewhat
of a blemish upon the wonderful story, valuable as they were supposed to
be in Bunyan's own time.

For many years it has been in my mind, not to re-write the Pilgrim's
Progress, for that would destroy its greatest charm, but to change the
words here and there to simpler ones, and to omit all the conversations
and arguments concerning subjects belonging to the field of doctrine; in
other words to place the story of the Pilgrim's Progress in such a form
that every child ten years old can understand it. My purpose is to make
it plain and interesting to children, leaving the older form of the book
to be read by them when they become older.

Perhaps a short account of Bunyan's own life may add to the interest of
his book. John Bunyan was born in 1628 at Elstow, a small village near
Bedford, which is in the heart of England. His father was a poor man,
traveling on foot from place to place mending pots and pans and the
simple furniture of country kitchens, and the son followed the same
trade, and was known as a "tinker." He tells us that he lived a wild
life, and was especially known as one of the worst swearers in the
region.

When the great Civil War broke out in England, in 1642, between King
Charles the First and the Parliament, Bunyan became a soldier on the
side of the Commonwealth, as the party against the king was called. He
served in the army between 1644 and 1646.

In 1648, at the age of twenty years, he married a good young woman, who
led him to prayer and to a new life. But it was hard for one who had led
such a life as his had been to turn to God, and it cost the young man a
great struggle. It seemed to him that his past sins were like a load
upon his back, just as he afterward wrote of his "pilgrim," and it was
long before he found peace.

He became a member of a little Baptist society, and soon began to
preach. Crowds came to hear him, drawn by his earnest spirit and his
quaint striking manner. But when Charles the Second became king, no
religious services were allowed except those of the Church of England,
and all other meetings were forbidden. Bunyan however went on preaching,
until he was sent to prison in Bedford. In Bedford jail he stayed twelve
years. To find a means of living in jail, he made lace, and sold it as a
support for himself and his blind daughter.

If the prison was hard for Bunyan his sufferings were made a blessing to
untold millions, for while in Bedford jail he wrote the Pilgrim's
Progress. This story was intended to be a parable, like many of our
Saviour's teachings; that is, it put into the form of a story the life
of one who turns from sin, finds salvation through Christ, and in the
face of many difficulties makes his way through this world to heaven.
Even a child who reads or listens to the book will see this meaning in
part; and he will understand it better as he grows older.

In 1672 Bunyan was set free, and allowed to begin again his work as a
Baptist minister, and he soon became one of the most popular preachers
in all England. He died quite suddenly in 1688, when he was sixty years
old, and is buried in an old graveyard now near the center of London,
called Bunhill Fields Burial-ground. In the same ground is buried
another great writer, Daniel DeFoe, whose story of "Robinson Crusoe"
ranks next to the Pilgrim's Progress in the number of its readers; also
Isaac Watts, the author of many hymns sung in all the churches, and Mrs.
Susanna Wesley, the mother of the great John Wesley. Four people who
have left a deep mark upon the world, all lie near together in this
small cemetery in London.

Every child should read the Pilgrim's Progress as a story if no more
than a story; should read it until he knows it by heart. And the older
he grows the deeper will be the meaning that he will see in it.

                                              JESSE LYMAN HURLBUT.




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


  CHRISTIAN CONFIDES IN HIS WIFE         _Frontispiece_

                                                  PAGE
  EVANGELIST POINTS TO WICKET-GATE                  15

  CHRISTIAN BEFORE THE CROSS                        50

  CHRISTIAN AND FAITHFUL JOIN COMPANY               89

  HOPEFUL AND CHRISTIAN                            129

  ATHEIST LAUGHING AT CHRISTIAN AND HOPEFUL        170

  CHRISTIANA'S BOYS BEGAN TO EAT                   231

  TURN-AWAY RESISTING EVANGELIST                   357




THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS


PART I




CHAPTER I.


As I walked through the wilderness of this world, I lighted on a certain
place where was a den,[1] and laid me down in that place to sleep; and
as I slept, I dreamed a dream. I dreamed, and behold, I saw a man
clothed with rags, standing in a certain place, with his face from his
own house, a book in his hand, and a great burden upon his back. I
looked, and saw him open the book, and read therein; and as he read, he
wept and trembled; and, not being able longer to contain, he brake out
with a lamentable cry, saying, "What shall I do?"

  [1] Bedford jail, in which Bunyan was twelve years a prisoner.

In this plight, therefore, he went home, and restrained himself as long
as he could, that his wife and children should not perceive his
distress; but he could not be silent long, because that his trouble
increased. Wherefore at length he brake his mind to his wife and
children; and thus he began to talk to them: "Oh my dear wife," said he,
"and you my sweet children, I, your dear friend, am in myself undone by
reason of a burden that lieth hard upon me; moreover, I am told to a
certainty that this our city will be burned with fire from heaven; in
which fearful overthrow, both myself, with thee, my wife, and you, my
sweet babes, shall miserably come to ruin, except some way of escape
can be found whereby we may be delivered." At this all his family were
sore amazed; not for that they believed that what he had said to them
was true, but because they thought that some frenzy or madness had got
into his head; therefore, it drawing towards night, and they hoping that
sleep might settle his brain, with all haste they got him to bed. But
the night was as troublesome to him as the day; wherefore, instead of
sleeping, he spent it in sighs and tears. So when the morning was come,
they would know how he did. He told them, Worse and worse: he also set
to talking to them again; but they began to be hardened. They also
thought to drive away his madness by harsh and surly treatment of him:
sometimes they would ridicule, sometimes they would chide, and sometimes
they would quite neglect him. Wherefore he began to retire himself to
his chamber, to pray for and pity them, and also to sorrow over his own
misery; he would also walk solitary in the fields, sometimes reading,
and sometimes praying; and thus for some days he spent his time.

[Sidenote: CHRISTIAN'S DISTRESS OF MIND]

Now, I saw, upon a time, when he was walking in the fields, that he was
(as he was wont) reading in his book, and greatly distressed in his
mind; and as he read, he burst out as he had done before, crying, "What
shall I do to be saved?"

I saw also that he looked this way and that way, as if he would run; yet
he stood still, because (as I perceived) he could not tell which way to
go. I looked then, and saw a man named Evangelist coming to him, who
asked, "Wherefore dost thou cry?"

[Illustration: Evangelist Points to Wicket-Gate.
                                   Page 15]

He answered, "Sir, I read in the book in my hand, that I am condemned to
die, and after that to come to judgment; and I find that I am not
willing to do the first, nor able to do the second."

Then said Evangelist, "Why not willing to die, since this life is
troubled with so many evils?" The man answered, "Because I fear that
this burden that is upon my back will sink me lower than the grave, and
I shall fall into Tophet.[2] And, sir, if I be not fit to go to prison,
I am not fit to go to judgment, and from thence to death; and the
thoughts of these things make me cry."

  [2] Tophet here means hell.

Then said Evangelist, "If this be thy condition, why standest thou
still?"

He answered, "Because I know not whither to go." Then he gave him a
parchment roll, and there was written within, "Flee from the wrath to
come."

The man, therefore, read it, and looking upon Evangelist very carefully,
said, "Whither must I fly?" Then said Evangelist (pointing with his
finger over a very wide field), "Do you see yonder wicket-gate?" The man
said, "No." Then said the other, "Do you see yonder shining light?" He
said, "I think I do." Then said Evangelist, "Keep that light in your
eye, and go up directly thereto; so shalt thou see the gate; at which,
when thou knockest, it shall be told thee what thou shalt do." So I saw
in my dream that the man began to run. Now, he had not run far from his
own door, when his wife and children perceiving it, began to cry after
him to return; but the man put his fingers in his ears, and ran on,
crying, "Life! life! eternal life!" So he looked not behind him, but
fled towards the middle of the plain.

[Sidenote: CHRISTIAN FLEES FROM THE CITY]

The neighbors also came out to see him run; and as he ran, some mocked,
others threatened, and some cried after him to return; and among those
that did so there were two that resolved to fetch him back by force. The
name of the one was Obstinate, and the name of the other Pliable. Now,
by this time the man was got a good distance from them; but, however,
they were resolved to pursue him, which they did, and in a little time
they overtook him. Then said the man, "Neighbors, wherefore are ye
come?" They said, "To persuade you to go back with us." But he said,
"That can by no means be: you dwell," said he, "in the City of
Destruction, the place also where I was born: I see it to be so; and,
dying there, sooner or later, you will sink lower than the grave, into a
place that burns with fire and brimstone. Be content, good neighbors,
and go along with me."

OBST. "What!" said Obstinate, "and leave our friends and comforts behind
us?"

CHRIS. "Yes," said Christian (for that was his name), "because that all
which you forsake is not worthy to be compared with a little of that I
am seeking to enjoy; and if you would go along with me, and hold it, you
shall fare as I myself; for there, where I go, is enough and to spare.
Come away, and prove my words."

OBST. What are the things you seek, since you leave all the world to
find them?

CHRIS. I seek a place that can never be destroyed, one that is pure, and
that fadeth not away, and it is laid up in heaven, and safe there, to be
given, at the time appointed, to them that seek it with all their heart.
Read it so, if you will, in my book.

OBST. "Tush!" said Obstinate, "away with your book; will you go back
with us or no?"

CHRIS. "No, not I," said the other, "because I have put my hand to the
plough."

[Sidenote: DISCOURSES WITH PLIABLE]

OBST. Come, then, neighbor Pliable, let us turn again, and go home
without him: there is a company of these crazy-headed fools, that, when
they take a fancy by the end, are wiser in their own eyes than seven men
that can render a reason.

PLI. Then said Pliable, "Don't revile; if what the good Christian says
is true, the things he looks after are better than ours; my heart
inclines to go with my neighbor."

OBST. What! more fools still? Be ruled by me, and go back; who knows
whither such a brain-sick fellow will lead you? Go back, go back, and be
wise.

CHRIS. Nay, but do thou come with thy neighbor Pliable; there are such
things to be had which I spoke of, and many more glories besides. If you
believe not me, read here in this book; and for the truth of what is
told therein, behold, all is made by the blood of Him that made it.

PLI. "Well, neighbor Obstinate," said Pliable, "I begin to come to a
point; I intend to go along with this good man, and to cast in my lot
with him. But, my good companion, do you know the way to this desired
place?"

CHRIS. I am directed by a man, whose name is Evangelist, to speed me to
a little gate that is before us, where we shall receive directions about
the way.

PLI. Come, then, good neighbor, let us be going. Then they went both
together.

"And I will go back to my place," said Obstinate; "I will be no
companion of such misled, fantastical fellows."

Now, I saw in my dream, that, when Obstinate was gone back, Christian
and Pliable went talking over the plain; and thus they began:

CHRIS. Come, neighbor Pliable, how do you do? I am glad you are
persuaded to go along with me. Had even Obstinate himself but felt what
I have felt of the powers and terrors of what is yet unseen, he would
not thus lightly have given us the back.

PLI. Come, neighbor Christian, since there are none but us two here,
tell me now further what the things are, and how to be enjoyed, whither
we are going.

CHRIS. I can better understand them with my mind than speak of them with
my tongue; but yet, since you are desirous to know, I will read of them
in my book.

PLI. And do you think that the words of your book are certainly true?

CHRIS. Yes, verily; for it was made by Him that cannot lie.

PLI. Well said; what things are they?

CHRIS. There is an endless kingdom to be enjoyed, and everlasting life
to be given us, that we may live in that kingdom forever.

PLI. Well said; and what else?

CHRIS. There are crowns of glory to be given us, and garments that will
make us shine like the sun in the sky.

PLI. This is very pleasant; and what else?

CHRIS. There shall be no more crying, nor sorrow; for he that is owner
of the place will wipe all tears from our eyes.

PLI. And what company shall we have there?

CHRIS. There we shall be with seraphims and cherubims, creatures that
shall dazzle your eyes to look on them. There also you shall meet with
thousands and ten thousands that have gone before us to that place; none
of them are hurtful, but all loving and holy; every one walking in the
sight of God, and standing in His presence with acceptance for ever. In
a word, there we shall see the elders with their golden crowns; there we
shall see the holy women with their golden harps; there we shall see
men that by the world were cut in pieces, burnt in flames, eaten of
beasts, drowned in the seas, for the love they bear to the Lord of the
place, all well, and clothed with everlasting life as with a garment.

PLI. The hearing of this is enough to delight one's heart. But are these
things to be enjoyed? How shall we get to be sharers thereof?

CHRIS. The Lord, the Governor of the country, hath written that in this
book; the substance of which is, If we be truly willing to have it, He
will bestow it upon us freely.

PLI. Well, my good companion, glad am I to hear of these things; come
on, let us mend our pace.

CHRIS. I cannot go so fast as I would, by reason of this burden that is
on my back.

[Sidenote: THE SLOUGH OF DESPOND]

Now, I saw in my dream, that just as they had ended this talk, they drew
nigh to a very miry slough or swamp, that was in the midst of the plain;
and they, being heedless, did both fall suddenly into the bog. The name
of the slough was Despond. Here, therefore, they wallowed for a time,
being grievously bedaubed with the dirt; and Christian, because of the
burden that was on his back, began to sink into the mire.

PLI. Then said Pliable, "Ah! neighbor Christian where are you now?"

CHRIS. "Truly," said Christian, "I do not know."

PLI. At this Pliable began to be offended, and angrily said to his
fellow, "Is this the happiness you have told me all this while of? If we
have such ill speed at our first setting out, what may we expect between
this and our journey's end? May I get out again with my life, you shall
possess the brave country alone for me." And with that, he gave a
desperate struggle or two, and got out of the mire on that side of the
swamp which was next to his own house: so away he went, and Christian
saw him no more.

Wherefore Christian was left to tumble in the Slough of Despond alone;
but still he tried to struggle to that side of the slough which was
farthest from his own house, and next to the wicket-gate; the which, he
did but could not get out because of the burden that was upon his back;
but I beheld in my dream, that a man came to him whose name was Help,
and asked him, What he did there?

CHRIS. "Sir," said Christian, "I was bid to go this way by a man called
Evangelist, who directed me also to yonder gate, that I might escape the
wrath to come; and as I was going there I fell in here."

HELP. But why did you not look for the steps?

CHRIS. Fear followed me so hard, that I fled the next way and fell in.

HELP. Then said he, "Give me thine hand." So he gave him his hand, and
he drew him out, and set him upon solid ground, and bade him go on his
way.

Then I stepped to him that plucked him out, and said, "Sir, wherefore,
since over this place is the way from the City of Destruction to yonder
gate, is it that this place is not mended, that poor travelers might go
thither with more safety?" And he said unto me, "This miry slough is
such a place as cannot be mended; it is the hollow whither the scum and
filth that go with the feeling of sin, do continually run, and therefore
it is called the Slough of Despond; for still, as the sinner is awakened
by his lost condition, there arise in his soul many fears, and doubts,
and discouraging alarms, which all of them get together and settle in
this place; and this is the reason of the badness of the ground.

"It is not the pleasure of the King that this place should remain so
bad. His laborers also have, by the direction of His Majesty's
surveyors, been for about these sixteen hundred years employed about
this patch of ground, if perhaps it might have been mended; yea, and to
my knowledge," said he, "here have been swallowed up at least twenty
thousand cart-loads, yea, millions, of wholesome teachings, that have at
all seasons been brought from all places of the King's dominions (and
they that can tell say they are the best materials to make good ground
of the place), if so be it might have been mended; but it is the Slough
of Despond still, and so will be when they have done what they can.

"True, there are, by the direction of the Lawgiver, certain good and
substantial steps, placed even through the very midst of this slough;
but at such time as this place doth much spew out its filth, as it doth
against change of weather, these steps are hardly seen; or, if they be,
men, through the dizziness of their heads, step aside, and then they are
bemired to purpose, notwithstanding the steps be there; but the ground
is good when they are got in at the gate."

Now, I saw in my dream, that by this time Pliable was got home to his
house. So his neighbors came to visit him; and some of them called him
wise man for coming back, and some called him a fool for risking himself
with Christian; others again did mock at his cowardliness, saying
"Surely since you began to venture, I would not have been so base to
have given out for a few difficulties;" so Pliable sat sneaking among
them. But at last he got more confidence; and then they all turned their
tales, and began to abuse poor Christian behind his back. And thus much
concerning Pliable.

[Sidenote: WORLDLY WISEMAN'S COUNSEL]

Now, as Christian was walking solitary by himself, he espied one afar
off come crossing over the field to meet him; and their hap was to meet
just as they were crossing the way of each other. The gentleman's name
that met him was Mr. Worldly Wiseman: he dwelt in the town of Carnal
Policy, a very great town, and also hard by from whence Christian came.
This man, then, meeting with Christian, and having heard about
him--(for Christian's setting forth from the City of Destruction was
much noised abroad, not only in the town where he dwelt, but also it
began to be the town-talk in some other places)--Mr. Worldly Wiseman
therefore, having some guess of him, by beholding his laborious going,
by noticing his sighs and groans, and the like, began thus to enter into
some talk with Christian:

WORLD. How now, good fellow! whither away after this burdened manner?

CHRIS. A burdened manner indeed, as ever I think poor creature had! And
whereas you ask me, Whither away? I tell you, sir, I am going to yonder
wicket-gate before me; for there, as I am informed, I shall be put into
a way to be rid of my heavy burden.

WORLD. Hast thou a wife and children?

CHRIS. Yes; but I am so laden with this burden, that I cannot take that
pleasure in them as formerly; methinks I am as if I had none.

WORLD. Wilt thou hearken to me, if I give thee counsel?

CHRIS. If it be _good_, I will; for I stand in need of good counsel.

WORLD. I would advise thee, then, that thou with all speed get thyself
rid of thy burden; for thou wilt never be settled in thy mind till then;
nor canst thou enjoy the blessings which God hath bestowed upon thee
till then.

CHRIS. That is that which I seek for, even to be rid of this heavy
burden; but get it off myself I cannot; nor is there any man in our
country that can take it off my shoulders; therefore am I going this
way, as I told you, that I may be rid of my burden.

WORLD. Who bid thee go this way to be rid of thy burden?

CHRIS. A man that appeared to me to be a very great and honorable
person; his name, as I remember, is Evangelist.

WORLD. I curse him for his counsel! there is not a more dangerous and
troublesome way in the world than is that into which he hath directed
thee; and that thou shalt find, if thou wilt be ruled by his advice.
Thou hast met with something, as I perceive, already; for I see the dirt
of the Slough of Despond is upon thee; but that slough is the beginning
of the sorrows that do attend those that go on in that way. Hear me: I
am older than thou: thou art like to meet with, in the way which thou
goest, wearisomeness, painfulness, hunger, perils, nakedness, sword,
lions, dragons, darkness, and, in a word, death, and what not. These
things are certainly true, having been proved by the words of many
people. And why should a man so carelessly cast away himself, by giving
heed to a stranger?

CHRIS. Why, sir, this burden upon my back is more terrible to me than
all these things which you have mentioned; nay, methinks I care not what
I meet with in the way, if so be I can also meet with deliverance from
my burden.

WORLD. How camest thou by the burden at first?

CHRIS. By reading this book in my hand.

WORLD. I thought so. And it has happened unto thee as unto other weak
men, who, meddling with things too high for them, do suddenly fall into
thy crazy thoughts, which thoughts do not only unman men, as thine I
perceive have done thee, but they run them upon desperate efforts to
obtain they know not what.

CHRIS. I know what I would obtain; it is ease for my heavy burden.

WORLD. But why wilt thou seek for ease this way, seeing so many dangers
attend it? Especially since (hadst thou but patience to hear me,) I
could direct thee to the getting of what thou desirest, without the
dangers that thou in this way wilt run thyself into. Yea, and the remedy
is at hand. Besides, I will add that, instead of those dangers, thou
shalt meet with much safety, friendship, and content.

CHRIS. Sir, I pray, open this secret to me.

WORLD. Why, in yonder village (the village is named Morality), there
dwells a gentleman whose name is Legality, a very wise man, and a man of
very good name, that has skill to help men off with such burdens as
thine is from their shoulders; yea, to my knowledge he hath done a great
deal of good this way; aye, and besides, he hath skill to cure those
that are somewhat crazed in their wits with their burdens. To him, as I
said, thou mayest go, and be helped presently. His house is not quite a
mile from this place; and if he should not be at home himself, he hath a
pretty young man as his son, whose name is Civility, that can do it (to
speak on) as well as the old gentleman himself. There, I say, thou
mayest be eased of thy burden; and if thou art not minded to go back to
thy former habitation (as indeed I would not wish thee), thou mayest
send for thy wife and children to thee in this village, where there are
houses now standing empty, one of which thou mayest have at a reasonable
rate; provision is there also cheap and good; and that which will make
thy life the more happy is, to be sure there thou shalt live by honest
neighbors, in credit and good fashion.

Now was Christian somewhat at a stand; but presently he concluded, "If
this be true which this gentleman hath said, my wisest course is to take
his advice;" and with that, he thus further spake:

CHRIS. Sir, which is my way to this honest man's house?

WORLD. Do you see yonder high hill?

CHRIS. Yes, very well.

WORLD. By that hill you must go, and the first house you come at is his.

[Sidenote: EVANGELIST AND CHRISTIAN.]

So Christian turned out of his way to go to Mr. Legality's house for
help; but, behold, when he was got now hard by the hill, it seemed so
high, and also that side of it that was next the wayside did hang so
much over, that Christian was afraid to venture farther, lest the hill
should fall on his head; wherefore there he stood still, and knew not
what to do. Also his burden now seemed heavier to him than while he was
in his way. There came also flashes of fire out of the hill, that made
Christian afraid that he should be burnt: here, therefore, he sweat and
did quake for fear. And now he began to be sorry that he had taken Mr.
Worldly Wiseman's counsel; and with that, he saw Evangelist coming to
meet him, at the sight also of whom he began to blush for shame. So
Evangelist drew nearer and nearer; and, coming up to him, he looked upon
him with a severe and dreadful countenance, and thus began to reason
with Christian:

EVAN. "What dost thou here, Christian?" said he; at which words
Christian knew not what to answer; wherefore at present he stood
speechless before him. Then said Evangelist further, "Art thou not the
man that I found crying, without the walls of the City of Destruction?"

CHRIS. Yes, dear sir, I am the man.

EVAN. Did not I direct thee the way to the little wicket-gate?

CHRIS. "Yes, dear sir," said Christian.

EVAN. How is it, then, that thou art so quickly turned aside? For thou
art now out of the way.

CHRIS. I met with a gentleman as soon as I had got over the Slough of
Despond, who persuaded me that I might, in the village before me, find a
man that could take off my burden.

EVAN. What was he?

CHRIS. He looked like a gentleman, and talked much to me, and got me at
last to yield: so I came hither, but when I beheld this hill, and how it
hangs over the way, I suddenly made a stand, lest it should fall on my
head.

EVAN. What said that gentleman to you?

CHRIS. Why, he asked me whither I was going, and I told him.

EVAN. And what said he then?

CHRIS. He asked me if I had a family, and I told him. But, said I, I am
so laden with the burden that is on my back, that I cannot take pleasure
in them as formerly.

EVAN. And what said he then?

CHRIS. He bid me with speed get rid of my burden; and I told him it was
ease that I sought. And, said I, I am therefore going to yonder gate to
receive further direction how I may get to the place of deliverance. So
he said that he would show me a better way, and short, not so hard as
the way, sir, that you sent me in; which way, said he, will direct you
to a gentleman's house that hath skill to take off these burdens. So I
believed him, and turned out of that way into this, if haply I might
soon be eased of my burden. But, when I came to this place, and beheld
things as they are, I stopped for fear (as I said) of danger; but I now
know not what to do.

EVAN. Then said Evangelist, "Stand still a little, that I may show thee
the words of God." So he stood trembling. Then said Evangelist, "God
says in his book, 'See that ye refuse not him that speaketh; for if they
escaped not who refused him that spake on earth, much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from Him that speaketh from heaven.' He said,
moreover, 'Now, the righteous man shall live by faith in God, but if any
man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.'" He also did
thus apply them: "Thou art the man that art running into misery; thou
hast begun to reject the counsel of the Most High, and to draw back thy
foot from the way of peace, even almost to the danger of thy everlasting
ruin."

Then Christian fell down at his feet as dead, crying, "Woe is me, for I
am undone!" At the sight of which Evangelist caught him by the right
hand, saying, "All manner of sin and evil words shall be forgiven unto
men." "Be not faithless, but believing." Then did Christian again a
little revive, and stood up trembling, as at first, before Evangelist.

Then Evangelist proceeded, saying, "Give more earnest heed to the things
that I shall tell thee of. I will now show thee who it was that led thee
astray, and who it was also to whom he sent thee. That man that met thee
is one Worldly Wiseman; and rightly is he so called; partly because he
seeks only for the things of this world (therefore he always goes to the
town of Morality to church), and partly because he loveth that way best,
for it saveth him from the Cross; and because he is of this evil
temper, therefore he seeketh to turn you from my way though it is the
right way.

"He to whom thou wast sent for ease, being by name Legality, is not able
to set thee free from thy burden. No man was as yet ever rid of his
burden by him; no, nor ever is like to be: ye cannot be set right by any
such plan. Therefore, Mr. Worldly Wiseman is an enemy, and Mr. Legality
is a cheat; and, for his son Civility, notwithstanding his simpering
looks, he is but a fraud and cannot help thee. Believe me, there is
nothing in all this noise that thou hast heard of these wicked men, but
a design to rob thee of thy salvation, by turning thee from the way in
which I had set thee." After this, Evangelist called aloud to the
heavens for proof of what he had said; and with that there came words
and fire out of the mountain under which poor Christian stood, which
made the hair of his flesh stand up. The words were thus spoken: "As
many as are of the works of the law are under the curse."

Now, Christian looked for nothing but death, and began to cry out
lamentably; even cursing the time in which he met with Mr. Worldly
Wiseman; still calling himself a thousand fools for listening to his
counsel. He also was greatly ashamed to think that this gentleman's
arguments should have the power with him so far as to cause him to
forsake the right way. This done, he spoke again to Evangelist, in words
and sense as follows:

CHRIS. Sir, what think you? Is there any hope? May I now go back, and go
up to the wicket-gate? Shall I not be abandoned for this, and sent back
from thence ashamed? I am sorry I have hearkened to this man's counsel;
but may my sins be forgiven?

EVAN. Then said Evangelist to him, "Thy sin is very great, for by it
thou hast committed two evils; thou hast forsaken the way that is good,
to tread in forbidden paths. Yet will the man at the gate receive thee,
for he has good will for men; only," said he, "take heed that thou turn
not aside again, lest thou perish from the way, when his anger is
kindled but a little."




CHAPTER II.


Then did Christian begin to go back to the right road; and Evangelist,
after he had kissed him, gave him one smile, and bid him God speed; so
he went on with haste, neither spake he to any man by the way; nor, if
any asked him, would he give them an answer. He went like one that was
all the while treading on forbidden ground, and could by no means think
himself safe, till again he was got in the way which he had left to
follow Mr. Worldly Wiseman's counsel: so after a time, Christian got up
to the gate. Now, over the gate there was written, "Knock, and it shall
be opened unto you."

He knocked, therefore, more than once or twice, saying:

  "May I now enter here? Will He within
  Open to sorry me, though I have been
  An undeserving rebel? Then shall I
  Not fail to sing His lasting praise on high."

[Sidenote: GOODWILL OPENS THE GATE]

At last there came a grave person to the gate named Goodwill, who asked
who was there, and whence he came, and what he would have?

CHRIS. Here is a poor burdened sinner. I come from the City of
Destruction, but am going to Mount Zion, that I may be set free from the
wrath to come; I would therefore, sir, since I am told that by this
gate is the way thither, know, if you are willing to let me in.

GOOD. "I am willing with all my heart," said he; and, with that, he
opened the gate.

So, when Christian was stepping in, the other gave him a pull. Then said
Christian, "What means that?" The other told him, "A little distance
from this gate there is erected a strong castle, of which Beelzebub, the
Evil One, is the captain; from whence both he and they that are with him
shoot arrows at those that come up to this gate, if haply they may die
before they can enter in." Then said Christian, "I rejoice and tremble."
So when he was got in, the man of the gate asked him who directed him
thither.

CHRIS. Evangelist bid me come hither and knock, as I did; and he said
that you, sir, would tell me what I must do.

GOOD. An open door is set before thee, and no man can shut it.

CHRIS. Now I begin to reap the benefit of the trouble which I have
taken.

GOOD. But how is it that you came alone?

CHRIS. Because none of my neighbors saw their danger, as I saw mine.

GOOD. Did any of them know you were coming?

CHRIS. Yes, my wife and children saw me at the first, and called after
me to turn again; also some of my neighbors stood crying and calling
after me to return; but I put my fingers in my ears, and so came on my
way.

GOOD. But did none of them follow you, to persuade you to go back?

CHRIS. Yes, both Obstinate and Pliable: but, when they saw that they
could not prevail, Obstinate went railing back, but Pliable came with me
a little way.

GOOD. But why did he not come through?

CHRIS. We indeed came both together until we came to the Slough of
Despond, into the which we also suddenly fell. And then was my neighbor
Pliable discouraged, and would not venture farther. Wherefore, getting
out again on the side next his own house, he told me I should win the
brave country alone for him: so he went his way, and I came mine; he
after Obstinate, and I to this gate.

GOOD. Then said Goodwill, "Alas, poor man! is the heavenly glory of so
little worth with him, that he counteth it not worth running the risk of
a few difficulties to obtain it?"

CHRIS. "Truly," said Christian, "I have said the truth of Pliable; and
if I should also say the truth of myself, it will appear there is not
betterment betwixt him and myself. 'Tis true, he went on back to his own
house; but I also turned aside to go into the way of death, being
persuaded thereto by the words of one Mr. Worldly Wiseman."

GOOD. Oh! did he light upon you? What! he would have had you seek for
ease at the hands of Mr. Legality! They are both of them a very cheat.
But did you take his counsel?

CHRIS. Yes, as far as I durst. I went to find out Mr. Legality, until I
thought that the mountain that stands by his house would have fallen
upon my head: wherefore there I was forced to stop.

GOOD. That mountain has been the death of many, and will be the death of
many more; it is well you escaped being by it dashed in pieces.

CHRIS. Why, truly, I do not know what had become of me there, had not
Evangelist happily met me again as I was musing in the midst of my
dumps; but it was God's mercy that he came to me again, for else I had
never come hither. But now I am come, such a one as I am, more fit
indeed for death by that mountain, than thus to stand talking with my
Lord. But, oh! what a favor this is to me, that yet I am to enter here!

GOOD. We make no objections against any, notwithstanding all that they
have done before they come hither; they in no wise are cast out. And
therefore, good Christian, come a little with me, and I will teach thee
about the way thou must go. Look before thee: dost thou see this narrow
way? That is the way thou must go. It was cast up by the men of old,
prophets, Christ and His apostles, and it is as straight as a rule can
make it: this is the way thou must go.

CHRIS. "But," said Christian, "are there no turnings nor windings by
which a stranger may lose his way?"

GOOD. "Yes, there are many ways butt down upon this, and they are
crooked and wide; but thus thou mayest distinguish the right from the
wrong, the right only being straight and narrow."

Then I saw in my dream, that Christian asked him further if he could not
help him off with his burden that was upon his back. For as yet he had
not got rid thereof, nor could he by any means get it off without help.

He told him, "As to thy burden, be content to bear it until thou comest
to the place of deliverance; for there it will fall from thy back of
itself."

Then Christian began to gird up his loins, and to turn again to his
journey.

So the other told him that as soon as he was gone some distance from the
gate, he would come at the house of the Interpreter, at whose door he
should knock, and he would show him excellent things. Then Christian
took his leave of his friend, and he again bid him God speed.

[Sidenote: House of the Interpreter]

Then he went on till he came to the house of the Interpreter, where he
knocked over and over. At last one came to the door, and asked who was
there.

CHRIS. Sir, here is a traveler who was bid by a friend of the good man
of this house to call here for his benefit; I would therefore speak with
the master of the house.

So he called for the master of the house, who, after a little time, came
to Christian, and asked him what he would have.

CHRIS. "Sir," said Christian, "I am a man that am come from the City of
Destruction, and am going to Mount Zion; and I was told by the man that
stands at the gate at the head of this way, that, if I called here, you
would show me excellent things, such as would be helpful to me on my
journey."

INTER. Then said the Interpreter, "Come in; I will show thee that which
will be profitable to thee." So he commanded his man to light the
candle, and bid Christian follow him; so he led him into a private room,
and bid his man open a door; the which when he had done, Christian saw
the picture of a very grave person hung up against the wall; and this
was the fashion of it: it had eyes lifted up to heaven, the best of
books in its hand, the law of truth was written upon its lips, the world
was behind its back; it stood as if it pleaded with men, and a crown of
gold did hang over its head.

CHRIS. Then said Christian, "What meaneth this?"

INTER. The man whose picture this is, is one of a thousand. He can say,
in the words of the apostle Paul, "Though ye have ten thousand teachers
in Christ, yet have you not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have
been your father through the Gospel." And whereas thou seest him with
his eyes lifted up to heaven, the best of books in his hand, and the law
of truth writ on his lips, it is to show thee that his work is to know
and unfold dark things to sinners; even as also thou seest him stand as
if he pleaded with men. And whereas thou seest the world is cast behind
him, and that a crown hangs over his head; that is to show thee that,
slighting and despising the things that are in the world, for the love
that he hath to his Master's service, he is sure in the world that comes
next to have glory for his reward. Now, said the Interpreter, I have
showed thee this picture first, because the man whose picture this is,
is the only man whom the Lord of the place whither thou art going hath
chosen to be thy guide, in all difficult places thou mayest meet with in
thy way; wherefore take good heed to what I have showed thee, and bear
well in thy mind what thou hast seen, lest in thy journey thou meet with
some that pretend to lead thee right, but their way goes down to death.

Then he took him by the hand, and led him into a very large parlor, that
was full of dust, because never swept; the which after he had looked at
it a little while, the Interpreter called for a man to sweep. Now, when
he began to sweep, the dust began so abundantly to fly about that
Christian had almost therewith been choked. Then said the Interpreter to
a girl that stood by, "Bring hither water, and sprinkle the room;" the
which when she had done, it was swept and cleansed with ease.

CHRIS. Then said Christian, "What means this?"

INTER. The Interpreter answered, "This parlor is the heart of a man
that was never made pure by the sweet grace of the Gospel. The dust is
his sin, and inward evils that have defiled the whole man. He that began
to sweep at first is the law; but she that brought water, and did
sprinkle it, is the Gospel. Now, whereas thou sawest that, as soon as
the first began to sweep, the dust did fly so about that the room could
not by him be cleansed, but that thou wast almost choked therewith; this
is to show thee, that the law, instead of cleansing the heart (by its
working) from sin, doth revive, put strength into, and increase it in
the soul, even as it doth discover and forbid it, for it doth not give
power to overcome. Again, as thou sawest the girl sprinkle the room with
water, upon which it was cleansed with ease; this is to show thee, that
when the Gospel comes, in the sweet and gracious power thereof, to the
heart, then, I say, even as thou sawest the maiden lay the dust by
sprinkling the floor with water, so is sin vanquished and subdued, and
the soul made clean through the faith of it, and, consequently, fit for
the King of Glory to dwell in."

I saw moreover in my dream, that the Interpreter took him by the hand,
and led him into a little room where sat two little children, each one
in his own chair. The name of the eldest was Passion, and the name of
the other Patience. Passion seemed to be much discontented, but Patience
was very quiet. The Christian asked, "What is the reason of the
discontent of Passion?" The Interpreter answered, "The governor of them
would have him stay for his best things till the beginning of next year;
but he will have all now. Patience is willing to wait."

Then I saw that one came to Passion, and brought him a bag of treasure,
and poured it down at his feet; the which he took up, and rejoiced
therein, and withal laughed Patience to scorn. But I beheld but awhile,
and he had wasted all away, and had nothing left him but rags.

CHRIS. Then said Christian to the Interpreter, "Explain this matter more
fully to me."

INTER. So he said, "These two lads are pictures: Passion, of the men of
this world; and Patience, of the men of that which is to come: for, as
here thou seest, Passion will have all now, this year, that is to say in
this world; so are the men of this world; they must have all their good
things now; they cannot stay till the next year, that is, until the next
world, for their portion of good. That proverb, 'A bird in the hand is
worth two in the bush,' is of more weight with them than all the words
in the Bible of the good of the world to come. But, as thou sawest that
he had quickly wasted all away, and had presently left him nothing but
rags, so will it be with all such men at the end of this world."

CHRIS. Then said Christian, "Now I see that Patience has the best
wisdom, and that upon many accounts. 1. Because he stays for the best
things. 2. And also because he will have the glory of his when the
other has nothing but rags."

INTER. Nay, you may add another; this, the glory of the next world will
never wear out; but these are suddenly gone. Therefore Passion had not
so much reason to laugh at Patience because he had his good things at
first, as Patience will have to laugh at Passion, because he had his
best things last; for first must give place to last, because last must
have his time to come; but last gives place to nothing, for there is not
another to succeed: he, therefore, that hath his portion first, must
needs have a time to spend it; but he that hath his portion last, must
have it lastingly.

CHRIS. Then I see it is not best to covet things that are now, but to
wait for things to come.

INTER. You say truth; "for the things that are seen soon pass away, but
the things that are not seen endure forever."

Then I saw in my dream, that the Interpreter took Christian by the hand
and led him into a place where was a fire burning against a wall, and
one standing by it, always casting much water upon it, to quench it; yet
did the fire burn higher and hotter.

CHRIS. Then said Christian, "What means this?"

INTER. The Interpreter answered, "This fire is the work of God that is
wrought in the heart: he that casts water upon it to extinguish and put
it out, is the devil; but, in that thou seest the fire notwithstanding
burn higher and hotter, thou shalt also see the reason of that." So
then he led him about to the other side of the wall, where he saw a man
with a vessel of oil in his hand, of the which he did also continually
cast, but secretly, into the fire.

CHRIS. Then said Christian, "What means this?"

INTER. The Interpreter answered, "This is Christ, who continually, with
the oil of His grace, helps the work already begun in the heart; by the
means of which notwithstanding what the devil can do, the souls of His
people prove gracious still. And in that thou sawest that the man stood
behind the wall to keep up the fire; this is to teach thee, that it is
hard for the tempted to see how this work of grace is kept alive in the
soul."

I saw also that the Interpreter took him again by the hand, and led him
into a pleasant place, where was built a stately palace, beautiful to
behold, at the sight of which Christian was greatly delighted. He saw
also upon the top thereof certain persons walking, who were clothed all
in gold.

Then said Christian, "May we go in thither?"

Then the Interpreter took him and led him up toward the door of the
palace; and behold, at the door stood a great company of men, as
desirous to go in, but durst not. There also sat a man at a little
distance from the door, at a table-side, with a book and his ink-horn
before him, to take the name of him that should enter therein; he saw
also that in the doorway stood many men in armor to keep it, being
resolved to do to the men that would enter what hurt and mischief they
could. Now was Christian somewhat in amaze. At last, when every man
started back for fear of the armed men, Christian saw a man of a very
stout countenance come up to the man that sat there to write, saying,
"Set down my name, sir:" the which when he had done, he saw the man draw
his sword, and put a helmet upon his head, and rush toward the door upon
the armed men, who laid upon him with deadly force; but the man, not at
all discouraged, fell to cutting and hacking most fiercely. So that,
after he had received and given many wounds to those that attempted to
keep him out, he cut his way through them all and pressed forward into
the palace; at which there was a pleasant voice heard from those that
were within, even of those that walked upon the top of the palace,
saying:

  "Come in, come in;
  Eternal glory thou shalt win."

So he went in, and was clothed in such garments as they. Then Christian
smiled, and said, "I think verily I know the meaning of this."

"Now," said Christian, "let me go hence." "Nay, stay," said the
Interpreter, "until I have showed thee a little more; and after that
thou shalt go on thy way." So he took him by the hand again, and led him
into a very dark room, where there sat a man in an iron cage.

Now, the man, to look on, seemed very sad. He sat with his eyes looking
down to the ground, his hands folded together; and he sighed as if he
would break his heart. Then said Christian, "What means this?" At which
the Interpreter bid him talk with the man.

Then said Christian to the man, "What art thou?" The man answered, "I am
what I was not once."

CHRIS. What wast thou once?

MAN. The man said, "I was once a fair and flourishing Christian, both in
mine own eyes, and also in the eyes of others; I was once, as I thought,
fair for the Celestial City, and had even joy at the thoughts that I
should get thither."

CHRIS. Well, but what art thou now?

MAN. I am now a man of despair, and am shut up in it, as in this iron
cage. I cannot get out. Oh, _now_ I cannot!

CHRIS. But how camest thou in this condition?

MAN. I left off to watch and be sober. I gave free reins to sin; I
sinned against the light of the Word and the goodness of God; I have
grieved the Spirit, and He is gone; I tempted the devil, and he has come
to me; I have provoked God to anger, and He has left me; I have so
hardened my heart that I _cannot_ turn.

Then said Christian to the Interpreter, "But are there no hopes for such
a man as this?" "Ask him," said the Interpreter.

CHRIS. Then said Christian, "Is there no hope, but you must be kept in
the iron cage of despair?"

MAN. No, none at all.

CHRIS. Why? the Son of the Blessed is very pitiful.

MAN. I have crucified Him to myself afresh. I have despised His person.
I have despised His holiness; I have counted His blood an unholy thing;
I have shown contempt to the Spirit of mercy. Therefore I have shut
myself out of all the promises of God, and there now remains to me
nothing but threatenings, dreadful threatenings, fearful threatenings of
certain judgment and fiery anger, which shall devour me as an enemy.

CHRIS. For what did you bring yourself into this condition?

MAN. For the desires, pleasures, and gains of this world; in the
enjoyment of which I did then promise myself much delight; but now every
one of those things also bite me, and gnaw me, like a burning worm.

CHRIS. But canst thou not now turn again to God?

MAN. God no longer invites me to come to Him. His Word gives me no
encouragement to believe; yea, Himself hath shut me up in this iron
cage; nor can all the men in the world let me out. O eternity! eternity!
how shall I grapple with the misery that I must meet with in eternity?

INTER. Then said the Interpreter to Christian, "Let this man's misery be
remembered by thee, and be an everlasting caution to thee."

[Sidenote: THE DREAM OF THE JUDGMENT]

CHRIS. "Well," said Christian, "this is fearful! God help me to watch
and be sober, and to pray, that I may shun the cause of this man's
misery. Sir, is it not time for me to go on my way now?"

INTER. Tarry till I show thee one thing more, and then thou shalt go on
thy way.

So he took Christian by the hand again, and led him into a chamber,
where there was one rising out of bed; and, as he put on his clothing,
he shook and trembled. Then said Christian, "Why doth this man thus
tremble?" The Interpreter then bid him tell to Christian the reason of
his so doing. So he began, and said, "This night, as I was in my sleep,
I dreamed, and behold, the heavens grew exceeding black; also it
thundered and lightened in most fearful manner, that it put me into an
agony. So I looked up in my dream, and saw the clouds rack at an unusual
rate; upon which I heard a great sound of a trumpet, and saw also a Man
sitting upon a cloud, attended with the thousands of heaven; they were
all in flaming fire; also the heavens were in a burning flame. I heard
then a great voice saying, 'Arise, ye dead, and come to judgment.' And
with that the rocks rent, the graves opened, and the dead that were
therein came forth: some of them were exceeding glad, and looked upward;
and some thought to hide themselves under the mountains. Then I saw the
Man that sat upon the cloud open the book and bid the world draw near.
Yet there was, by reason of a fierce flame that issued out and came
before Him, a certain distance betwixt Him and them, as betwixt the
judge and the prisoners at the bar. I heard it also called out to them
that stood around on the Man that sat on the cloud, 'Gather together the
tares, the chaff, and stubble, and cast them into the burning lake. And,
with that, the bottomless pit opened, just whereabout I stood; out of
the mouth of which there came, in an abundant manner, smoke and coals of
fire, with hideous noises. It was also said to the same persons, 'Gather
my wheat into the garner.' And, with that, I saw many catched up and
carried away into the clouds; but I was left behind. I also sought to
hide myself, but I could not; for the Man that sat upon the cloud still
kept His eye upon me; my sins also came into my mind, and my conscience
did accuse me on every side. Upon this I awakened from my sleep."

CHRIS. But what was it that made you so afraid of this sight?

MAN. Why I thought that the day of judgment was come, and that I was not
ready for it. But this affrighted me most, that the angels gathered up
several, and left me behind; also the pit of hell opened her mouth just
where I stood. My conscience, too, troubled me; and, as I thought, the
judge had always His eye upon me, showing anger in His countenance.

INTER. Then said the Interpreter to Christian, "Hast thou considered
these things?"

CHRIS. Yes; and they put me in hope and fear.

INTER. Well, keep all things so in thy mind, that they may be as a goad
in thy sides, to prick thee forward in the way thou must go.

Then Christian began to gird up his loins, and to address himself to his
journey. Then said the Interpreter, "The Comforter be always with thee,
good Christian, to guide thee into the way that leads to the city."

So Christian went on his way, saying:

  "Here have I seen things rare and profitable;
  Things pleasant, dreadful; things to make me stable
  In what I have begun to take in hand:
  Then let me think on them, and understand
  Wherefore they showed me where; and let me be
  Thankful, O good Interpreter, to thee."




CHAPTER III.


Now, I saw in my dream that the highway up which Christian was to go was
fenced on either side with a wall that was called Salvation. Up this
way, therefore, did burdened Christian run, but not without great
difficulty, because of the load on his back.

He ran thus till he came to a place somewhat ascending; and upon that
place stood a Cross, and a little below, in the bottom, a tomb. So I saw
in my dream, that just as Christian came up with the cross, his burden
loosed from off his shoulders, and fell from off his back, and began to
tumble, and so continued to do till it came to the mouth of the tomb,
where it fell in, and I saw it no more.

[Illustration: Christian Before the Cross.
                                   Page 50]

Then was Christian glad and lightsome, and said with a merry heart, "He
hath given me rest by His sorrow, and life by His death." Then he stood
still awhile to look and wonder; for it was very surprising to him that
the sight of the cross should thus ease him of his burden. He looked,
therefore, and looked again, even till the springs that were in his head
sent the water down his cheeks. Now, as he stood looking and weeping,
behold, three Shining Ones came to him, and saluted him with "Peace be
to thee." So the first said to him, "Thy sins be forgiven thee;" the
second stripped him of his rags, and clothed him with a change of
garments; the third also set a mark on his forehead, and gave him a roll
with a seal upon it, which he bade him look on as he ran, and that he
should give it in at the heavenly gate; so they went their way. Then
Christian gave three leaps for joy, and went on, singing:

  "Thus far did I come laden with my sin;
  Nor could aught ease the grief that I was in,
  Till I came hither; what a place is this!
  Must here be the beginning of my bliss?
  Must here the burden fall from off my back?
  Must here the strings that bound it to me crack?
  Blest cross! blest sepulchre! blest rather be
  The Man that was there put to shame for me!"

[Sidenote: SIMPLE, SLOTH, PRESUMPTION]

I saw then in my dream that he went on thus, even until he came to the
bottom, where he saw, a little out of the way, three men fast asleep,
with fetters upon their heels. The name of one was Simple, of another
Sloth, and of the third Presumption.

Christian, then, seeing them lie in this case, went to them, if perhaps
he might awake them, and cried, "You are like them that sleep on the top
of a mast; for the deep sea is under you, a gulf that hath no bottom:
awake, therefore, and come away; be willing, also, and I will help you
off with your irons." He also told them, "If he that goeth about like a
roaring lion comes by, you will certainly become a prey to his teeth."
With that they looked upon him, and began to reply in this sort: Simple
said, "I see no danger." Sloth said, "Yet a little more sleep." And
Presumption said, "Every tub must stand upon his own bottom." And so
they lay down to sleep again, and Christian went on his way.

[Sidenote: FORMALIST AND HYPOCRISY]

Yet was he troubled to think that men in that danger should so little
care for the kindness of him that so offered to help them, both by
awakening of them, advising them, and offering to help them off with
their irons. And, as he was troubled thereabout, he espied two men come
tumbling over the wall on the left hand of the narrow way; and they made
up apace to him. The name of one was Formalist, and the name of the
other was Hypocrisy. So, as I said, they drew up unto him, who thus
began talking with them:

CHRIS. Gentlemen, whence came you, and whither go you?

FORM. and HYP. We were born in the land of Vain-glory, and are going for
praise to Mount Zion.

CHRIS. Why came you not in at the gate which standeth at the beginning
of the way? Know ye not that it is written, "He that cometh not in by
the door, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a
robber?"

FORM. and HYP. They said that to go to the gate for entrance was, by all
their countrymen, counted too far about; and that therefore their usual
way was to make a short cut of it, and to climb over the wall as they
had done.

CHRIS. But will it not be counted a trespass against the Lord of the
city whither we are bound, thus to disobey His will?

FORM. and HYP. They told him, that as for that, he needed not trouble
his head thereabout; for what they did they had custom for, and could
show, if need were, testimony that could prove it for more than a
thousand years.

CHRIS. "But," said Christian, "will it stand a trial at law?"

FORM. and HYP. They told him that custom, it being of so long standing
as above a thousand years, would doubtless now be admitted as a thing
according to law by a fair judge. "And besides," said they, "if we get
into the way, what matter is it which way we may get in? If we are in,
we are in: thou art but in the way, who, as we perceive, came in at the
gate; and we are also in the way, that came tumbling over the wall:
wherein, now, is thy condition better than ours?"

CHRIS. I walk by the rule of my Master; you walk by the rude working
of your fancies. You are counted thieves already by the Lord of the way;
therefore I doubt you will not be found true men at the end of the way.
You come in by yourselves without His word, and shall go out by
yourselves without His mercy.

To this they made him but little answer; only they bid him look to
himself. Then I saw that they went on every man in his way, without much
talking one with another; save that these two men told Christian, that,
as to law and rules, they doubted not but that they should as carefully
do them as he. "Therefore," said they, "we see not wherein thou
differest from us, but by the coat which is on thy back, which was, as
we believe given thee by some of thy neighbors to hide the shame of thy
nakedness."

CHRIS. By laws and rules you will not be saved, since you came not in by
the door. And as for this coat that is on my back, it was given to me by
the Lord of the place whither I go; and that, as you say, to cover my
nakedness with. And I take it as a token of His kindness to me; for I
had nothing but rags before. And besides, thus I comfort myself as I go.
Surely, think I, when I come to the gate of the city, the Lord thereof
will know me for good, since I have His coat on my back; a coat that He
gave me freely in the day that He stripped me of my rags. I have
moreover, a mark in my forehead, of which perhaps you have taken no
notice, which one of my Lord's most intimate friends fixed there the day
that my burden fell off my shoulders. I will tell you, moreover, that I
had then given me a roll sealed, to comfort me by reading as I go in the
way; I was also bid to give it in at the heavenly gate, in token of my
certain going in after it; all which things, I doubt, you want, and want
them because you came not in at the gate.

To these things they gave him no answer; only they looked upon each
other, and laughed. Then I saw that they went on all, save that
Christian kept before, who had no more talk but with himself, and
sometimes sighingly, and sometimes comfortably; also he would be often
reading in the roll that one of the Shining Ones gave him, by which he
was refreshed.

[Sidenote: THE HILL OF DIFFICULTY]

I beheld then that they all went on till they came to the foot of the
Hill Difficulty, at the bottom of which was a spring. There were also in
the same place two other ways, besides that which came straight from the
gate; one turned to the left hand, and the other to the right, at the
bottom of the hill; but the narrow way lay right up the hill, and the
name of that going up the side of the hill is called Difficulty.
Christian now went to the spring, and drank thereof to refresh himself,
and then began to go up the hill, saying:

  "The hill, though high, I covet to ascend;
  The difficulty will not me offend,
  For I perceive the way to life lies here.
  Come, pluck up, heart, let's neither faint nor fear.
  Better, though _difficult_, the right way to go,
  Than wrong, though _easy_, where the end is woe."

The other two also came to the foot of the hill. But when they saw that
the hill was steep and high, and that there were two other ways to go;
and supposing also that these two ways might meet again with that up
which Christian went, on the other side of the hill; therefore they were
resolved to go in those ways. Now, the name of one of those ways was
Danger, and the name of the other Destruction. So the one took the way
which is called Danger, which led him into a great wood; and the other
took directly up the way to destruction, which led him into a wide
field, full of dark mountains, where he stumbled and fell, and rose no
more.

I looked then after Christian, to see him go up the hill, where I
perceived he fell from running to going, and from going to clambering
upon his hands and his knees, because of the steepness of the place.
Now, about the midway to the top of the hill was a pleasant arbor, made
by the Lord of the hill for the refreshment of weary travelers. Thither,
therefore, Christian got, where also he sat down to rest him; then he
pulled his roll out of his bosom, and read therein to his comfort; he
also now began afresh to take a review of the coat or garment that was
given him as he stood by the cross. Thus pleasing himself a while, he at
last fell into a slumber, and thence into a fast sleep, which detained
him in that place until it was almost night; and in his sleep his roll
fell out of his hand. Now, as he was sleeping, there came one to him,
and awaked him, saying, "Go to the ant, thou sluggard;[3] consider her
ways, and be wise." And, with that, Christian suddenly started up, and
sped on his way, and went apace till he came to the top of the hill.

  [3] Idle one.

[Sidenote: TIMOROUS AND MISTRUST]

Now, when he was got up to the top of the hill, there came two men
running amain: the name of the one was Timorous, and of the other
Mistrust; to whom Christian said, "Sirs, what's the matter? You run the
wrong way." Timorous answered, that they were going to the city of Zion,
and had got up that difficult place: "but," said he, "the farther we go,
the more danger we meet with; wherefore we turned, and are going back
again."

"Yes," said Mistrust, "for just before us lie a couple of lions in the
way, whether sleeping or waking we know not; and we could not think, if
we came within reach, but they would presently pull us in pieces."

CHRIS. Then said Christian, "You make me afraid; but whither shall I fly
to be safe? If I go back to my own country, that is prepared for fire
and brimstone, and I shall certainly perish there; if I can get to the
Celestial City, I am sure to be in safety there: I must venture. To go
back is nothing but death; to go forward is fear of death, and life
everlasting beyond it. I will yet go forward." So Mistrust and Timorous
ran down the hill, and Christian went on his way. But, thinking again of
what he heard from the men, he felt in his bosom for his roll, and found
it not. Then was Christian in great distress, and knew not what to do;
for he wanted that which used to comfort him, and that which should have
been his pass into the Celestial City. Here, therefore, he began to be
greatly troubled, and knew not what to do. At last he bethought himself
that he had slept in the arbor that is on the side of the hill; and,
falling down upon his knees, he asked God's forgiveness for that his
foolish act, and then went back to look for his roll. But all the way he
went back, who can sufficiently set forth the sorrow of Christian's
heart? Sometimes he sighed, sometimes he wept, and oftentimes he blamed
himself for being so foolish to fall asleep in that place, which was
erected only for a little refreshment from his weariness. Thus,
therefore, he went back, carefully looking on this side and on that, all
the way as he went, if happily he might find his roll that had been his
comfort so many times in his journey. He went thus till he came again
within sight of the arbor where he sat and slept; but that sight renewed
his sorrow the more, by bringing again, even afresh, his evil of
sleeping into his mind. Thus, therefore, he now went on, bewailing his
sinful sleep, saying, "O wretched man that I am, that I should sleep in
the day-time; that I should sleep in the midst of difficulty! that I
should so indulge myself, as to use that rest for ease to my flesh which
the Lord of the hill hath builded only for the relief of the spirits of
pilgrims! How many steps have I taken in vain! Thus it happened to
Israel; for their sin they were sent back again by the way of the Red
Sea; and I am made to tread those steps with sorrow which I might have
trod with delight, had it not been for this sinful sleep. How far might
I have been on my way by this time! I am made to tread those steps
thrice over which I needed not to have trod but once; yea, also, now I
am like to be benighted, for the day is almost spent. Oh that I had not
slept!"

[Sidenote: CHRISTIAN RECOVERS HIS ROLL]

Now, by this time he was come to the arbor again, where for awhile he
sat down and wept; but at last (as Providence would have it), looking
sorrowfully down under the settle, there he espied his roll, the which
he, with trembling and haste, caught up, and put it into his bosom. But
who can tell how joyful this man was when he had got his roll again? for
this roll was the assurance of his life and acceptance at the desired
haven. Therefore he laid it up in his bosom, giving thanks to God for
directing his eye to the place where it lay, and with joy and tears
betook himself again to his journey. But oh, how nimbly now did he go up
the rest of the hill! Yet, before he got up, the sun went down upon
Christian; and this made him again recall the folly of his sleeping to
his remembrance; and thus he began again to condole with himself, "Oh,
thou sinful sleep! how for thy sake am I like to be benighted in my
journey. I must walk without the sun, darkness must cover the path of my
feet, and I must hear the noise of the doleful creatures, because of my
sinful sleep." Now also he remembered the story that Mistrust and
Timorous told him, of how they were frighted with the sight of the
lions. Then said Christian to himself again, "These beasts range in the
night for their prey; and if they should meet with me in the dark, how
should I avoid them? how should I escape being torn in pieces?" Thus he
went on his way. But, while he was thus bewailing his unhappy mistake,
he lifted up his eyes, and behold there was a very stately palace before
him, the name of which was Beautiful, and it stood just by the highway
side.

[Sidenote: WATCHFUL THE PORTER]

So I saw in my dream that he made haste, and went forward, that, if
possible, he might get lodging there. Now, before he had gone far, he
entered into a very narrow passage, which was about a furlong off the
Porter's lodge; and looking very narrowly before him as he went, he
espied two lions in the way. Now, thought he, I see the dangers by which
Mistrust and Timorous were driven back. (The lions were chained, but he
saw not the chains). Then he was afraid, and thought also himself to go
back after them; for he thought nothing but death was before him. But
the Porter at the lodge, whose name is Watchful, perceiving that
Christian made a halt as if he would go back, cried out unto him,
saying, "Is thy strength so small? fear not the lions, for they are
chained, and are placed there for the trial of faith where it is, and
for the finding out of those that have none: keep in the midst of the
path, and no hurt shall come unto thee."

Then I saw that he went on trembling for fear of the lions; but, taking
good heed to the words of the Porter, he heard them roar, but they did
him no harm. Then he clapped his hands, and went on till he came and
stood before the gate where the Porter was. Then said Christian to the
Porter, "Sir, what house is this? and may I lodge here to-night?"

The Porter answered, "This house was built by the Lord of the hill, and
He built it for the relief and security of pilgrims." The Porter also
asked whence he was, and whither he was going.

CHRIS. I am come from the City of Destruction, and am going to Mount
Zion; but, because the sun is now set, I desire, if I may, to lodge here
to-night.

PORT. What is your name?

CHRIS. My name is now Christian, but my name at the first was Graceless.

PORT. But how doth it happen that you come so late? The sun is set.

CHRIS. I had been here sooner, but that, wretched man that I am, I slept
in the arbor that stands on the hill-side. Nay, I had, notwithstanding
that, been here much sooner, but that in my sleep I lost my roll, and
came without it to the brow of the hill; and then, feeling for it and
finding it not, I was forced with sorrow of heart to go back to the
place where I slept my sleep, where I found it; and now I am come.

PORT. Well, I will call out one of the women of this place, who will, if
she likes your talk, bring you in to the rest of the family, according
to the rules of the house.

So Watchful the Porter rang a bell, at the sound of which came out of
the door of the house a grave and beautiful young woman, named
Discretion, and asked why she was called.

The Porter answered, "This man is on a journey from the City of
Destruction to Mount Zion; but, being weary and benighted, he asked me
if he might lodge here to-night; so I told him I would call for thee,
who, after speaking with him, mayest do as seemeth thee good, even
according to the law of the house."

[Sidenote: PIETY, PRUDENCE, CHARITY]

Then she asked him whence he was, and whither he was going; and he told
her. She asked him also how he got into the way; and he told her. Then
she asked him what he had seen and met with on the way; and he told her.
And at last she asked his name. So he said, "It is Christian; and I have
so much the more a desire to lodge here to-night, because, by what I
perceive, this place was built by the Lord of the hill for the relief
and safety of pilgrims." So she smiled, but the water stood in her eyes;
and after a little pause, she said, "I will call forth two or three of
my family." So she ran to the door, and called out Prudence, Piety, and
Charity, who, after a little more discourse with him brought him in to
the family; and many of them, meeting him at the threshold of the house,
said, "Come in, thou blessed of the Lord: this house was built by the
Lord of the hill on purpose to entertain such pilgrims in." Then he
bowed his head, and followed them into the house. So, when he was come
in and sat down, they gave him something to drink, and agreed together,
that, until supper was ready, some of them should talk with Christian,
for the best use of the time; and they appointed Piety, Prudence, and
Charity to talk with him; and thus they began:

PIETY. Come, good Christian since we have been so loving to you to
receive you into our house this night, let us, if perhaps we may better
ourselves thereby, talk with you of all things that have happened to you
in your pilgrimage.

CHRIS. With a very good will, and I am glad that you are so well
disposed.

PIETY. What moved you at first to betake yourself to a pilgrim's life?

[Sidenote: CHRISTIAN'S ADVENTURES]

CHRIS. I was driven out of my native country by a dreadful sound that
was in mine ears; to wit, that certain destruction did await me, if I
abode in that place where I was.

PIETY. But how did it happen that you came out of your country this way?

CHRIS. It was as God would have it; for, when I was under the fears of
destruction, I did not know whither to go; but by chance there came a
man even to me, as I was trembling and weeping, whose name is
Evangelist, and he directed me to the wicket-gate, which else I should
never have found, and so set me in the way that hath led me directly to
this house.

PIETY. But did you not come by the house of the Interpreter?

CHRIS. Yes, and did see such things there, the remembrance of which will
stick by me as long as I live, especially three things; to wit, how
Christ, in despite of Satan, the Evil One maintains His work of grace
in the heart; how the man had sinned himself quite out of hopes of God's
mercy; and also the dream of him that thought in his sleep the day of
judgment was come.

PIETY. Why? did you hear him tell his dream?

CHRIS. Yes, and a dreadful one it was, I thought it made my heart ache
as he was telling of it; but yet I am glad I heard of it.

PIETY. Was that all you saw at the house of the Interpreter?

CHRIS. No; he took me, and had me where he showed me a stately palace;
and how the people were clad in gold that were in it; and how there came
a venturous man, and cut his way through the armed men that stood in the
door to keep him out; and how he was bid to come in and win eternal
glory. Methought those things did delight my heart. I would have stayed
at that good man's house a twelvemonth, but that I knew I had farther to
go.

PIETY. And what saw you else in the way?

CHRIS. Saw? Why, I went but a little farther, and I saw One, as I
thought in my mind, hang bleeding upon a tree; and the very sight of Him
made my burden fall off my back; for I groaned under a very heavy
burden, and then it fell down from off me. It was a strange thing to me,
for I never saw such a thing before; yea, and while I stood looking up
(for then I could not forbear looking), three Shining Ones came to me.
One of them told me that my sins were forgiven me; another stripped me
of my rags, and gave me this broidered coat which you see; and the third
set the mark which you see in my forehead, and gave me this sealed roll.
(And, with that, he plucked it out of his bosom.)

PIETY. But you saw more than this, did you not?

CHRIS. The things that I have told you were the best; yet some other
matters I saw; as namely I saw three men, Simple, Sloth, and
Presumption, lie asleep, a little out of the way as I came, with irons
upon their heels; but do you think I could wake them? I also saw
Formalist and Hypocrisy come tumbling over the wall, to go, as they
pretended, to Zion; but they were quickly lost, even as I myself did
tell them, but they would not believe. But, above all, I found it hard
work to get up this hill, and as hard to come by the lions' mouths; and
truly, if it had not been for the good man the Porter, that stands at
the gate, I do not know but that, after all, I might have gone back
again; but now I thank God I am here, and I thank you for receiving of
me.

Then Prudence thought good to ask him a few questions, and desired his
answer to them.

PRU. Do you think sometimes of the country from whence you came?

CHRIS. Yes, but with much shame and detestation. Truly, if I had been
mindful of that country from whence I came out, I might have had an
opportunity to have returned; but now I desire a better country, that
is, a heavenly one.

PRU. Do you not yet bear away with you in your thoughts some of the
things that you did in the former time?

CHRIS. Yes, but greatly against my will; especially my inward and sinful
thoughts, with which all my countrymen, as well as myself, were
delighted. But now all those things are my grief; and, might I but
choose mine own things, I would choose never to think of those things
more; but when I would be doing that which is best, that which is worst
is with me.

PRU. Do you not find sometimes as if those things were overcome, which
at other times are your trouble?

CHRIS. Yes, but that is but seldom; but they are to me golden hours in
which such things happen to me.

PRU. Can you remember by what means you find your annoyances, at times,
as if they were overcome?

CHRIS. Yes; when I think what I saw at the cross, that will do it; and
when I look upon my broidered coat, that will do it; also when I look
into the roll that I carry in my bosom, that will do it; and when my
thoughts wax warm about whither I am going, that will do it.

PRU. And what makes you so desirous to go to Mount Zion?

CHRIS. Why, there I hope to see Him alive that did hang dead on the
cross; and there I hope to be rid of all these things that to this day
are in me an annoyance to me. There, they say, there is no death; and
there I shall dwell with such company as I like best. For, to tell you
the truth, I love Him because I was by Him eased of my burden; and I am
weary of my inward sickness. I would fain be where I shall die no more,
and with the company that shall continually cry, "Holy, holy, holy!"

[Sidenote: CHARITY TALKS WITH CHRISTIAN]

CHAR. Then said Charity to Christian, "Have you a family? are you a
married man?"

CHRIS. I have a wife and four small children.

CHAR. And why did you not bring them along with you?

CHRIS. Then Christian wept, and said, "Oh, how willingly would I have
done it! but they were all of them utterly against my going on
pilgrimage."

CHAR. But you should have talked to them, and endeavored to have shown
them the danger of staying behind.

CHRIS. So I did, and told them also what God had shown to me of the
destruction of our city; but I seemed to them as one that mocked, and
they believed me not.

CHAR. And did you pray to God that He would bless your words to them?

CHRIS. Yes, and that with much affection; for you must think that my
wife and poor children are very dear unto me.

CHAR. But did you tell them of your own sorrow and fear of destruction?
for I suppose that you could see your destruction before you.

CHRIS. Yes, over, and over, and over. They might also see my fears in my
countenance, in my tears, and also in my trembling under the fear of the
judgment that did hang over our heads: but all was not enough to prevail
with them to come with me.

CHAR. But what could they say for themselves why they came not?

CHRIS. Why, my wife was afraid of losing this world, and my children
were given to the foolish delights of youth; so, what by one thing, and
what by another, they left me to wander in this manner alone.

CHAR. But did you not, with your vain life, hinder all that you by words
used by way of persuasion to bring them away with you?

CHRIS. Indeed, I cannot commend my life, for I am conscious to myself of
many failings therein. I know also, that a man, by his actions may soon
overthrow what, by proofs or persuasion, he doth labor to fasten upon
others for their good. Yet this I can say, I was very wary of giving
them occasion, by any unseemly action, to make them averse to going on
pilgrimage. Yea, for this very thing they would tell me I was too
precise, and that I denied myself of things (for their sakes) in which
they saw no evil. Nay, I think I may say that, if what they saw in me
did hinder them, it was my great tenderness in sinning against God, or
of doing any wrong to my neighbor.

CHAR. Indeed, Cain hated his brother because his own works were evil,
and his brother's righteous; and, if thy wife and children have been
offended with thee for this, they thereby show themselves to be
resolutely opposed to good: thou hast freed thy soul from their blood.

Now I saw in my dream, that thus they sat talking together till supper
was ready. So, when they had made ready, they sat down to meat. Now, the
table was furnished with fat things, and wine that was well refined; and
all their talk at the table was about the Lord of the hill; as, namely,
about what He had done, and wherefore He did what He did, and why He had
builded that house; and by what they said, I perceived that He had been
a great warrior, and had fought with and slain him that had the power of
death, but not without great danger to Himself, which made me love Him
the more.

For, as they said, and as I believe (said Christian), He did it with the
loss of much blood. But that which puts the glory of grace into all He
did, was, that He did it out of pure love to this country. And, besides,
there were some of them of the household that said they had seen and
spoken with Him since He did die on the cross; and they have declared
that they had it from His own lips, that He is such a lover of poor
pilgrims, that the like is not to be found from the east to the west.
They moreover gave an instance of what they affirmed; and that was, He
had stripped Himself of His glory, that He might do this for the poor;
and that they had heard Him say and affirm that He would not dwell in
the mountains of Zion alone. They said, moreover, that He had made many
pilgrims princes, though by nature they were beggars born, and their
home had been the dunghill.

Thus they talked together till late at night; and after they had
committed themselves to their Lord for protection, they betook
themselves to rest. The Pilgrim they laid in a large upper chamber,
whose window opened towards the sunrising. The name of the chamber was
Peace, where he slept till break of day, and then he awoke and sang:

  "Where am I now? Is this the love and care
  Of Jesus, for the men that pilgrims are,
  Thus to provide that I should be forgiven,
  And dwell already the next door to heaven?"

[Sidenote: THE VIRGINS READ TO CHRISTIAN]

So in the morning they all got up; and after some more talking together,
they told him that he should not depart till they had shown him the
rarities of that place. And first they took him into the study, where
they showed him records of the greatest age; in which, as I remember in
my dream, they showed him first the history of the Lord of the hill,
that He was the son of the Ancient of Days, and had lived from the
beginning. Here also were more fully written the acts that He had done,
and the names of many hundreds that He had taken into his service; and
how he had placed them in such houses that could neither by length of
days nor decays of nature be destroyed.

Then they read to him some of the worthy acts that some of His servants
had done; as, how they had conquered kingdoms, wrought righteousness,
obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of
fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong,
waxed valiant in fight, and turned to flight the armies of the enemies.

They then read again in another part of the records of the house, where
it was shown how willing their Lord was to receive into His favor any
even any, though they in time past had done great wrongs to His person
and rule. Here also were several other histories of many other famous
things, of all which Christian had a view; as of things both ancient and
modern, together with prophecies and foretellings of things that surely
come to pass, both to the dread and wonder of enemies, and the comfort
and happiness of pilgrims.

The next day they took him and led him into the armory, where they
showed him all manner of weapons which their Lord had provided for
pilgrims; as sword, shield, helmet, breast-plate, all-prayer, and shoes
that would not wear out. And there was here enough of this to harness
out as many men for the service of their Lord as there be stars in the
heaven for multitude.

They also showed him some of the things with which some of His servants
had done wonderful things. They showed him Moses' rod; the hammer and
nail with which Jael slew Sisera; the pitchers, trumpets, and lamps too,
with which Gideon put to flight the armies of Midian. Then they showed
him the ox's goad wherewith Shamgar slew six hundred men. They showed
him also the jaw-bone with which Samson did such mighty feats. They
showed him, moreover, the sling and stone with which David slew Goliath
of Gath, and the sword also with which their Lord will kill the Man of
Sin, in the day that He shall rise up to the battle. They showed him,
besides, many excellent things, with which Christian was much delighted.
This done, they went to their rest again.

Then I saw in my dream that on the morrow he got up to go forward, but
they desired him to stay till the next day also; "and then," said they,
"we will, if the day be clear, show you the Delectable Mountains;" which
they said would yet further add to his comfort, because they were nearer
the desired haven than the place where at present he was. So he
consented and stayed. When the morning was up, they led him to the top
of the house, and bid him look south. So he did, and behold, at a great
distance he saw a most pleasant mountainous country, beautified with
woods, vineyards, fruits of all sorts, flowers also, with springs and
fountains, very lovely to behold. Then he asked the name of the country.
They said it was Immanuel's Land; "and it is as common," said they, "as
this hill is, to and for all the pilgrims. And when thou comest there,
from thence thou mayest see to the gate of the Celestial City, as the
shepherds that live there will make appear."

Now he bethought himself of setting forward, and they were willing he
should. "But first," said they, "let us go again into the armory." So
they did; and when he came there, they dressed him from head to foot
with armor of proof, lest perhaps he should meet with assaults in the
way. He being, therefore, thus armed, walked out with his friends to the
gate; and there he asked the Porter if he saw any pilgrim pass by. Then
the Porter answered, "Yes."

CHRIS. "Pray, did you know him?" said he.

PORT. I asked his name, and he told me it was Faithful.

CHRIS. "Oh," said Christian, "I know him, he is my townsman, my near
neighbor; he comes from the place where I was born. How far do you think
he may be before?"

PORT. He has got by this time below the hill.

CHRIS. "Well," said Christian, "good Porter, the Lord be with thee, and
add to all thy blessings much increase for the kindness thou has shown
to me!"

Then he began to go forward; but Discretion, Piety, Charity, and
Prudence would accompany him down to the foot of the hill. So they went
on together repeating their former discourses, till they came to go down
the hill. Then said Christian, "As it was difficult coming up, so far so
as I can see, it is dangerous going down." "Yes," said Prudence, "so it
is; for it is a hard matter for a man to go down the Valley of
Humiliation, as thou art now, and to catch no slip by the way;
therefore," said they, "are we come out to accompany thee down the
hill." So he began to go down, but very warily; yet he caught a slip or
two.

Then I saw in my dream that these good companions, when Christian was
gone down to the bottom of the hill, gave him a loaf of bread, a bottle
of wine, and a cluster of raisins; and then he went his way.




CHAPTER IV.


But now, in this Valley of Humiliation, poor Christian was hard put to
it; for he had gone but a little way before he espied a foul fiend
coming over the field to meet him: his name is Apollyon. Then did
Christian begin to be afraid, and to cast in his mind whether to go back
or to stand his ground. But he considered again that he had no armor for
his back, and therefore thought that to turn the back to him might give
him greater advantage with ease to pierce him with darts; therefore he
resolved to venture and stand his ground; for, thought he, had I no more
in mine eye than the saving of my life, it would be the best way to
stand. So he went on, and Apollyon met him. Now, the monster was hideous
to behold: he was clothed with scales like a fish, and they are his
pride; he had wings like a dragon, and feet like a bear, and out of his
belly came fire and smoke; and his mouth was as the mouth of a lion.
When he was come up to Christian, he beheld him with a disdainful
countenance, and thus began to question with him:

[Sidenote: APOLLYON STAYS CHRISTIAN]

APOLLYON. Whence come you, and whither are you bound?

CHRIS. I am come from the City of Destruction, which is the place of all
evil, and am going to the City of Zion.

APOL. By this I perceive that thou art one of my subjects; for all that
country is mine, and I am the prince and God of it. How is it then that
thou hast run away from thy king? Were it not that I hope that thou
mayest do me more service, I would strike thee now at one blow to the
ground.

CHRIS. I was indeed born in your kingdom; but your service was hard, and
your wages such as a man could not live on; for the wages of sin is
death; therefore, when I was come to years, I did as other thoughtful
persons do, look out, if perhaps I might mend myself.

APOL. There is no prince that will thus lightly lose his subjects,
neither will I as yet lose thee; but, since thou complainest of thy
service and wages, be content to go back, and what our country will
afford I do here promise to give thee.

CHRIS. But I have let myself to another, even to the King of princes;
and how can I with fairness go back with thee?

APOL. Thou hast done in this according to the proverb, "changed a bad
for a worse;" but it is common for those that have called themselves His
servants, after awhile to give Him the slip, and return again to me. Do
thou so too, and all shall be well.

CHRIS. I have given Him my faith, and sworn my service to Him; how,
then, can I go back from this, and not be hanged as a traitor?

APOL. Thou didst the same to me, and yet I am willing to pass by all,
if now thou wilt yet turn again and go back.

CHRIS. What I promised thee was in my youth, and besides, I count that
the Prince under whose banner I now stand is able to set me free, yea,
and to pardon also what I did as to my service with thee. And besides, O
thou destroying Apollyon, to speak the truth, I like His service, His
wages, His servants, His government, His company, and country, better
than thine; therefore leave off to persuade me further: I am His
servant, and I will follow Him.

APOL. Consider again when thou art in cold blood, what thou art likely
to meet with in the way that thou goest. Thou knowest that for the most
part His servants come to an ill end, because they are disobedient
against me and my ways. How many of them have been put to shameful
deaths! And besides, thou countest His service better than mine; whereas
He never came yet from the place where He is, to deliver any that served
Him out of their hands; but as for me, how many times, as all the world
very well knows, have I delivered, either by power or fraud, those that
have faithfully served me, from Him and His, though taken by them! And
so I will deliver thee.

CHRIS. His forbearing at present to deliver them is on purpose to try
their love, whether they will cleave to Him to the end; and, as for the
ill end thou sayest they come to, that is most glorious in their
account. For, for present deliverance, they do not much expect it; for
they stay for their glory, and then they shall have it when their prince
comes in His and the glory of the angels.

APOL. Thou hast already been unfaithful in thy service to Him; and how
dost thou think to receive wages of Him?

CHRIS. Wherein, O Apollyon, have I been unfaithful to Him?

APOL. Thou didst faint at first setting out, when thou wast almost
choked in the Gulf of Despond. Thou didst attempt wrong ways to be rid
of thy burden, whereas thou shouldst have stayed till thy Prince had
taken it off. Thou didst sinfully sleep and lose thy choice things. Thou
wast almost persuaded to go back at the sight of the lions. And when
thou talkest of thy journey, and of what thou hast seen and heard, thou
art inwardly desirous of glory to thyself in all that thou sayest or
doest.

CHRIS. All this is true, and much more which thou hast left out; but the
Prince whom I serve and honor is merciful and ready to forgive. But
besides, these infirmities possessed me in thy own country; for there I
sucked them in, and I have groaned under them, been sorry for them, and
have obtained pardon of my Prince.

APOL. Then Apollyon broke out into a grievous rage, saying, "I am an
enemy to this Prince; I hate His person, His laws, and people. I am come
out on purpose to withstand thee."

[Sidenote: CHRISTIAN THE CONQUEROR]

CHRIS. Apollyon, beware what you do, for I am in the King's highway,
the way of holiness: therefore take heed to yourself.

APOL. Then Apollyon straddled quite over the whole breadth of the way,
and said, "I am void of fear in this matter. Prepare thyself to die; for
I swear by my infernal den, that thou shalt go no farther: here will I
spill thy soul." And, with that, he threw a flaming dart at his breast;
but Christian held a shield in his hand, with which he caught, and so
prevented the danger of that.

Then did Christian draw, for he saw it was time to bestir him; and
Apollyon as fast made at him, throwing darts as thick as hail, by the
which, notwithstanding all that Christian could do to avoid it, Apollyon
wounded him in his head, his hand, and foot. This made Christian give a
little back; Apollyon, therefore, followed his work amain, and Christian
again took courage, and resisted as manfully as he could. This sore
combat lasted for above half a day, even till Christian was almost quite
spent. For you must know that Christian, by reason of his wounds, must
needs grow weaker and weaker.

Then Apollyon, espying his opportunity, began to gather up close to
Christian, and, wrestling with him, gave him a dreadful fall; and, with
that, Christian's sword flew out of his hand. Then said Apollyon, "I am
sure of thee now." And, with that, he had almost pressed him to death,
so that Christian began to despair of life. But, as God would have it,
while Apollyon was fetching his last blow, thereby to make a full end
of this good man, Christian nimbly reached out his hand for his sword,
and caught it, saying, "Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I
fall I shall arise;" and, with that, gave him a deadly thrust, which
made him give back, as one that had received his mortal wound.
Christian, perceiving that, made at him again, saying, "Nay, in all
these things we are more than conquerors through Him that loved us."
And, with that, Apollyon spread forth his dragon's wings, and sped him
away, that Christian for a season saw him no more.

In this combat no man can imagine, unless he had seen and heard, as I
did, what yelling and hideous roaring Apollyon made all the time of the
fight: he spake like a dragon; and, on the other side, what sighs and
groans burst from Christian's heart. I never saw him all the while give
so much as one pleasant look, till he perceived he had wounded Apollyon
with his two-edged sword; then, indeed, he did smile and look upward;
but it was the dreadfullest sight that ever I saw.

[Sidenote: CHRISTIAN GIVES THANKS]

CHRIS. So, when the battle was over, Christian said, "I will here give
thanks to Him that hath delivered me out of the mouth of the lion; to
Him that did help me against Apollyon." And so he did, saying:

  "Great Satan, the captain of this fiend,
  Designed my ruin; therefore to this end
  He sent him harnessed out: and he with rage
  That hellish was, did fiercely me engage;
  But blessed angels helped me; and I,
  By dint of sword, did quickly make him fly:
  Therefore to God let me give lasting praise,
  And thank and bless His holy name always."

Then there came to him a hand with some of the leaves of the tree of
life; the which Christian took, and laid upon the wounds that he had
received in the battle, and was healed immediately. He also sat down in
that place to eat bread, and to drink of the bottle that was given to
him a little before: so, being refreshed, he went forth on his journey,
with his sword drawn in his hand; "For," he said, "I know not but some
other enemy may be at hand." But he met with no other harm from Apollyon
quite through this valley.

Now, at the end of this valley was another, called the Valley of the
Shadow of Death; and Christian must needs go through it, because the way
to the Celestial City lay through the midst of it. Now this valley is a
very solitary place; the prophet Jeremiah thus describes it: "A
wilderness, a land of deserts and pits, a land of drought, and of the
shadow of death, a land that no man" but a Christian "passeth through,
and where no man dwelt."

Now here Christian was worse put to it than in his fight with Apollyon,
as in the story you shall see.

I saw then in my dream, that when Christian was got to the borders of
the Shadow of Death, there met him two men, children of them that
brought up an evil report of the good land, making haste to go back; to
whom Christian spake as follows:

CHRIS. Whither are you going?

MEN. They said, "Back, back! and we would have you to do so too, if
either life or peace is prized by you."

CHRIS. "Why, what's the matter?" said Christian.

MEN. "Matter!" said they: "we were going that way as you are going, and
went as far as we durst: and indeed we were almost past coming back; for
had we gone a little farther, we had not been here to bring the news to
thee."

CHRIS. "But what have you met with?" said Christian.

MEN. Why, we were almost in the Valley of the Shadow of Death, but that
by good hap we looked before us, and saw the danger before we came to
it.

CHRIS. "But what have you seen?" said Christian.

MEN. Seen! why, the valley itself, which is as dark as pitch: we also
saw there the hobgoblins, satyrs, and dragons of the pit; we heard also
in that valley a continual howling and yelling, as of a people under
unutterable misery, who there sat bound in affliction and irons; and
over that hung the discouraging clouds of confusion; Death also does
always spread his wings over it. In a word, it is every whit dreadful,
being utterly without order.

CHRIS. Then said Christian, "I perceive not yet, by what you have said,
but that this is my way to the desired haven."

MEN. Be it thy way, we will not choose it for ours.

So they parted, and Christian went on his way, but still with his sword
drawn in his hand, for fear lest he should be attacked.

I saw then in my dream, as far as this valley reached, there was on the
right hand a very deep ditch; that ditch is it into which the blind have
led the blind in all ages, and have both there miserably perished.
Again, behold, on the left hand there was a very dangerous quag, or
marsh, into which, if even a good man falls, he finds no bottom for his
foot to stand on: into that quag King David once did fall, and had no
doubt there been smothered, had not He that is able plucked him out.

The pathway was here also exceedingly narrow, and therefore good
Christian was the more put to it; for when he sought, in the dark, to
shun the ditch, on the one hand he was ready to tip over into the mire
on the other; also when he sought to escape the mire, without great
carefulness he would be ready to fall into the ditch. Thus he went on,
and I heard him here sigh bitterly, for besides the danger mentioned
above, the pathway was here so dark, that ofttimes, when he lifted up
his foot to go forward, he knew not where or upon what he should set it
next.

[Sidenote: A COMPANY OF FIENDS]

About the midst of this valley I perceived the mouth of hell to be, and
it stood also hard by the wayside. Now, thought Christian, what shall I
do? And ever and anon the flame and smoke would come out in such
abundance, with sparks and hideous noises (things that cared not for
Christian's sword, as did Apollyon before), that he was forced to put up
his sword, and betake himself to another weapon, called "All-Prayer." So
he cried in my hearing, "O Lord, I beseech Thee, deliver my soul." Thus
he went on a great while, yet still the flames would be reaching towards
him; also he heard doleful voices, and rushings to and fro, so that
sometimes he thought he should be torn in pieces, or trodden down like
mire in the streets. This frightful sight was seen, and those dreadful
noises were heard by him, for several miles together, and, coming to a
place where he thought he heard a company of fiends coming forward to
meet him, he stopped, and began to muse what he had best to do.
Sometimes he had half a thought to go back; then again he thought he
might be half-way through the valley. He remembered, also, how he had
already vanquished many a danger, and that the danger of going back
might be much more than going forward. So he resolved to go on; yet the
fiends seemed to come nearer and nearer. But, when they were come even
almost at him, he cried out with a most vehement voice, "I will walk in
the strength of the Lord God." So they gave back, and came no farther.

[Sidenote: VALLEY OF SHADOW OF DEATH]

One thing I would not let slip: I took notice that now poor Christian
was so confounded that he did not know his own voice; and thus I
perceived it: just when he was come over against the mouth of the
burning pit, one of the wicked ones got behind him, and stepped up
softly to him, and whisperingly suggested many wicked words to him,
which he verily thought had proceeded from his own mind. This put
Christian more to it than anything he had met with before, even to think
that he should now speak evil of Him that he had so much loved before.
Yet, if he could have helped it, he would not have done it; but he had
not the wisdom either to stop his ears, or to know from whence those
wicked words came.

When Christian had traveled in this sorrowful condition some
considerable time he thought he heard the voice of a man, as going
before him, saying, "Though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of
Death I will fear no evil; for Thou art with me."

Then he was glad, and that for these reasons:

First,--Because he gathered from thence, that some who feared God were
in this valley as well as himself.

Secondly,--For that he perceived God was with them, though in that dark
and dismal state. And why not, thought he, with me, though by reason of
the kindness that attends this place, I cannot perceive it?

Thirdly,--For that he hoped (could he overtake them) to have company
by-and-by. So he went on, and called to him that was before; but he knew
not what to answer, for that he also thought himself to be alone. And
by-and-by the day broke. Then said Christian, "He hath turned the shadow
of death into the morning."

Now, morning being come, he looked back, not out of desire to return,
but to see, by the light of the day, what dangers he had gone through in
the dark. So he saw more perfectly the ditch that was on the one hand,
and the quag that was on the other; also how narrow the way which led
betwixt them both. Also now he saw the hobgoblins, and satyrs, and
dragons of the pit, but all afar off; for after break of day they came
not nigh; yet they were shown to him according to that which is written,
"He showeth deep things out of darkness, and bringeth out to light the
shadow of death."

Now was Christian much affected with his deliverance from all the
dangers of his solitary way; which dangers, though he feared them much
before, yet he saw them more clearly now, because the light of the day
made them plain to him. And about this time the sun was rising, and this
was another mercy to Christian; for you must note that, though the first
part of the Valley of the Shadow of Death was dangerous, yet this second
part, which he was yet to go, was if possible far more dangerous; for,
from the place where he now stood, even to the end of the valley, the
way was all along set so full of snares, traps, gins, and nets here,
and so full of pits, pitfalls, deep holes, and shelvings down there,
that, had it now been dark, as it was when he came the first part of the
way, had he had a thousand souls, they had in reason been cast away.
But, as I said just now the sun was rising. Then said he, "His candle
shineth on my head, and by His light I go through darkness."

[Sidenote: POPE AND PAGAN]

In this light, therefore, he came to the end of the valley. Now, I saw
in my dream that at the end of the valley lay blood, bones, ashes, and
mangled bodies of men, even of pilgrims that had gone this way formerly;
and, while I was musing what should be the reason, I espied a little
before me a cave, where two giants, POPE and PAGAN, dwelt in old time;
by whose power and tyranny, the men whose bones, blood, ashes, etc., lay
there, were cruelly put to death. But by this place Christian went
without danger, whereat I somewhat wondered; but I have learnt since,
that Pagan has been dead many a day; and, as for the other, though he be
yet alive, he is, by reason of age, also of the many shrewd brushes that
he met with in his younger days, grown so crazy and stiff in his joints,
that he can now do little more than sit in his cave's mouth, grinning at
pilgrims as they go by, and biting his nails because he cannot come to
them.

So I saw that Christian went on his way; yet, at the sight of the old
man that sat at the mouth of the cave, he could not tell what to think,
especially because he spoke to him, though he could not go after him,
saying, "You will never mend till more of you be burned." But he held
his peace, and set a good face on it, and so went by and caught no hurt.
Then sang Christian:

  "O, world of wonders (I can say no less),
  That I should be preserved in that distress
  That I have met with here! Oh, blessed be
  That hand that from it hath delivered me!
  Dangers in darkness, devils, hell, and sin,
  Did compass me, while I this vale was in;
  Yes, snares, and pits, and traps, and nets did lie
  My path about, that worthless, silly I
  Might have been catched, entangled, and cast down;
  But, since I live, let Jesus wear the crown."

[Illustration: Christian and Faithful Join Company.
                                   Page 89]




CHAPTER V.


Now as Christian went on his way, he came to a little ascent which was
cast up on purpose that pilgrims might see before them: up there,
therefore, Christian went; and looking forward, he saw Faithful before
him upon his journey. Then said Christian aloud, "Ho, ho! so-ho! stay,
and I will be your companion." At that Faithful looked behind him; to
whom Christian cried, "Stay, stay, till I come up to you." But Faithful
answered, "No, I am upon my life, and the avenger of blood is behind
me."

[Sidenote: CHRISTIAN JOINS FAITHFUL]

At this Christian was somewhat moved; and putting to all his strength,
he quickly got up with Faithful, and did also overrun him: so the last
was first. Then did Christian boastfully smile, because he had gotten
the start of his brother; but, not taking good heed to his feet, he
suddenly stumbled and fell, and could not rise again until Faithful came
up to help him.

Then I saw in my dream, they went very lovingly on together, and had
sweet talk together of all things that had happened to them in their
pilgrimage; and thus Christian began:

CHRIS. My honored and well-beloved brother Faithful, I am glad that I
have overtaken you, and that God has so tempered our spirits that we can
walk as companions in this so pleasant a path.

FAITH. I had thought, dear friend, to have had your company quite from
our town; but you did get the start of me, wherefore I was forced to
come thus much of the way alone.

CHRIS. How long did you stay in the City of Destruction before you set
out after me on your pilgrimage?

[Sidenote: WHAT WAS SAID IN THE CITY]

FAITH. Till I could stay no longer; for there was great talk, presently
after you were gone out, that our city would, in a short time, with fire
from heaven, be burned down to the ground.

CHRIS. What! did your neighbors talk so?

FAITH. Yes, it was for a while in everybody's mouth.

CHRIS. What! and did no more of them but you come out to escape the
danger?

FAITH. Though there was, as I said, a great talk thereabout, yet I do
not think they did firmly believe it. For, in the heat of the talking I
heard some of them deridingly speak of you, and of your desperate
journey; for so they called this your pilgrimage. But I did believe, and
do still, that the end of our city will be with fire and brimstone from
above; and therefore I have made my escape.

CHRIS. Did you hear no talk of neighbor Pliable?

FAITH. Yes, Christian; I heard that he followed you till he came to the
Slough of Despond, where, as some said, he fell in; but he would not be
known to have so done; but I am sure he was soundly bedabbled with that
kind of dirt.

CHRIS. And what said the neighbors to him?

FAITH. He hath, since his going back, been held greatly in derision, and
that among all sorts of people: some do mock and despise him, and scarce
any will set him on work. He is now seven times worse than if he had
never gone out of the city.

CHRIS. But why should they be set so against him, since they also
despise the way that he forsook?

FAITH. "Oh," they say, "hang him; he is a turncoat! he was not true to
his profession!" I think God has stirred up even his enemies to hiss at
him and laugh at him, because he hath forsaken the way.

CHRIS. Had you no talk with him before you came out?

FAITH. I met him once in the streets, but he leered away on the other
side, as one ashamed of what he had done; so I spake not to him.

CHRIS. Well, at my first setting out, I had hopes of that man, but now I
fear he will perish in the overthrow of the city. For it has happened to
him according to the true proverb, "The dog is turned to his vomit
again, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire."

FAITH. These are my fears of him too; but who can hinder that which will
be?

CHRIS. "Well, neighbor Faithful," said Christian, "let us leave him, and
talk of things that more immediately concern ourselves. Tell me now
what you have met with in the way as you came; for I know you have met
with some things, or else it may be writ for a wonder."

FAITH. I escaped the slough that I perceive you fell into, and got up to
the gate without that danger; only I met with one whose name was Wanton,
that had like to have done me a mischief.

CHRIS. It was well you escaped her net: Joseph was hard put to it by
her, and he escaped her as you did; but it had like to have cost him his
life. But what did she do to you?

FAITH. You cannot think (but that you know something) what a flattering
tongue she had; she lay at me hard to turn aside with her, promising me
all manner of enjoyment.

CHRIS. Nay, she did not promise you the enjoyment of a good conscience.

FAITH. You know what I mean--not the enjoyment of the soul, but of the
body.

CHRIS. Thank God you have escaped her: the abhorred of the Lord shall
fall into her ditch.

FAITH. Nay, I know not whether I did wholly escape her or no.

CHRIS. Why, I suppose you did not consent to her desires?

FAITH. No, not to defile myself; for I remembered an old writing that I
had seen which saith, "Her steps take hold of hell." So I shut mine
eyes, because I would not be bewitched with her looks. Then she railed
on me, and I went my way.

CHRIS. Did you meet with no other assault as you came?

[Sidenote: FAITHFUL AND ADAM THE FIRST]

FAITH. When I came to the foot of the hill called Difficulty, I met with
a very aged man, who asked me what I was and whither bound. I told him
that I was a pilgrim, going to the Celestial City. Then said the old
man, "Thou lookest like an honest fellow: wilt thou be content to dwell
with me, for the wages that I shall give thee?" Then I asked him his
name, and where he dwelt. He said his name was Adam the First, and that
he dwelt in the town of Deceit. I asked him then what was his work, and
what the wages that he would give. He told me that his work was many
delights; and his wages, that I should be his heir at last. I further
asked him what house he kept, and what other servants he had. So he told
me that his house was filled with all the dainties of the world, and
that his servants were his own children. Then I asked him how many
children he had. He said that he had but three daughters, the Lust of
the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, and that I
should marry them if I would. Then I asked, how long time he would have
me live with him? And he told me, As long as he lived himself.

CHRIS. Well, and what conclusion came the old man and you to at last?

FAITH. Why, at first I found myself somewhat inclinable to go with the
man, for I thought he spake very fair; but looking in his forehead, as
I talked with him, I saw there written, "Put off the old man with his
deeds."

CHRIS. And how then?

FAITH. Then it came burning hot into my mind, whatever he said, and
however he flattered, when he got home to his house he would sell me for
a slave. So I bid him forbear, for I would not come near the door of his
house. Then he reviled me, and told me that he would send such a one
after me that should make my way bitter to my soul. So I turned to go
away from him; but, just as I turned myself to go thence, I felt him
take hold of my flesh, and give me such a deadly twitch back, that I
thought he had pulled part of me after himself: this made me cry, "O
wretched man!" So I went on my way up the hill. Now, when I had got
about half-way up, I looked behind me, and saw one coming after me,
swift as the wind; so he overtook me just about the place where the
settle stands.

CHRIS. "Just there," said Christian, "did I sit down to rest me; but
being overcome with sleep, I there lost this roll out of my bosom."

FAITH. But, good brother, hear me out. So soon as the man overtook me,
he was but a word and a blow; for down he knocked me, and laid me for
dead. But, when I was a little come to myself again, I asked him
wherefore he served me so. He said, because of my secret inclining to
Adam the First. And, with that, he struck me another deadly blow on the
breast, and beat me down backwards; so I lay at his feet as dead as
before. So, when I came to myself again, I cried him mercy; but he said,
"I know not how to show mercy;" and, with that, he knocked me down
again. He had doubtless made an end of me, but that One came by, and bid
him forbear.

CHRIS. Who was that that bid him forbear?

FAITH. I did not know him at first; but, as He went by, I perceived the
holes in His hands and His side; then I concluded that He was our Lord.
So I went up the hill.

CHRIS. That man that overtook you was Moses. He spareth none, neither
knoweth he how to show mercy to those that disobey his law.

FAITH. I know it very well: it was not the first time that he has met
with me. It was he that came to me when I dwelt securely at home, and
that told me he would burn my house over my head if I stayed there.

CHRIS. But Did not you see the house that stood there, on the top of
that hill on the side of which Moses met you?

FAITH. Yes, and the lions too, before I came at it. But, for the lions,
I think they were asleep, for it was about noon; and because I had so
much of the day before me I passed by the Porter, and came down the
hill.

CHRIS. He told me, indeed, that he saw you go by; but I wished you had
called at the house, for they would have showed you so many rarities,
that you would scarce have forgot them to the day of your death. But
pray tell me, did you meet nobody in the Valley of Humility?

FAITH. Yes, I met with one Discontent, who would willingly have
persuaded me to go back again with him: his reason was, for that the
valley was altogether without honor. He told me, moreover, that there to
go was the way to disoblige all my friends, as Pride, Arrogancy,
Self-Conceit, Worldly-Glory, with others, who he knew, as he said, would
be very much offended if I made such a fool of myself as to wade through
this valley.

CHRIS. Well, and how did you answer him?

FAITH. I told him that, although all these that he named might claim
kindred of me, and that rightly (for, indeed, they were my relations
according to the flesh), yet, since I became a pilgrim, they have
disowned me, as I also have rejected them; and therefore they were to me
now no more than if they had never been of my lineage. I told him,
moreover, that as to this valley, he had quite misrepresented the thing;
for before honor is humility, and a haughty spirit before a fall.
"Therefore," said I, "I had rather go through this valley to the honor
that was so accounted by the wisest, than choose that which he esteemed
most worthy of our affections."

CHRIS. Met you with nothing else in that valley?

[Sidenote: SHAME A BOLD VILLAIN]

FAITH. Yes, I met with Shame; but, of all the men that I met with in my
pilgrimage, he I think, bears the wrong name. The others would take
"No" for an answer, at least after some words of denial; but this
bold-faced Shame would never have done.

CHRIS. Why, what did he say to you?

FAITH. What? why, he objected against religion itself. He said it was a
pitiful, low, sneaking business for a man to mind religion. He said that
a tender conscience was an unmanly thing; and that for a man to watch
over his words and ways, so as to tie up himself from that liberty that
the brave spirits of the times accustom themselves unto, would make him
the ridicule of all the people in our time. He objected also, that but a
few of the mighty, rich, or wise were ever of my opinion; nor any of
them neither, before they were persuaded to be fools, to venture the
loss of all for nobody else knows what. He, moreover, objected the base
and low estate and condition of those that were chiefly the pilgrims of
the times in which they lived; also their ignorance, and want of
understanding in all worldly knowledge. Yea, he did hold me to it at
that rate also, about a great many more things than here I relate; as,
that it was a shame to sit whining and mourning under a sermon, and a
shame to come sighing and groaning home; that it was a shame to ask my
neighbor forgiveness for petty faults, or to give back what I had taken
from any. He said also that religion made a man grow strange to the
great, because of a few vices (which he called by finer names), and
because religion made him own and respect the base, who were of the same
religious company; "and is not this," said he, "a shame?"

CHRIS. And what did you say to him?

FAITH. Say? I could not tell what to say at first. Yea, he put me so to
it that my blood came up in my face; even this Shame fetched it up, and
had almost beat me quite off. But at last I began to consider that that
which is highly esteemed among men is had in abomination with God. And I
thought again, This Shame tells me what men are, but it tells me nothing
what God, or the Word of God is. And I thought, moreover, that at the
day of doom we shall not be doomed to death or life according to the
spirits of the world, but according to the wisdom and law of the
Highest. Therefore, thought I, what God says is best--is best, though
all the men in the world are against it. Seeing, then, that God prefers
His religion; seeing God prefers a tender conscience; seeing they that
make themselves fools for the kingdom of heaven are wisest, and that the
poor man that loveth Christ is richer than the greatest man in the world
that hates Him; Shame, depart! thou art an enemy to my salvation. Shall
I listen to thee against my sovereign Lord? how, then, shall I look Him
in the face at His coming? Should I now be ashamed of His way and
servants how can I expect the blessing? But, indeed, this Shame was a
bold villain: I could scarce shake him out of my company; yea, he would
be haunting of me, and continually whispering me in the ear with some
one or other of the weak things that attend religion. But at last I told
him it was in vain to attempt further in this business; for those things
that he despised, in those did I see most glory; and so, at last, I got
past this persistent one. And when I had shaken him off, then I began to
sing,

  "The trials that those men do meet withal,
  That are obedient to the heavenly call,
  Are manifold, and suited to the flesh,
  And come, and come, and come again afresh;
  That now, or some time else, we by them may
  Be taken, overcome, and cast away.
  Oh, let the pilgrims, let the pilgrims then,
  Be vigilant and quit themselves like men!"

CHRIS. I am glad, my brother, that thou didst withstand this villain so
bravely: for of all, as thou sayest, I think he has the wrong name; for
he is so bold as to follow us in the streets, and to attempt to put us
to shame before all men; that is, to make us ashamed of that which is
good. But, if he was not himself bold, he would never attempt to do as
he does. But let us still resist him; for, notwithstanding all his bold
words, he promoteth the fool, and none else. "The wise shall inherit
glory," said Solomon; "but shame shall be the promotion of fools."

FAITH. I think we must cry to Him for help against Shame who would have
us to be valiant for truth upon the earth.

CHRIS. You say true. But did you meet nobody else in that valley?

FAITH. No, not I; for I had sunshine all the rest of the way through
that, and also through the Valley of the Shadow of Death.

CHRIS. It was well for you! I am sure it fared far otherwise with me. I
had for a long season, as soon almost as I entered into that valley, a
dreadful combat with that foul fiend Apollyon; yea, I thought verily he
would have killed me, especially when he got me down, and crushed me
under him, as if he would have crushed me to pieces. For, as he threw
me, my sword flew out of my hand; nay, he told me he was sure of me; and
I cried to God, and He heard me, and delivered me out of all my
troubles. Then I entered into the Valley of the Shadow of Death, and had
no light for almost half the way through it. I thought I should have
been killed there over and over: but at last day broke, and the sun
rose, and I went through that which was behind with far more ease and
quiet.

[Sidenote: TALKATIVE OVERTAKEN]

Moreover, I saw in my dream that, as they went on, Faithful, as he
chanced to look on one side, saw a man whose name is Talkative walking
at a distance beside them; for in this place there was room enough for
them all to walk. He was a tall man, and something better looking at a
distance than near at hand. To this man Faithful spoke himself in this
manner:

FAITH. Friend, whither away? Are you going to the heavenly country?

TALK. I am going to that same place.

FAITH. That is well; then I hope we may have your good company.

TALK. With a very good will, will I be your companion.

FAITH. Come on, then, and let us go together, and let us spend our time
in talking of things that are profitable.

TALK. To talk of things that are good, to me is very acceptable, with
you or with any other; and I am glad that I have met with those that
incline to so good a work; for, to speak the truth, there are but few
who care thus to spend their time as they are in their travels, but
choose much rather to be speaking of things to no profit; and this has
been a trouble to me.

FAITH. That is, indeed, a thing to be lamented; for what things so
worthy of the use of the tongue and mouth of men on earth, as are the
things of the God of heaven?

TALK. I like you wonderfully well, for your saying is full of the truth;
and I will add, What thing is so pleasant, and what so profitable, as to
talk of the things of God? What things so pleasant? that is, if a man
hath any delight in things that are wonderful. For instance, if a man
doth delight to talk of the history or the mystery of things, or if a
man doth love to talk of miracles, wonders, or signs, where shall he
find things written so delightful, or so sweetly penned, as in the Holy
Scripture?

FAITH. That's true; but to be profited by such things in our talk should
be that which we design.

[Sidenote: TALKATIVE SELF-DECEIVED]

TALK. That is it that I said; for to talk of such things is most
profitable; for, by so doing, a man may get knowledge of many things; as
of the folly of earthly things, and the benefit of things above.
Besides, by this a man may learn what it is to turn from sin, to
believe, to pray, to suffer, or the like; by this, also, a man may learn
what are the great promises and comforts of the Gospel, to his own
enjoyment. Further, by this a man may learn to answer false opinions, to
prove the truth, and also to teach the ignorant.

FAITH. All this is true; and glad am I to hear these things from you.

TALK. Alas! the want of this is the cause that so few understand the
need of faith, and the necessity of a work of grace in their soul, in
order to eternal life.

FAITH. But, by your leave, heavenly knowledge of these is the gift of
God; no man attaineth to them by human working, or only by the talk of
them.

TALK. All that I know very well, for a man can receive nothing except it
be given him from heaven; I could give you a hundred scriptures for the
confirmation of this.

FAITH. "Well, then," said Faithful, "what is that one thing that we
shall at this time found our talk upon?"

TALK. What you will. I will talk of things heavenly or things earthly;
things in life or things in the gospel; things sacred or things worldly;
things past or things to come; things foreign or things at home; things
necessary or things accidental, provided that all be done to our profit.

FAITH. Now did Faithful begin to wonder; and, stepping to Christian (for
he walked all this while by himself), he said to him, but softly, "What
a brave companion have we got! Surely this man will make a very
excellent pilgrim."

[Sidenote: FAITHFUL DISPUTES TALKATIVE]

CHRIS. At this Christian modestly smiled, and said, "This man with whom
you are so taken will deceive with this tongue of his twenty of them
that know him not."

FAITH. Do you know him, then?

CHRIS. Know him? Yes, better than he knows himself.

FAITH. Pray what is he?

CHRIS. His name is Talkative; he dwelleth in our town. I wonder that you
should be a stranger to him: only I consider that our town is large.

FAITH. Whose son is he? and whereabout doth he dwell?

CHRIS. He is the son of one Say-well. He dwelt in Prating Row, and is
known to all that are acquainted with him by the name of Talkative of
Prating Row; and notwithstanding his fine tongue, he is but a sorry
fellow.

FAITH. Well, he seems to be a very pretty man.

CHRIS. That is, to them that have not a thorough acquaintance with him,
for he is best abroad; near home he is ugly enough. Your saying that he
is a pretty man brings to my mind what I have observed in the work of
the painter, whose pictures show best at a distance, but very near more
unpleasing.

FAITH. But I am ready to think you do but jest, because you smiled.

CHRIS. God forbid that I should jest (though I smiled) in this matter,
or that I should accuse any falsely. I will give you a further discovery
of him. This man is for any company, and for any talk. As he talketh now
with you, so will he talk when he is on the ale-bench; and the more
drink he hath in his crown, the more of these things he hath in his
mouth. Religion hath no place in his heart, or house, or conversation:
all he hath lieth in his tongue, and his religion is to make a noise
therewith.

FAITH. Say you so? Then am I in this man greatly deceived.

CHRIS. Deceived! you may be sure of it. Remember the proverb, "They say,
and do not;" but the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. He
talketh of prayer, of turning to God, of faith, and of the new birth;
but he knows but only to talk of them. I have been in his family, and
have seen him both at home and abroad, and I know what I say of him is
the truth. His house is as empty of religion as the white of an egg is
of savor. There is there neither prayer nor sign of turning from sin;
yea, the brute, in his kind, serves God far better than he. He is the
very stain, reproach, and shame of religion to all that know him. It can
hardly have a good word in all that end of the town where he dwells,
through him. Thus say the common people that know him: "A saint abroad,
and a devil at home." His poor family finds it so: he is such a
fault-finder, such a railer at, and so unreasonable with his servants,
that they neither know how to do for or speak to him. Men that have any
dealings with him say, it is better to deal with a Turk than with him,
for fairer dealing they shall have at their hands. This Talkative, if it
be possible, will go beyond them, cheat, beguile, and overreach them.
Besides, he brings up his sons to follow his steps; and, if he findeth
in any of them a foolish timorousness (for so he calls the first
appearance of a tender conscience), he calls them fools and blockheads,
and by no means will employ them in much, or speak to their commendation
before others. For my part, I am of opinion that he has, by his wicked
life, caused many to stumble and fall, and will be, if God prevent not,
the ruin of many more.

FAITH. Well, my brother, I am bound to believe you, not only because you
say you know him, but also because like a Christian you make your
reports of men. For I cannot think you speak these things of ill-will,
but because it is even so as you say.

CHRIS. Had I known him no more than you, I might, perhaps, have thought
of him as at first you did; yea, had he received this report only from
those that are enemies to religion, I should have thought it had been a
slander, a lot that often falls from bad men's mouths upon good men's
names and professions. But all these things, yea, and a great many more
as bad, of my own knowledge I can prove him guilty of. Besides, good men
are ashamed of him: they can neither call him brother nor friend; the
very naming of him among them makes them blush, if they know him.

FAITH. Well, I see that saying and doing are two things, and hereafter I
shall better observe the difference between them.

CHRIS. They are two things, indeed, and are as diverse as are the soul
and the body; for, as the body without the soul is but a dead carcase,
so _saying_, if it be alone, is but a dead carcase also. The soul of
religion is the practical part. "Pure religion and undefiled before God
and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and the widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world." This,
Talkative is not aware of: he thinks that hearing and saying will make a
good Christian, and thus he deceiveth his own soul. Hearing is but as
the sowing of the seed; talking is not sufficient to prove that fruit is
indeed in the heart and life. And let us assure ourselves that, at the
day of doom, men shall be judged according to their fruits.

FAITH. Well, I was not so fond of his company at first, but I am as sick
of it now. What shall we do to be rid of him?

CHRIS. Take my advice, and do as I bid you, and you shall find that he
will soon be sick of your company too, except God shall touch his heart
and turn it.

FAITH. What would you have me to do?

CHRIS. Why, go to him, and enter into some serious conversation about
the power of religion and ask him plainly (when he has approved of it,
for that he will) whether this thing be set up in his heart, house or
conduct.

FAITH. Then Faithful stepped forward again, and said to Talkative,
"Come, what cheer? How is it now?"

TALK. Thank you, well: I thought we should have had a great deal of talk
by this time.

FAITH. Well, if you will, we will fall to it now; and, since you left it
with me to state the question, let it be this: How doth the saving grace
of God show itself when it is in the heart of man?

TALK. I perceive, then, that our talk must be about the power of things.
Well, it is a very good question, and I shall be willing to answer you.
And take my answer in brief, thus. First, where the grace of God is in
the heart, it causeth there a great outcry against sin. Secondly,--

FAITH. Nay, hold; let us consider of one at once. I think you should
rather say, it shows itself by inclining the soul to hate its sin.

TALK. Why, what difference is there between crying out against and
hating sin?

FAITH. Oh! a great deal. A man may cry out against sin in order to
appear good; but he cannot hate it except by a real dislike for it. I
have heard many cry out against sin in the pulpit, who yet can abide it
well enough in the heart, house, and life. Some cry out against sin,
even as the mother cries out against her child in her lap, when she
calleth it a naughty girl, and then falls to hugging and kissing it.

TALK. You are trying to catch me, I perceive.

FAITH. No, not I; I am only for setting things right. But what is the
second thing whereby you would prove a discovery of a work of God in the
heart?

TALK. Great knowledge of hard things in the Bible.

[Sidenote: TALKATIVE PARTS COMPANY]

FAITH. This sign should have been first; but, first or last, it is also
false; for knowledge, great knowledge, may be obtained in the mysteries
of the Gospel, and yet no work of grace in the soul. Yea, if a man have
all knowledge, he may yet be nothing, and so, consequently, be no child
of God. When Christ said, "Do ye know all these things?" and the
disciples had answered, "Yes," He added, "Blessed are ye if ye do them."
He doth not lay the blessing in the knowledge of them, but in the doing
of them. For there is a knowledge that is not attended with doing: "He
that knoweth his master's will, and doeth it not." A man may know like
an angel, and yet be no Christian; therefore your sign of it is not
true. Indeed, to know, is a thing that pleaseth talkers and boasters;
but to do is that which pleaseth God.

TALK. You are trying to catch me again: this is not profitable.

FAITH. Well, if you please, name another sign how this work of grace
showeth itself where it is.

TALK. Not I; for I see we shall not agree.

FAITH. Well, if you will not, will you give me leave to do it?

TALK. You may say what you please.

FAITH. God's work in the soul showeth itself either to him that hath it
or to standers by. To him that has it, it is shown by making him see and
feel his own sins. To others who are standing by it is shown by his
life, a life of doing right in the sight of God. And now, sir, as to
this brief account of the work of grace, and also the showing of it, if
you have aught to object, object; if not, then give me leave to ask you
a second question.

TALK. Nay, my part is not now to object, but to hear; let me, therefore,
have your second question.

FAITH. It is this: Have you felt your own sins, and have you turned from
them? And do your life and conduct show it the same? Or is your religion
in word or in tongue, and not in deed and truth? Pray, if you incline to
answer me in this, say no more than you know the God above will say
Amen to, and also nothing but what your conscience can approve you in;
for not he that commendeth himself is approved, but whom the Lord
commendeth. Besides, to say I am thus and thus, when my conduct and all
my neighbors tell me I lie, is great wickedness.

TALK. Then Talkative at first began to blush; but, recovering himself,
thus he replied: "This kind of discourse I did not expect; nor am I
disposed to give an answer to such questions, because I count not myself
bound thereto, unless you take upon you to be a questioner; and though
you should do so, yet I may refuse to make you my judge. But, I pray,
will you tell me why you ask me such questions?"

FAITH. Because I saw you forward to talk, and because I knew not that
you had aught else but notion. Besides, to tell you all the truth, I
have heard of you that you are a man whose religion lies in talk, and
that your life gives this your mouth-profession the lie. They say you
are a spot among Christians, and that religion fareth the worse for your
ungodly conduct; that some already have stumbled at your wicked ways,
and that more are in danger of being destroyed thereby: your religion,
and an alehouse, and greed for gain, and uncleanness, and swearing, and
lying, and vain company-keeping, etc., will stand together. You are a
shame to all who are members of the church.

TALK. Since you are ready to take up reports, and to judge so rashly as
you do, I cannot but conclude you are some peevish or cross man, not fit
to be talked with; and so adieu.

CHRIS. Then came up Christian, and said to his brother, "I told you how
it would happen; your words and his heart could not agree. He had rather
leave your company than reform his life. But he is gone, as I said: let
him go; the loss is no man's but his own: he has saved us the trouble of
going from him; for he continuing (as I suppose he will do) as he is, he
would have been but a blot in our company. Besides, the Apostle says,
'From such withdraw thyself.'"

FAITH. But I am glad we had this little talk with him; it may happen
that he will think of it again: however, I have dealt plainly with him,
and so am clear of his blood, if he perisheth.

CHRIS. You did well to talk so plainly to him as you did. There is but
little of this faithful dealing with men now-a-days; and that makes
religion to be despised by so many; for they are these talkative fools,
whose religion is only in word, and are vile and vain in their life,
that, being so much admitted into the fellowship of the godly, do puzzle
the world, blemish Christianity, and grieve the sincere. I wish that all
men would deal with such as you have done; then should they either be
made more suitable to religion, or the company of saints would be too
hot for them.

FAITH. Then did Faithful say,

  "How Talkative at first lifts up his plumes!
  How bravely doth he speak! How he presumes
  To drive down all before him! But so soon
  As Faithful talks of heart-work, like the moon
  That's past the full, into the wane he goes;
  And so will all but he who heart-work knows."

Thus they went on, talking of what they had seen by the way, and so made
that way easy, which would otherwise, no doubt, have been tedious to
them; for now they went through a wilderness.




CHAPTER VI.


Now, when they were got almost quite out of this wilderness, Faithful
chanced to cast his eye back, and espied one coming after him, and he
knew him. "Oh!" said Faithful to his brother, "who comes yonder?" Then
Christian looked, and said, "It is my good friend Evangelist." "Ay, and
my good friend, too," said Faithful; "for it was he that set me the way
to the gate." Now was Evangelist come up unto them, and thus saluted
them:

EVAN. Peace be with you, dearly beloved, and peace be to your helpers.

CHRIS. Welcome, welcome, my good Evangelist: the sight of thy face
brings to my thought thy former kindness and unwearied laboring for my
eternal good.

FAITH. "And a thousand times welcome," said good Faithful: "thy company,
O sweet Evangelist, how desirable is it to us poor pilgrims!"

EVAN. Then said Evangelist, "How hath it fared with you, my friends,
since the time of our last parting? What have you met with, and how have
you behaved yourselves?"

Then Christian and Faithful told him of all things that had happened to
them in the way; and how, and with what difficulty, they had arrived to
that place.

EVAN. "Right glad am I," said Evangelist, "not that you met with trials,
but that you have been victors, and for that you have, notwithstanding
many weaknesses, continued in the way to this very day. I say, right
glad am I of this thing, and that for my own sake and yours. I have
sowed, and you have reaped; and the day is coming when 'both he that
sowed and they that reaped shall rejoice together;' that is, if you
faint not. The crown is before you, and it is an uncorruptible one: so
run that you may obtain it. Some there be that set out for this crown,
and after they have gone far for it, another comes in and takes it from
them: 'Hold fast, therefore, that you have; let no man take your
crown.'"

Then Christian thanked him for his words, but told him withal that they
would have him speak further to them, for their help the rest of the
way; and the rather, for that they well knew that he was a prophet, and
could tell them of things that might happen unto them, and also how they
might resist and overcome them. To which request Faithful also
consented. So Evangelist began as followeth:

[Sidenote: EVANGELIST EXHORTS CHRISTIAN]

EVAN. My sons, you have heard, in the words of the truth of the Gospel,
that you must "through many trials enter into the kingdom of heaven;"
and again, that "in every city bonds and afflictions await you;" and
therefore you cannot expect that you should go long on your pilgrimage
without them in some sort or other. You have found something of the
truth of these words upon you already, and more will immediately follow;
for now, as you see, you are almost out of this wilderness, and
therefore you will soon come into a town that you will by-and-by see
before you; and in that town you will be hardly beset with enemies who
will strain hard but they will kill you; and be you sure that one or
both of you must seal the truth which you hold with blood: but be you
faithful unto death, and the King will give you a crown of life. He that
shall die there, although his death will be unnatural, and his pain,
perhaps, great, he will yet have the better of his fellow; not only
because he will be arrived at the Celestial City soonest, but because he
will escape many miseries that the other will meet with in the rest of
his journey. But when you are come to the town, and shall find fulfilled
what I have here related, then remember your friend, and quit yourselves
like men, and commit the keeping of your souls to God in well-doing, as
unto a faithful Creator.

[Sidenote: THE PILGRIMS AT VANITY FAIR]

Then I saw in my dream, that, when they were got out of the wilderness,
they presently saw a town before them, and the name of that town is
Vanity; and at the town there is a fair kept, called Vanity Fair. It is
kept all the year long. It beareth the name of Vanity Fair, because the
town where it is kept is lighter than vanity, and also because all that
is there sold, or that cometh thither, is vanity; as is the saying of
the Wise, "All that cometh is vanity."

This is no newly begun business, but a thing of ancient standing. I will
show you the original of it.

Almost five thousand years ago, there were pilgrims walking to the
Celestial City, as these two honest persons are; and Beelzebub,
Apollyon, and Legion, with their companions, perceiving by the path that
the pilgrims made that their way to the city lay through this town of
Vanity, they contrived here to set up a fair; a fair wherein should be
sold all sorts of vanity, and that it should last all the year long.
Therefore at this fair are all such things sold as houses, lands,
trades, places, honors, preferments, titles, countries, kingdoms, lusts,
pleasures, and delights of all sorts, as wives, husbands, children,
masters, servants, lives, blood, bodies, souls, silver, gold, pearls,
precious stones, and what not.

And, moreover, at this fair there are at all times to be seen jugglings,
cheats, games, plays, fools, apes, knaves, and rogues, and that of every
kind.

Here are to be seen, too, and that for nothing, thefts, murders, false
swearers, and that of a blood-red color.

And, as in other fairs of less moment there are several rows and streets
under their proper names, where such and such wares are vended; so here
likewise you have the proper places, rows, streets (namely, countries
and kingdoms), where the wares of this fair are soonest to be found.
Here are the Britain Row, the French Row, the Italian Row, the Spanish
Row, the German Row, where several sorts of vanities are to be sold.
But, as in other fairs some one commodity is as the chief of all the
fair, so the ware of Rome and her goods are greatly promoted in this
fair; only our English nation, with some others, have taken dislike
thereat.

Now, as I said, the way to the Celestial City lies just through this
town where this lusty fair is kept; and he that would go to the city,
and yet not go through this town, "must needs go out of the world." The
Prince of princes Himself, when here, went through this town to His own
country, and that upon a fair day too; yea, and as I think, it was
Beelzebub, the chief lord of this fair, that invited Him to buy of his
vanities; yea, would have made Him lord of the fair, would He but have
done him reverence as He went through the town. Yea, because He was such
a person of honor, Beelzebub had Him from street to street, and showed
Him all the kingdoms of the world in a little time, that he might, if
possible, allure that Blessed One to ask for and buy some of his
vanities; but He had no mind to the merchandise, and therefore left the
town without laying out so much as one farthing upon these vanities.
This fair, therefore, is an ancient thing of long-standing, and a very
great fair.

Now, these pilgrims, as I said, must needs go through this fair. Well,
so they did; but, behold, even as they entered into the fair, all the
people in the fair were moved and the town itself, as it were, in a
hubbub about them, and that for several reasons; for,

First,--The pilgrims were clothed with such kind of garments as were
different from the raiment of any that traded in that fair. The people,
therefore, of the fair, made a great gazing upon them: some said they
were fools; some, they were bedlams; and some, they were outlandish men.

Secondly,--And, as they wondered at their apparel, so they did likewise
at their speech; for few could understand what they said. They naturally
spoke the language of Canaan; but they that kept the fair were the men
of this world. So that from one end of the fair to the other, they
seemed barbarians each to the other.

Thirdly,--But that which did not a little amuse the store-keepers was,
that these pilgrims set very light by all their wares. They cared not so
much as to look upon them; and if they called upon them to buy, they
would put their fingers in their ears, and cry, "Turn away mine eyes
from beholding vanity," and look upwards, signifying that their trade
and traffic were in heaven.

One chanced, mockingly, beholding the actions of the men, to say unto
them, "What will you buy?" But they, looking gravely upon him, said, "We
buy the truth." At that there was an occasion taken to despise the men
the more: some mocking, some taunting, some speaking reproachfully, and
some calling on others to smite them. At last things came to a hubbub
and great stir in the fair, insomuch that all order was confounded. Now
was word presently brought to the great one of the fair, who quickly
came down, and deputed some of his most trusty friends to take these men
for trial about whom the fair was almost overturned. So the men were
brought to trial, and they that sat upon them asked them whence they
came, whither they went, and what they did there in such an unusual
garb. The men told them that they were pilgrims and strangers in the
world, and that they were going to their own country, which was the
heavenly Jerusalem, and that they had given no occasion to the men of
the town, nor yet to the merchants, thus to abuse them, and to hinder
them in their journey, except it was for that, when one asked them what
they would buy, they said they would buy the truth. But they that were
appointed to examine them did not believe them to be any other than
crazy people and mad, or else such as came to put all things into a
confusion in the fair. Therefore they took them and beat them, and
besmeared them with dirt, and then put them into the cage, that they
might be made a spectacle to all the men of the fair. There, therefore,
they lay for some time, and were made the objects of any man's sport, or
malice, or revenge; the great one of the fair laughing still at all that
befell them. But, the men being patient, and "not rendering railing for
railing, but contrariwise blessing," and giving good words for bad, and
kindness for injuries done, some men in the fair that were more
observing and less opposed than the rest, began to check and blame the
baser sort for their continual abuses done by them to the men. They,
therefore, in an angry manner, let fly at them again, counting them as
bad as the men in the cage, and telling them that they seemed to be in
league with them, and should be made partakers of their misfortunes. The
others replied, that, for aught they could see, the men were quiet and
sober, and intended nobody any harm; and that there were many that
traded in their fair that were more worthy to be put into the cage, yea,
and pillory too, than were the men that they had abused. Thus, after
divers words had passed on both sides (the men behaving themselves all
the while very wisely and soberly before them,) they fell to some blows,
and did harm to one another. Then were these two poor men brought before
the court again, and there charged as being guilty of the late hubbub
that had been in the fair. So they beat them pitifully, and hanged irons
upon them, and led them in chains up and down the fair, for an example
and terror to others, lest any should speak in their behalf, or join
themselves unto them. But Christian and Faithful behaved themselves yet
more wisely, and received the wrongs and shame that were cast upon them
with so much meekness and patience, that it won to their side (though
but few in comparison of the rest) several of the men in the fair. This
put the other party in yet a greater rage, insomuch that they resolved
upon the death of these two men. Wherefore they threatened that neither
cage nor irons should serve their turn, but that they should die for the
abuse they had done, and for deceiving the men of the fair.

[Sidenote: THE PILGRIMS IN STOCKS]

Then were they remanded to the cage again, until further order should be
taken with them. So they put them in, and made their feet fast in the
stocks.

Here, therefore, they called again to mind what they had heard from
their faithful friend Evangelist, and were more confirmed in their way
and sufferings, by what he told them would happen to them. They also now
comforted each other, that whose lot it was to suffer, even he should
have the best of it; therefore each man secretly wished he might have
that privilege. But, committing themselves to the all-wise disposal of
Him that ruleth all things, with much content they abode in the
condition in which they were, until they should be otherwise disposed
of.

[Sidenote: LORD HATE-GOOD]

Then a convenient time being appointed, they brought them forth to their
trial, in order to their being condemned. When the time was come, they
were brought before their enemies, and placed on trial. The judge's name
was Lord Hate-good: the charges against both were one and the same in
substance, though somewhat varying in form; the contents whereof were
this: "That they were enemies to and disturbers of their trade; that
they had made riots and divisions in the town, and had won a party to
their own most dangerous opinions, in contempt of the law of their
prince."

Then Faithful began to answer, that he had only set himself against that
which had set itself against Him that is higher than the highest. "And,"
said he, "as for disturbances, I make none, being myself a man of peace;
the parties that were won to us, were won by beholding our truth and
innocence, and they are only turned from the worse to the better. And,
as to the king you talk of, since he is Beelzebub, the enemy of our
Lord, I defy him and all his angels."

[Sidenote: THE PILGRIMS ON TRIAL]

Then it was made known that they that had aught to say for their lord
the king against the prisoner at the bar should forthwith appear and
give in their evidence. So there came in three witnesses; to wit, Envy,
Superstition, and Pickthank. They were then asked if they knew the
prisoner at the bar, and what they had to say for their lord the king
against him.

Then stood forth Envy, and said to this effect: "My lord, I have known
this man a long time, and will attest upon my oath before this honorable
bench that he is--"

JUDGE. Hold! Give him his oath.

ENVY. So they sware him. Then said he, "My lord, this man,
notwithstanding his name, Faithful is one of the vilest men in our
country. He cares for neither prince nor people, law nor custom, but
doth all that he can to possess all men with certain of his disloyal
notions, which he in the general calls principles of faith and holiness.
And in particular, I heard him once myself affirm that Christianity and
the customs of our town of Vanity were opposite, and could not be
reconciled. By which saying, my lord, he doth at once not only condemn
all our laudable doings, but us in the doing of them."

JUDGE. Then did the judge say to him, "Hast thou any more to say?"

ENVY. My lord, I could say much more, only I would not be tiresome to
the court. Yet, if need be, when the other gentlemen have given in their
evidence, rather than anything shall be wanting that will dispatch him,
I will have more to speak against him. So he was bid stand by.

Then they called Superstition, and bade him look upon the prisoner. They
also asked what he could say for their lord the king against him. Then
they sware him: so he began:

SUPER. My lord, I have no great acquaintance with this man, nor do I
desire to have further knowledge of him. However, this I know, that he
is a very pestilent fellow, from some discourse the other day that I had
with him in this town; for then, talking with him, I heard him say that
our religion was naught, and such by which a man could by no means
please God. Which saying of his, my lord, your lordship very well knows
what necessarily thence will follow; to wit, that we still do worship in
vain, are yet in our sins, and finally shall be destroyed: and this is
that which I have to say.

Then was Pickthank sworn, and bid say what he knew, in behalf of their
lord the king, against the prisoner at the bar.

PICK. My lord, and you gentlemen all, this fellow I have known a long
time, and have heard him speak things that ought not to be spoken, for
he hath railed on our noble prince Beelzebub, and hath spoken
contemptuously of his honorable friends, whose names are, the Lord
Old-man, the Lord Carnal-Delight, the Lord Luxurious, the Lord
Desire-of-Vain-Glory, my old Lord Lust, Sir Having Greedy, with all the
rest of our nobility and he hath said, moreover, that, if all men were
of his mind, if possible there is not one of these noblemen should have
any longer a being in this town. Besides, he has not been afraid to rail
on you, my lord, who are now appointed to be his judge, calling you an
ungodly villain, with many other such-like abusive terms, with which he
hath bespattered most of the gentry of our town.

JUDGE. When this Pickthank had told his tale, the judge directed his
speech to the prisoner at the bar, saying, "Thou runagate, heretic, and
traitor! hast thou heard what these honest gentlemen have witnessed
against thee?"

FAITH. May I speak a few words in my own defense?

JUDGE. Sirrah, sirrah, thou deservest to live no longer, but to be slain
immediately upon the place; yet, that all men may see our gentleness
towards thee, let us hear what thou, vile runagate, hast to say.

FAITH. 1. I say, then, in answer to what Mr. Envy hath spoken, I have
never said aught but this, that what rule, or laws, or custom, or people
were flat against the Word of God, are opposite to Christianity. If I
have said amiss in this, convince me of my error, and I am ready here
before you to take back my words.

2. As to the second, to wit, Mr. Superstition and his charge against me,
I said only this, that in the worship of God there is required true
faith. But there can be no true faith without a knowledge of the will of
God. Therefore, whatever is thrust into the worship of God that is not
agreeable to the word of God will not profit to eternal life.

3. As to what Mr. Pickthank hath said, I say (avoiding terms, as that I
am said to rail, and the like), that the prince of this town, with all
the rabblement his attendants, by this gentleman named, are more fit for
a being in hell than in this town and country. And so the Lord have
mercy upon me!

Then the judge called to the jury (who all this while stood by to hear
and observe), "Gentlemen of the jury, you see this man about whom so
great an uproar hath been made in this town; you have also heard what
these worthy gentlemen have witnessed against him; also you have heard
his reply and confession. It lieth now in your breast to hang him or to
save his life; but yet I think meet to instruct you into our law.

"There was an act made in the days of Pharaoh, the great servant to our
prince, that, lest those of a contrary religion should multiply and grow
too strong for him, their males should be thrown into the river. There
was also an act made in the days of Nebuchadnezzar the Great, another of
his servants, that whoever would not fall down and worship his golden
image should be thrown into a fiery furnace. There was also an act made
in the days of Darius, that whoso for some time called upon any god but
him should be cast into the lions' den. Now, the substance of these laws
this rebel has broken, not only in thought (which is not to be borne,)
but also in word and deed, which must, therefore, needs be intolerable.
You see he disputeth against our religion; and for the reason that he
hath confessed he deserveth to die the death."

[Sidenote: FAITHFUL DIES AT THE STAKE]

Then went the jury out, whose names were Mr. Blind-man, Mr. No-good, Mr.
Malice, Mr. Love-lust, Mr. Live-loose, Mr. Heady, Mr. High-mind, Mr.
Enmity, Mr. Liar, Mr. Cruelty, Mr. Hate-light, and Mr. Implacable, who
every one gave in his private voice against him among themselves, and
afterwards unanimously concluded to bring him in guilty before the
Judge. And first among themselves, Mr. Blind-man, the foreman, said, "I
see clearly that this man is a heretic." Then said Mr. No-good, "Away
with such a fellow from the earth!" "Ay," said Mr. Malice, "for I hate
the very look of him." Then said Mr. Love-lust, "I could never endure
him." "Nor I," said Mr. Live-loose; "for he would always be condemning
my way." "Hang him, hang him!" said Mr. Heady. "A sorry scrub," said Mr.
High-mind. "My heart riseth against him," said Mr. Enmity. "He is a
rogue," said Mr. Liar. "Hanging is too good for him," said Mr. Cruelty.
"Let us dispatch him out of the way," said Mr. Hate-light. Then said Mr.
Implacable, "Might I have all the world given to me, I could not be
reconciled to him; therefore let us forthwith bring him in guilty of
death."

And so they did: therefore he was presently condemned to be had from the
place where he was, to the place from whence he came, and there to be
put to the most cruel death that could be invented.

They therefore brought him out, to do with him according to their law;
and first they scourged him, then they buffeted him, then they lanced
his flesh with knives; after that they stoned him with stones, then
pricked him with their swords, and, last of all, they burned him to
ashes at the stake. Thus came Faithful to his end.

Now, I saw that there stood behind the multitude a chariot and a couple
of horses waiting for Faithful, who (so soon as his enemies had slain
him) was taken up into it, and straightway was carried up through the
clouds with sound of trumpet the nearest way to the Celestial Gate. But
as for Christian, he had some delay, and was sent back to prison; so he
there remained for a space. But He who overrules all things, having the
power of their rage in his own hand, so wrought it about that Christian
for that time escaped them, and went his way. And as he went, he sang,
saying,

  "Well, Faithful, thou hast faithfully professed
  Unto thy Lord, with whom thou shalt be blest,
  When faithless ones, with all their vain delights,
  Are crying out under their hellish plights.
  Sing, Faithful, sing, and let thy name survive;
  For though they killed thee, thou art yet alive."

[Illustration: Hopeful and Christian.
                                   Page 120]




CHAPTER VII.


Now, I saw in my dream, that Christian went forth not alone; for there
was one whose name was Hopeful (being so made by looking upon Christian
and Faithful in their words and behavior in their sufferings at the
fair,) who joined himself unto him, and, entering into a brotherly
pledge told him that he would be his companion. Thus one died to show
faithfulness to the truth, and another rises out of his ashes to be a
companion with Christian in his pilgrimage. This Hopeful also told
Christian that there were many more of the men in the fair that would
take their time and follow after.

[Sidenote: BY-ENDS OF FAIR-SPEECH]

So I saw that, quickly after they were got out of the fair, they
overtook one that was going before them, whose name was By-ends; so they
said to him, "What countryman, sir? and how far go you this way?" He
told them that he came from the town of Fair-speech, and he was going to
the Celestial City; but told them not his name.

CHRIS. "From Fair-speech! are there any that be good live there?"

BY. "Yes," said By-ends, "I hope."

CHRIS. Pray, sir, what may I call you?

BY. I am a stranger to you, and you to me: if you be going this way, I
shall be glad of your company; if not, I must be content.

CHRIS. This town of Fair-speech, I have heard of it; and, as I remember,
they say it's a wealthy place.

BY. Yes, I will assure you that it is; and I have very many rich kindred
there.

CHRIS. Pray, who are your kindred there? if a man may be so bold.

BY. Almost the whole town; but in particular my Lord Turnabout, my Lord
Timeserver, my Lord Fair-speech, from whose ancestors that town first
took its name; also Mr. Smooth-man, Mr. Facing-both-ways, Mr. Anything;
and the parson of our parish, Mr. Two-tongues, was my mother's own
brother by father's side; and to tell you the truth, I am become a
gentleman of good quality; yet my great-grandfather was but a waterman,
looking one way and rowing another, and I got most of my estate by the
same occupation.

CHRIS. Are you a married man?

BY. Yes, and my wife is a very virtuous woman, the daughter of a
virtuous woman; she was my Lady Feigning's daughter: therefore she came
of a very honorable family, and is arrived to such a pitch of breeding,
that she knows how to carry it to all, even to prince and peasant. 'Tis
true we somewhat differ in religion from those of the stricter sort, yet
but in two small points: First, we never strive against wind and tide;
secondly, we are always most zealous when Religion is well dressed and
goes in his silver slippers: we love much to walk with him in the
street if the sun shines and the people praise him.

Then Christian stepped a little aside to his fellow Hopeful, saying, "It
runs in my mind that this is one By-ends, of Fair-speech; and if it be
he, we have as very a knave in our company as dwelleth in all these
parts." Then said Hopeful, "Ask him; methinks he should not be ashamed
of his name." So Christian came up with him again, and said, "Sir, you
talk as if you knew something more than all the world doth; and if I
take not my mark amiss, I deem I have half a guess of you. Is not your
name Mr. By-ends, of Fair-speech?"

BY. This is not my name; but, indeed, it is a nickname that is given me
by some that cannot abide me, and I must be content to bear it as a
reproach, as other good men have borne theirs before me.

CHRIS. But did you never give an occasion to men to call you by this
name?

BY. Never, never! The worst that ever I did to give them an occasion to
give me this name was, that I had always the luck to jump in my judgment
with the present way of the times, whatever it was, and my chance was to
gain thereby. But if things are thus cast upon me, let me count them a
blessing; but let not the malicious load me therefore with reproach.

CHRIS. I thought, indeed, that you were the man that I heard of; and, to
tell you what I think, I fear this name belongs to you more properly
than you are willing we should think it doth.

BY. Well, if you will thus imagine, I cannot help it: you shall find me
a fair company-keeper if you still admit me your companion.

CHRIS. If you will go with us, you must go against wind and tide; the
which, I perceive, is against your opinion; you must also own Religion
in his rags, as well as when in his silver slippers; and stand by him,
too, when bound in irons, as well as when he walketh the streets with
applause.

BY. You must not impose or lord it over my faith; leave it to my
liberty, and let me go with you.

CHRIS. Not a step farther, unless you will do in what I declare as we
do.

BY. Then said By-ends, "I never desert my old principles, since they are
harmless and profitable. If I may not go with you, I must do as I did
before you overtook me, even go by myself, until some overtake me that
will be glad of my company."

[Sidenote: MONEY-LOVE'S PRINCIPLES]

Now, I saw in my dream that Christian and Hopeful forsook him, and kept
their distance before him; but one of them, looking back, saw three men
following Mr. By-ends; and, behold, as they came up with him, he made
them a very low bow, and they also gave him a compliment. The men's
names were Mr. Hold-the-world, Mr. Money-love, and Mr. Save-all; men
that Mr. By-ends had been formerly acquainted with; for in their
boyhood they were schoolfellows, and taught by one Mr. Gripe-man a
schoolmaster in Love-gain, which is a market town in the county of
Coveting, in the North. This schoolmaster taught them the art of
getting, either by violence, cheating, flattery, lying, or by putting on
a pretence of religion; and these four gentlemen had learned much of the
art of their master, so that they could each of them have kept such a
school themselves.

Well, when they had, as I said, thus saluted each other, Mr. Money-love
said to Mr. By-ends, "Who are they upon the road before us?" for
Christian and Hopeful were yet within view.

BY. They are a couple of far countrymen, that, after their mode, are
going on pilgrimage.

MONEY. Alas! why did they not stay, that we might have had their good
company? for they, and we, and you, sir, I hope, are all going on
pilgrimage.

BY. We are so, indeed; but the men before us are so rigid, and love so
much their own notions, and do also so lightly esteem the opinions of
others, that, let a man be ever so godly, yet, if he agrees not with
them in all things, they thrust him quite out of their company.

SAVE. That is bad; but we read of some that are righteous overmuch, and
such men's rigidness makes them to judge and condemn all but themselves.
But I pray, what and how many were the things wherein you differed?

BY. Why, they, after their headstrong manner conclude that it is their
duty to rush on their journey all weathers; and I am for waiting for
wind and tide. They are for taking the risk of all for God at a clap;
and I am for taking all advantages to secure my life and property. They
are for holding their notions, though all other men be against them; but
I am for religion in what and so far as, the times and my safety will
bear it. They are for Religion when in rags and contempt; but I am for
him when he walks in his golden slippers, in the sunshine, and with
applause.

HOLD. Ay, and hold you there still, good Mr. By-ends; for, for my part,
I can count him but a fool, that, having the liberty to keep what he
has, shall be so unwise as to lose it. Let us be wise as serpents. It is
best to make hay while the sun shines. You see how the bee lieth still
all winter, and bestirs her only when she can have profit and pleasure.
God sends sometimes rain and sometimes sunshine; if they be such fools
to go through the rain, yet let us be content to take fair weather along
with us. For my part, I like that religion best that will stand with the
safety of God's good blessings unto us; for who can imagine, that is
ruled by his reason, since God has bestowed upon us the good things of
this life, but that He would have us keep them for His sake? Abraham and
Solomon grew rich in religion; and Job says that "a good man should lay
up gold as dust;" but he must not be such as the men before us, if they
be as you have described them.

SAVE. I think that we are all agreed in this matter, and therefore there
needs no more words about it.

MONEY. No, there needs no more words about this matter, indeed; for he
that believes neither Scripture nor reason (and you see we have both on
our side), neither knows his own liberty nor seeks his own safety.

And so these four men, Mr. By-ends, Mr. Money-love, Mr. Save-all, and
old Mr. Hold-the-world, walked on together, while Christian and Hopeful
were far in advance.

[Sidenote: CHRISTIAN AND HOPEFUL]

Then Christian and Hopeful went on till they came to a delicate plain,
called Ease, where they went with much content; but that plain was but
narrow, so they were quickly got over it. Now at the farther side of
that plain was a little hill, called Lucre,[4] and in that hill a silver
mine, which some of them that had formerly gone that way, because of the
rarity of it, had turned aside to see; but going too near the brink of
the pit, the ground, being deceitful under them, broke, and they were
slain; some also had been maimed there, and could not to their dying day
be their own men again.

  [4] An old word meaning "money" or "riches."

Then I saw in my dream that a little off the road, over against the
silver mine, stood Demas (gentleman-like) to call to passengers to come
and see; who said to Christian and his fellow, "Ho! turn aside hither,
and I will show you a thing."

CHRIS. What thing so deserving as to turn us out of the way?

DEMAS. Here is a silver mine, and some digging in it for treasure; if
you will come, with a little pains you may richly provide for
yourselves.

HOPE. Then said Hopeful, "Let us go see."

CHRIS. "Not I," said Christian. "I have heard of this place before now,
and how many have there been slain; and besides, that treasure is a
snare to those that seek it, for it hindereth them in their pilgrimage."

CHRIS. Then Christian called to Demas, saying, "Is not the place
dangerous? Hath it not hindered many in their pilgrimage?"

DEMAS. Not very dangerous, except to those that are careless. But
withal, he blushed as he spake.

CHRIS. Then said Christian to Hopeful, "Let us not stir a step, but
still keep on our way."

HOPE. I will warrant you, when By-ends comes up, if he hath the same
invitation as we, he will turn in thither to see.

CHRIS. No doubt thereof, for his principles lead him that way; and a
hundred to one but he dies there.

DEMAS. Then Demas called out again, saying, "But will you not come over
and see?"

CHRIS. Then Christian roundly answered, saying, "Demas, thou art an
enemy to the right ways of the Lord of this way, and hast been already
condemned for thine own turning aside, by one of His Majesty's judges;
and why seekest thou to have us condemned also? Besides, if we at all
turn aside, our Lord the King will certainly hear thereof, and will
there put us to shame where we should stand with boldness before Him."

Demas cried again that he also was one of their company, a pilgrim like
themselves, and that, if they would tarry a little, he also himself
would walk with them.

CHRIS. Then said Christian, "What is thy name? Is it not the same by the
which I have called thee?"

DEMAS. Yes, my name is Demas; I am the son of Abraham.

CHRIS. I know you: Gehazi was your great-grandfather, and Judas your
father, and you have trod in their steps. It is but a devilish prank
that thou usest: thy father was hanged for a traitor, and thou deservest
no better reward. Assure thyself that when we come to the King, we will
tell him of this thy behavior. Thus they went their way.

By this time By-ends and his companions were come again within sight,
and they at the first beck went over to Demas. Now, whether they fell
into the pit by looking over the brink thereof, or whether they went
down to dig, or whether they were smothered in the bottom by the damps
that commonly arise, of these things I am not certain; but this I
observed, that they never were seen again in the way. Then sang
Christian:

  "By-ends and silver Demas both agree;
  One calls; the other runs, that he may be
  A sharer in his lucre; so these two
  Take up in this world, and no farther go."

Now, I saw that just on the other side of the plain the pilgrims came to
a place where stood an old monument hard by the highway-side; at the
sight of which they were both concerned, because of the strangeness of
the form thereof; for it seemed to them as if it had been a woman
changed into the shape of a pillar. Here, therefore, they stood looking
and looking upon it, but could not for a time tell what they should make
thereof. At last Hopeful espied written above, upon the head thereof, a
writing in an unusual hand; but he, being no scholar, called to
Christian (for he was learned,) to see if he could pick out the meaning;
so he came, and after a little laying of letters together, he found the
same to be this, "Remember Lot's wife." So he read it to his fellow;
after which, they both concluded that that was the pillar of salt into
which Lot's wife was turned, for her looking back with a covetous heart
when she was going from Sodom. Which sudden and amazing sight gave them
occasion for speaking thus:

CHRIS. Ah, my brother! this is a seasonable sight. It came just in time
to us after the invitation which Demas gave us to come over to view the
hill Lucre; and, had we gone over, as he desired us, and as thou wast
inclining to do, my brother, we had, for aught I know, been made
ourselves, like this woman, a spectacle for those that shall come after
to behold.

HOPE. I am sorry that I was so foolish, and am made to wonder that I am
not now as Lot's wife; for wherein was the difference betwixt her sin
and mine? She only looked back, and I had a desire to go see. Let God's
goodness be praised; and let me be ashamed that ever such a thing should
be in mine heart.

CHRIS. Let us take notice of what we see here, for our help for time to
come. This woman escaped one judgment, for she fell not by the
destruction of Sodom; yet she was destroyed by another, as we see: she
is turned into a pillar of salt.

HOPE. What a mercy is it that neither thou, but especially I, am not
made myself this example! This gives reason to us to thank God, to fear
before Him and always to remember Lot's wife.

[Sidenote: RIVER OF THE WATER OF LIFE]

I saw, then, that they went on their way to a pleasant river, which
David the King called "the river of God," but John, "the river of the
water of life." Now their way lay just upon the bank of this river;
here, therefore, Christian and his companion walked with great delight;
they drank also of the water of the river, which was pleasant and
enlivening to their weary spirits. Besides, on the banks of this river
on either side were green trees that bore all manner of fruit; and the
leaves of the trees were good for medicine; with the fruit of these
trees they were also much delighted; and the leaves they ate to prevent
illness, especially such diseases that come to those that heat their
blood by travels. On either side of the river was also a meadow,
curiously beautified with lilies, and it was green all the year long. In
this meadow they lay down and slept, for here they might lie down
safely. When they awoke, they gathered again of the fruit of the trees
and drank again of the water of the river, and they lay down again to
sleep. This they did several days and nights. Then they sang:

  "Behold ye, how these crystal streams do glide,
  To comfort pilgrims by the highway-side;
  The meadows green, besides their fragrant smell,
  Yield dainties for them; and he who can tell
  What pleasant fruit, yea, leaves, these trees do yield,
  Will soon sell all, that he may buy this field."

So when they were disposed to go on (for they were not as yet at their
journey's end,) they ate and drank, and departed.

Now, I beheld in my dream that they had not journeyed far, but the river
and the way for a time parted, at which they were not a little sorry;
yet they durst not go out of the way. Now the way from the river was
rough, and their feet tender by reason of their travels; so the souls of
the pilgrims were much discouraged because of the way. Wherefore, still
as they went on they wished for a better way. Now, a little before them
there was, on the left hand of the road, a meadow, and a stile to go
over into it, and that meadow is called By-path Meadow. Then said
Christian to his fellow, "If this meadow lieth along by our wayside,
let's go over it." Then he went to the stile to see; and behold, a path
lay along by the way on the other side of the fence. "It is according to
my wish," said Christian; "here is the easiest going. Come, good
Hopeful, and let us go over."

HOPE. But how if this path should lead us out of the way?

[Sidenote: VAIN-CONFIDENCE]

CHRIS. "That is not likely," said the other. "Look, doth it not go along
by the wayside?" So Hopeful, being persuaded by his fellow, went after
him over the stile. When they were gone over, and were got into the
path, they found it very easy to their feet; and withal, they, looking
before them, espied a man walking as they did, and his name was
Vain-Confidence: so they called after him, and asked him whither that
way led. He said, "To the Celestial Gate." "Look," said Christian, "did
not I tell you so? By this you may see we are right." So they followed,
and he went before them. But, behold, the night came on, and it grew
very dark; so that they that were behind lost sight of him that went
before. He, therefore, that went before (Vain-Confidence by name) not
seeing the way before him, fell into a deep pit, which was on purpose
there made by the prince of those grounds to catch careless fools,
withal and was dashed in pieces with his fall.

Now Christian and his fellow heard him fall. So they called to know the
matter; but there was none to answer, only they heard a groaning. Then
said Hopeful, "Where are we now?" Then was his fellow silent, as
mistrusting that he had led him out of the way; and now it began to
rain, and thunder, and lighten in a most dreadful manner, and the water
rose amain.

Then Hopeful groaned in himself, saying, "Oh that I had kept on my way!"

CHRIS. Who could have thought that this path should have led us out of
the way?

HOPE. I was afraid on't at the very first, and therefore gave you that
gentle caution. I would have spoken plainer, but that you are older than
I.

CHRIS. Good brother, be not offended. I am very sorry I have brought
thee out of the way, and that I have put thee into such great danger.
Pray, my brother, forgive me: I did not do it of any evil intent.

HOPE. Be comforted, my brother, for I forgive thee, and believe, too,
that this shall be for our good.

CHRIS. I am glad I have with me a merciful brother; but we must not
stand still: let us try to go back again.

HOPE. But, good brother, let me go before.

CHRIS. No, if you please; let me go first, that, if there be any
danger, I may be first therein, because by my means we are both gone out
of the way.

HOPE. "No, you shall not go first; for your mind being troubled may lead
you out of the way again." Then for their encouragement they heard the
voice of one saying, "Let thine heart be towards the highway, even the
way that thou wentest; turn again." But by this time the waters were
greatly risen, by reason of which the way of going back was very
dangerous. (Then I thought that it is easier going out of the way when
we are in, than going in when we are out.) Yet they undertook to go
back; but it was so dark, and the flood so high, that, in their going
back, they had like to have been drowned nine or ten times.

[Sidenote: GIANT DESPAIR]

Neither could they, with all the skill they had, get again to the stile
that night. Wherefore, at last lighting under a little shelter, they sat
down there until daybreak; but, being weary, they fell asleep. Now,
there was, not far from the place where they lay, a castle, called
Doubting Castle the owner whereof was Giant Despair, and it was in his
grounds they now were sleeping; wherefore he, getting up in the morning
early, and walking up and down in his fields, caught Christian and
Hopeful asleep in his grounds. Then, with a grim and surly voice, he bid
them awake, and asked them whence they were, and what they did in his
grounds. They told him they were pilgrims, and that they had lost their
way. Then said the giant, "You have this night trespassed on me by
trampling in and lying on my grounds, and therefore you must go along
with me." So they were forced to go, because he was stronger than they.
They had also but little to say, for they knew themselves in fault. The
giant, therefore, drove them before him, and put them into his castle,
into a very dark dungeon, nasty and smelling vilely to the spirits of
these two men. Here, then, they lay from Wednesday morning till Saturday
night, without one bit of bread or drop of drink, or light, or any to
ask how they did; they were, therefore, here in evil case, and were far
from friends and people whom they knew. Now, in this place Christian had
double sorrow, because it was through his thoughtless haste that they
were brought into this distress.

[Sidenote: THE PILGRIMS IN A DUNGEON]

Now, Giant Despair had a wife, and her name was Diffidence. So, when he
was gone to bed, he told his wife what he had done; to wit, that he had
taken a couple of prisoners and cast them into his dungeon for
trespassing on his grounds. Then he asked her also what he had best to
do further to them. So she asked him what they were, whence they came,
and whither they were bound; and he told her. Then she advised him, that
when he arose in the morning, he should beat them without any mercy. So,
when he arose, he getteth him a grievous crab-tree cudgel, and goes down
into the dungeon to them, and there first fell to abusing them as if
they were dogs, although they never gave him a word of distaste. Then he
falls upon them, and beats them fearfully, in such sort that they were
not able to help themselves, or to turn them upon the floor. This done,
he withdraws and leaves them there to sorrow over their misery and to
mourn under their distress. So all that day they spent their time in
nothing but sighs and bitter grief. The next night she, talking with her
husband about them further, and understanding that they were yet alive,
did advise him to tell them to make away with themselves. So, when
morning was come, he goes to them in a surly manner, as before and,
perceiving them to be very sore with the stripes that he had given them
the day before, he told them that, since they were never like to come
out of that place, their only way would be forthwith to make an end of
themselves, either with knife, halter, or poison: "For why," said he,
"should you choose life, seeing it is attended with so much bitterness?"
But they desired him to let them go. With that, he looked ugly upon
them, and rushing to them, had doubtless made an end of them himself,
but that he fell into one of his fits (for he sometimes, in sunshiny
weather, fell into fits), and lost for a time the use of his hands,
wherefore he withdrew, and left them as before to consider what to do.
Then did the prisoners consult between themselves, whether it was best
to take his advice or no; and thus they began to discourse:

CHRIS. "Brother," said Christian, "what shall we do? The life we now
live is miserable. For my part, I know not whether is best, to live
thus, or to die out of hand. My soul chooseth strangling rather than
life, and the grave is more easy for me than this dungeon. Shall we be
ruled by the giant?"

[Sidenote: HOPEFUL CHEERS CHRISTIAN]

HOPE. Indeed, our present condition is dreadful; and death would be far
more welcome to me than thus for ever to abide. But yet, let us think:
the Lord of the country to which we are going hath said, "Thou shalt do
no murder," no, not to another man's person; much more, then, are we
forbidden to take his advice to kill ourselves. Besides, he that kills
another can but commit murder upon his body; but for one to kill himself
is to kill body and soul at once. And, moreover, my brother, thou
talkest of ease in the grave; but hast thou forgotten the hell, whither,
for certain, the murderers go? for "no murderer hath eternal life." And
let us consider again, that all the law is not in the hand of Giant
Despair: others, so far as I can understand, have been taken by him as
well as we, and yet have escaped out of his hand. Who knows but that
God, who made the world, may cause that Giant Despair may die? or that,
at some time or other, he may forget to lock us in? or that he may, in a
short time, have another of his fits before us, and he may lose the use
of his limbs? and if ever that should come to pass again, for my part, I
am resolved to pluck up the heart of a man, and try to my utmost to get
from under his hand. I was a fool that I did not try to do it before.
But however, my brother, let us be patient, and endure awhile: the time
may come that may give us a happy release; but let us not be our own
murderers.

With these words, Hopeful at present did calm the mind of his brother;
so they continued together in the dark that day, in their sad and
doleful condition.

Well, towards evening, the giant goes down into the dungeon again, to
see if his prisoners had taken his counsel. But, when he came there, he
found them alive; and truly, alive was all; for now, what for want of
bread and water, and by reason of the wounds they received when he beat
them, they could do little but breathe. But, I say, he found them alive;
at which he fell into a grievous rage, and told them that, seeing they
had disobeyed his counsel, it should be worse with them than if they had
never been born.

At this they trembled greatly, and I think that Christian fell into a
swoon; but, coming a little to himself again, they renewed their
discourse about the giant's advice and whether yet they had best to take
it or no. Now, Christian again seemed for doing it; but Hopeful made his
second reply as followeth:

HOPE. "My brother," said he, "rememberest thou not how valiant thou hast
been heretofore? Apollyon could not crush thee, nor could all that thou
didst hear, or see, or feel in the Valley of the Shadow of Death. What
hardship, terror, and amazement hast thou already gone through! and art
thou now nothing but fear? Thou seest that I am in the dungeon with
thee, a far weaker man by nature than thou art; also this giant has
wounded me as well as thee, and hath also cut off the bread and water
from my mouth; and, with thee, I mourn without the light. But let us
have a little more patience. Remember how thou showedst thyself the man
at Vanity Fair, and wast neither afraid of the chain, nor cage, nor yet
of bloody death. Wherefore, let us (at least to avoid the shame that it
becomes not a Christian to be found in) bear up with patience as well as
we can."

Now, night being come again, and the giant and his wife being in bed,
she asked him concerning the prisoners, and if they had taken his
advice: to which he replied, "They are sturdy rogues; they choose rather
to bear all hardship than to make away with themselves." Then said she,
"Take them unto the castle-yard to-morrow, and show them the bones and
skulls of those that thou hast already killed; and make them believe,
ere a week comes to an end, thou wilt tear them also in pieces, as thou
hast done their fellows before them."

So when the morning was come, the giant goes to them again, and takes
them into the castle-yard and shows them as his wife had bidden him.
"These," said he, "were pilgrims, as you are, once, and they trespassed
in my grounds as you have done; and when I thought fit, I tore them in
pieces; and so within ten days I will do you. Go, get you down to your
den again." And, with that, he beat them all the way thither. They lay,
therefore, all day on Saturday in a lamentable case, as before. Now,
when night was come, and when Mrs. Diffidence and her husband, the giant
were got to bed, they began to renew their talking of their prisoners;
and withal, the old giant wondered that he could neither by his blows
nor counsel bring them to an end. And, with that, his wife replied, "I
fear," said she, "that they live in hope that some will come to relieve
them; or that they have picklocks about them, by the means of which they
hope to escape." "And sayest thou so, my dear?" said the giant: "I will
therefore search them in the morning."

[Sidenote: THE PILGRIMS ESCAPE]

Well, on Saturday about midnight, they began to pray, and continued in
prayer till almost break of day.

Now, a little before it was day, good Christian, as one half amazed,
brake out into this earnest speech: "What a fool," quoth he, "am I to
lie in a foul-smelling dungeon, when I may as well walk at liberty! I
have a key in my bosom called Promise, that will, I am sure, open any
lock in Doubting Castle." Then said Hopeful, "That is good news, good
brother: pluck it out of thy bosom, and try."

Then Christian pulled it out of his bosom, and began to try at the
dungeon door, whose bolt, as he turned the key, gave back, and the door
flew open with ease, and Christian and Hopeful both came out. Then he
went to the outward door that leads into the castle-yard, and with his
key opened that door also. After, he went to the iron gate, for that
must be opened too; but that lock went exceedingly hard, yet the key did
open it. Then they thrust open the gate to make their escape with speed;
but that gate, as it opened, made such a creaking, that it waked Giant
Despair who, hastily rising to pursue his prisoners, felt his limbs to
fail; for his fits took him again, so that he could by no means go after
them. Then they went on, and came to the King's highway again, and so
were safe because they were out of Giant Despair's rule.

Now, when they were gone over the stile, they began to contrive with
themselves what they should do at that stile to prevent those that
should come after from falling into the hands of Giant Despair. So they
agreed to build there a pillar, and to engrave upon the side thereof
this sentence: "Over this stile is the way to Doubting Castle, which is
kept by Giant Despair, who despiseth the King of the Celestial Country,
and seeks to destroy His holy pilgrims." Many, therefore, that followed
after, read what was written, and escaped the danger. This done, they
sang as follows:

  "Out of the way we went, and then we found
  What 'twas to tread upon forbidden ground:
  And let them that come after have a care,
  Lest heedlessness make them as we to fare;
  Lest they for trespassing his prisoners are
  Whose Castle's Doubting, and whose name's Despair."




CHAPTER VIII.

[Sidenote: THE DELECTABLE MOUNTAINS]


They went then till they came to the Delectable[5] Mountains, which
mountains belong to the Lord of that hill of which we have spoken
before. So they went up to the mountains to behold the gardens and
orchards, the vineyards and fountains of water, where also they drank
and washed themselves, and did freely eat of the vineyards. Now there
were on the tops of these mountains shepherds feeding their flocks, and
they stood by the highway-side. The pilgrims, therefore, went to them,
and leaning upon their staves (as is common with weary pilgrims when
they stand to talk with any by the way), they asked, "Whose delightful
mountains are these, and whose be the sheep that feed upon them?"

  [5] This word means "pleasant," or "delightful."

SHEP. These mountains are Immanuel's Land, and they are within sight of
His city; and the sheep also are His, and He laid down His life for
them.

CHRIS. Is this the way to the Celestial City?

SHEP. You are just in your way.

CHRIS. How far is it thither?

SHEP. Too far for any but those who shall get thither indeed.

CHRIS. Is the way safe or dangerous?

SHEP. Safe for those for whom it is to be safe; but sinners shall fall
therein.

CHRIS. Is there in this place any relief for pilgrims that are weary and
faint in the way?

SHEP. The Lord of these mountains hath given us a charge not to be
forgetful to care for strangers; therefore the good of the place is
before you.

I saw also in my dream that when the shepherds perceived that they were
wayfaring men, they also put questions to them (to which they made
answer as in other places), as, "Whence came you?" and "How got you into
the way?" and, "By what means have you so persevered therein? for but
few of them that begin to come hither do show their faces on these
mountains." But when the shepherds heard their answers, being pleased
therewith they looked very lovingly upon them, and said, "Welcome to the
Delectable Mountains!"

The shepherds, I say, whose names were Knowledge, Experience, Watchful,
and Sincere, took them by the hand and took them to their tents, and
made them partake of what was ready at present. They said moreover, "We
would that you should stay here awhile, to be acquainted with us, and
yet more to cheer yourselves with the good of these Delectable
Mountains." They then told them that they were content to stay. So they
went to rest that night, because it was very late.

[Sidenote: THE SHEPHERDS CONDUCT THEM]

Then I saw in my dream that in the morning the shepherds called up
Christian and Hopeful to walk with them upon the mountains. So they
went forth with them and walked a while, having a pleasant prospect on
every side. Then said the shepherds one to another, "Shall we show these
pilgrims some wonders?" So, when they had concluded to do it, they had
them first to the top of the hill called Error, which was very steep on
the farthest side, and bid them look down to the bottom. So Christian
and Hopeful looked down, and saw at the bottom several men dashed all to
pieces by a fall they had had from the top. Then said Christian, "What
meaneth this?" Then the shepherds answered, "Have you not heard of them
that were made to err, by hearkening to Hymeneus and Philetus, as
concerning the faith of the rising from the dead?" They answered, "Yes."
Then said the shepherds, "Those you see lie dashed to pieces at the
bottom of this mountain are they; and they have continued to this day
unburied, as you see, for an example to others to take heed how they
clamber too high, or how they come too near the brink of this mountain."

Then I saw that they had them to the top of another mountain, and the
name of that is Caution and bid them look afar off; and when they did,
they perceived, as they thought, several men walking up and down among
the tombs that were there; and they perceived that the men were blind,
because they stumbled sometimes upon the tombs, and because they could
not get out from among them. Then said Christian, "What means this?"

The shepherds then answered, "Did you not see a little below these
mountains a stile that led into a meadow on the left hand side of this
way?" They answered, "Yes." Then said the shepherds, "From that stile
there goes a path that leads directly to Doubting Castle, which is kept
by Giant Despair; and these men" (pointing to them among the tombs)
"came once on pilgrimage, as you do now, even until they came to that
same stile. And because the right way was rough in that place, they
chose to go out of it into that meadow, and there were taken by Giant
Despair, and cast into Doubting Castle, where, after they had been kept
a while in the dungeon, he at last did put out their eyes, and led them
among those tombs, where he has left them to wander to this very day,
that the saying of the Wise Man might be fulfilled, 'He that wandereth
out of the way of knowledge, shall remain in the congregation of the
dead.'" Then Christian and Hopeful looked upon one another with tears
gushing out, but yet said nothing to the shepherds.

Then I saw in my dream, that the shepherds had them to another place in
a bottom, where was a door on the side of a hill; and they opened the
door, and bid them look in. They looked in, therefore, and saw that
within it was very dark and smoky; they also thought that they heard
there a rumbling noise, as of fire, and a cry of some tormented, and
that they smelt the scent of brimstone. Then said Christian, "What means
this?" The shepherds told them, "This is a by-way to hell, a way that
hypocrites go in at: namely, such as sell their birthright, with Esau;
such as sell their master, with Judas; such as blaspheme the Gospel,
with Alexander; and that lie and deceive with Ananias and Sapphira his
wife."

HOPE. Then said Hopeful to the shepherds, "I perceive that these had on
them, even every one, a show of pilgrimage, as we have now; had they
not?"

SHEP. Yes, and held it a long time too.

HOPE. How far might they go on in pilgrimage in their day, since they
notwithstanding were thus miserably cast away?

SHEP. Some farther, and some not so far as these mountains.

Then said the pilgrims one to another, "We have need to cry to the
Strong for strength."

SHEP. Ay, and you will have need to use it when you have it, too.

[Sidenote: GATE OF THE CELESTIAL CITY]

By this time the pilgrims had a desire to go forward, and the shepherds
a desire they should; so they walked together towards the end of the
mountains. Then said the shepherds one to another, "Let us here show to
the pilgrims the gate of the Celestial City, if they have skill to look
through our perspective glass."[6] The pilgrims then lovingly accepted
the motion; so they had them to the top of a high hill called Clear, and
gave them their glass to look.

  [6] "Perspective glass" is an old name for a telescope or spy-glass.

Then they tried to look; but the remembrance of that last thing, that
the shepherds had showed them, made their hands shake, by means of which
hindrance they could not look steadily through the glass; yet they
thought they saw something like the gate, and also some of the glory of
the place. Thus they went away, and sang this song:

  "Thus by the shepherds secrets are revealed,
  Which from all other men are kept concealed.
  Come to the shepherds, then, if you would see
  Things deep, things hid, and that mysterious be."

When they were about to depart, one of the shepherds gave them a note of
the way. Another of them bid them beware of the Flatterer. The third bid
them take heed that they slept not upon the Enchanted Ground. And the
fourth bid them God speed.

So I awoke from my dream.




CHAPTER IX.

[Sidenote: THEY OVERTAKE IGNORANCE]


And I slept, and dreamed again, and saw the same two pilgrims going down
the mountains along the highway towards the city. Now, a little below
these mountains, on the left hand, lieth the country of Conceit; from
which country there comes into the way in which the pilgrims walked a
little crooked lane. Here, therefore, they met with a very brisk lad,
that came out of that country, and his name was Ignorance. So Christian
asked him from what parts he came, and whither he was going.

IGNOR. Sir, I was born in the country that lieth off there a little on
the left hand, and I am going to the Celestial City.

CHRIS. But how do you think to get in at the gate? for you may find some
difficulty there.

IGNOR. As other people do.

CHRIS. But what have you to show at the gate, that may cause that the
gate should be opened to you?

IGNOR. I know my Lord's will, and have been a good liver; I pay every
man his own; I pray, fast, pay money to the church and give to the poor,
and have left my country for whither I am going.

CHRIS. But thou camest not in at the wicket-gate that is at the head of
this way: thou camest in hither through that same crooked lane; and
therefore I fear, however thou mayest think of thyself, when the
reckoning day shall come, thou wilt have laid to thy charge that thou
art a thief and a robber, instead of getting admittance into the city.

IGNOR. Gentlemen, ye be utter strangers to me: I know you not: be
content to follow the custom of your country, and I will follow the
custom of mine. I hope all will be well. And, as for the gate that you
talk of, all the world knows that that is a great way off of our
country. I cannot think that any man in all our parts doth so much as
know the way to it; nor need they matter whether they do or no, since we
have, as you see, a fine, pleasant green lane, that comes down from our
country, the next way into the way.

When Christian saw that the man was wise in his own opinion, he said to
Hopeful, whisperingly, "There is more hope of a fool than of him." And
said, moreover "When he that is a fool walketh by the way, his wisdom
faileth him, and he saith to every one that he is a fool. What! shall we
talk further with him, or outgo him at present, and so leave him to
think of what he hath heard already, and then stop again for him
afterwards, and see if by degrees we can do any good to him?"

Then said Hopeful:

  "Let Ignorance a little while now muse
  On what is said, and let him not refuse
  Good counsel to embrace, lest he remain
  Still ignorant of what's the chiefest gain.
  God saith, those that no understanding have
  (Although He made them), them He will not save."

HOPE. He further added, "It is not good, I think, to say all to him at
once: let us pass him by, if you will, and talk to him by and by, even
as he is able to bear it."

So they both went on, and Ignorance he came after. Now, when they had
passed him a little way, they entered into a very dark lane, where they
met a man whom seven devils had bound with seven strong cords, and were
carrying of him back to the door that they saw on the side of the hill.
Now good Christian began to tremble, and so did Hopeful his companion;
yet, as the devils led away the man, Christian looked to see if he knew
him; and he thought it might be one Turn-away, that dwelt in the town of
Apostasy. But he did not perfectly see his face, for he did hang his
head like a thief that is found; but being gone past, Hopeful looked
after him, and espied on his back a paper with this inscription, "One
who was wicked while claiming to be good, and turned away from God."

[Sidenote: THREE STURDY ROGUES]

Then said Christian to his fellow, "Now I call to remembrance that which
was told of a thing that happened to a good man hereabout. The name of
that man was Little-Faith, but a good man, and dwelt in the town of
Sincere. The thing was this: At the entering in at this passage, there
comes down from Broad-way Gate a lane called Dead Man's Lane; so-called
because of the murders that are commonly done there; and this
Little-Faith, going on pilgrimage as we do now, chanced to sit down
there, and slept. Now, there happened at that time to come down that
lane, from Broad-way Gate, three sturdy rogues, and their names were
Faint-heart, Mistrust, and Guilt, three brothers; and they espying
Little-Faith, where he was, came galloping up with speed. Now, the good
man was just awaked from his sleep, and was getting up to go on his
journey. So they came up all to him, and with threatening language bid
him stand. At this, Little-Faith looked as white as a sheet and had
neither power to fight nor fly. Then said Faint-heart, 'Deliver thy
purse;' but, he making no haste to do it (for he was loth to lose his
money) Mistrust ran up to him, and, thrusting his hand into his pocket,
pulled out thence a bag of silver. Then he cried out, 'Thieves!
thieves!' With that, Guilt, with a great club that was in his hand,
struck Little-Faith on the head, and with that blow felled him flat to
the ground, where he lay bleeding as one that would bleed to death. All
this while the thieves stood by. But, at last, they hearing that some
were upon the road, and fearing lest it should be one Great-Grace, that
dwells in the city of Good-Confidence, they betook themselves to their
heels, and left this good man to shift for himself. Now, after a while,
Little-Faith came to himself, and, getting up, made shift to scramble on
his way. This was the story."

HOPE. But did they take from him all that ever he had?

CHRIS. No; the place where his jewels were they never ransacked; so
those he kept still. But as I was told, the good man was much afflicted
for his loss, for the thieves got most of his spending money. That which
they got not, as I said, were jewels; also he had a little odd money
left, but scarce enough to bring him to his journey's end. Nay, if I was
not misinformed, he was forced to beg as he went, to keep himself alive,
for his jewels he might not sell; but, beg and do what he could, he
went, as we say, often with a hungry stomach the most part of the rest
of the way.

HOPE. But is it not a wonder they got not from him his certificate, by
which he was to receive admission at the Celestial Gate?

CHRIS. It is a wonder; but they got not that, though they missed it not
through any cunning of his; for he, being dismayed by their coming upon
him, had neither power nor skill to hide anything; so it was more by
good providence than by his endeavor, that they missed of that good
thing.

HOPE. But it must needs be a comfort to him that they got not his jewels
from him.

CHRIS. It might have been great comfort to him, had he used it as he
should; but they that told me the story said, that he made but little
use of it all the rest of the way, and that because of the alarm that he
had in their taking away his money. Indeed, he forgot it a great part of
the rest of his journey; and besides, when at any time it came into his
mind, and he began to be comforted therewith, then would fresh thoughts
of his loss come again upon him, and those thoughts would swallow up
all.

[Sidenote: HOPEFUL REBUKED]

HOPE. Alas, poor man! this could not but be a great grief unto him.

CHRIS. Grief! ay, a grief indeed. Would it not have been so to any of
us, had we been used as he, to be robbed and wounded too, and that in a
strange place, as he was? It is a wonder he did not die with grief, poor
heart! I was told that he scattered almost all the rest of the way with
nothing but doleful and bitter complaints; telling also to all that
overtook him, or that he overtook in the way as he went, where he was
robbed, and how; who they were that did it, and what he had lost; how he
was wounded, and that he hardly escaped with life.

HOPE. But it is a wonder that his necessities did not put him upon
selling or pawning some of his jewels, that he might have wherewith to
relieve himself in his journey.

CHRIS. Thou talkest like one whose head is thick to this very day. For
what should he pawn them, or to whom should he sell them? In all that
country where he was robbed, his jewels were not accounted of; nor did
he want that relief which could from thence be administered to him.
Besides, had his jewels been missing at the gate of the Celestial City,
he had (and that he knew well enough) been shut out from an inheritance
there; and that would have been worse to him than the coming and villany
of ten thousand thieves.

HOPE. But, Christian, these three fellows, I am persuaded in my heart,
are but a company of cowards: would they have run else, think you, as
they did at the noise of one that was coming on the road? Why did not
Little-Faith pluck up a greater heart? He might, methinks, have stood
one brush with them, and have yielded when there had been no remedy.

CHRIS. That they are cowards many have said, but few have found it so in
the time of trial. As for a great heart, Little-Faith had none; and I
perceive by thee, my brother, hadst thou been the man concerned, thou
art but for a brush, and then to yield. And, verily, since this is the
height of thy courage now they are at a distance from us, should they
appear to thee as they did to him, they might put thee to second
thoughts. But consider again, they are but journeymen-thieves; they
serve under the king of the bottomless pit, who, if need be, will come
in to their aid himself, and his voice is as the roaring of a lion. I
myself have been engaged as this Little-Faith was, and I found it a
terrible thing. These three villains set upon me: and I beginning like a
Christian to resist, they gave but a call, and in came their master. I
would, as the saying is, have given my life for a penny, but that, as
God would have it, I was clothed with armor of proof. Ay, and yet,
though I was so protected, I found it hard work to quit myself like a
man. No man can tell what in that combat attends us, but he that hath
been in the battle himself.

[Sidenote: LITTLE-FAITH AND GREAT-GRACE]

HOPE. Well, but they ran, you see, when they did but suppose that one
Great-Grace was in the way.

CHRIS. True, they have often fled, both they and their master, when
Great-Grace hath but appeared; and no marvel, for he is the King's
champion. But I trow you will put some difference between Little-Faith
and the King's champion? All the King's subjects are not His champions,
nor can they when tried do such feats of war as he. Is it meet to think
that a little child should handle Goliath as David did? or that there
should be the strength of an ox in a wren? Some are strong, some are
weak; some have great faith, some have little: this man was one of the
weak, and therefore he went to the wall.

HOPE. I would it had been Great-Grace for their sakes.

CHRIS. If it had been he, he might have had his hands full; for I must
tell you that though Great-Grace is excellent good at his weapons, and
has, and can, so long as he keeps them at sword's point, do well enough
with them; yet, if they get within him, even Faint-heart, Mistrust, or
the other, it shall go hard but they will throw up his heels. And when a
man is down, you know, what can he do?

Whoso looks well upon Great-Grace's face will see those scars and cuts
there, that shall easily give proof of what I say. Yea, once I heard
that he should say (and that when he was in the combat), "We despaired
even of life." How did these sturdy rogues and their fellows make David
groan, mourn, and roar! Yea, Heman, and Hezekiah too, though champions
in their days, were forced to bestir when by these attacked; and yet,
notwithstanding, they had their coats soundly brushed by them. Peter,
upon a time, would go try what he could do; but though some do say of
him that he is the prince of the apostles, they handled him so that they
made him at last afraid of a sorry girl.

[Sidenote: LITTLE-FAITH AMONG THIEVES]

Besides, their king is at their whistle--he is never out of hearing; and
if at any time they be put to the worst, he, if possible, comes in to
help them; and of him it is said, "The sword of him that layeth at him
cannot hold; the spear, the dart, nor the habergeon. He esteemeth iron
as straw, and brass as rotten wood. The arrow cannot make him flee;
sling-stones are turned with him into stubble. Darts are counted as
stubble: he laugheth at the shaking of a spear." What can a man do in
this case? It is true, if a man could at every turn have Job's horse,
and had skill and courage to ride him, he might do notable things. For
his neck is clothed with thunder. He will not be afraid as the
grasshopper: "the glory of his nostrils is terrible. He paweth in the
valley, and rejoiceth in his strength: he goeth on to meet the armed
men. He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted, neither turneth he his
back from the sword. The quiver rattleth against him, the glittering
spear and the shield. He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage;
neither believeth he that it is the sound of the trumpet. He saith among
the trumpets, Ha! ha! and he smelleth the battle afar off, the thunder
of the captains, and the shouting."

But for such footmen as thee and I are, let us never desire to meet with
an enemy, nor vaunt as if we could do better, when we hear of others
that have been foiled, nor be tickled at the thoughts of our manhood;
for such commonly come by the worst when tried. Witness Peter, of whom I
made mention before: he would swagger, ay, he would; he would, as his
vain mind prompted him to say, do better and stand more for his Master
than all men; but who so foiled and run down by those villains as he?

Then Christian sang:

  "Poor Little-Faith! hast been among the thieves?
  Wast robbed? Remember this: whoso believes
  And gets more faith, shall then a victor be
  Over ten thousand; else, scarce over three."

So they went on, and Ignorance followed. They went then till they came
to a place where they saw a way put itself into their way, and seemed
withal to lie as straight as the way which they should go; and here they
knew not which of the two to take, for both seemed straight before them;
therefore here they stood still to consider. And, as they were thinking
about the way, behold, a man, black of flesh, but covered with a very
light robe, came to them, and asked them why they stood there. They
answered they were going to the Celestial City, but knew not which of
these ways to take. "Follow me," said the man; "it is thither that I am
going." So they followed him to the way that but now came into the road,
which by degrees turned and turned them so from the city that they
desired to go to, that, in a little time, their faces were turned away
from it; yet they followed him. But by-and-by, before they were aware,
he led them both within the folds of a net, in which they were both so
entangled that they knew not what to do; and with that, the white robe
fell off the black man's back. Then they saw where they were. Wherefore,
there they lay crying some time, for they could not get themselves out.

CHRIS. Then said Christian to his fellow, "Now do I see myself in an
error. Did not the shepherds bid us beware of flatterers? As is the
saying of the Wise Man, so we have found it this day: 'A man that
flattereth his neighbor, spreadeth a net at his feet.'"

[Sidenote: A SHINING ONE APPEARS]

HOPE. They also gave us a note of directions about the way, for our more
sure finding thereof; but therein we have also forgotten to read, and
have not kept ourselves from the paths of the destroyer. Thus they lay
bewailing themselves in the net. At last they espied a Shining One
coming towards them with a whip of small cord in his hand. When he was
come to the place where they were, he asked them whence they came, and
what they did there. They told him that they were poor pilgrims going to
Zion, but were led out of their way by a black man clothed in white,
"Who bid us," said they, "follow him, for he was going thither too."
Then said he with the whip, "It is Flatterer, a false prophet, that hath
changed himself into an angel of light." So he rent the net, and let the
men out. Then said he to them, "Follow me, that I may set you in your
way again." So he led them back to the way which they had left to follow
the Flatterer. Then he asked them, saying, "Where did you lie the last
night?" They said, "With the shepherds upon the Delectable Mountains."
He asked them then if they had not of those shepherds a note of
direction for the way. They answered, "Yes." "But did you not," said he,
"when you were at a stand, pluck out and read your note?" They answered,
"No." He asked them, "Why?" They said they forgot. He asked them,
moreover, if the shepherds did not bid them beware of the Flatterer.
They answered, "Yes; but we did not imagine," said they, "that this
fine-spoken man had been he."

Then I saw in my dream, that he commanded them to lie down; which when
they did, he whipped them sore, to teach them the good way wherein they
should walk; and, as he whipped them, he said, "As many as I love, I
rebuke and chasten; be zealous, therefore, and repent." This done, he
bid them go on their way, and take good heed to the other directions of
the shepherds. So they thanked him for all his kindness, and went softly
along the right way, singing:

  "Come hither, you that walk along the way,
  See how the pilgrims fare that go astray;
  They catchèd are in an entangling net,
  'Cause they good counsel lightly did forget;
  'Tis true, they rescued were; but yet, you see,
  They're scourged to boot: let this your caution be."

Now, after awhile they perceived afar off, one coming softly and alone,
all along the highway, to meet them. Then said Christian to his fellow,
"Yonder is a man with his back towards Zion, and he is coming to meet
us."

HOPE. I see him: let us take heed to ourselves lest he should prove a
flatterer also.

[Sidenote: THEY MEET ATHEIST]

So he drew nearer and nearer, and at last came up to them. His name was
Atheist,[7] and he asked them whither they were going.

  [7] An atheist is one who does not believe that there is a God.

CHRIS. We are going to Mount Zion.

Then Atheist fell into a very great laughter.

CHRIS. What is the meaning of your laughter?

ATHEIST. I laugh to see what ignorant persons you are, to take upon
yourselves so tedious a journey, and yet are like to have nothing but
your travel for your pains.

[Illustration: Atheist Laughing at Christian and Hopeful.
                                   Page 170]

CHRIS. Why, man, do you think we shall not be received?

ATHEIST. Received! There is no such a place as you dream of in all this
world.

CHRIS. But there is in the world to come.

ATHEIST. When I was at home in mine own country, I heard as you now
affirm, and, from that hearing, went out to see, and have been seeking
this city these twenty years, but find no more of it than I did the
first day I set out.

CHRIS. We have both heard and believe that there is such a place to be
found.

ATHEIST. Had not I, when at home, believed I had not come thus far to
seek; but, finding none (and yet I should had there been such a place to
be found, for I have gone to seek it farther than you), I am going back
again, and will seek to refresh myself with the things that I then cast
away for hopes of that which I now see is not.

CHRIS. Then said Christian to Hopeful his fellow, "Is it true which this
man hath said?"

HOPE. Take heed; he is one of the flatterers. Remember what it hath cost
us once already for hearkening to such kind of fellows. What! no Mount
Zion? Did we not see from the Delectable Mountains the gate of the city?
Also, are we not now to walk by faith? Let us go on, lest the man with
the whip overtake us again. I say, my brother, cease to hear him, and
let us believe to the saving of the soul.

CHRIS. My brother, I did not put the question to thee for that I
doubted of the truth of our belief myself, but to prove thee, and to
fetch from thee a fruit of the honesty of thy heart. As for this man, I
know that he is blinded. Let thee and me go on, knowing that we have
belief of the truth, and no lie is of the truth.

HOPE. Now do I rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

So they turned away from the man, and he, laughing at them, went his
way.

I then saw in my dream that they went till they came into a certain
country, whose air naturally tended to make one drowsy if he came a
stranger into it. And here Hopeful began to be very dull and heavy of
sleep; wherefore he said unto Christian, "I do now begin to grow so
drowsy, that I can scarcely hold up mine eyes; let us lie down here, and
take one nap."

CHRIS. "By no means," said the other, "lest sleeping, we never awake
more."

HOPE. Why, my brother? sleep is sweet to the laboring man: we may be
refreshed if we take a nap.

CHRIS. Do not you remember that one of the shepherds bid us beware of
the Enchanted Ground? He meant by that that we should beware of
sleeping; wherefore let us not sleep as others, but let us watch and be
sober.

HOPE. I acknowledge myself in fault; and had I been here alone, I had,
by sleeping, run the danger of death. I see it is true that the Wise
Man saith, "Two are better than one." Hitherto hath thy company been my
help; and thou shalt have a good reward for thy labor.

CHRIS. "Now, then," said Christian, "to prevent drowsiness in this
place, let us talk about something profitable."

HOPE. With all my heart.

[Sidenote: HOPEFUL NARRATES CONVERSION]

CHRIS. Where shall we begin?

HOPE. Where God began with us. But do you begin, if you please.

CHRIS. I will sing you first this song:

  "When saints do sleepy grow, let them come hither,
  And hear how these two pilgrims talk together;
  Yea, let them learn of them, in any wise,
  Thus to keep ope their drowsy, slumbering eyes.
  Saints' fellowship, if it be managed well,
  Keeps them awake, and that in spite of hell."

CHRIS. Then Christian began, and said, "I will ask you a question. How
came you to think at first of doing as you do now?"

HOPE. Do you mean, how came I at first to look after the good of my
soul?

CHRIS. Yes, that is my meaning.

HOPE. I continued a great while in the delight of those things which
were seen and sold at our fair; things which I believe now would have,
had I continued in them still, drowned me in ruin and destruction.

CHRIS. What things were they?

HOPE. All the treasures and riches of the world. Also I delighted much
in rioting, revelling, drinking, swearing, lying, uncleanness,
Sabbath-breaking, and what not, that tended to destroy the soul. But I
found at last, by hearing and considering of things that are holy, which
indeed I heard of you, as also of beloved Faithful, that was put to
death for his faith, and good living in Vanity Fair, that the end of
these things is death; and that, for these things' sake, the wrath of
God cometh upon those who disobey him.

CHRIS. And did you presently fall under the power of this feeling?

HOPE. No; I was not willing presently to know the evil of sin, nor the
destruction that follows upon the doing of it; but tried, when my mind
at first began to be shaken with the Word, to shut mine eyes against the
light thereof.

CHRIS. But what was the cause of your waiting so long?

HOPE. The causes were,--Firstly, I was ignorant that this was the work
of God upon me. Secondly, Sin was yet very sweet to my flesh, and I was
loth to leave it. Thirdly, I could not tell how to part with mine old
companions, their presence and actions were so desirable unto me.
Fourthly, The hours in which these feelings were upon me, were such
troublesome and such heart-affrighting hours, that I could not bear, no,
not so much as the remembrance of them upon my heart.

CHRIS. Then, as it seems, sometimes you got rid of your trouble?

HOPE. Yes, verily, but it would come into my mind again, and then I
should be as bad, nay, worse than I was before.

CHRIS. Why, what was it that brought your sins to mind again?

HOPE. Many things; as,

  1. If I did but meet a good man in the streets; or,

  2. If I have heard any read in the Bible; or,

  3. If mine head did begin to ache; or,

  4. If I were told that some of my neighbors
  were sick; or,

  5. If I heard the bell toll for some that were
  dead; or,

  6. If I thought of dying myself; or,

  7. If I heard that sudden death happened to
  others;

  8. But especially when I thought of myself that
  I must quickly come to judgment.

CHRIS. And could you at any time with ease get off the guilt of sin,
when by any of these ways it came upon you?

HOPE. No, not I; for then they got faster hold of my conscience; and
then, if I did but think of going back to sin (though my mind was turned
against it,) it would be double torment to me.

CHRIS. And how did you do then?

HOPE. I thought I must endeavor to mend my life; for else, thought I, I
am sure to be lost forever.

CHRIS. And did you endeavor to mend?

HOPE. Yes, and fled from not only my sins, but sinful company too, and
betook me to religious duties, as praying, reading, weeping for sin,
speaking truth to my neighbors, etc. These things did I, with many
others, too much here to tell.

CHRIS. And did you think yourself well then?

HOPE. Yes, for a while; but, at the last, my trouble came tumbling upon
me again, and that over the neck of all my trying to do right.

CHRIS. How came that about, since you were now doing right, as far as
you knew?

HOPE. There were several things brought it upon me; especially such
sayings as these: "All our righteousness are as filthy rags;" "By the
works of the law shall no flesh be made righteous;" "When ye shall have
done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are
unprofitable;" with many more such like. From whence I began to reason
with myself thus: If all my righteousness are filthy rags, if by the
deeds of the law no man can be made righteous, and if, when we have done
_all_, we are yet unprofitable, then it is but a folly to think of
heaven by the law. I further thought thus; If a man runs a hundred
pounds into the shopkeeper's debt, and after that shall pay for all that
he shall buy; yet his old debt stands still in the book uncrossed; for
the which the shopkeeper may sue him, and cast him into prison till he
shall pay the debt.

CHRIS. Well, and how did you apply this to yourself?

HOPE. Why, I thought thus with myself: I have by my sins run a great
way into God's book, and my now reforming will not pay off that score.
Therefore I should think still, under all my present trying. But how
shall I be freed from that punishment that I have brought myself in
danger of by my former sins.

CHRIS. A very good application; but pray go on.

HOPE. Another thing that hath troubled me ever since my late turning
from sin is, that if I look narrowly into the best of what I do now, I
still see sin, new sin, mixing itself with the best of that I do; so
that now I am forced to conclude that, notwithstanding my former fond
opinion of myself and duties, I have committed sin enough in one duty to
send me to hell, though my former life had been faultless.

CHRIS. And what did you do then?

HOPE. Do! I could not tell what to do, till I brake my mind to Faithful;
for he and I were well acquainted. And he told me, that unless I could
obtain the righteousness of a Man that never had sinned, neither mine
own nor all the righteousness of the world could save me.

CHRIS. And did you think he spake true?

HOPE. Had he told me so when I was pleased and satisfied with mine own
trying, I had called him fool for his pains; but now, since I see mine
own weakness and the sin which cleaves to my best performance, I have
been forced to be of his opinion.

CHRIS. But did you think, when at first he suggested it to you, that
there was such a Man to be found, of whom it might justly be said that
He never committed sin?

HOPE. I must confess the words at first sounded strangely; but after a
little more talk and company with him I had full certainty about it.

CHRIS. And did you ask him what Man this was, and how you must be made
righteous by Him?

HOPE. Yes, and he told me it was the Lord Jesus, that dwelleth on the
right hand of the Most High. And thus, said he, you must be made right
by Him, even by trusting what He hath done by Himself in the days of His
flesh, and suffered when He did hang on the tree. I asked him further,
How that Man's righteousness could be of that power to help another
before God? And he told me He was the mighty God, and did what He did,
and died the death also, not for Himself, but for me; to whom His
doings, and the worthiness of them, should be given if I believed on
Him.

CHRIS. And what did you do then?

HOPE. I made my objections against my believing, for that I thought He
was not willing to save me.

CHRIS. And what said Faithful to you then?

HOPE. He bid me go to Him and see. Then I said it was too much for me to
ask for. But he said No, for I was invited to come. Then he gave me a
book of Jesus' own writing to encourage me the more freely to come; and
he said concerning that book, that every word and letter thereof stood
firmer than heaven and earth. Then I asked him what I must do when I
came; and he told me I must entreat on my knees, with all my heart and
soul, the Father to reveal Him to me. Then I asked him further how I
must make my prayer to Him; and he said, Go, and thou shalt find Him
upon a mercy-seat, where He sits all the year long to give pardon and
forgiveness to them that come. I told him that I knew not what to say
when I came; and he bid me say to this effect: God be merciful to me a
sinner, and make me to know and believe in Jesus Christ; for I see that
if His righteousness had not been, or I have not faith in that
righteousness, I am utterly cast away. Lord, I have heard that Thou art
a merciful God, and hast given that Thy Son Jesus Christ should be the
Saviour of the world; and, moreover, that Thou art willing to bestow Him
upon such a poor sinner as I am. And I am a sinner indeed. Lord, take
therefore this opportunity, and show Thy grace in the salvation of my
soul, through Thy Son Jesus Christ. Amen.

CHRIS. And did you do as you were bidden?

HOPE. Yes, over, and over, and over.

CHRIS. And did the Father show His son to you?

HOPE. Not at the first, nor second, nor third, nor fourth, nor fifth;
no, nor at the sixth time neither.

CHRIS. What did you do then?

HOPE. What! why, I could not tell what to do.

CHRIS. Had you no thoughts of leaving off praying?

HOPE. Yes; a hundred times twice told.

CHRIS. And what was the reason you did not?

HOPE. I believed that that was true which had been told me; to wit, that
without the righteousness of this Christ, all the world could not save
me; and therefore, thought I with myself, if I leave off I die, and I
can but die at the throne of grace. And withal, this came into my mind:
"Though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not
tarry." So I continued praying until the Father showed me His Son.

CHRIS. And how was He shown unto you?

HOPE. I did not see Him with my bodily eyes, but with the eyes of my
heart, and thus it was: One day I was very sad, I think sadder than at
any one time in my life; and this sadness was through a fresh sight of
the greatness and vileness of my sins. And, as I was then looking for
nothing but hell and the everlasting loss of my soul, suddenly, as I
thought, I saw the Lord Jesus look down from heaven upon me, and saying,
"Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved."

But I replied, "Lord, I am a great, a very great sinner." And He
answered, "My grace is sufficient for thee." Then I said, "But, Lord,
what is believing?" And then I saw from that saying, "He that cometh to
me shall never hunger, and he that believeth on me shall never thirst,"
that believing and coming was all one; and that he that came, that is,
ran out in his heart and desire after salvation by Christ, he indeed
believed in Christ. Then the water stood in mine eyes, and I asked
further, "But, Lord, may such a great sinner as I am be indeed accepted
of Thee, and be saved by thee?" and I heard Him say, "And him that
cometh to me I will in no wise cast out." Then said I, "But how Lord,
must I consider of Thee in my coming to Thee, that my faith may be
placed aright upon Thee?" Then he said, "Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners. He is the end of the law for righteousness to
every one that believes. He died for our sins, and rose again for our
righteousness. He loved us, and washed us from our sins in His own
blood. He is Mediator between God and us. He ever liveth to plead for
us." From all which I gathered that I must look for righteousness in His
person, and for satisfaction for my sins by His blood; that what He did
in obedience to His Father's law, and in submitting to the penalty
thereof, was not for Himself, but for him that will accept it for his
salvation, and be thankful. And now was my heart full of joy, mine eyes
full of tears, and mine affections running over with love to the name,
people, and ways of Jesus Christ.

CHRIS. This was a revelation of Christ to your soul indeed. But tell me
particularly what effect this had upon your spirit.

HOPE. It made me see that all the world, notwithstanding all the
righteousness thereof, is in a state of condemnation. It made me see
that God the Father, though He be just, can justly forgive the coming
sinner. It made me greatly ashamed of the vileness of my former life,
and confounded me with the sense of my own ignorance; for there never
came thought into my heart before now, that showed me so the beauty of
Jesus Christ. It made me love a holy life, and long to do something for
the honor and glory of the name of the Lord Jesus. Yea, I thought that
had I now a thousand gallons of blood in my body, I could spill it all
for the sake of the Lord Jesus.




CHAPTER X.


I saw then in my dream that Hopeful looked back, and saw Ignorance, whom
they had left behind, coming after. "Look," said he to Christian, "how
far yonder youngster loitereth behind."

CHRIS. Ay, ay, I see him: he careth not for our company.

HOPE. But I think it would not have hurt him, had he kept pace with us
hitherto.

CHRIS. That is true; but I warrant you he thinks otherwise.

HOPE. That I think he doth; but, however, let us tarry for him. So they
did.

CHRIS. Then Christian said to him, "Come away, man; why do you stay so
behind?"

IGNOR. I take my pleasure in walking alone, even more a great deal than
in company, unless I like it the better.

Then said Christian to Hopeful (but softly), "Did I not tell you he
cared not for our company? But, however," said he, "come up, and let us
talk away the time in this solitary place." Then, directing his speech
to Ignorance, he said, "Come how do you? How stands it between God and
your soul now?"

IGNOR. I hope well; for I am always full of good thoughts, that come
into my mind to comfort me as I walk.

CHRIS. What good motions? pray tell us.

IGNOR. Why, I think of God and heaven.

CHRIS. So do the devils and lost souls.

IGNOR. But I think of them and desire them.

CHRIS. So do many that are never like to come there. "The soul of the
sluggard desireth and hath nothing."

IGNOR. But I think of them, and leave all for them.

CHRIS. That I doubt, for leaving of all is a very hard matter; yea, a
harder matter than many are aware of. But why, or by what, art thou
persuaded that thou hast left all for God and heaven?

IGNOR. My heart tells me so.

CHRIS. The Wise Man says, "He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool."

IGNOR. This is spoken of an evil heart; but mine is a good one.

CHRIS. But how dost thou prove that?

IGNOR. It comforts me in the hopes of heaven.

CHRIS. That may be through its deceitfulness; for a man's heart may
minister comfort to him in the hopes of that thing for which he has yet
no ground to hope.

IGNOR. But my heart and life agree together; and therefore my hope is
well grounded.

CHRIS. Who told thee that thy heart and life agree together?

IGNOR. My heart tells me so.

CHRIS. Ask my fellow if I be a thief! Thy heart tells thee so! Except
the Word of God telleth thee in this matter, other testimony is of no
value.

IGNOR. But is it not a good heart that hath good thoughts? and is not
that a good life that is according to God's commandments?

CHRIS. Yes, that is a good heart that hath good thoughts, and that is a
good life that is according to God's commandments; but it is one thing,
indeed, to have these, and another thing only to think so.

IGNOR. Pray, what count you good thoughts, and a life according to God's
commandments?

CHRIS. There are good thoughts of many kinds: some respecting ourselves,
some God, some Christ, and some other things.

IGNOR. You go so fast, I cannot keep pace with you. Do you go on before:
I must stay awhile behind.

Then they said:

  "Well, Ignorance, wilt thou yet foolish be,
  To slight good counsel, ten times given thee?
  And if thou yet refuse it, thou shalt know,
  Ere long, the evil of thy doing so.
  Remember, man, in time; stoop, do not fear;
  Good counsel, taken well, saves; therefore hear:
  But, if thou yet shalt slight it, thou wilt be
  The loser, Ignorance, I'll warrant thee."

Then Christian addressed himself thus to his fellow:

CHRIS. Well, come, my good Hopeful; I perceive that thou and I must
walk by ourselves again.

[Sidenote: THE TWO PILGRIMS PROCEED]

So I saw in my dream that they went on apace before, and Ignorance he
came hobbling after. Then said Christian to his companion, "It pities me
much for this poor man: it will certainly go ill with him at last."

HOPE. Alas! there are abundance in our town in his condition, whole
families, yea, whole streets, and that of pilgrims, too; and if there be
so many in our parts, how many, think you, must there be in the place
where he was born?

CHRIS. Indeed, the Word saith, "He hath blinded their eyes, lest they
should see."

HOPE. Well said; I believe you have said the truth. Are we now almost
got past the Enchanted Ground?

CHRIS. Why, art thou weary of our talking?

HOPE. No, verily; but that I would know where we are.

CHRIS. We have not now above two miles farther to go thereon. Well, we
will leave at this time our neighbor Ignorance by himself, and fall upon
another subject.

HOPE. With all my heart; but you shall still begin.

CHRIS. Well, then, did you not know, about ten years ago, one Temporary
in your parts, who was a forward man in religion then?

HOPE. Know him! yes; he dwelt in Graceless, a town about two miles off
of Honesty, and he dwelt next door to one Turnback.

CHRIS. Right, he dwelt under the same roof with him. Well, that man was
much awakened once: I believe that then he had some sight of his sins,
and of the punishment that was due thereto.

HOPE. I am of your mind; for (my house not being above three miles from
him) he would ofttimes come to me, and that with many tears. Truly, I
pitied the man, and was not altogether without hope of him; but one may
see, it is not every one that cries "Lord! Lord!"

CHRIS. He told me once that he was resolved to go on pilgrimage as we do
now; but all of a sudden he grew acquainted with one Save-self, and then
he became a stranger to me, for at that time he gave up going on
pilgrimage.




CHAPTER XI.

[Sidenote: BEULAH LAND]


Now I saw in my dream, that by this time the pilgrims were got over the
Enchanted Ground, and entering into the country of Beulah, whose air was
very sweet and pleasant: the way lying directly through it, they enjoyed
themselves there for a season. Yea, here they heard continually the
singing of birds and saw every day the flowers appear on the earth, and
heard the voice of the turtle in the land. In this country the sun
shineth night and day; wherefore this was beyond the Valley of the
Shadow of Death, and also out of the reach of Giant Despair; neither
could they from this place so much as see Doubting Castle. Here they
were within sight of the City they were going to; also here met them
some of the inhabitants thereof; for in this land the Shining Ones
commonly walked, because it was upon the borders of heaven. Here they
had no want of corn and wine; for in this place they met with abundance
of what they had sought for in all their pilgrimage. Here they heard
voices from out of the City, loud voices, saying, "Say ye to the
daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh! Behold, His reward is
with Him!" Here all the inhabitants of the country called them "The holy
people, and redeemed of the Lord, sought out," etc.

Now, as they walked in this land, they had more rejoicing than in parts
more remote from the kingdom to which they were bound; and drawing near
to the City, they had yet a more perfect view thereof. It was builded of
pearls and precious stones, also the streets thereof were paved with
gold; so that by reason of the natural glory of the City, and the
reflection of the sunbeams upon it, Christian with desire fell sick;
Hopeful also had a fit or two of the same disease, wherefore here they
lay by it awhile, crying out because of their pangs, "If you see my
Beloved tell Him that I am sick of love."

But being a little strengthened, and better able to bear their sickness,
they walked on their way, and came yet nearer and nearer, where were
orchards, vineyards, and gardens, and their gates opened into the
highway. Now, as they came up to these places, behold, the gardener,
stood in the way; to whom the pilgrims said, "Whose goodly vineyards and
gardens are these?" He answered, "They are the King's, and are planted
here for His own delight, and also for the solace of pilgrims." So the
gardener had them into the vineyards, and bid them refresh themselves
with the dainties. He also showed them there the King's walks, and the
arbors where He delighted to be; and here they tarried and slept.

Now I beheld in my dream, that they talked more in their sleep at this
time than ever they did in all their journey; and being in thought
thereabout, the gardener said even to me, "Wherefore dost thou meditate
at the matter? It is the nature of the fruit of the grapes of these
vineyards to go down so sweetly as to cause the lips of them that are
asleep to speak."

So I saw, when they awoke they undertook to go up to the City. But, as I
said, the reflection of the sun upon the City (for the City was pure
gold) was so extremely glorious, that they could not, as yet, with open
face behold it, but through a glass made for that purpose. So I saw
that, as they went on, there met them two men in raiment that shone like
gold, also their faces shone as the light.

These men asked the pilgrims whence they came; and they told them. They
also asked them where they had lodged, what difficulties and dangers,
what comforts and pleasures, they had met in the way; and they told
them. Then said the men that met them, "You have but two difficulties
more to meet with, and then you are in the City."

Christian, then, and his companion, asked the men to go along with them;
so they told them that they would. "But," said they, "you must obtain it
by your own faith." So I saw in my dream that they went on together till
they came in sight of the gate.

[Sidenote: A RIVER INTERVENES]

Now I further saw, that betwixt them and the gate was a river; but there
was no bridge to go over, and the river was very deep. At the sight,
therefore, of this river, the pilgrims were much stunned; but the men
that went with them said, "You must go through, or you cannot come at
the gate."

The pilgrims then began to inquire if there was no other way to the
gate; to which they answered, "Yes; but there hath not any save two, to
wit, Enoch and Elijah, been permitted to tread that path since the
foundation of the world, nor shall until the last trumpet shall sound."
The pilgrims then, especially Christian, began to be anxious in his
mind, and looked this way and that; but no way could be found by them by
which they might escape the river. Then they asked the men if the waters
were all of a depth. They said, "No," yet they could not help them in
that case; "for," said they, "you shall find it deeper or shallower as
you believe in the King of the place."

They then addressed themselves to the water; and, entering, Christian
began to sink, and crying out to his good friend Hopeful, he said, "I
sink in deep waters; the billows go over my head; all His waves go over
me."

Then said the other, "Be of good cheer, my brother; I feel the bottom,
and it is good." Then said Christian, "Ah! my friend, the sorrows of
death have compassed me about; I shall not see the land that flows with
milk and honey." And with that, a great darkness and horror fell upon
Christian, so that he could not see before him. Also here he in a great
measure lost his senses, so that he could neither remember nor orderly
talk of any of those sweet refreshments that he had met with in the way
of his pilgrimage. But all the words that he spake still tended to show
that he had horror of mind, and heart-fears that he should die in that
river, and never obtain entrance in at the gate. Here also, as they that
stood by perceived, he was much in the troublesome thoughts of the sins
that he had committed, both since and before he began to be a pilgrim.
It was also observed that he was troubled with the sight of demons and
evil spirits; for ever and anon he would intimate so much by words.

Hopeful, therefore, here had much ado to keep his brother's head above
water; yea, sometimes he would be quite gone down, and then, ere a while
he would rise up again half dead. Hopeful would also endeavor to comfort
him, saying, "Brother, I see the gate, and men standing by to receive
us;" but Christian would answer, "It is you, it is you they wait for:
you have been hopeful ever since I knew you." "And so have you," said he
to Christian. "Ah, brother," said he, "surely, if I were right, He would
now arise to help me; but for my sins He hath brought me into this
snare, and hath left me." Then said Hopeful, "My brother, these troubles
and distresses that you go through in these waters are no sign that God
hath forsaken you; but are sent to try you, whether you will call to
mind that which hitherto you have received of His goodness, and live
upon Him in your distresses."

Then I saw in my dream that Christian was in thought awhile. To whom
also Hopeful added these words, "Be of good cheer, Jesus Christ maketh
thee whole." And, with that, Christian brake out with a loud voice, "Oh,
I see Him again; and He tells me, 'When thou passest through the waters,
I will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow
thee.'" Then they both took courage; and the enemy was, after that, as
still as a stone, until they were gone over. Christian, therefore,
presently found ground to stand upon; and so it followed that the rest
of the river was but shallow. Thus they got over.

[Sidenote: TWO SHINING MEN]

Now, upon the bank of the river, on the other side, they saw the two
Shining Men again, who there waited for them. Wherefore, being come out
of the river, they saluted them, saying, "We are heavenly spirits, sent
forth to help those that shall be heirs of salvation." Thus they went
along towards the gate. Now, you must note that the City stood upon a
mighty hill; but the pilgrims went up that hill with ease, because they
had these two men to lead them up by the arms; also they had left their
mortal garments behind them in the river; for though they went in with
them, they came out without them. They therefore went up here with much
activity and speed, though the foundation upon which the City was framed
was higher than the clouds. They therefore went up through the regions
of the air, sweetly talking as they went, being comforted because they
had safely got over the river, and had such glorious companions to
attend them.

[Sidenote: MOUNT ZION]

The talk they had with the Shining Ones, was about the glory of the
place; who told them that the beauty and glory of it were such as could
not be put into words. "There," said they, "is the Mount Zion, the
heavenly Jerusalem, the innumerable company of angels, and the spirits
of good men made perfect. You are going now," said they, "to the
Paradise of God, wherein you shall see the tree of life, and eat of the
never-fading fruits thereof; and when you come there, you shall have
white robes given you, and your walk and talk shall be every day with
the King, even all the days of an eternal life. There you shall not see
again such things as you saw when you were in the lower region upon the
earth; to wit, sorrow, sickness, affliction, and death; 'for the former
things are passed away.' You are going now to Abraham, to Isaac, and to
Jacob, and to the prophets, men that God hath taken away from the evil
to come, and that are now resting upon their beds, each one walking in
his righteousness." The men then asked, "What must we do in the holy
place?" To whom it was answered, "You must there receive the comfort of
all your toil, and have joy for all your sorrow; you must reap what you
have sown, even the fruit of all your prayers, and tears, and sufferings
for the King by the way. In that place you must wear crowns of gold,
and enjoy the perpetual sight and visions of the Holy One; for there you
shall see Him as He is. There also you shall serve Him continually with
praise, with shouting and thanksgiving, whom you desired to serve in the
world, though with much difficulty, because of the weakness of your
bodies. There your eyes shall be delighted with seeing and your ears
with hearing the pleasant voice of the Mighty One. There you shall enjoy
your friends again that are gone thither before you; and there you shall
with joy receive even every one that follows into the holy place after
you. There also you shall be clothed with glory and majesty, and put
into a state fit to ride out with the King of Glory. When He shall come
with sound of trumpet in the clouds, as upon the wings of the wind, you
shall come with Him; and when He shall sit upon the throne of judgment,
you shall sit by Him; yea, and when He shall pass sentence upon all the
workers of evil, let them be angels or men, you also shall have a voice
in that judgment because they were His and your enemies. Also, when He
shall again return to the City, you shall go too, with sound of trumpet,
and be ever with Him."

Now, while they were thus drawing towards the gate, behold, a company of
the heavenly host came out to meet them; to whom it was said by the
other two Shining Ones, "These are the men that have loved our Lord when
in the world, and that have left all for His holy name; and He hath
sent us to fetch them, and we have brought them thus far on their
desired journey, that they may go in and look their Redeemer in the face
with joy." Then the heavenly host gave a great shout, saying, "Blessed
are they which are called to the marriage supper of the Lamb." There
came out also at this time to meet them several of the King's
trumpeters, clothed in white and shining raiment who, with melodious
noises and loud, made even the heavens to echo with their sound. These
trumpeters saluted Christian and his fellow with ten thousand welcomes
from the world; and this they did with shouting and sound of trumpet.

[Sidenote: THE CELESTIAL CITY]

This done, they compassed them round on every side; some went before,
some behind, and some on the right hand, some on the left (as it were to
guard them through the upper regions), continually sounding as they
went, with melodious noise, in notes on high: so that the very sight was
to them that could behold it as if heaven itself was come down to meet
them. Thus, therefore, they walked on together; and, as they walked,
ever and anon these trumpeters, even with joyful sound, would, by mixing
their music, with looks and gestures, still signify to Christian and his
brother how welcome they were into their company, and with what gladness
they came to meet them. And now were these two men as it were in heaven
before they came at it, being swallowed up with the sight of angels, and
with hearing of their melodious notes. Here also they had the City
itself in view, and thought they heard all the bells therein to ring,
and welcome them thereto. But, above all, the warm and joyful thoughts
that they had about their own dwelling there with such company, and that
for ever and ever, oh! by what tongue or pen can their glorious joy be
expressed?

And thus they came up to the gate. Now, when they were come up to the
gate, there was written over it in letters of gold, "BLESSED ARE THEY
THAT DO HIS COMMANDMENTS, THAT THEY MAY HAVE RIGHT TO THE TREE OF LIFE,
AND MAY ENTER IN THROUGH THE GATES INTO THE CITY."

Then I saw in my dream, that the Shining Men bid them call at the gate:
the which when they did, some from above looked over the gate: such as
Enoch, Moses, and Elijah, and others, to whom it was said, "These
pilgrims are come from the City of Destruction, for the love that they
bear to the King of this place." And then the pilgrims gave in unto them
each man his certificate, which they had received in the beginning;
those therefore were carried in to the King, who, when He had read them,
said, "Where are the men?" To whom it was answered, "They are standing
without the gate." The King then commanded to open the gate, "that the
righteous nation," said He, "which keepeth the truth, may enter in."

Now, I saw in my dream, that these two men went in at the gate; and lo!
as they entered, their looks were changed so that their faces became
bright; and they had garments put on that shone like gold. There were
also that met them with harps and crowns, and gave them to them--the
harps to praise withal, and the crowns in token of honor. Then I heard
in my dream that all the bells in the City rang again for joy, and that
it was said unto them, "Enter ye into the joy of your Lord." I also
heard the men themselves, that they sang with a loud voice, saying,
"Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto Him that sitteth
upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever!"

Now, just as the gates were opened to let in the men, I looked in after
them, and behold, the City shone like the sun; the streets also were
paved with gold; and in them walked many men with crowns on their heads,
palms in their hands, and golden harps to sing praises withal.

There were also of them that had wings, and they answered one another
without ceasing, saying, "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord!" And, after
that, they shut up the gates; which when I had seen, I wished myself
among them.

[Sidenote: IGNORANCE FAILS TO ENTER]

Now while I was gazing upon all these things, I turned my head to look
back, and saw Ignorance come up to the river-side; but he soon got over,
and that without half the difficulty which the other two men met with.
For it happened that there was then in the place one Vain-Hope, a
ferryman, that with his boat helped him over; so he, as the others I
saw, did ascend the hill, to come up to the gate; only he came alone,
neither did any man meet him with the least encouragement. When he was
come up to the gate, he looked up to the writing that was above, and
then began to knock, supposing that entrance should have been quickly
given to him; but he was asked by the men that looked over the top of
the gate, "Whence came you? and what would you have?" He answered, "I
have eaten and drunk in the presence of the King, and He has taught in
our streets." Then they asked him for his certificate, that they might
go in and show it to the King: so he fumbled in his bosom for one, and
found none. Then said they, "Have you none?" But the man answered never
a word. So they told the King; but He would not come down to see him,
but commanded the two Shining Ones that conducted Christian and Hopeful
to the City, to go out and take Ignorance, and bind him hand and foot,
and have him away. Then they took him up, and carried him through the
air to the door that I saw in the side of the hill, and put him in
there. Then I saw that there was a way to hell, even from the gates of
heaven, as well as from the City of Destruction!

       *       *       *       *       *

So I awoke, and behold, it was a dream.




CONCLUSION.


  Now, reader, I have told my dream to thee,
  See if thou canst interpret it to me,
  Or to thyself or neighbor; but take heed
  Of misinterpreting; for that, instead
  Of doing good, will but thyself abuse:
  By misinterpreting, evil ensues.
    Take heed also that thou be not extreme
  In playing with the outside of my dream;
  Nor let my figure or similitude
  Put thee into a laughter or a feud.
  Leave this for boys and fools; but as for thee,
  Do thou the substance of my matter see.
    Put by the curtains, look within my veil;
  Turn up my metaphors, and do not fail,
  There, if thou seekest them, such things to find
  As will be helpful to an honest mind.
    What of my dross thou findest there, be bold
  To throw away; but yet preserve the gold.
  What if my gold be wrapped up in ore?--
  None throws away the apple for the core.
  But if thou shalt cast all away as vain,
  I know not but t'will make me dream again.




THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS.

PART II.




CHAPTER I.

COURTEOUS COMPANIONS,--


Some time since, to tell you my dream that I had of Christian the
Pilgrim, and of his dangerous journey towards the Celestial Country, was
pleasant to me and profitable to you. I told you then, also, what I saw
concerning his wife and children, and how unwilling they were to go with
him on pilgrimage, insomuch that he was forced to go on his progress
without them; for he durst not run the danger of that destruction which
he feared would come by staying with them in the City of Destruction;
wherefore, as I then showed you, he left them and departed.

Now, it hath so happened, through the abundance of business, that I have
been much hindered and kept back from my wonted travels into those parts
whence he went, and so could not, till now, obtain an opportunity to
make further inquiry after those whom he left behind, that I might give
you an account of them. But, having had some concerns that way of late,
I went down again thitherward. Now, having taken up my lodgings in a
wood about a mile off the place, as I slept I dreamed again.

[Sidenote: THE AUTHOR AND MR. SAGACITY]

And as I was in my dream, behold, an aged gentleman came by where I lay;
and, because he was to go some part of the way that I was travelling,
methought I got up and went with him. So, as we walked, and as travelers
usually do, I was as if we fell into discourse; and our talk happened to
be about Christian and his travels; for thus I began with the old man:

"Sir," said I, "what town is that there below, that lieth on the left
hand of our way?"

Then said Mr. Sagacity (for that was his name), "It is the City of
Destruction; a populous place, but possessed with a very ill-conditioned
and idle sort of people."

"I thought that was that city," quoth I: "I went once myself through
that town, and therefore know that this report you give of it is true."

SAG. Too true! I wish I could speak truth in speaking better of them
that dwell therein.

"Well, sir," quoth I, "then I perceive you to be a well-meaning man, and
so one that takes pleasure to hear and tell of that which is good. Pray,
did you never hear what happened to a man some time ago of this town
(whose name was Christian), that went on pilgrimage up towards the
higher regions?"

SAG. Hear of him! Ay, and I also heard of the difficulties, troubles,
wars, captivities, cries, groans, frights and fears that he met with and
had in his journey. Besides, I must tell you all our country rings of
him: there are but few houses that have heard of him and his doings but
have sought after and got the record of his pilgrimage. Yea, I think I
may say that his hazardous journey has got many wellwishers to his ways;
for though, when he was here, he was a fool in every man's mouth, yet
now he is gone he is highly commended of all. For 'tis said he lives
bravely where he is: yea, many of them that are resolved never to run
his risks yet have their mouths water at his gains.

"They may," quoth I, "well think, if they think anything that is true,
that he liveth well where he is; for he now lives at and in the Fountain
of Life, and has what he has without labor and sorrow; for there is no
grief mixed therewith. But, pray, what talk have the people about him?"

SAG. Talk! the people talk strangely about him: some say that he now
walks in white; that he has a chain of gold about his neck; that he has
a crown of gold beset with pearls upon his head. Others say that the
Shining Ones, that sometimes showed themselves unto him in his journey,
are become his companions, and that he is as familiar with them in the
place where he is, as here one neighbor is with another. Besides, it is
confidently spoken concerning him, that the King of the place where he
is has bestowed upon him already a very rich and pleasant dwelling at
court, and that he every day eateth and drinketh and walketh with Him,
and receiveth of the smiles and favors of Him that is judge of all
there. Moreover, it is expected of some, that his Prince, the Lord of
that country, will shortly come into these parts, and will know the
reason, if they can give any, why his neighbors set so little by him,
and had him so much in derision, when they perceived that he would be a
Pilgrim. For they say, now he is so in the affections of his Prince, and
that his Sovereign is so much concerned with the wrongs that were cast
upon Christian when he became a Pilgrim, that He will look upon all as
if done unto Himself; and no marvel, for it was for the love that he had
to his Prince that he ventured as he did.

[Sidenote: SAGACITY TELLS OF CHRISTIANA]

"I daresay," quoth I; "I am glad on't; I am glad for the poor man's
sake, for that he now has rest from his labor, and for that he reapeth
the benefit of his tears with joy, and for that he has got beyond
gunshot of his enemies, and is out of the reach of them that hate him. I
also am glad for that a rumor of these things is noised abroad in this
country: who can tell but that it may work some good effect on some that
are left behind? But pray, sir, while it is fresh in my mind, do you
hear anything of his wife and children? Poor hearts! I wonder in my mind
what they do."

SAG. Who? Christiana and her sons? They are like to do as well as did
Christian himself; for, though they all played the fool at first, and
would by no means be persuaded by either the tears or entreaties of
Christian, yet, second thoughts have wrought wonderfully with them, so
they have packed up, and are also gone after him.

"Better and better," quoth I: "but, what! wife and children and all?"

SAG. It is true: I can give you an account of the matter, for I was upon
the spot at the instant, and was thoroughly acquainted with the whole
affair.

"Then," said I, "a man, it seems, may report it for a truth?"

SAG. You need not fear to declare it. I mean, that they are all gone on
pilgrimage, both the good woman and her four boys. And, since (we are,
as I perceive) going some considerable way together, I will give you an
account of the whole matter.

This Christiana (for that was her name from the day that she, with her
children betook themselves to a pilgrim's life) after her husband had
gone over the river, and she could hear of him no more, her thoughts
began to work in her mind. First, for that she had lost her husband, and
of that the loving bond of that relation was utterly broken betwixt
them. For you know (said he to me) it is only natural that the living
should have many sad thoughts, in the remembrance of the loss of loving
relations. This, therefore, of her husband, did cost her many a tear.
But this was not all; for Christiana did also begin to consider with
herself, whether unbecoming behavior towards her husband was not one
cause that she saw him no more, and that in such sort he was taken away
from her. And, upon this, came into her mind, by swarms, all her unkind,
unnatural, and ungodly treatment of her dear friend; which also troubled
her conscience, and did load her with guilt. She was, moreover, much
broken with recalling to remembrance the restless groans, brinish tears,
and self-bemoanings of her husband, and how she did harden her heart
against all his entreaties and loving persuasions of her and her sons to
go with him; yea, there was not anything that Christian either said to
her or did before her, all the while that his burden did hang on his
back, but it returned upon her like a flash of lightning, and rent her
heart in sunder. Specially that bitter outcry of his, "What shall I do
to be saved?" did ring in her ears most dolefully.

Then said she to her children, "Sons, we are all undone. I have sinned
away your father, and he is gone; he would have had us with him, but I
would not go myself; I also have hindered you of life."

With that, the boys fell all into tears, and cried out to go after their
father.

"Oh," said Christiana, "that it had been but our lot to go with him!
then had it fared well with us, beyond what it is like to do now. For
though I formerly foolishly imagined, concerning the troubles of your
father, that they came from a foolish fancy that he had, or for that he
was overrun with melancholy humors; yet now it will not out of my mind
but that they sprang from another cause; and it was this, that the light
of life was given him, by the help of which, as I perceive, he has
escaped the snares of death."

[Sidenote: OF CHRISTIANA'S DREAM]

Then they all wept again, and cried out, "Oh, woe worth the day!"

The next night Christiana had a dream; and, behold, she saw as if a
broad parchment were opened before her, in which were recorded the sum
of her ways; and the times, as she thought, looked very black upon her.
Then she cried out aloud in her sleep, "Lord, have mercy upon me a
sinner!" and the little children heard her.

After this, she thought she saw two very ill-favored ones standing by
her bed-side, and saying, "What shall we do with this woman? for she
cries out for mercy waking and sleeping: if she be suffered to go on as
she begins, we shall lose her as we have lost her husband. Wherefore we
must, by one way or other, seek to take her off from the thoughts of
what shall be hereafter; else, all the world cannot help but she will
become a pilgrim."

Now she awoke in a great sweat; also a trembling was upon her; but after
a while, she fell to sleeping again. And then she thought she saw
Christian her husband in a place of bliss, among many immortals, with a
harp in his hand, standing and playing upon it before One that sat upon
a throne, with a rainbow about His head.

She saw, also, as if he bowed his head with his face to the paved work
that was under the Prince's feet, saying, "I heartily thank my Lord and
King for bringing of me into this place." Then shouted a company of them
that stood round about, and harped with their harps; but no man living
could tell what they said, but Christian and his companions.

Next morning, when she was up, and had prayed to God and talked with her
children a while, one knocked hard at the door; to whom she spake out,
saying, "If thou comest in God's name, come in." So he said, "Amen," and
opened the door, and saluted her with "Peace be to this house!" The
which, when he had done, he said, "Christiana, knowest thou wherefore I
am come?" Then she blushed and trembled, also her heart began to wax
warm with desires to know from whence he came, and what was his errand
to her. So he said unto her, "My name is Secret: I dwell with those that
are on high. It is talked of where I dwell, as if thou hadst a desire to
go thither; also there is a report that thou art aware of the evil thou
hast formerly done to thy husband, in hardening thy heart against his
way, and in keeping of these thy babes in their ignorance. Christiana,
the Merciful One hath sent me to tell thee, that He is a God ready to
forgive, and that He taketh delight to pardon offences. He also would
have thee know that He inviteth thee to come into His presence, to His
table, and that He will feed thee with the fat of His house, and with
the heritage of Jacob thy father.

"There is Christian, thy husband that was, with legions more, his
companions, ever behold that face that doth minister life to beholders;
and they will be glad when they shall hear the sound of thy feet step
over thy Father's threshold."

[Sidenote: CHRISTIANA IS SENT FOR]

Christiana at this was greatly abashed in herself, and bowed her head to
the ground.

This visitor proceeded, and said, "Christiana, here is also a letter for
thee, which I have brought from thy husband's King." So she took it, and
opened it; but it smelt after the manner of the best perfume; also it
was written in letters of gold. The contents of the letter were these:
"That the King would have her to do as Christian her husband; for that
was the way to come to His City, and to dwell in His presence with joy
for ever."

At this the good woman was quite overcome; so she cried out to her
visitor, "Sir, will you carry me and my children with you, that we also
may worship this King?"

Then said the visitor, "Christiana, the bitter is before the sweet. Thou
must through troubles, as did he that went before thee, enter the
Celestial City. Wherefore I advise thee to do as did Christian thy
husband: go to the wicket-gate yonder over the plain, for that stands in
the head of the way up which you must go; and I wish thee all good
speed. Also I advise that thou put this letter in thy bosom, that thou
read therein to thyself, and to thy children, until you have got it by
rote of heart: for it is one of the songs that thou must sing while thou
art in this house of thy pilgrimage. Also this thou must deliver in at
the farther gate."

Now, I saw in my dream, that this old gentleman, as he told me the
story, did himself seem to be greatly affected therewith. He moreover
went on, and said:

So Christiana called her sons together, and began thus to address
herself unto them: "My sons, I have, as you may perceive, been of late
under much trouble in my soul about the death of your father: not for
that I doubt at all of his happiness, for I am satisfied now that he is
well. I have also been much affected with the thoughts of mine own state
and yours, which I verily believe is by nature miserable. My treatment
also of your father in his distress is a great load to my conscience,
for I hardened both mine own heart and yours against him, and refused to
go with him on pilgrimage.

"The thoughts of these things would now kill me outright, but for a
dream which I had last night, and but for the encouragement that this
stranger has given me this morning. Come, my children, let us pack up,
and be gone to the gate that leads to the Celestial Country, that we may
see your father, and be with him and his companions in peace, according
to the laws of that land."

Then did her children burst out into tears, for joy that the heart of
their mother was so inclined. So their visitor bade them farewell; and
they began to prepare to set out for their journey.

[Sidenote: MRS. TIMOROUS AND CHRISTIANA]

But while they were thus about to be gone, two of the women that were
Christiana's neighbors came up to the house, and knocked at the door.
To whom she said as before, "if you come in God's name, come in." At
this the women were stunned; for this kind of language they used not to
hear, or to perceive to drop from the lips of Christiana. Yet they came
in; but, behold they found the good woman preparing to be gone from her
house.

So they began, and said, "Neighbor, pray what is your meaning by this?"

Christiana answered and said to the eldest of them, whose name was Mrs.
Timorous, "I am preparing for a journey."

This Timorous was daughter to him that met Christian upon the Hill
Difficulty, and would have had him go back for fear of the lions.

TIM. For what journey, I pray you?

CHR. Even to go after my good husband. And with that she fell a weeping.

TIM. I hope not so, good neighbor. Pray, for your poor children's sake,
do not so unwomanly cast away yourself.

CHR. Nay, my children shall go with me; not one of them is willing to
stay behind.

TIM. I wonder in my very heart what or who has brought you into this
mind!

CHR. Oh, neighbor, knew you but as much as I do, I doubt not but that
you would go with me.

TIM. Prithee, what new knowledge hast thou got that so worketh off thy
mind from thy friends, and that tempteth thee to go nobody knows where?

CHR. Then Christiana replied, "I have been sorely afflicted since my
husband's departure from me, but especially since he went over the
river. But that which troubleth me most is my unkind treatment of him
when he was under his distress. Besides, I am now as he was then:
nothing will serve me but going on pilgrimage. I was a-dreaming last
night that I saw him. Oh that my soul was with him! He dwelleth in the
presence of the King of the country; he sits and eats with Him at His
table; he has become a companion of immortals, and has a house now given
him to dwell in, to which the best palaces on earth, if compared, seem
to me but as a dunghill. The Prince of the place has also sent for me,
with promises of entertainment if I shall come to Him; His messenger was
here even now, and has brought me a letter which invites me to come."
And with that she plucked out the letter, and read it, and said to them,
"What now will you say to this?"

[Sidenote: MERCY ALSO DESIRES TO GO]

TIM. Oh, the madness that hath possessed thee and thy husband, to run
yourselves upon such difficulties! You have heard, I am sure, what your
husband did meet with, even in a manner at the first step that he took
on his way, as our neighbor Obstinate can yet testify, for he went along
with them, yea, and Pliable too; until they, like wise men, were afraid
to go any farther. We also heard, over and above, how he met with the
lions, Apollyon, the Shadow of Death, and many other things. Nor is the
danger he met with at Vanity Fair to be forgotten by thee. For if he,
though a man, was so hard put to it, what canst thou, being but a poor
woman, do? Consider also that these four sweet babes are thy children,
thy flesh and thy bones. Wherefore, though thou shouldest be so rash as
to cast away thyself, yet, for the sake of thy children, keep thou at
home.

But Christiana said unto her, "Tempt me not, my neighbor. I have now a
price put into my hands to get gain, and I should be a fool of the
greatest size if I should have no heart to strike in with the
opportunity. And for that you tell me of all these troubles which I am
like to meet with in the way, they are so far off from being to me a
discouragement, that they show I am in the right. The bitter must come
before the sweet, and that also will make the sweet the sweeter.
Wherefore, since you came not to my house in God's name, as I said, I
pray you to be gone, and not to disquiet me further."

Then Timorous reviled her, and said to her fellow, "Come, neighbor
Mercy, let us leave her in her own hands, since she scorns our counsel
and company." But Mercy was at a stand, and could not so readily comply
with her neighbor, and that for a twofold reason. 1. Her heart yearned
over Christiana; so she said within herself, "If my neighbor will needs
be gone, I will go a little way with her, and help her." 2. Her heart
yearned over her own soul; for what Christiana had said had taken hold
upon her mind. Wherefore she said within herself again, "I will yet have
more talk with this Christiana, and if I find truth and life in what she
shall say, myself, with my heart, shall also go with her." Wherefore
Mercy began thus to reply to her neighbor Timorous:

MER. Neighbor, I did indeed come with you to see Christiana this
morning; and since she is, as you see, taking her last farewell of her
country, I think to walk this sunshiny morning a little with her, to
help her on her way.

But she told her not of the second reason, but kept that to herself.

TIM. Well, I see you have a mind to go a-fooling too; but take heed in
time, and be wise. While we are out of danger, we are out; but when we
are in, we are in.

So Mrs. Timorous returned to her house, and Christiana betook herself to
her journey. But when Timorous was got home to her house, she sends for
some of her neighbors; to wit, Mrs. Bat's-eyes, Mrs. Inconsiderate, Mrs.
Light-mind, and Mrs. Know-nothing. So, when they were come to her house,
she falls to telling of the story of Christiana and of her intended
journey. And thus she began her tale:

[Sidenote: MRS. TIMOROUS' NEIGHBORS]

TIM. Neighbors, having had little to do this morning, I went to give
Christiana a visit; and when I came at the door, I knocked, as you know
it is our custom; and she answered, "If you come in God's name come in."
So in I went, thinking all was well; but when I came in I found her
preparing herself to depart the town, she and also her children. So I
asked her what was her meaning by that. And she told me, in short, that
she was now of a mind to go on pilgrimage, as did her husband. She told
me also a dream that she had, and how the King of the country where her
husband was had sent her an inviting letter to come thither.

Then said Mrs. Know-nothing, "And, what! do you think she will go?"

TIM. Ay, go she will, whatever comes on't; and methinks I know it by
this: for that which was my great reason in persuading her to stay at
home (that is, the troubles she was like to meet with in the way) is one
great reason with her to put her forward on her journey. For she told
me, in so many words, "The bitter goes before the sweet; yea, and
forasmuch as it so doth, it makes the sweet the sweeter."

MRS. BAT'S-EYES. "Oh, this blind and foolish woman!" said she; "will she
not take warning by her husband's trials? For my part, I see, if he were
here again, he would rest him content in a whole skin, and never run so
many dangers for nothing."

Mrs. Inconsiderate also replied, saying, "Away with such fantastical
fools from the town! a good riddance, for my part, I say, of her! Should
she stay where she dwells, and retain this her mind, who could live
quietly by her? for she will either be dumpish, or unneighborly, or
talk of such matters as no wise body can abide. Wherefore, for my part,
I shall never be sorry for her departure: let her go, and let better
come in her room. It was never a good world since these whimsical fools
dwelt in it."

Then Mrs. Light-mind added as followeth: "Come, put this kind of talk
away. I was yesterday at Madam Wanton's, where we were as merry as the
maids. For who do you think should be there, but I and Mrs.
Love-the-Flesh, and three or four more, with Mr. Lechery, Mrs. Filth,
and some others. So there we had music and dancing, and what else was
meet to fill up the pleasure. And, I dare say, my lady herself is an
admirable well-bred gentlewoman, and Mr. Lechery is as pretty a
fellow."




CHAPTER II.

THE WICKET-GATE.


By this time Christiana was got on her way, and Mercy went along with
her. So as they went, her children being there also, Christiana began to
discourse. "And, Mercy," said Christiana, "I take this as an unexpected
favor, that thou shouldest set forth out of doors with me, to accompany
me a little in my way."

MER. Then said young Mercy (for she was but young), "If I thought it
would be a good purpose to go with you, I would never go near the town
any more."

CHR. "Well, Mercy," said Christiana, "cast in thy lot with me: I well
know what will be the end of our pilgrimage: my husband is where he
would not but be for all the gold in the Spanish mines. Nor shalt thou
be turned away, though thou goest but upon my invitation. The King who
hath sent for me and my children is One that delighteth in mercy.
Besides, if thou wilt, I will hire thee, and thou shalt go along with me
as my servant; yet we will have all things in common betwixt thee and
me, only go along with me."

MER. But how shall I be sure that I also shall be welcomed? Had I this
hope but from one that can tell, I would have no hesitation at all, but
would go, being helped by Him that can help, though the way be never so
tedious.

CHR. Well, loving Mercy, I will tell thee what thou shalt do: go with me
to the wicket-gate, and there I will further inquire for thee; and if
there thou dost not meet with encouragement, I will be content that thou
shalt return to thy place: I also will pay thee for thy kindness which
thou showest to me and my children, in the accompanying of us in our way
as thou dost.

[Sidenote: MERCY GOES WITH CHRISTIANA]

MER. Then will I go thither, and will take what shall follow; and the
Lord grant that my lot may there fall, even as the King of heaven shall
have His heart upon me!

Christiana was then glad at her heart, not only that she had a
companion, but also for that she had prevailed with this poor maid to
fall in love with her own salvation. So they went on together and Mercy
began to weep.

Then said Christiana, "Wherefore weepeth my sister so?"

MER. "Alas!" said she, "who can but lament, that shall but rightly
consider what a state and condition my poor relations are in, that yet
remain in our sinful town? And that which makes my grief the more heavy
is, because they have no one to teach them nor to tell them what is to
come."

CHR. Tenderness becometh pilgrims; and thou dost for thy friends as my
good Christian did for me when he left me: he mourned for that I would
not heed nor regard him; but his Lord and ours did gather up his tears,
and put them into His bottle; and now both I and thou, and these my
sweet babes, are reaping the fruit and benefit of them I hope, Mercy,
that these tears of thine will not be lost; for the Truth hath said that
"they that sow in tears shall reap in joy," in singing; and "he that
goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come
again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him."

Then said Mercy:

  "Let the Most Blessèd be my guide,
    If 't be His blessèd will,
  Unto His gate, into His fold,
    Up to His holy hill.

  "And never let Him suffer me
    To swerve or turn aside
  From His free grace and holy ways,
    Whate'er shall me betide.

  "And let Him gather them of mine
    That I have left behind:
  Lord, make them pray they may be Thine,
    With all their heart and mind."

Now my old friend proceeded, and said, "But when Christiana came to the
Slough of Despond, she began to be at a stand; 'For,' said she, 'this is
the place in which my dear husband had like to have been smothered with
mud.' She perceived also that, notwithstanding the command of the King
to make this place for pilgrims good, yet it was rather worse than
formerly." So I asked if that was true.

"Yes," said the old gentleman, "too true, for many there be that pretend
to be the King's laborers, and say they are for mending the King's
highway, that bring dirt and dung instead of stones, and so mar instead
of mending. Here Christiana, therefore, with her boys, did make a stand.
But said Mercy, 'Come, let us venture, only let us be wary.' Then they
looked well to their steps, and made shift to get staggeringly over. Yet
Christiana had to have been in, and that not once nor twice.

"Now, they had no sooner got over, but they thought they heard words
that said unto them, 'Blessed is she that believeth, for there shall be
a performance of those things which were told her from the Lord.'

"Then they went on again; and said Mercy to Christiana, 'Had I as good
ground to hope for a loving reception at the wicket-gate as you, I think
no Slough of Despond would discourage me.'

"'Well,' said the other, 'You know your trouble, and I know mine; and,
good friend, we shall have enough evil before we come at our journey's
end. For can it be imagined that the people that design to attain such
excellent glories as we do, and that are so envied that happiness as we
are, but that we shall meet with what fears, with what troubles and
afflictions they can possibly assault us with, that hate us?'"

[Sidenote: AT THE WICKET GATE]

And now Mr. Sagacity left me to dream out my dream by myself. Wherefore,
methought I saw Christiana, and Mercy, and the boys, go all of them up
to the gate; to which when they were come they betook themselves to a
short debate about how they must manage their calling at the gate, and
what should be said unto him that did open unto them: so it was
concluded, since Christiana was the eldest, that she should knock for
entrance, and that she should speak to him that did open, for the rest.
So Christiana began to knock, and, as her poor husband did, she knocked
and knocked again. But instead of any that answered, they all thought
that they heard as if a dog came barking upon them; a dog, and a great
one too: and this made the women and children afraid, nor durst they for
a while to knock any more, for fear the mastiff should fly upon them.
Now, therefore, they were greatly tumbled up and down in their minds,
and knew not what to do. Knock they durst not, for fear of the dog; go
back they durst not, for fear the keeper of the gate should espy them as
they so went, and should be offended with them. At last they thought of
knocking again, and knocked more loudly than they did at first. Then
said the Keeper of the gate, "Who is there?" So the dog left off to
bark, and He opened unto them.

Then Christiana made low obeisance, and said, "Let not our Lord be
offended with His handmaidens, for that we have knocked at His princely
gate."

Then said the Keeper, "Whence come ye? and what is it that you would
have?"

Christiana answered, "We are come from whence Christian did come, and
upon the same errand as he; to wit, to be, if it shall please you,
graciously admitted by this gate into the way that leads to the
Celestial City. And I answer, my Lord, in the next place, that I am
Christiana, once the wife of Christian, that now is gotten above."

With that the Keeper of the gate did marvel, saying, "What! is she now
become a pilgrim, that, but a while ago hated that life?"

Then she bowed her head, and said, "Yes; and so are these my sweet babes
also."

Then He took her by the hand, and let her in, and said also, "Suffer the
little children to come unto me;" and with that He shut up the gate.
This done, He called to a trumpeter that was above, over the gate, to
entertain Christiana with shouting and sound of trumpet for joy. So he
obeyed, and sounded, and filled the air with his melodious notes.

Now, all this while poor Mercy did stand without trembling and crying,
for fear that she was rejected. But when Christiana had got admittance
for herself and her boys, then she began to make intercession for Mercy.

[Sidenote: MERCY FALLS IN A SWOON]

CHR. And she said, "My Lord, I have a companion of mine that stands yet
without, that is come hither upon the same account as myself, one that
is much troubled in her mind, for that she comes, as she thinks, without
sending for; whereas I was sent to by my husband's King to come."

Now Mercy began to be very impatient, for each minute was as long to her
as an hour; wherefore she prevented Christiana from asking for her more
fully by knocking at the gate herself. And she knocked then so loud that
she made Christiana to start. Then said the Keeper of the gate, "Who is
there?" And said Christiana, "It is my friend."

So He opened the gate and looked out; but Mercy was fallen down without
in a swoon, for she fainted, and was afraid that no gate would be opened
to her.

Then he took her by the hand, and said, "Maiden, I bid thee arise."

"Oh, sir," said she, "I am faint: there is scarce life left in me."

But He answered that "One once said, 'When my soul fainted within me, I
remembered the Lord; and my prayer came in unto Thee, into Thy holy
temple.' Fear not, but stand upon thy feet, and tell me wherefore thou
art come."

MER. I am come for that unto which I was never invited, as my friend
Christiana was. Hers was from the King, and mine was but from her.
Wherefore I fear I presume.

KEEP. Did she desire thee to come with her to this place?

MER. Yes; and, as my Lord sees, I am come. And if there is any grace and
forgiveness of sins to spare, I beseech that I, Thy poor handmaiden, may
be partaker thereof.

[Sidenote: MERCY PERMITTED TO ENTER]

Then He took her again by the hand, and led her gently in, and said, "I
pray for all them that believe on me, by what means soever they come
unto me." Then said He to those that stood by, "Fetch something, and
give it to Mercy to smell on, thereby to stay her fainting." So they
fetched her a bundle of myrrh, and a while after she was revived.

And now was Christiana and her boys and Mercy received of the Lord at
the head of the way, and spoke kindly unto by Him. Then said they yet
further unto Him, "We are sorry for our sins, and beg of our Lord His
pardon and further information what we must do."

"I grant pardon," said He, "by word and deed: by word, in the promise of
forgiveness; by deed, in the way I obtained it. Take the first from my
lips with a kiss, and the other as it shall be revealed."

Now, I saw in my dream, that He spake many good words unto them, whereby
they were greatly gladded. He also had them up to the top of the gate,
and showed them by what deed they were saved; and told them withal that
that sight they would have again as they went along the way, to their
comfort.

So He left them a while in a summer parlor below, where they entered
into a talk by themselves; and thus Christiana began:

"O Lord, how glad am I that we are got in hither!"

MER. So you well may; but I of all have cause to leap for joy.

CHR. I thought one time as I stood at the gate, because I knocked, and
none did answer, that all our labor had been lost, specially when that
ugly cur made such a heavy barking against us.

MER. But my worst fear was after I saw that you were taken into His
favor, and that I was left behind. Now, thought I, it is fulfilled which
is written, "Two women shall be grinding at the mill; the one shall be
taken, and the other left." I had much ado to forbear crying out,
"Undone! undone!" And afraid I was to knock any more: but when I looked
up to what was written over the gate, I took courage. I also thought
that I must either knock again or die; so I knocked, but I cannot tell
how, for my spirit now struggled betwixt life and death.

_Chr._ Can you not tell how you knocked? I am sure your knocks were so
earnest, that the very sound of them made me start. I thought I never
heard such knocking in all my life; I thought you would come in by
violent hands, or take the kingdom by storm.

_Mer._ Alas! to be in my case, who that so was could but have done so?
You saw that the door was shut upon me, and that there was a most cruel
dog thereabout. Who, I say, that was so faint-hearted as I, would not
have knocked with all their might? But, pray, what said my Lord to my
rudeness? Was He not angry with me?

CHR. When He heard your lumbering noise, He gave a wonderful innocent
smile; I believe what you did pleased Him well enough, for He showed no
sign to the contrary. But I marvel in my heart why he keeps such a dog;
had I known that afore, I should not have had heart enough to have
ventured myself in this manner. But now we are in, we are in, and I am
glad with all my heart.

_Mer._ I will ask, if you please, next time He comes down, why He keeps
such a filthy cur in His yard. I hope He will not take it amiss.

"Ay, do," said the children, "and persuade Him to hang him, for we are
afraid he will bite us when we go hence."

So at last He came down to them again, and Mercy fell to the ground on
her face before Him, and worshiped, and said, "Let my Lord accept the
offering of praise which I now offer unto Him with my lips."

[Sidenote: MERCY EXPRESSES HER FEARS]

So He said unto her, "Peace be to thee; stand up." But she continued
upon her face, and said, "Righteous art Thou, O Lord, when I plead with
Thee; yet let me talk with Thee of Thy judgments. Wherefore dost Thou
keep so cruel a dog in Thy yard, at the sight of which such women and
children as we are ready to fly from the gate with fear?" He answered
and said, "That dog has another owner; he also is kept close in another
man's ground, only my pilgrims hear his barking: he belongs to the
castle which you see there at a distance, but can come up to the walls
of this place. He has frighted many an honest pilgrim from worse to
better, by the great voice of his roaring. Indeed, he that owneth him
doth not keep him out of any good-will to me or mine, but with intent to
keep the pilgrims from coming to me, and that they may be afraid to come
and knock at this gate for entrance. Sometimes also he has broken out,
and has worried some that I love; but I take all at present patiently. I
also give my pilgrims timely help, so that they are not delivered up to
his power, to do with them what his doggish nature would prompt him to.
But, what! my beloved one, I should suppose, hadst thou known even so
much beforehand, thou wouldst not have been afraid of a dog. The beggars
that go from door to door will, rather than lose a supposed alms, run
the danger of the bawling, barking, and biting too, of a dog; and shall
a dog in another man's yard, a dog whose barking I turn to the profit of
pilgrims, keep any one from coming to me? I deliver them from the lions,
their darling from the power of the dog."

MER. Then said Mercy, "I confess my ignorance, I spake what I understood
not: I acknowledge that Thou doest all things well."

CHR. Then Christiana began to talk of their journey, and to inquire
after the way.

So He fed them, and washed their feet, and set them in the way of His
steps, according as He had dealt with her husband before.

So I saw in my dream that they walked on in their way, and had the
weather very comfortable to them.

Then Christiana began to sing:

  "Blessed be the day that I began
    A pilgrim for to be;
  And blessèd also be the man
    That thereto movèd me.

  "'Tis true 'twas long ere I began
    To seek to live for ever;
  But now I run fast as I can:
    'Tis better late than never.

  "Our tears to joy, our fears to faith,
    Are turnèd, as we see;
  Thus our beginning (as one saith)
    Shows what our end will be."

Now, there was, on the other side of the wall that fenced in the way up
which Christiana and her companions were to go, a garden, and that
garden belonged to him whose was that barking dog, of whom mention was
made before. And some of the fruit-trees that grew in that garden shot
their branches over the wall; and, being mellow, they that found them
did gather them up and oft eat of them to their hurt. So Christiana's
boys, as boys are apt to do, being pleased with the trees, and the fruit
that did hang thereon, did bend the branches down, and pluck the fruit,
and begin to eat. Their mother did also chide them for so doing; but
still the boys went on.

[Illustration: Christiana's Boys Began to Eat.
                                   Page 231]

"Well," said she, "my sons, you do wrong, for that fruit is none of
ours;" but she did not know that it did belong to the enemy: I'll
warrant you, if she had, she would have been ready to die for fear. But
that passed, and they went on their way.

[Sidenote: THE ILL-FAVORED ONES]

Now, by that they were gone about two bow-shots from the place that led
them unto the way, they espied two very ill-favored ones coming down
apace to meet them. With that, Christiana, and Mercy her friend, covered
themselves with their veils, and so kept on their journey; the children
also went on before; so that, at last, they met together. Then they that
came down to meet them came just up to the women, as if they would
embrace them; but Christiana said, "Stand back, or go peaceably by, as
you should."

Yet these two, as men that are deaf, regarded not Christiana's words,
but began to lay hands upon them. At that, Christiana, waxing very
wroth, spurned at them with her feet. Mercy also, as well as she could,
did what she could to shift them. Christiana again said to them, "Stand
back, and be gone; for we have no money to lose, being pilgrims, as you
see, and such, too, as live upon the charity of our friends."

ILL-FAVORED ONE. Then said one of the two men, "We make no assault upon
you for money, but are come out to tell you that, if you will grant one
small request which we shall ask, we will make women of you for ever."

CHR. Now Christiana, imagining what they should mean, made answer again,
"We will neither hear nor regard, nor yield to what you shall ask. We
are in haste, and cannot stay; our business is a business of life or
death."

So again she and her companions made a fresh attempt to go past them;
but they letted them in their way.

ILL-FAV. And they said, "We intend no hurt to your lives; it is another
thing we would have."

CHR. "Ay," quoth Christiana, "you would have us body and soul, for I
know it is for that you are come; but we will die rather upon the spot,
than to suffer ourselves to be brought into such snares as shall risk
the loss of our well-being hereafter." And, with that, they both
shrieked out, and cried, "Murder! murder!" and so put themselves under
those laws that are provided for the protection of women. But the men
still made their approach upon them, with design to prevail against
them. They therefore cried out again.

[Sidenote: A RELIEVER APPEARS]

Now, they being, as I said, far from the gate in at which they came,
their voices were heard from where they were, thither; wherefore some of
the house came out, and, knowing it was Christiana's tongue, they made
haste to her relief. But by the time that they were got within sight of
them, the women were in a very great terror; the children also stood
crying by. Then did he that came in for their relief call out to the
ruffians, saying, "What is that thing you do? Would you make my Lord's
people to do wrong?" He also attempted to take them, but they did make
their escape over the wall into the garden of the man to whom the great
dog belonged; so the dog became their protector. This Reliever then came
up to the women and asked them how they did.

So they answered, "We thank thy Prince, pretty well, only we have been
somewhat affrighted: we thank thee also for that thou camest in to our
help, otherwise we had been overcome."

RELIEVER. So, after a few more words, this Reliever said as followeth:
"I marvelled much when you were entertained at the gate above, being ye
knew that ye were but weak women, that you asked not the Lord for a
conductor. Then might you have avoided these troubles and dangers; for
He would have granted you one."

CHR. "Alas!" said Christiana, "we were taken so with our present
blessing, that dangers to come were forgotten by us. Besides, who could
have thought that, so near the King's palace, there could have lurked
such naughty ones? Indeed, it had been well for us had we asked our Lord
for one; but, since our Lord knew it would be for our profit, I wonder
He sent not one along with us."

REL. It is not always necessary to grant things not asked for, lest, by
so doing, they become of little value; but when the want of a thing is
felt, then he who needs it feels its preciousness; and so when it is
given it will be used. Had my Lord granted you a conductor, you would
not either have so bewailed that oversight of yours, in not asking for
one, as now you have occasion to do. So all things work for good, and
tend to make you more wary.

CHR. Shall we go back again to my Lord, and confess our folly, and ask
one?

REL. Your confession of your folly I will present Him with. To go back
again you need not; for, in all places where you shall come, you will
find no want at all; for, in every one of my Lord's lodgings, which He
has prepared for the care of His pilgrims, there is sufficient to
furnish them against all attempts whatsoever. But, as I said, He will be
asked of by them, to do it for them. And 'tis a poor thing that is not
worth asking for.

[Sidenote: THE PILGRIMS PROCEED]

When he had thus said, he went back to his place, and the pilgrims went
on their way.

MER. Then said Mercy, "What a sudden blank is here! I made account we
had been past all danger, and that we should never see sorrow more."

CHR. "Thy innocence, my sister," said Christiana to Mercy, "may excuse
thee much; but as for me, fault is so much the greater, for that I saw
the danger before I came out of the doors, and yet did not provide for
it when provision might have been had. I am, therefore, much to be
blamed."

MER. Then said Mercy, "How knew you this before you came from home?
Pray, open to me this riddle."

CHR. Why, I will tell you. Before I set foot out of doors, one night, as
I lay in my bed, I had a dream about this; for methought I saw two men,
as like these as ever any in the world could look, stand at my bed's
feet, plotting how they might prevent my salvation. I will tell you
their very words. They said (it was when I was in my troubles), "What
shall we do with this woman? for she cries out waking and sleeping for
forgiveness: if she be suffered to go on as she begins, we shall lose
her as we have lost her husband." This, you know, might have made me
take heed, and have provided when provision might have been had.

MER. "Well," said Mercy, "as by this neglect we have been made to behold
our own imperfections, so our Lord has taken occasion thereby to make
manifest the riches of His grace; for He, as we see, has followed us
with unasked kindness, and has delivered us from their hands that were
stronger than we, of His mere good pleasure."




CHAPTER III.

THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE.


Thus, now, when they had talked away a little more time, they drew near
to a house which stood in the way, which house was built for the relief
of pilgrims, as you will find more fully related in the first part of
these records of the Pilgrim's Progress. So they drew on towards the
house (the house of the Interpreter); and, when they came to the door,
they heard a great talk in the house. Then they gave ear, and heard, as
they thought, Christiana mentioned by name; for you must know that there
went along, even before her, a talk of her and her children's going on
pilgrimage. And this was the more pleasing to them, because they had
heard she was Christian's wife, that woman who was some time ago so
unwilling to hear of going on pilgrimage. Thus, therefore, they stood
still, and heard the good people within commending her, who, they little
thought, stood at the door. At last Christiana knocked, as she had done
at the gate before. Now, when she had knocked, there came to the door a
young maiden, and opened the door and looked; and, behold, two women
were there.

[Sidenote: THE INTERPRETER'S HOUSE]

MAID. Then said the maid to them, "With whom would you speak in this
place?"

CHR. Christiana answered, "We understand that this is a place prepared
for those that are become pilgrims, and we now at this door are such;
wherefore we pray that we may be partakers of that for which we at this
time are come; for the day, as thou seest, is very far spent, and we are
loth to-night to go any farther."

DAM. Pray, what may I call your name, that I may tell it to my lord
within?

CHR. My name is Christiana: I was the wife of that pilgrim that some
years ago did travel this way; and these be his four children. This
young woman is my companion, and is going on pilgrimage too.

INNOCENT. Then Innocent ran in (for that was her name,) and said to
those within, "Can you think who is at the door? There are Christiana
and her children, and her companion, all waiting for entertainment
here."

Then they leaped for joy, and went and told their master. So he came to
the door, and looking upon her, he said, "Art thou that Christiana whom
Christian the good man left behind him, when he betook himself to a
pilgrim's life?"

CHR. I am that woman that was so hard-hearted as to slight my husband's
troubles, and then left him to go on his journey alone; and these are
his four children. But now also I am come, for I am convinced that no
way is right but this.

INTER. Then is fulfilled that which also is written of the man that
said to his son, "Go, work to-day in my vineyard;" and he said to his
father, "I will not;" but afterwards he repented, and went.

CHR. Then said Christiana, "So be it: Amen. God make it a true saying
upon me, and grant that I may be found at the last of Him in peace,
without spot and blameless!"

INTER. But why standest thou thus at the door? Come in, thou blessed
one. We were talking of thee but now; for tidings have come to us before
how thou art become a pilgrim. Come, children, come in; come, maiden,
come in.

So he had them all into the house.

[Sidenote: PILGRIMS ENTERTAINED]

So when they were within, they were bidden to sit down and rest them;
the which when they had done, those that attended upon the pilgrims in
the house came into the room to see them. And one smiled, and another
smiled, and they all smiled for joy that Christiana was become a
pilgrim. They also looked upon the boys; they stroked them over the
faces with the hand, in token of their kind reception of them; they also
carried it lovingly to Mercy, and bid them all welcome into their
master's house.

After a while, because supper was not ready, the Interpreter took them
into his significant rooms, and showed them what Christian, Christiana's
husband, had seen some time before. Here, therefore, they saw the man in
the cage, the man and his dream, the man that cut his way through his
enemies, and the picture of the biggest of them all, together with the
rest of those things that were then so profitable to Christian.

This done, and after those things had been seen and thought of by
Christiana and her company, the Interpreter takes them apart again, and
has them first into a room where was a man that could look no way but
downwards, with a muck-rake in his hand. There stood also one over his
head, with a celestial crown in his hand, and proffered to give him that
crown for his muck-rake; but the man did neither look up nor regard, but
raked to himself the straws, the small sticks, and the dust of the
floor.

Then said Christiana, "I persuade myself that I know somewhat the
meaning of this; for this is a figure of a man of this world. Is it not,
good sir?"

INTER. "Thou hast said the right," said he; "and his muck-rake doth show
his worldly mind. And whereas thou seest him rather give heed to rake up
straws and sticks, and the dust of the floor, than to do what he says
that calls to him from above with the celestial crown in his hand; it is
to show that heaven is but a fable to some, and that things here are
counted the only things substantial. Now, whereas it was also showed
thee that the man could look no way but downwards; it is to let thee
know that earthly things, when they are with power upon men's minds,
quite carry their hearts away from God."

CHR. Then said Christiana, "Oh, deliver me from this muck-rake!"

INTER. "That prayer," said the Interpreter, "has lain by till it is
almost rusty. 'Give me not riches' is scarce the prayer of one of ten
thousand. Straws, and sticks, and dust, with most, are the great things
now looked after."

With that, Mercy and Christiana wept, and said, "It is, alas! too true."

[Sidenote: INTERPRETER'S ALLEGORIES]

When the Interpreter had showed them this, he had them into the very
best room in the house; a very brave room it was. So he bid them look
round about, and see if they could find anything there. Then they looked
round and round; for there was nothing to be seen but a very great
spider on the wall, and that they overlooked.

MER. Then said Mercy, "Sir, I see nothing."

But Christiana held her peace.

INTER. "But," said the Interpreter, "look again."

She therefore looked again, and said, "Here is not anything but an ugly
spider, who hangs by her hands upon the wall."

Then said he, "Is there but one spider in all this spacious room?"

Then the water stood in Christiana's eyes, for she was a woman quick of
mind; and she said, "Yes, my lord; there is here more than one; yea, and
spiders whose venom is far more destructive than that which is in her."

The Interpreter then looked pleasantly upon her, and said, "Thou hast
said the truth."

This made Mercy blush and the boys to cover their faces; for they all
began now to understand the riddle.

Then said the Interpreter again, "The spider taketh hold with her hands
(as you see), and is in kings' palaces. And wherefore is this recorded,
but to show you that, how full of the venom of sin soever you be, yet
you may, by the hand of faith, lay hold of and dwell in the best room
that belongs to the king's house above."

CHR. "I thought," said Christiana, "of something of this; but I could
not imagine it all. I thought that we were like spiders, and that we
looked like ugly creatures, in what fine rooms soever we were: but that
by this spider, this venomous and ill-favored creature, we were to learn
how to act faith, that came not into my mind; and yet she has taken hold
with her hands, and, as I see, dwelleth in the best room in the house.
God has made nothing in vain."

Then they seemed all to be glad, but the water stood in their eyes; yet
they looked one upon another, and also bowed before the Interpreter.

He had them then into another room, where were a hen and chickens, and
bid them observe a while. So one of the chickens went to the trough to
drink; and every time she drank, she lifted up her head and her eyes
toward heaven. "See," said he, "what this little chick doth; and learn
of her to acknowledge whence your mercies come, by receiving them with
looking up. Yet again," said he, "observe and look."

So they gave heed, and perceived that the hen did walk in a fourfold
method towards her chickens. First, she had a common call, and that she
hath all day long. Secondly, she had a special call, and that she had
but sometimes. Thirdly, she had a brooding note. And, fourthly she had
an outcry.

INTER. "Now," said he, "compare this hen to your King, and these
chickens to His obedient ones: for, answerable to her, He Himself hath
His methods which He walketh in toward His people. By His common call,
He gives nothing; by His special call, He always has something to give;
He also has a brooding voice for them that are under His wing; and He
hath an outcry, to give the alarm when He seeth the enemy come. I chose,
my darlings, to lead you into the room where such things are, because
you are women, and they are easy for you."

CHR. "And, sir," said Christiana, "pray let us see some more."

So he had them into the slaughter-house, where the butcher was killing a
sheep; and, behold, the sheep was quiet, and took her death patiently.
Then said the Interpreter, "You must learn of this sheep to suffer, and
to put up with wrongs without murmurings and complaints. Behold how
quietly she takes her death; and, without objecting, she suffereth her
skin to be pulled over her ears. Your King doth call you His sheep."

After this, he led them into his garden, where was great variety of
flowers; and he said, "Do you see all these?" So Christiana said, "Yes."
Then said he again, "Behold, the flowers are diverse in stature, in
quality, and color, and smell, and virtue, and some are better than
others; also, where the gardener has set them, there they stand, and
quarrel not one with another."

Again, he had them into his field, which he had sowed with wheat and
corn; but when they beheld, the tops of all were cut off, and only the
straw remained. He said again, "This ground was made rich, and was
ploughed, and sowed; but what shall we do with the crop?" Then said
Christiana, "Burn some, and make muck of the rest." Then said the
Interpreter again, "Fruit, you see, is that thing you look for; and, for
want of that, you send it to the fire, and to be trodden under foot of
men. Beware that in this you condemn not yourselves."

Then, as they were coming in from abroad, they espied a little robin
with a great spider in his mouth. So the Interpreter said, "Look here."
So they looked, and Mercy wondered; but Christiana said, "What a
disparagement is it to such a pretty little bird as the robin-redbreast
is; he being also a bird above many, that loveth to maintain a kind of
sociableness with man! I had thought they had lived upon crumbs of
bread, or upon other such harmless matter. I like him worse than I
did."

The Interpreter then replied, "This robin is an emblem very apt, to set
forth some people by; for to sight they are as this robin, pretty of
note, color, and conduct. They seem also to have a very great love for
those that are sincere followers of Christ; and above all other to
desire to associate with them, and to be in their company, as if they
could live upon the good man's crumbs. They pretend, also, that
therefore it is that they frequent the house of the godly and the
appointments of the Lord; but, when they are by themselves, as the
robin, they can catch and gobble up spiders, they can change their diet,
drink wickedness, and swallow down sin like water."

So, when they were come again into the house, because supper as yet was
not ready, Christiana again desired that the Interpreter would either
show, or tell of, some other things that were profitable.

Then the Interpreter began, and said, "The fatter the sow is the more
she desires the mire; the fatter the ox is, the more thoughtlessly he
goes to the slaughter; and the more healthy the lusty man is, the more
prone he is unto evil. There is a desire in women to go neat and fine;
and it is a comely thing to be adorned with that which in God's sight is
of great price. 'Tis easier watching a night or two than to sit up a
whole year together; so 'tis easier for one to begin to profess well
than to hold out as he should to the end. Every ship-master, when in a
storm, will willingly cast that overboard which is of the smallest value
in the vessel; but who will throw the best out first? None but he that
feareth not God. One leak will sink a ship, and one sin will destroy a
sinner. He that forgets his friends is ungrateful unto him but he that
forgets his Saviour is unmerciful to himself. He that lives in sin, and
looks for happiness hereafter, is like him that soweth weeds, and thinks
to fill his barn with wheat or barley. If a man would live well, let him
bring before him his last day, and make it always his company-keeper.
Whispering, and change of thoughts, prove that sin is in the world. If
the world, which God sets light by, is counted a thing of that worth
with men, what is heaven, that God commendeth! If the life that is
attended with so many troubles is so loth to be let go by us, what is
the life above! Everybody will cry up the goodness of men; but who is
there that is, as he should be, affected with the goodness of God?"

When the Interpreter had done, he takes them out into his garden again,
and had them to a tree, whose inside was all rotten and gone, and yet it
grew and had leaves.

Then said Mercy, "What means this?"

"This tree," said he, "whose outside is fair, and whose inside is
rotten, is that to which many may be compared that are in the garden of
God, who with their mouths speak high in behalf of God, but indeed will
do nothing for Him; whose leaves are fair, but their heart good for
nothing but to be tinder for the devil's tinder-box."

Now supper was ready, the table spread, and all things set on the board;
so they sat down, and did eat when one had given thanks. And the
Interpreter did usually entertain those that lodged with him with music
at meals; so the minstrels played. There was also one that did sing, and
a very fine voice he had. His song was this:

  "The Lord is only my support,
    And He that doth me feed;
  How can I then want anything
    Whereof I stand in need?"

[Sidenote: DISCOURSE AT SUPPER]

When the song and music were ended, the Interpreter asked Christiana
what it was that first did move her to betake herself to a pilgrim's
life. Christiana answered, "First, the loss of my husband came into my
mind, at which I was heartily grieved; but all that was but natural
affection. Then, after that, came the troubles and pilgrimages of my
husband into my mind, and also how unkindly I had behaved to him as to
that. So guilt took hold of my mind, and would have drawn me into the
pond, to drown myself, but that, just at the right time, I had a dream
of the well-being of my husband, and a letter sent by the King of that
country where my husband dwells, to come to him. The dream and the
letter together so wrought upon my mind, that they forced me to this
way."

INTER. But met you with no opposition afore you set out of doors?

CHR. Yes, a neighbor of mine, one Mrs. Timorous: she was akin to him
that would have persuaded my husband to go back for fear of the lions.
She all-to-be-fooled me for, as she called it, my intended desperate
adventure; she also urged what she could to dishearten me from it--the
hardship and troubles that my husband met with in the way; but all this
I got over pretty well. But a dream that I had of two ill-looked ones,
that I thought did plot how to make me fail in my journey, that hath
troubled me much: yea, it still runs in my mind, and makes me afraid of
every one that I meet, lest they should meet me to do me a mischief, and
to turn me out of my way. Yea, I may tell my Lord, though I would not
have everybody know it, that, between this and the gate by which we got
into the way, we were both so sorely attacked that we were made to cry
out "murder;" and the two that made this attack upon us were like the
two that I saw in my dream.

Then said the Interpreter, "Thy beginning is good; thy latter end shall
greatly increase." So he addressed himself to Mercy, and said unto her,
"And what moved thee to come hither, sweetheart?"

Then Mercy blushed and trembled, and for a while continued silent.

INTER. Then said he, "Be not afraid; only believe, and speak thy mind."

MER. So she began, and said, "Truly, sir, my lack of knowledge is that
which makes me wish to be in silence, and that also that fills me with
fears of coming short at last. I cannot tell of visions and dreams, as
my friend Christiana can nor know I what it is to mourn for my refusing
the advice of those that were good relations."

INTER. What was it, then, dear heart, that hath prevailed with thee to
do as thou hast done?

MER. Why, when our friend here was packing up to be gone from our town,
I and another went accidentally to see her. So we knocked at the door
and went in. When we were within, and seeing what she was doing, we
asked her what was her meaning. She said she was sent for to go to her
husband; and then she up and told us how she had seen him in a dream,
dwelling in a wonderful place, among immortals, wearing a crown, playing
upon a harp, eating and drinking at his Prince's table, and singing
praises to Him for bringing him thither, and so on. Now, methought while
she was telling these things unto us, my heart burned within me. And I
said in my heart, If this be true, I will leave my father and my mother,
and the land of my birth, and will, if I may, go along with Christiana.
So I asked her further of the truth of these things, and if she would
let me go with her; for I saw now that there was no dwelling but with
the danger of ruin any longer in our town. But yet I came away with a
heavy heart; not for that I was unwilling to come away, but for that so
many of my relations were left behind. And I am come with all the desire
of my heart, and will go, if I may, with Christiana, unto her husband
and his King.

INTER. Thy setting out is good, for thou hast given credit to the truth:
thou art a Ruth, who did, for the love she bare to Naomi and to the Lord
her God, leave father and mother, and the land of her birth, to come out
and go with a people that she knew not heretofore. The Lord bless thy
work, and a full reward be given thee of the Lord God of Israel, under
whose wings thou art come to trust.

Now supper was ended, and preparation was made for bed: the women were
laid singly alone, and the boys by themselves. Now, when Mercy was in
bed, she could not sleep for joy, for that now her doubts of missing at
last were removed farther from her than ever they were before. So she
lay blessing and praising God, who had had such favor for her.

In the morning they arose with the sun, and prepared themselves for
their departure; but the Interpreter would have them tarry a while:
"For," said he, "you must orderly go from hence." Then said he to the
maid that first opened to them, "Take them and have them into the
garden, to the bath, and there wash them, and make them clean from the
soil which they have gathered by traveling."

Then Innocent the maid took them and had them into the garden, and
brought them to the bath; so she told them they must wash and be clean,
for so her master would have the women to do that called at his house as
they were going on pilgrimage. Then they went in and washed, yea, they
and the boys and all; and they came out of that bath, not only sweet and
clean, but also much enlivened, and strengthened in their joints. So,
when they came in, they looked fairer a deal than when they went out to
the washing.

When they were returned out of the garden from the bath, the Interpreter
took them, and looked upon them, and said unto them, "Fair as the moon."
Then he called for the seal wherewith they used to be sealed that were
washed in this bath. So the seal was brought, and he set his mark upon
them, that they might be known in the places whither they were yet to
go; and the mark was set between their eyes. This seal added greatly to
their beauty, for it was an ornament to their faces. It also added to
their glory, and made their countenances more like those of angels.

[Sidenote: CLOTHED IN WHITE RAIMENT]

Then said the Interpreter again to the maid that waited upon these
women, "Go into the vestry, and fetch out garments for these people." So
she went and fetched out white raiment and laid it down before him; so
he commanded them to put it on; it was fine linen, white and clean. When
the women were thus adorned, they seemed to be afraid one of the other,
for that they could not see that glory each one had in herself, which
they could see in each other. Now, therefore, they began to esteem each
other better than themselves. For "You are fairer than I am," said one;
and "You are more beautiful than I am," said another. The children also
stood amazed, to see into what fashion they were brought.

The Interpreter then called for a man-servant of his, one Great-heart,
and bid him take sword, and helmet, and shield, and "Take these my
daughters," said he, "and conduct them to the house called Beautiful, at
which place they will rest next." So he took his weapons, and went
before them; and the Interpreter said, "God speed!" Those also that
belonged to the family sent them away with many a good wish. So they
went on their way and sang:

  "This place hath been our second stage:
    Here we have heard and seen
  Those good things that from age to age
    To others hid have been.
  The Dunghill-raker, Spider, Hen,
    The Chicken, too, to me
  Have taught a lesson: let me then
    Conformèd to it be.

  "The Butcher, Garden, and the Field,
    The Robin and his bait,
  Also the Rotten Tree, doth yield
    Me argument of weight:
  To move me for to watch and pray,
    To strive to be sincere,
  To take my cross up day by day,
    And serve the Lord with fear."




CHAPTER IV.

THE CROSS AND THE CONSEQUENCES.


Now, I saw in my dream that they went on, and Great-heart before them.
So they went, and came to the place where Christian's burden fell off
his back and tumbled into a sepulchre. Here, then, they made a pause,
and here also they blessed God. "Now," said Christiana, "comes to my
mind what was said to us at the gate, to wit, that we should have pardon
by word and deed: by word, that is, by the promise; by deed, that is, in
the way it was obtained. What the promise is, of that I know something;
but what it is to have pardon by deed, or in the way that it was
obtained, Mr. Great-heart, I suppose you know; wherefore, if you please,
let us hear you speak thereof."

[Sidenote: GREAT-HEART DISCOURSES]

GREAT. Pardon by the deed done, is pardon obtained by some one for
another that hath need thereof; not by the person pardoned, but in the
way, saith another, in which I have obtained it. So then, to speak to
the question at large, the pardon that you, and Mercy, and these boys
have obtained, was obtained by another; to wit, by Him that let you in
at the gate. And He hath obtained it in this double way: He has shown
righteousness to cover you, and spilt His blood to wash you in.

CHR. This is brave! Now I see that there was something to be learnt by
our being pardoned by word and deed. Good Mercy, let us labor to keep
this in mind; and, my children, do you remember it also. But, sir, was
not this it that made my good Christian's burden fall from off his
shoulders, and that made him give three leaps for joy?

GREAT. Yes, it was the belief of this that cut off those strings that
could not be cut by other means; and it was to give him proof of the
virtue of this that he was suffered to carry his burden to the Cross.

CHR. I thought so; for though my heart was lightsome and joyous before,
yet it is ten times more lightsome and joyous now. And I am persuaded by
what I have felt, though I have felt but little as yet, that, if the
most burdened man in the World was here, and did see and believe as I
now do, it would make his heart merry and blithe.

GREAT. There is not only comfort and the ease of a burden brought to us
by the sight and consideration of these, but an endeared love born in us
by it; for who can, if he doth but once think that pardon comes, not
only by promise, but thus, but be affected with the way and means of his
redemption, and so love the Man that hath wrought it for him?

CHR. True: methinks it makes my heart bleed, to think that He should
bleed for me. Oh, Thou loving One! Oh, Thou blessed One! Thou deservest
to have me: Thou hast bought me. Thou deservest to have me all: Thou
hast paid for me ten thousand times more than I am worth. No marvel that
this made the water stand in my husband's eyes, and that it made him
trudge so nimbly on. I am persuaded he wished me with him; but, vile
wretch that I was! I let him come all alone. Oh, Mercy, that thy father
and mother were here! yea, and Mrs. Timorous also! Nay, I wish now with
all my heart that here was Madam Wanton too. Surely, surely, their
hearts would be affected; nor could the fear of the one, nor the
powerful passions of the other, prevail with them to go home again, and
refuse to become good pilgrims.

GREAT. You speak now in the warmth of your affections: will it, think
you, be always thus with you? Besides, this is not given to every one,
nor to every one that did see your Jesus bleed. There were that stood
by, and that saw the blood run from His heart to the ground, and yet
were so far off this, that instead of lamenting, they laughed at Him,
and instead of becoming His disciples, did harden their hearts against
him. So that all that you have, my daughters, you have by a peculiar
feeling made by a thinking upon what I have spoken to you. This you
have, therefore, by a special grace.

[Sidenote: SIMPLE, SLOTH, PRESUMPTION]

Now, I saw still in my dream, that they went on till they were come to
the place that Simple, and Sloth, and Presumption lay and slept in, when
Christian went by on pilgrimage; and, behold, they were hanged up in
irons a little way off on the other side.

MER. Then said Mercy to him that was their guide and conductor, "What
are those three men? and for what are they hanged there?"

GREAT. These three men were men of very bad qualities: they had no mind
to be pilgrims themselves, and whomsoever they could they hindered. They
were for sloth and folly themselves, and whomsoever they could persuade
with, they made so too, and withal taught them to presume that they
should do well at last. They were asleep when Christian went by; and,
now you go by, they are hanged.

MER. But could they persuade any to be of their opinion?

GREAT. Yes, they turned several out of the way. There was Slow-pace that
they persuaded to do as they. They also prevailed with one Short-wind,
with one No-heart, with one Linger-after-lust, and with one Sleepy-head,
and with a young woman--her name was Dull--to turn out of the way and
become as they. Besides, they brought up an ill report of your Lord,
persuading others that He was a hard task-master. They also brought up
an evil report of the good land, saying it was not half so good as some
pretended it was. They also began to speak falsely about His servants,
and to count the very best of them meddlesome, troublesome busy-bodies.
Further, they would call the bread of God, husks; the comforts of His
children, fancies; the travel labor of pilgrims, things to no purpose.

CHR. "Nay," said Christiana, "if they were such, they never shall be
bewailed by me: they have but what they deserve; and I think it is well
that they hang so near the highway, that others may see and take
warning. But had it not been well if their crimes had been engraven on
some plate of iron or brass, and left here where they did their
mischiefs, for a caution to other bad men?"

GREAT. So it is, as you well may perceive, if you will go a little to
the wall.

MER. No, no: let them hang, and their names rot, and their crimes live
for ever against them. I think it a high favor that they were hanged
afore we came hither who knows, else, what they might have done to such
poor women as we are?

Then she turned it into a song, saying:

  "Now, then, you three, hang there, and be a sign
  To all that shall against the truth combine;
  And let him that comes after fear this end,
  If unto pilgrims he is not a friend.
  And thou, my soul, of all such men beware
  That unto holiness opposers are."

Thus they went on till they came at the foot of the Hill Difficulty,
where again their good friend Mr. Great-heart took an occasion to tell
them of what happened there when Christian himself went by. So he had
them first to the spring. "Lo," saith he, "this is the spring that
Christian drank of before he went up this hill: and then it was clear
and good; but now it is dirty with the feet of some that are not
desirous that pilgrims here should quench their thirst." Thereat Mercy
said, "And why are they so envious, I wonder?" But said their guide, "It
will do if taken up and put into a vessel that is sweet and good; for
then the dirt will sink to the bottom, and the water come out by itself
more clear." Thus, therefore, Christiana and her companions were
compelled to do. They took it up, and put it into an earthen pot, and so
let it stand till the dirt was gone to the bottom, and then they drank
thereof.

[Sidenote: TWO DANGEROUS PATHS]

Next he showed them the two by-ways that were at the foot of the hill,
where Formality and Hypocrisy lost themselves. And said he, "These are
dangerous paths. Two were here cast away when Christian came by; and
although, as you see, these ways are since stopped up with chains,
posts, and a ditch, yet there are that will choose to adventure here,
rather than take the pains to go up this hill."

CHR. The way of transgressors is hard. It is a wonder that they can get
into those ways without danger of breaking their necks.

GREAT. They will venture: yea, if at any time any of the King's servants
doth happen to see them, and doth call unto them, and tell them that
they are in the wrong ways, and do bid them beware the danger, then they
will railingly return them answer, and say, "As for the word that thou
hast spoken unto us in the name of the King, we will not hearken unto
thee; but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our
own mouth." Nay, if you look a little farther, you shall see that these
ways are warned against enough, not only by these posts, and ditch, and
chain, but also by being hedged up; yet they will choose to go there.

CHR. They are idle: they love not to take pains: up-hill way is
unpleasant to them. So it is fulfilled unto them as it is written, "The
way of the slothful man is a hedge of thorns." Yea, they will rather
choose to walk upon a snare than go up this hill, and the rest of this
way to the City.

Then they set forward, and began to go up the hill; and up the hill they
went. But, before they got to the top, Christiana began to pant, and
said, "I dare say this is a breathing hill: no marvel if they that love
their ease more than their souls choose to themselves a smoother way."
Then said Mercy, "I must sit down;" also the least of the children began
to cry. "Come, come," said Great-heart, "sit not down here, for a little
above is the Prince's arbor." Then took he the little boy by the hand,
and led him up thereto.

[Sidenote: THE ARBOR ON THE HILL]

When they were come to the arbor, they were very willing to sit down,
for they were all in a pelting heat. Then said Mercy, "How sweet is rest
to them that labor, and how good is the Prince of pilgrims to provide
such resting-places for them! Of this arbor I have heard much, but I
never saw it before. But here let us beware of sleeping; for, as I have
heared, for that it cost poor Christian dear."

Then said Mr. Great-heart to the little ones, "Come, my pretty boys, how
do you do? what think you now of going on pilgrimage?"

"Sir," said the least, "I was almost beat out of heart; but I thank you
for lending me a hand at my need. And I remember now what my mother has
told me, namely, 'That the way to heaven is as up a ladder, and the way
to hell is as down a hill.' But I rather go up the ladder to life, than
the hill to death."

Then said Mercy, "But the proverb, is, 'To go down the hill is easy.'"

But James said (for that was his name), "The day is coming when, in my
opinion, going down-hill will be the hardest of all."

"That's a good boy," said his master; "thou hast given her a right
answer."

Then Mercy smiled, but the little boy did blush.

CHR. "Come," said Christiana, "will you eat a bit, a little to sweeten
your mouths, while you sit here to rest your legs? for I have here a
piece of pomegranate, which Mr. Interpreter put in my hand just when I
came out of his doors: he gave me also a piece of a honeycomb, and a
little bottle of spirits."

"I thought he gave you something," said Mercy, "because he called you
aside."

"Yes, so he did," said the other; "but, Mercy, it shall still be as I
said it should, when at first we came from home; thou shalt be a sharer
in all the good that I have, because thou so willingly didst become my
companion."

Then she gave to them, and they did eat, both Mercy and the boys. And
said Christiana to Mr. Great-heart, "Sir, will you do as we and take
some refreshment?"

But he answered, "You are going on pilgrimage, and presently I shall
return; much good may have do to you: at home I eat the same every day."

Now, when they had eaten and drunk, and had chatted a little longer,
their guide said to them, "The day wears away; if you think good, let us
prepare to be going." So they got up to go, and the little boys went
before; but Christiana forgot to take her bottle of spirits with her, so
she sent her little boy back to fetch it.

Then said Mercy, "I think this is a losing place: here Christian lost
his roll, and here Christiana left her bottle behind her. Sir, what is
the cause of this?"

So their guide made answer, and said, "The cause is sleep or
forgetfulness: some sleep when they should keep awake, and some forget
when they should remember. And this is the very cause why often at the
resting-places some pilgrims, in some things, come off losers. Pilgrims
should watch, and remember what they have already received, under their
greatest enjoyments; but, for want of doing so, ofttimes their rejoicing
ends in tears, and their sunshine in a cloud: witness the story of
Christian at this place."

[Sidenote: MISTRUST AND TIMOROUS]

When they were come to the place where Mistrust and Timorous met
Christian, to persuade him to go back for fear of the lions, they
perceived as it were a stage, and before it, towards the road, a broad
plate, with a copy of verses written thereon, and underneath the reason
of the raising up of that stage in that place rendered. The verses were
these:

  "Let him that sees this stage take heed
    Unto his heart and tongue;
  Lest, if he do not, here he speed
    As some have, long agone."

The words underneath the verses were, "This stage was built to punish
such upon, who, through timorousness or mistrust, shall be afraid to go
farther on pilgrimage. Also on this stage both Mistrust and Timorous
were burned through the tongue with a hot iron, for endeavoring to
hinder Christian in his journey."

Then said Mercy, "This is much like to the saying of the Beloved, 'What
shall be given unto thee, or what shall be done unto thee, thou false
tongue? Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of juniper.'"

So they went on till they came within sight of the lions. Now, Mr.
Great-heart was a strong man, so he was not afraid of a lion. But yet,
when they were come up to the place where the lions were, the boys, that
went before, were glad to cringe behind, for they were afraid of the
lions so they stepped back, and went behind.

At this their guide smiled, and said, "How now, my boys! do you love to
go before when no danger doth approach, and love to come behind so soon
as the lions appear?"

Now, as they went up, Mr. Great-heart drew his sword, with intent to
make a way for the pilgrims in spite of the lions. Then there appeared
one that, it seems, had taken upon him to back the lions; and he said to
the pilgrims' guide, "What is the cause of your coming hither?" Now, the
name of that man was Grim, or Bloody-man, because of his slaying of
pilgrims; and he was of the race of the giants.

GREAT. Then said the pilgrims' guide, "These women and children are
going on pilgrimage, and this is the way they must go; and go it they
shall, in spite of thee and the lions."

GRIM. This is not their way, neither shall they go therein. I am come
forth to withstand them, and to that end will back the lions.

[Sidenote: GREAT-HEART OVERCOMES GRIM]

Now, to say truth, by reason of the fierceness of the lions, and of the
grim carriage of him that did back them, this way had of late lain much
unoccupied, and was almost all grown over with grass.

CHR. Then said Christiana, "Though the highways have been unoccupied
heretofore, and though the travellers have been made in times past to
walk through by-paths, it must not be so now I am risen. 'Now I am risen
a mother in Israel.'"

GRIM. Then he swore by the lions, "But it should," and therefore bid
them turn aside, for they should not passage there.

But Great-heart their guide made first his approach unto Grim, and laid
so heavily at him with his sword, that he forced him to a retreat.

GRIM. Then said he that attempted to back the lions, "Will you slay me
upon mine own ground?"

GREAT. It is the King's highway that we are in, and in His way it is
that thou hast placed thy lions; but these women, and these children,
though weak, shall hold on their way in spite of thy lions.

And, with that, he gave him again a downright blow, and brought him upon
his knees. With this blow he also broke his helmet, and with the next he
cut off an arm. Then did the giant roar so hideously, that his voice
frighted the women, and yet they were glad to see him lie sprawling upon
the ground. Now, the lions were chained, and so of themselves could do
nothing.

Wherefore, when old Grim, that intended to back them, was dead, Mr.
Great-heart said to the pilgrims, "Come now, and follow me, and no hurt
shall happen to you from the lions." They therefore went on; but the
women trembled as they passed by them: the boys also looked as if they
would die; but they all got by without further hurt.




CHAPTER V.

THE PALACE BEAUTIFUL.


Now, then, they were within sight of the Porter's lodge, and they soon
came up unto it; but they made the more haste after this to go thither,
because it is dangerous travelling there in the night. So, when they
were come to the gate, the guide knocked, and the Porter cried, "Who is
there?" But as soon as the guide had said "It is I," he knew his voice,
and came down, for the guide had oft before that come thither as a
conductor of pilgrims. When he was come down he opened the gate; and,
seeing the guide stand just before it (for he saw not the women, for
they were behind him), he said unto him, "How now, Mr. Great-heart! what
is your business here so late to-night?"

"I have brought," said he, "some pilgrims hither, where, by my Lord's
commandment, they must lodge. I had been here some time ago, had I not
been opposed by the giant that did use to back the lions; but I, after a
long and tedious combat with him, have cut him off, and have brought the
pilgrims hither in safety."

PORT. Will you not go in, and stay till morning?

GREAT. No, I will return to my Lord to-night.

CHR. Oh, sir, I know not how to be willing you should leave us in our
pilgrimage: you have been so faithful and so loving to us, you have
fought so stoutly for us, you have been so hearty in counselling of us,
that I shall never forget your favor towards us.

MER. Then said Mercy, "Oh that we might have thy company to our
journey's end! How can such poor women as we hold out in a way so full
of troubles as this way is, without a friend and defender?"

JAMES. Then said James, the youngest of the boys, "Pray, sir, be
persuaded to go with us, and help us, because we are so weak, and the
way so dangerous as it is."

GREAT. I am at my Lord's commandment. If he shall allot me to be your
guide quite through, I will willingly wait upon you. But here you failed
at first; for when he bid me come thus far with you, then you should
have begged me of him to have gone quite through with you, and he would
have granted your request. However, at present I must withdraw; and so,
good Christiana, Mercy, and my brave children, adieu.

Then the Porter, Mr. Watchful, asked Christiana of her country and of
her kindred. And she said, "I come from the City of Destruction. I am a
widow woman, and my husband is dead: his name was Christian, the
pilgrim."

"How!" said the Porter, "was he your husband?"

[Sidenote: A JOYFUL RECEPTION]

"Yes," said she, "and these are his children, and this" (pointing to
Mercy) "is one of my townswomen."

Then the Porter rang his bell, as at such times he is wont, and there
came to the door one of the maids, whose name was Humble-mind; and to
her the Porter said, "Go, tell it within that Christiana, the wife of
Christian, and her children, are come hither on pilgrimage."

She went in, therefore, and told it. But oh, what a noise for gladness
was there within when the maid did but drop that word out of her mouth!

So they came with haste to the Porter, for Christiana stood still at the
door. Then some of those within said unto her, "Come in, Christiana,
come in, thou wife of that good man; come in, thou blessed woman; come
in, with all that are with thee."

So she went in, and they followed her that were her children and her
companions. Now, when they were gone in, they were had into a very large
room, where they were bidden to sit down. So they sat down, and the
chief of the house were called to see and welcome the guests. Then they
came in and understanding who they were did salute each other with a
kiss, and said, "Welcome, ye that bear the grace of God; welcome to us,
your friends!"

Now, because it was somewhat late, and because the pilgrims were weary
with their journey, and also made faint with the sight of the fight, and
of the terrible lions, therefore they desired, as soon as might be, to
prepare to go to rest. "Nay," said those of the family, "refresh
yourselves first with a morsel of meat;" for they had prepared for them
a lamb, with the accustomed sauce belonging thereto, for the Porter had
heard before of their coming, and had told it to them within. So, when
they had supped, and ended their prayer with a psalm, they desired they
might go to rest.

"But let us," said Christiana, "if we may be so bold as to choose, be in
that chamber that was my husband's when he was here."

So they had them up thither, and they lay all in a room. When they were
at rest, Christiana and Mercy entered into discourse about things that
were convenient.

CHR. Little did I think once, when my husband went on pilgrimage, that I
should ever have followed.

MER. And you as little thought of lying in his bed, and in his chamber
to rest, as you do now.

CHR. And much less did I ever think of seeing his face with comfort, and
of worshipping the Lord the King with him; and yet now I believe I
shall.

MER. Hark! don't you hear a noise?

CHR. Yes, it is, as I believe, a noise of music, for joy that we are
here.

MER. Wonderful! Music in the house, music in the heart, and music also
in heaven, for joy that we are here!

[Sidenote: MERCY'S DREAM]

Thus they talked a while, and then betook themselves to sleep. So in the
morning, when they were awake, Christiana said to Mercy, "What was the
matter, that you did laugh in your sleep to-night? I suppose you were in
a dream."

MER. So I was, and a sweet dream it was; but are you sure I laughed?

CHR. Yes, you laughed heartily; but, prithee, Mercy, tell me thy dream.

MER. I was dreaming that I sat all alone in a solitary place, and was
bemoaning of the hardness of my heart. Now, I had not sat there long,
but methought many were gathered about me to see me, and to hear what it
was that I said. So they hearkened, and I went on bemoaning the hardness
of my heart. At this, some of them laughed at me, some called me fool,
and some thrust me about. With that, methought I looked up, and saw one
coming with wings towards me. So he came directly to me, and said,
"Mercy, what aileth thee?" Now, when he had heard me make my complaint,
he said, "Peace be to thee;" he also wiped mine eyes with his
handkerchief, and clad me in silver and gold. He put a chain about my
neck, and ear-rings in mine ears, and a beautiful crown upon my head.
Then he took me by the hand, and said, "Mercy, come after me." So he
went up, and I followed, till we came to a golden gate. Then he knocked;
and when they within opened, the man went in, and I followed him up to a
throne upon which One sat; and He said to me, "Welcome, daughter!" The
place looked bright and twinkling, like the stars, or rather like the
sun; and I thought that I saw your husband there. So I awoke from my
dream. But did I laugh?

CHR. Laugh! ay, and well you might, to see yourself so well. For you
must give me leave to tell you, that I believe it was a good dream; and
that, as you have begun to find the first part true, so you shall find
the second at last. "God speaks once, yea, twice, yet man perceiveth it
not; in a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon
men, in slumberings upon the bed." We need not, when abed, to lie awake
to talk with God: He can visit us while we sleep, and cause us then to
hear His voice. Our heart oftentimes wakes when we sleep; and God can
speak to that, either by words, by proverbs, or by signs and
similitudes, as well as if one was awake.

MER. Well, I am glad of my dream; for I hope ere long to see it
fulfilled, to the making of me laugh again.

CHR. I think it is now high time to rise, and to know what we must do.

MER. Pray, if they invite us to stay, a while, let us willingly accept
of the proffer. I am the willinger to stay a while here, to grow better
acquainted with these maids. Methinks Prudence, Piety, and Charity have
very lovely and sober countenances.

CHR. We shall see what they will do.

So, when they were up and ready, they came down; and they asked one
another of their rest, and if it was comfortable or not.

MER. "Very good," said Mercy; "it was one of the best nights' lodging
that ever I had in my life."

Then said Prudence and Piety, "If you will be persuaded to stay here a
while, you shall have what the house will afford."

CHAR. "Ay, and that with a very good will," said Charity.

So they consented, and stayed there about a month, or above, and became
very profitable one to another.

[Sidenote: MR. BRISK VISITS MERCY]

Now, by that these pilgrims had been at this place a week, Mercy had a
visitor that pretended some good-will unto her; and his name was Mr.
Brisk; a man of some breeding, and that pretended to religion, but a man
that stuck very close to the world. So he came once or twice, or more,
to Mercy, and offered love unto her. Now, Mercy was a fair countenance,
and therefore the more alluring.

Her mind also was, to be always busying of herself in doing; for, when
she had nothing to do for herself, she would be making of hose and
garments for others, and would bestow them upon them that had need. And
Mr. Brisk, not knowing where or how she disposed of what she made,
seemed to be greatly taken, for that he found her never idle. "I will
warrant her a good housewife," quoth he to himself.

Mercy then told the matter to the maidens that were of the house, and
inquired of them concerning him; for they did know him better than she.
So they told her that he was a very busy young man, and one who
pretended to serve the Lord, but was, as they feared, a stranger to the
power of that which is good.

"Nay, then," said Mercy, "I will look no more on him; for I purpose
never to have a clog to my soul."

Prudence then replied that "There needed no great matter of
discouragement to be given to him; her continuing so as she had begun to
do for the poor would quickly cool his courage."

So, the next time he comes, he finds her at her old work, a-making of
things for the poor. Then said he, "What! always at it?"

"Yes," said she, "either for myself or for others."

"And what canst thou earn a day?" quoth he.

"I do these things," said she, "that I may be rich in good works, laying
up in store for myself a good foundation against the time to come, that
I may lay hold on eternal life."

"Why, prithee, what doest thou with them?" said he.

"Clothe the naked," said she.

With that, his countenance fell. So he forbore to come at her again. And
when he was asked the reason why, he said that "Mercy was a pretty lass,
but troubled with too much working for others."

[Sidenote: MERCY REJECTS THE SUITOR]

When he had left her, Prudence said, "Did I not tell thee that Mr. Brisk
would soon forsake thee? yea, he will raise up an ill report of thee;
for, notwithstanding his pretence to serve bad and his seeming love to
Mercy, yet Mercy and he are of tempers so different, that I believe they
will never come together."

MER. I might have had husbands afore now, though I spake not of it to
any; but they were such as did not like my ways, though never did any of
them find fault with my person. So they and I could not agree.

PRUD. Mercy in our days is little set by, any further than as to its
name: the practice, which is set forth by thy works, there are but few
that can abide.

MER. "Well," said Mercy, "if nobody will have me, I will die a maid, or
my works shall be to me as a husband; for I cannot change my nature; and
to have one that lies cross to me in this, that I purpose never to admit
of as long as I live. I had a sister, named Bountiful, that was married
to one of these selfish people; but he and she could never agree; but,
because my sister was resolved to do as she had begun, that is, to show
kindness to the poor, therefore her husband first cried her down in
public, and then turned her out of his doors."

PRUD. And yet he was a church-member, I warrant you?

MER. Yes, such a one as he was; and of such as he the world is now
full; but I am for none of them at all.

[Sidenote: MATTHEW FALLS SICK]

Now Matthew, the eldest son of Christiana, fell sick, and his sickness
was sore upon him for he was much pained in his bowels; so that he was
with it, at times, pulled as it were both ends together.

There dwelt also not far from thence one Mr. Skill, an ancient and
well-approved physician. So Christiana desired it and they sent for him,
and he came. When he was entered the room, and had a little observed the
boy, he concluded that he was sick of the gripes. Then he said to his
mother, "What diet has Matthew of late fed upon?"

"Diet!" said Christiana, "nothing but that which is wholesome."

The physician answered, "This boy has been tampering with something that
lies in his stomach undigested, and that will not away without means.
And I tell you he must be purged, or else he will die."

SAM. Then said Samuel, "Mother, what was that which my brother did
gather up and eat, so soon as we were come from the gate that is at the
head of this way? You know that there was an orchard on the left hand,
on the other side of the wall, and some of the trees hung over the wall,
and my brother did pull down the branches and did eat."

CHR. "True, my child," said Christiana, "he did take thereof and did
eat; naughty boy as he was, I did chide him, and yet he would eat
thereof."

SKILL. I knew he had eaten something that was not wholesome food; and
that food, to wit, that fruit, is even the most hurtful of all. It is
the fruit of Beelzebub's orchard. I do marvel that none did warn you of
it: many have died thereof.

CHR. Then Christiana began to cry, and she said, "Oh, naughty boy! and
oh, careless mother! What shall I do for my son?"

SKILL. Come, do not be too much dejected; the boy may do well again, but
he must purge and vomit.

CHR. Pray, sir, try the utmost of your skill with him, whatever it
costs.

SKILL. Nay, I hope I shall be reasonable.

[Sidenote: DOCTOR SKILL PRESCRIBES]

So he made him a purge, but it was too weak; it was said, it was made of
the blood of a goat, the ashes of an heifer, and with some of the juice
of hyssop, etc. When Mr. Skill had seen that that purge was too weak, he
made him one to the purpose. It was made [the name was written in Latin]
_ex carne et sanguine Christi_;[8] (you know physicians give strange
medicines to their patients)--and it was made up into pills, with a
promise or two, and a proportionable quantity of salt. Now, he was to
take them three at a time, fasting, in half a quarter of a pint of the
tears of sorrow.

  [8] That is, "of the body and blood of Christ."

When this potion was prepared and brought to the boy, he was loth to
take it, though torn with the gripes as if he should be pulled in
pieces.

"Come, come," said the physician, "you must take it."

"It goes against my stomach," said the boy.

"I must have you take it," said his mother.

"I shall vomit it up again," said the boy.

"Pray, sir," said Christiana to Mr. Skill, "how does it taste?"

"It has no ill taste," said the doctor; and with that she touched one of
the pills with the tip of her tongue.

"O Matthew," said she, "this potion is sweeter than honey. If thou
lovest thy mother, if thou lovest thy brothers, if thou lovest Mercy, if
thou lovest thy life, take it."

So, with much ado, after a short prayer for the blessing of God upon it,
he took it, and it wrought kindly with him. It caused him to purge, it
caused him to sleep and rest quietly; it put him into a fine heat and
breathing sweat, and did quite rid him of his gripes. So, in a little
time he got up, and walked about with a staff, and would go from room to
room, and talk with Prudence, Piety, and Charity, of his sickness, and
how he was healed.

So, when the boy was healed, Christiana asked Mr. Skill, saying, "Sir,
what will content you for your pains and care to and of my child?"

And he said, "You must pay the Master of the College of Physicians,
according to the rules made in that case and provided."

CHR. "But, sir," said she, "what is this pill good for else?"

SKILL. It is an universal pill: it is good against all the diseases that
pilgrims are troubled with; and when it is well prepared, it will keep
good time out of mind.

CHR. Pray, sir, make me up twelve boxes of them; for if I can get these,
I will never take other physic.

SKILL. These pills are good to prevent diseases, as well as to cure when
one is sick. Yea, I dare say it, and stand to it, that if a man will but
use this physic as he should, it will make him live for ever. But, good
Christiana, thou must give these pills no other way than as I have
prescribed; for if you do, they will do no good. So he gave unto
Christiana physic for herself and her boys, and for Mercy; and bid
Matthew take heed how he ate any more green plums; and kissed them and
went his way.

It was told you before, that Prudence bid the boys, if at any time they
would, they should ask her some questions that might be profitable, and
she would say something to them.

MATT. Then Matthew, who had been sick, asked her, "Why, for the most
part, physic should be bitter to our palates?"

PRUD. To show how unwelcome the Word of God, and the effects thereof,
are to a sinful heart.

MATT. Why does physic, if it does good, purge and cause that we vomit?

PRUD. To show that the Word, when it works effectually, cleanseth the
heart and mind. For look, what the one doth to the body, the other doth
to the soul.

MATT. What should we learn by seeing the flame of our fire go upwards,
and by seeing the beams and sweet influences of the sun strike
downwards?

PRUD. By the going up of the fire, we are taught to ascend to heaven by
fervent and hot desires. And by the sun's sending his heat, beams, and
sweet influences downwards, we are taught that the Saviour of the world,
though high reaches down with His grace and love to us below.

MATT. Where have the clouds their water?

PRUD. Out of the sea.

MATT. What may we learn from that?

PRUD. That ministers should fetch their teaching from God.

MATT. Why do they empty themselves upon the earth?

PRUD. To show that ministers should give out what they know of God to
the world.

MATT. Why is the rainbow caused by the sun?

PRUD. To show that the promise of God's grace is made sure to us in
Christ.

MATT. Why do the springs come from the sea to us through the earth?

PRUD. To show that the grace of God comes to us through the body of
Christ.

MATT. Why do some of the springs rise out of the tops of high hills?

PRUD. To show that the spirit of grace shall spring up in some that are
great and mighty, as well as in many that are poor and low.

MATT. Why doth the fire fasten upon the candle-wick?

PRUD. To show that, unless grace doth kindle upon the heart, there will
be no true light of life in us.

MATT. Why is the wick, and tallow, and all, spent to maintain the light
of the candle?

PRUD. To show that body, and soul, and all, should be at the service of,
and spend themselves to maintain in good condition, that grace of God
that is in us.

MATT. Why doth the pelican pierce her own breast with her bill?

PRUD. To nourish her young ones with her blood, and thereby to show that
Christ the Blessed so loveth His young (His people), as to save them
from death by His blood.

MATT. What may one learn by hearing the cock to crow?

PRUD. Learn to remember Peter's sin and Peter's sorrow. The cock's
crowing shows also that day is coming on: let, then, the crowing of the
cock put thee in mind of that last and terrible day of judgment.

Now, about this time, their month was out; wherefore they signified to
those of the house that it was convenient for them to be up and going.
Then said Joseph to his mother, "It is convenient that you forget not to
send to the house of Mr. Interpreter, to pray him to grant that Mr.
Great-heart should be sent unto us, that he may be our conductor the
rest of our way."

"Good boy," said she, "I had almost forgot." So she drew up a petition,
and prayed Mr. Watchful the Porter to send it by some fit man to her
good friend Mr. Interpreter, who, when it was come, and he had seen the
contents of the petition, said to the messenger, "Go, tell them that I
will send him."

When the family where Christiana was saw that they had a purpose to go
forward, they called the whole house together, to give thanks to their
King for sending of them such profitable guests as these. Which done,
they said unto Christiana, "And shall we not show thee something,
according, as our custom is to do to pilgrims, on which thou mayest
meditate when thou art upon the way?"

[Sidenote: THE PILGRIMS VIEW CURIOSITIES]

So they took Christiana, her children, and Mercy, into the closet, and
showed them one of the apples that Eve did eat of, and that which she
also did give to her husband, and that for the eating of which they were
both turned out of Paradise, and asked her what she thought that was.

Then Christiana said, "It is food or poison, I know not which."

So they opened the matter to her, and she held up her hands and
wondered.

Then they had her to a place, and showed her Jacob's ladder. Now, at
that time there were some angels ascending upon it. So Christiana looked
and looked, to see the angels go up, and so did the rest of the company.
Then they were going into another place, to show them something else;
but James said to his mother, "Pray bid them stay here a little longer,
for this is a curious sight." So they turned again, and stood feeding
their eyes with this so pleasing a prospect.

After this they had them into a place where did hang up a golden anchor.
So they bid Christiana take it down; "For," said they, "you shall have
it with you, for it is of absolute necessity that you should, that you
may lay hold of that within the veil, and stand steadfast, in case you
should meet with turbulent weather." So they were glad thereof.

Then they took them, and had them to the mount upon which Abraham our
father had offered up Isaac his son, and showed them the altar, the
wood, the fire, and the knife; for they remain to be seen to this very
day. When they had seen it, they held up their hands, and blessed
themselves, and said, "Oh! what a man for love to his Master, and for
denial to himself, was Abraham!"

After they had showed them all these things, Prudence took them into the
dining-room, where stood a pair of excellent virginals;[9] so she
played upon them, and turned what she had showed them into this
excellent song, saying:

  "Eve's apple we have showèd you--
    Of that be you aware;
  You have seen Jacob's ladder too,
    Upon which angels are.
  An anchor you receivèd have:
    But let not these suffice,
  Until with Abra'm, you have gave
    Your best a sacrifice."

  [9] An instrument of music, used in the time of John Bunyan, somewhat
  like a very small piano.

[Sidenote: GREAT-HEART CONDUCTS THEM]

Now, about this time, one knocked at the door. So the Porter opened, and
behold, Mr. Great-heart was there; but when he was come in, what joy was
there! For it came now fresh again into their minds, how, but a while
ago, he had slain old Grim Bloody-man, the giant, and had delivered them
from the lions.

Then said Mr. Great-heart to Christiana and to Mercy, "My lord has sent
each of you a bottle of wine, and also some parched corn, together with
a couple of pomegranates; he has also sent the boys some figs and
raisins, to refresh you in your way."

Then they addressed themselves to their journey; and Prudence and Piety
went along with them. When they came at the gate, Christiana asked the
Porter if any one of late went by.

He said, "No; only one some time since, who also told me that, of late,
there had been a great robbery committed on the King's highway as you
go. But he saith the thieves are taken, and will shortly be tried for
their lives."

Then Christiana and Mercy were afraid; but Matthew said, "Mother, fear
nothing as long as Mr. Great-heart is to go with us, and to be our
conductor."

Then said Christiana to the Porter, "Sir, I am much obliged to you for
all the kindnesses that you have shown me since I came hither, and also
for that you have been so loving and kind to my children. I know not how
to gratify your kindness; wherefore, pray, as a token of my respects to
you, accept of this small mite."

So she put a gold angel[10] in his hand; and he made her a low
obeisance, and said, "Let thy garments be always white, and let thy head
want no ointment. Let Mercy live and not die, and let not her works be
few." And to the boys he said, "Do you flee youthful passions, and
follow after godliness with them that are grave and wise, so shall you
put gladness into your mother's heart, and obtain praise of all that are
sober-minded."

  [10] An old English coin, bearing the figure of an angel.

So they thanked the Porter, and departed.

Now I saw in my dream that they went forward until they were come to the
brow of the hill; where Piety, bethinking herself, cried out, "Alas! I
have forgot what I intended to bestow upon Christiana and her
companions: I will go back and fetch it." So she ran and fetched it.
While she was gone, Christiana thought she heard, in a grove a little
way off on the right hand, a most curious melodious note, with words
much like these:

  "Through all my life Thy favor is
    So frankly showed to me,
  That in Thy house for evermore
    My dwelling-place shall be."

And listening still, she thought she heard another answer it, saying:

  "For why? the Lord our God is good;
    His mercy is for ever sure;
  His truth at all times firmly stood,
    And shall from age to age endure."

So Christiana asked Prudence what it was that made those curious notes.
"They are," said she, "our country birds: they sing these notes but
seldom, except it be at the spring, when the flowers appear and the sun
shines warm, and then you may hear them all day long. I often," said
she, "go out to hear them; we also ofttimes keep them tame in our house.
They are very fine company for us when we are melancholy; also they make
the woods, and groves, and solitary places, places desirable to be in."

By this time Piety was come again. So she said to Christiana, "Look
here: I have brought thee a plan of all those things that thou hast seen
at our house, upon which thou mayest look when thou findest thyself
forgetful, and call those things again to remembrance for thy teaching
and comfort."




CHAPTER VI.

THE VALLEY OF HUMILIATION.


Now they began to go down the hill into the Valley of Humiliation. It
was a steep hill, and the way was slippery; but they were very careful,
so they got down pretty well. When they were down in the valley, Piety
said to Christiana, "This is the place where Christian, your husband,
met with the foul fiend Apollyon, and where they had that dreadful fight
that they had: I know you cannot but have heard thereof. But be of good
courage: as long as you have here Mr. Great-heart to be your guide and
conductor, we hope you will fare the better."

So when these two had given the pilgrims unto the care of their guide,
he went forward, and they went after.

GREAT. Then said Mr. Great-heart, "We need not to be so afraid of this
valley, for here is nothing to hurt us, unless we procure it to
ourselves. It is true that Christian did here meet with Apollyon, with
whom he had also a sore combat; but that fray was the fruit of those
slips that he got in his going down the hill; for they that get slips
there, must look for combats here. And hence it is that this valley has
got so hard a name. For the common people, when they hear that some
frightful thing has befallen such a one in such a place, are of an
opinion that that place is haunted with some foul fiend or evil spirit;
when, alas! it is for the fruit of their doing that such things do
befall them there. This Valley of Humiliation is of itself as fruitful a
place as any the crow flies over; and I am persuaded, if we could hit
upon it, we might find, somewhere hereabouts, something that might give
us an account why Christian was so hardly beset in this place."

Then James said to his mother, "Lo, yonder stands a pillar, and it looks
as if something was written thereon: let us go and see what it is." So
they went, and found there written, "Let Christian's slips before he
came hither, and the battles that he met with in this place, be a
warning to those that come after."

"Lo!" said their guide, "did not I tell you that there was something
hereabouts that would give intimation of the reason why Christian was so
hard beset in this place?" Then turning himself to Christiana, he said,
"No disgrace to Christian, more than to many others whose hap and loss
his was; for it is easier going up than down this hill; and that can be
said but of few hills in all these parts of the world. But we will leave
the good man: he is at rest; he also had a brave victory over his enemy.
Let Him that dwelleth above grant that we fare no worse, when we come to
be tried, than he.

"But we will come again to this Valley of Humiliation. It is the best
and most fruitful piece of ground in all these parts. It is fat ground,
and, as you see, consisteth much in meadows; and if a man was to come
here in the summer-time, as we do now, if he knew not anything before
thereof, and if he also delighted himself in the sight of his eyes, he
might see that that would be delightful to him. Behold how green this
valley is, also how beautified with lilies! I have also known many
laboring men that have got good estates in this valley of Humiliation;
for 'God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.' Indeed,
it is a very fruitful soil, and doth bring forth by handfuls. Some also
have wished that the next way to their Father's house were here, that
they might be troubled no more with either hills or mountains to go
over; but the way is the way, and there's an end."

Now, as they were going along and talking, they espied a boy feeding his
father's sheep. The boy was in very mean clothes, but of a very fresh
and well-favored countenance; and as he sat by himself he sang. "Hark,"
said Mr. Great-heart, "to what the shepherd's boy saith." So they
hearkened, and he said:

  "He that is down needs fear no fall
    He that is low, no pride;
  He that is humble ever shall
    Have God to be his guide.

  "I am content with what I have
    Little be it or much:
  And, Lord, contentment still I crave
    Because Thou savest much.

  "Fulness to such a burden is,
    That go on pilgrimage;
  Here little, and hereafter bliss,
    Is best from age to age."

Then said their guide, "Do you hear him? I will dare to say that this
boy lives a merrier life, and wears more of that herb called
heart's-ease in his bosom, than he that is clad in silk and velvet. But
we will proceed in our account of this valley.

"In this valley our Lord formerly had His country house: He loved much
to be here. He loved also to walk these meadows, for He found the air
was pleasant. Besides, here a man shall be free from the noise and from
the hurryings of this life. All states are full of noise and confusion,
only the Valley of Humiliation is that empty and solitary place. Here a
man shall not be so let and hindered in his thoughts as in other places
he is apt to be. This is a valley that nobody walks in but those that
love a pilgrim's life. And though Christian had the hard hap to meet
here with Apollyon, and to enter with him into a brisk encounter, yet I
must tell you that in former times men have met with angels here, have
found pearls here, and have in this place found the words of life.

"Did I say, our Lord had here in former days His country house, and
that He loved here to walk? I will add, in this place, and to the people
that love to tread these grounds, He has left a yearly sum of money, to
be faithfully paid them at certain seasons, for their support by the
way, and for their further encouragement to go on their pilgrimage."

SAM. Now, as they went on, Samuel said to Mr. Great-heart, "Sir, I
perceive that in this valley my father and Apollyon had their battle;
but whereabout was the fight? for I perceive this valley is large."

[Sidenote: FORGETFUL GREEN]

GREAT. Your father had that battle with Apollyon at a place yonder
before us, in a narrow passage just beyond Forgetful Green. And, indeed,
that place is the most dangerous place in all these parts. For, if at
any time the pilgrims meet with any brunt, it is when they forget what
favors they have received, and how unworthy they are of them. This is
the place also where others have been hard put to it. But more of the
place when we are come to it; for I persuade myself, that to this day
there remains either some sign of the battle, or some monument to
testify that such a battle there was fought.

MER. Then said Mercy, "I think that I am as well in this valley as I
have been anywhere else in all our journey: the place, methinks, suits
with my spirit. I love to be in such places, where there is no rattling
with coaches nor rumbling with wheels. Methinks here one may, without
much trouble, be thinking what he is, whence he came, what he has done,
and to what the King has called him. Here one may think and break at
heart, and melt in one's spirit, until one's eyes become like the
fish-pools in Heshbon. They that go rightly through this Valley of Baca,
make it a well; the rain that God sends down from heaven upon them that
are here also filleth the pools. This valley is that from whence also
the King will give to His their vineyards; and they that go through it
shall sing, as Christian did, for all he met with Apollyon."

GREAT. "'Tis true," said their guide; "I have gone through this valley
many a time, and never was better than when here. I have also been a
conductor to several pilgrims, and they have confessed the same. 'To
this man will I look,' saith the King, 'even to him that is poor and of
a contrite spirit, and that trembleth at my word.'"

Now they were come to the place where the afore-mentioned battle was
fought. Then said the guide to Christiana, her children, and Mercy,
"This is the place; on this ground Christian stood, and up there came
Apollyon against him. And look--did not I tell you?--here is some of
your husband's blood upon these stones to this day. Behold, also, how
here and there are yet to be seen upon the place some of the shivers of
Apollyon's broken darts. See also how they did beat the ground with
their feet as they fought, to make good their places against each other;
how also, with their by-blows, they did split the very stones in
pieces. Verily, Christian did here play the man, and showed himself as
stout as could, had he been there, even Hercules himself. When Apollyon
was beat, he made his retreat to the next valley, that is called the
Valley of the Shadow of Death, unto which we shall come soon. Lo, yonder
also stands a monument, on which is engraven this battle, and
Christian's victory, to his fame throughout all ages."

[Sidenote: VALLEY OF SHADOW OF DEATH]

So, because it stood just on the way-side before them, they stepped to
it, and read the writing, which word for word was this:

  "Hard by here was a battle fought,
    Most strange, and yet most true;
  Christian and Apollyon sought
    Each other to subdue.

  "The man so bravely played the man,
    He made the fiend to fly;
  Of which a monument I stand,
    The same to testify."

When they had passed by this place, they came upon the borders of the
Shadow of Death. This valley was longer than the other; a place also
most strangely haunted with evil things, as many are able to testify;
but these women and children went the better through it, because they
had daylight, and because Mr. Great-heart was their conductor.

When they were entered upon this valley, they thought that they heard a
groaning, as of dead men--a very great groaning. They thought also that
they did hear words of moaning spoken, as of some in extreme torment.
These things made the boys to quake; the women also looked pale and wan;
but their guide bid them be of good comfort.

So they went on a little farther, and they thought that they felt the
ground begin to shake under them, as if some hollow place was there;
they heard also a kind of hissing, as of serpents; but nothing as yet
appeared. Then said the boys, "Are we not yet at the end of this doleful
place?" But the guide also bid them be of good courage, and look well to
their feet; "lest haply," said he, "you be taken in some snare."

Now James began to be sick; but I think the cause thereof was fear; so
his mother gave him some of that glass of spirits that had been given
her at the Interpreter's house, and three of the pills that Mr. Skill
had prepared; and the boy began to revive. Thus they went on till they
came to about the middle of the valley; and then Christiana said,
"Methinks I see something yonder upon the road before us, a thing of
such a shape as I have not seen." Then said Joseph, "Mother, what is
it?" "An ugly thing, child, an ugly thing," said she. "But, mother, what
is it like?" said he. "'Tis like I cannot tell what," said she, "and now
it is but a little way off." Then said she, "It is nigh!"

[Sidenote: RESIST THE DEVIL]

"Well, well," said Mr. Great-heart, "let them that are most afraid keep
close to me." So the fiend came on, and the conductor met it; but, when
it was just come to him, it vanished to all their sights. Then
remembered they what had been said some time ago, "Resist the devil, and
he will flee from you."

They went therefore on, as being a little refreshed. But they had not
gone far before Mercy, looking behind her, saw, as she thought,
something most like a lion, and it came a great padding pace after; and
it had a hollow voice of roaring, and at every roar that it gave it made
all the valley echo, and all their hearts to ache, save the heart of him
that was their guide. So it came up, and Mr. Great-heart went behind,
and put the pilgrims all before him. The lion also came on apace, and
Mr. Great-heart addressed himself to give him battle. But, when he saw
that it was determined that resistance should be made, he also drew
back, and came no farther.

They then went on again, and their conductor did go before them, till
they came to a place where was cast up a pit the whole breadth of the
way; and before they could be prepared to go over that, a great mist and
darkness fell upon them, so that they could not see. Then said the
pilgrims, "Alas! what now shall we do?" But their guide made answer,
"Fear not, stand still, and see what an end will be put to this also."
So they stayed there, because their path was marred. They then also
thought that they did hear more apparently the noise and rushing of the
enemies; the fire also, and the smoke of the pit, were much easier to be
discerned. Then said Christiana to Mercy, "Now I see what my poor
husband went through. I have heard much of this place, but I never was
here before now. Poor man! he went here all alone in the night; he had
night almost quite through the way; also these fiends were busy about
him, as if they would have torn him in pieces. Many have spoken of it,
but none can tell what the Valley of the Shadow of Death should mean,
until they come in it themselves. 'The heart knoweth its own bitterness,
and a stranger intermeddleth not with its joy.' To be here is a fearful
thing."

GREAT. This is like doing business in great waters, or like going down
into the deep. This is like being in the heart of the sea, and like
going down to the bottoms of the mountains. Now it seems as if the
earth, with its bars, were about us for ever. But let them that walk in
darkness and have no light, trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon
their God. For my part, as I have told you already, I have gone often
through this valley, and have been much harder put to it than now I am;
and yet, you see, I am alive. I would not boast, for that I am not mine
own saviour; but I trust we shall have a good deliverance. Come, let us
pray for light to Him that can lighten our darkness, and that can
rebuke not only these, but all the Satans in hell.

So they cried and prayed, and God sent light and deliverance; for there
was now no hindrance in their way, no, not there where but now they were
stopped with a pit. Yet they were not got through the valley; so they
went on still; and behold, great stinks and loathsome smells, to the
great annoyance of them. Then said Mercy to Christiana, "It is not so
pleasant being here as at the gate, or at the Interpreter's, or at the
house where we lay last."

"Oh, but," said one of the boys, "it is not so bad to go through here as
it is to abide here always; and, for aught I know, one reason why we
must go this way to the house prepared for us is, that our home might be
made the sweeter to us."

"Well said, Samuel," quoth the guide; "thou hast now spoke like a man."

"Why, if ever I get out here again," said the boy, "I think I shall
prize light and good way better than ever I did in all my life."

Then said the guide, "We shall be out by-and-by."

So on they went, and Joseph said, "Cannot we see to the end of this
valley as yet?"

[Sidenote: AMONG THE SNARES]

Then said the guide, "Look to your feet, for we shall presently be among
the snares."

So they looked to their feet, and went on; but they were troubled much
with the snares. Now, when they were come among the snares, they espied
a man cast into the ditch on the left hand, with his flesh all rent and
torn.

Then said the guide, "That is one Heedless, that was going this way; he
has lain there a great while. There was one Take-heed with him when he
was taken and slain, but he escaped their hands. You cannot imagine how
many are killed hereabouts; and yet men are so foolishly venturous as to
set out lightly on pilgrimage, and to come without a guide. Poor
Christian! it is a wonder that he here escaped; but he was beloved of
his God, also he had a good heart of his own, or else he could never
have done it."

[Sidenote: GREAT-HEART ENCOUNTERS MAUL]

Now they drew towards the end of the way; and just where Christian had
seen the cave when he went by, out thence came forth Maul, a giant. This
Maul did use to spoil young pilgrims by deceiving them; and he called
Great-heart by his name, and said unto him, "How many times have you
been forbidden to do these things?"

Then said Mr. Great-heart, "What things?"

"What things!" quoth the giant; "you know what things; but I will put an
end to your trade."

"But pray," said Mr. Great-heart, "before we fall to it, let us
understand wherefore we must fight."

Now the women and children stood trembling, and knew not what to do.

Quoth the giant, "You rob the country, and rob it with the worst of
thefts."

"These are but random words," said Mr. Great-heart; "tell what robberies
I have done, man."

Then said the giant, "Thou practicest the craft of a kidnapper: thou
gatherest up women and children, and carriest them into a strange
country, to the weakening of my master's kingdom."

But now Great-heart replied, "I am a servant of the God of heaven; my
business is to persuade sinners to turn to God. I am commanded to do my
best to turn men, women, and children from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan unto God; and if this be indeed the ground of thy
quarrel, let us fall to it as soon as thou wilt."

[Sidenote: THE GIANT IS SLAIN]

Then the giant came up, and Mr. Great-heart went to meet him; and as he
went, he drew his sword, but the giant had a club. So without more ado
they fell to it; and, at the first blow, the giant struck Mr.
Great-heart down upon one of his knees. With that, the women and
children cried out. So Mr. Great-heart, recovering himself, laid about
him in full lusty manner, and gave the giant a wound in his arm. Thus he
fought for the space of an hour, to that height of heat, that the breath
came out of the giant's nostrils as the heat doth out of a boiling
cauldron.

Then they sat down to rest them; but Mr. Great-heart betook himself to
prayer. Also the women and children did nothing but sigh and cry all the
time that the battle did last.

When they had rested them, and taken breath, they both fell to it again;
and Mr. Great-heart with a blow fetched the giant down to the ground.
"Nay, hold, and let me recover," quoth he. So Mr. Great-heart fairly let
him get up: so to it they went again; and the giant missed but little of
breaking Mr. Great-heart's skull with his club.

Mr. Great-heart seeing that, runs to him in the full heat of his spirit,
and pierceth him under the fifth rib. With that the giant began to
faint, and could hold up his club no longer. Then Mr. Great-heart
seconded his blow, and smote the head of the giant from his shoulders.
Then the women and the children rejoiced, and Mr. Great-heart also
praised God for the deliverance He had wrought.

When this was done, they amongst them erected a pillar, and fastened the
giant's head thereon, and wrote under it in letters that passengers
might read:

  "He that did wear this head, was one
    That pilgrims did misuse;
  He stopped their way, he spared none,
    But did them all abuse;
  Until that I, Great-heart, arose,
    The pilgrims' guide to be;
  Until that I did him oppose
    That was their enemy."

Now, I saw that they went to the high ground that was a little way off,
cast up to be a prospect for pilgrims. That was the place from whence
Christiana had the first sight of Faithful his brother. Wherefore here
they sat down and rested. They also here did eat and drink and make
merry, for that they had gotten deliverance from this so dangerous an
enemy. As they sat thus and did eat, Christiana asked the guide if he
had caught no hurt in the battle. Then said Mr. Great-heart, "No, save a
little on my flesh; yet that also shall be so far from being to my harm
that it is at present a proof of my love to my Master and you, and shall
be a means, by grace, to increase my reward at last."

CHR. But were you not afraid, good sir, when you saw him come out with
his club?

GREAT. "It is my duty," said he, "to mistrust my own ability, that I may
have trust in Him who is stronger than all."

CHR. But what did you think when he fetched you down to the ground at
the first blow?

GREAT. "Why, I thought," replied he, "that so my Master Himself was
served; and yet He it was that conquered at the last."

MATT. When you all have thought what you please, I think God has been
wonderful good unto us, both in bringing us out of this valley, and in
delivering us out of the hand of this enemy. For my part, I see no
reason why we should distrust our God any more, since He has now, and in
such a place as this, given us such proof of His love as this.

[Sidenote: OLD HONEST]

Then they got up and went forward. Now, a little before them stood an
oak; and under it, when they came to it, they found an old pilgrim fast
asleep. They knew that he was a pilgrim by his clothes, and his staff,
and his girdle.

So the guide, Mr. Great-heart, awaked him; and the old gentleman, as he
lifted up his eyes, cried out, "What's the matter? what are you, and
what is your business here?"

GREAT. Come, man, be not so hot; here are none but friends.

Yet the old man gets up, and stands upon his guard, and will know of
them what they are. Then said the guide, "My name is Great-heart; I am
the guide of these pilgrims, that are going to the Celestial Country."

HONEST. Then said Mr. Honest, "I cry you mercy: I feared that you had
been of the company of those that some time ago did rob Little-Faith of
his money; but now I look better about me I perceive you are honester
people."

GREAT. Why, what would or could you have done to have helped yourself,
if we indeed had been of that company?

HON. Done! why, I would have fought as long as breath had been in me;
and, had I so done, I am sure you could never have given me the worst
on't, for a Christian can never be overcome unless he shall yield of
himself.

GREAT. "Well said, Father Honest," quoth the guide; "for by this I know
thou art a cock of the right kind, for thou hast said the truth."

HON. And by this also I know that thou knowest what true pilgrimage is;
for all others do think that we are the soonest overcome of any.

[Sidenote: CONVERSES WITH HONEST]

GREAT. Well, now we are so happily met, pray let me crave your name, and
the name of the place you came from.

HON. My name I cannot; but I came from the town of Stupidity; it lieth
about four degrees beyond the City of Destruction.

GREAT. Oh! are you that countryman? then I deem I have half a guess of
you: your name is old Honesty, is it not?

HON. So the old gentleman blushed, and said, "Not Honesty, but Honest is
my name; and I wish that my nature may agree to what I am called. But,
sir," said the old gentleman, "how could you guess that I am such a man,
since I came from such a place?"

GREAT. I had heard of you before by my Master; for He knows all things
that are done on the earth. But I have often wondered that any should
come from your place, for your town is worse than is the City of
Destruction itself.

HON. Yes, we lie more off from the sun, and so are more cold and
senseless. But were a man in a mountain of ice, yet if the Sun of
Righteousness should rise upon him, his frozen heart shall feel a thaw;
and thus it hath been with me.

GREAT. I believe it, Father Honest, I believe it; for I know the thing
is true.

Then the old gentleman saluted all the pilgrims with a holy kiss of
love, and asked them their names, and how they had fared since they had
set out on their pilgrimage.

CHR. Then said Christiana, "My name I suppose you have heard of: good
Christian was my husband, and these are his children."

But can you think how the old gentleman was taken when she told him who
she was? He skipped, he smiled, he blessed them with a thousand good
wishes, saying:

HON. I have heard much of your husband, and of his travels and wars
which he underwent in his days. Be it spoken to your comfort, the name
of your husband rings all over these parts of the world: his faith, his
courage, his enduring, and his sincerity under all, have made his name
famous. Then he turned him to the boys, and asked of them their names,
which they told him. Then he said unto them, "Matthew, be thou like
Matthew the publican, not in vice, but in virtue. Samuel," said he, "be
thou like Samuel the prophet, a man of faith and prayer. Joseph," said
he, "be thou like Joseph in Potiphar's house, pure, and one that flees
from temptation. And James, be thou like James the Just, and like James
the brother of our Lord." Then they told him of Mercy, and how she had
left her town and her kindred to come along with Christiana and with her
sons. At that, the old honest man said, "Mercy is thy name? by Mercy
shalt thou be sustained and carried through all those difficulties that
shall attack thee in thy way, till thou shalt come thither where thou
shalt look the Fountain of Mercy in the face with comfort."

All this while the guide, Mr. Great-heart, was very well pleased and
smiled upon his companion.

[Sidenote: THEY DISCUSS MR. FEARING]

Now, as they walked along together, the guide asked the old gentleman if
he did not know one Mr. Fearing, that came on pilgrimage out of his
parts.

HON. "Yes, very well," said he. "He was a man that had the root of the
matter in him; but he was one of the most troublesome pilgrims that ever
I met with in all my days."

GREAT. I perceive you knew him, for you have given a very right
character of him.

HON. Knew him! I was a great companion of his; I was with him most an
end: when he first began to think upon what would come upon us
hereafter, I was with him.

GREAT. I was his guide from my master's house to the gates of the
Celestial City.

HON. Then you knew him to be a troublesome one?

GREAT. I did so; but I could very well bear it, for men of my calling
are oftentimes entrusted with the conduct of such as he was.

HON. Well, then, pray let us hear a little of him, and how he managed
himself under your conduct.

GREAT. Why, he was always afraid that he should come short of whither he
had a desire to go. Everything frightened him that he heard anybody
speak of, if it had but the least appearance of opposition in it. I hear
that he lay roaring at the Slough of Despond for above a month together;
nor durst he, for all he saw several go over before him, venture, though
they, many of them, offered to lend him their hand. He would not go back
again neither. The Celestial City, he said, he should die if he came not
to it; and yet was discouraged at every difficulty, and stumbled at
every straw that anybody cast in his way. Well, after he had lain at the
Slough of Despond a great while, as I have told you, one sunshine
morning, I don't know how, he ventured, and so got over; but, when he
was over, he would scarce believe it. He had, I think, a Slough of
Despond in his mind, a slough that he carried everywhere with him, or
else he could never have been as he was. So he came up to the gate (you
know what I mean) that stands at the head of this way, and here also he
stood a good while before he would venture to knock. When the gate was
opened, he would give back, and give place to others, and say that he
was not worthy. For, for all he got before some to the gate, yet many of
them went in before him. There the poor man would stand shaking and
shrinking: I dare say it would have pitied one's heart to have seen him.
Nor would he go back again. At last, he took the hammer that hanged on
the gate in his hand, and gave a small rap or two; then One opened to
him, but he shrank back as before. He that opened stepped out after
him, and said, "Thou trembling one, what wantest thou?" With that, he
fell down to the ground. He that spoke to him wondered to see him so
faint; so He said to him, "Peace be to thee: up, for I have set open the
door to thee; come in, for thou are blessed." With that, he got up, and
went in trembling; and when he was in, he was ashamed to show his face.
Well, after he had been entertained there a while, as you know how the
manner is, he was bid go on his way, and also told the way he should
take. So he came till he came to our house; but as he behaved himself at
the gate, so he did at my master the Interpreter's door. He lay
thereabout in the cold a good while before he would venture to call: yet
he would not go back; and the nights were long and cold then. Nay, he
had a note of need in his bosom to my master, to receive him and grant
him the comfort of his house, and also to allow him a stout and valiant
conductor, because he was himself so chicken-hearted a man; and yet, for
all that, he was afraid to call at the door. So he lay up and down
thereabouts, till, poor man, he was almost starved; yea, so great was
his fear, though he had seen several others for knocking get in, yet he
was afraid to venture. At last, I think I looked out of the window, and
perceiving a man to be up and down about the door, I went out to him,
and asked what he was; but, poor man, the water stood in his eyes; so I
perceived what he wanted. I went therefore in, and told it in the
house, and we showed the things to our Lord: so he sent me out again, to
entreat him to come in; but I dare say I had hard work to do it. At last
he came in; and I will say that for my Lord, he carried it wonderful
lovingly to him. There were but few good bits at the table, but some of
it was laid upon his trencher. Then he presented the note; and my Lord
looked thereon, and said his desire should be granted. So, when he had
been there a good while, he seemed to get some heart, and to be a little
more comfortable. For my master, you must know, is one of very tender
heart, specially to them that are afraid; wherefore he carried it so
towards him as might tend most to his encouragement. Well, when he had a
sight of the things of the place, and was ready to take his journey to
go to the City, my Lord, as he did to Christian before, gave him a
bottle of spirits, and some comfortable things to eat. Thus we set
forward, and I went before him; but the man was but of few words, only
he would sigh aloud.

[Sidenote: GREAT-HEART'S REMINISCENCES]

When we were come to the place where the three fellows were hanged, he
said that he doubted that that would be his end also. Only he seemed
glad when he saw the Cross and the sepulchre. There, I confess, he
desired to stay a little to look; and he seemed, for a little while
after, to be a little cheery. When we came at the Hill Difficulty, he
made no stick at that, nor did he much fear the lions, for you must know
that his trouble was not about such things as those; his fear was about
his acceptance at last.

I got him in at the House Beautiful, I think, before he was willing.
Also, when he was in, I brought him acquainted with the damsels that
were of the place; but he was ashamed to make himself much for company.
He desired much to be alone; yet he always loved good talk, and often
would get behind the screen to hear it. He also loved much to see
ancient things, and to be pondering them in his mind. He told me,
afterwards, that he loved to be in those two houses from which he came
last; to wit, at the gate, and that of the Interpreter; but that he
durst not be so bold as to ask.

When we went also from the House Beautiful, down the hill into the
Valley of Humiliation, he went down as well as ever I saw a man in my
life: for he cared not how mean he was, so he might be happy at last.
Yea, I think there was a kind of sympathy betwixt that valley and him;
for I never saw him better in all his pilgrimage than when he was in
that valley.

Here he would lie down, embrace the ground, and kiss the very flowers
that grew in this valley. He would now be up every morning by break of
day, tracing and walking to and fro in this valley.

But when he was come to the entrance of the Valley of the Shadow of
Death, I thought I should have lost my man: not for that he had any
inclination to go back--that he always abhorred; but he was ready to
die for fear. "Oh, the hobgoblins will have me! the hobgoblins will have
me!" cried he, and I could not beat him out of it. He made such a noise
and such an outcry here, that, had they but heard him, it was enough to
encourage them to come and fall upon us.

But this I took very great notice of, that this valley was as quiet
while we went through it as ever I knew it before or since. I suppose
those enemies here had now a special check from our Lord, and a command
not to meddle until Mr. Fearing had passed over it.

[Sidenote: FEARING AT VANITY FAIR]

It would be too tedious to tell you of all, I will therefore only
mention a passage or two more. When he was come at Vanity Fair, I
thought he would have fought with all the men in the fair. I feared
there we should both have been knocked on the head, so hot was he
against their fooleries. Upon the Enchanted Ground he was also very
wakeful. But, when he was come at the river where was no bridge, there
again he was in a heavy case. Now, now, he said, he should be drowned
for ever, and so never see that face with comfort that he had come so
many miles to behold.

And here also I took notice of what was very remarkable: the water of
that river was lower at this time than ever I saw it in all my life: so
he went over at last, not much above wetshod. When he was going up to
the gate, I began to take leave of him, and to wish him a good
reception above. So he said, "I shall, I shall." Then parted we
asunder, and I saw him no more.

HON. Then it seems he was well at last?

GREAT. Yes, yes; I never had a doubt about him. He was a man of choice
spirit; only he was always kept very low, and that made his life so
burthensome to himself and so troublesome to others. He was, above many,
tender of sin: he was so afraid of doing injuries to others, that he
often would deny himself of that which was lawful because he would not
offend.

HON. But what should be the reason that such a good man should be all
his days so much in the dark?

GREAT. There are two sorts of reasons for it. One is, the wise God will
have it so; some must pipe, and some must weep. Now Mr. Fearing was one
that played upon this bass. He and his fellows sound the sackbut, whose
notes are more doleful than the notes of other music are; though,
indeed, some say the bass is the ground of music. And, for my part, I
care not at all for that profession which begins, not in heaviness of
mind. The first string that the musician usually touches is the bass,
when he intends to put all in tune. God also plays upon this string
first, when He sets the soul in tune for Himself. Only here was the
imperfection of Mr. Fearing: he could play upon no other music but this
till toward his latter end.

I make bold to talk thus in figures, for the ripening of the wits of
young readers, and because, in the book of the Revelation, the saved
are compared to a company of musicians, that play upon their trumpets
and harps, and sing their songs before the throne.

HON. He was a very zealous man, as one may see by the relation which you
have given of him. Difficulties, lions, or Vanity Fair he feared not at
all; it was only sin, death, and hell that were to him a terror, because
he had some doubts about his interest in that Celestial Country.

GREAT. You say right: those were the things that were his troublers, and
they, as you have well observed, arose from the weakness of his mind
thereabout, not from weakness of spirit as to the practical part of a
pilgrim's life. I dare believe that, as the proverb is, he would have
bit a firebrand, had it stood in his way; but the things with which he
was oppressed no man ever yet could shake off with ease.

CHR. Then said Christiana, "This relation of Mr. Fearing has done me
good. I thought nobody had been like me; but I see there was some
semblance betwixt this good man and I: only we differed in two things.
His troubles were so great that they broke out; but mine I kept within.
His also lay so hard upon him, they made him that he could not knock at
the houses provided for entertainment; but my trouble was always such as
made me knock the louder."

MER. If I might also speak my heart, I must say that something of him
has also dwelt in me; for I have ever been more afraid of the lake, and
the loss of a place in Paradise, than I have been of the loss of other
things. Oh, thought I, may I have the happiness to have a habitation
there, it is enough, though I part with all the world to win it!

MATT. Then said Matthew, "Fear was one thing that made me think that I
was far from having that within me which makes me sure of being saved.
But if it were so with such a good man as he, why may it not also go
well with me?"

JAMES. "No fears, no grace," said James, "Though there is not always
grace where there is the fear of hell, yet, to be sure, there is no
grace where there is no fear of God."

GREAT. Well said, James; thou hast hit the mark. For the fear of God is
the beginning of wisdom; and, to be sure, they that want the beginning
have neither middle nor end. But we will here conclude our discourse of
Mr. Fearing, after we have sent after him this farewell:

  "Well, Master Fearing, thou didst fear
    Thy God, and wast afraid
  Of doing anything while here
    That would have thee betrayed.

  "And didst thou fear the lake and pit?
    Would others did so too!
  For, as for them that want thy wit,
    They do themselves undo."

[Sidenote: HONEST TELLS OF MR. SELF-WILL]

Now I saw that they still went on in their talk; for, after Mr.
Great-heart had made an end with Mr. Fearing, Mr. Honest began to tell
them of another, but his name was Mr. Self-will. "He pretended himself
to be a pilgrim," said Mr. Honest, "but I persuade myself he never came
in at the gate that stands at the head of the way."

GREAT. Had you ever any talk with him about it?

HON. Yes, more than once or twice; but he would always be like himself,
self-willed. He neither cared for man, nor argument, nor yet example;
what his mind prompted him to, that he would do, and nothing else could
he be got to do.

GREAT. Pray, what principles did he hold? for I suppose you can tell.

HON. He held that a man might follow the sins as well as the virtues of
pilgrims; and that, if he did both, he should be certainly saved.

GREAT. How! If he had said it is possible for the best to be guilty of
the vices, as well as to partake of the virtues, of pilgrims, he could
not much have been blamed; for, indeed, we are free from no sin
absolutely, but on condition that we watch and strive. But this, I
perceive, is not the thing; but, if I understood you right, your meaning
is that he was of opinion that it was allowable so to be.

HON. Ay, ay, so I mean, and so he believed and acted.

GREAT. But what grounds had he for his so saying?

HON. Why, he said he had the Scripture for his warrant.

[Sidenote: HONEST QUOTES SELF-WILL]

GREAT. Prithee, Mr. Honest, present us with a few particulars.

HON. So I will. He said, To have to do with other men's wives had been
practiced by David, God's beloved; and therefore he could do it. He
said, To have more women than one was a thing that Solomon practiced;
and therefore he could do it. He said that Sarah lied, and so did Rahab;
and therefore he could do it. He said that the disciples went at the
bidding of their Master, and took away the owner's ass; and therefore he
could do so too. He said that Jacob got the inheritance of his father in
a way of guile and cheating; and therefore he could do so too.

GREAT. Highly base, indeed! And you are sure he was of this opinion?

HON. I have heard him plead for it, bring Scripture for it, bring
argument for it, and so on.

GREAT. An opinion that is not fit to be with any allowance in the world!

HON. You must understand me rightly: he did not say that _any_ man might
do this; but that they who had the virtues of those that did such
things, might also do the same.

GREAT. But what more false than such a conclusion? For this is as much
as to say that, because good men heretofore have sinned through weakness
or forgetfulness, therefore he had an allowance to do it of a purpose;
or if, because a child, by the blast of the wind, or for that it
stumbled at a stone, fell down and defiled itself in the mire,
therefore he might wilfully lie down and wallow like a boar therein. Who
could have thought that any one could so far have been blinded by the
power of sin. But what is written must be true: they "stumble at the
Word, being disobedient; whereunto also they were appointed." His
supposing that such may have the godly man's virtues, who accustom
themselves to their vices, is also a delusion as strong as the other. To
eat up the sin of God's people as a dog licks up filth, is no sign of
one that is possessed with their virtues. Nor can I believe that one who
is of this opinion can have faith or love in him. But I know you have
made strong objections against him: prithee, what can he say for
himself?

HON. Why, he says, "To do this openly and by way of opinion, seems
abundantly more honest than to do it and yet hold contrary to it in
opinion."

GREAT. A very wicked answer. For, though to let loose the bridle to
lusts while our opinions are against such things is bad; yet to sin, and
plead a toleration so to do, is worse. The one stumbles beholders
accidentally, the other _pleads_ them into the snare.

HON. There are many of this man's mind, that have not this man's mouth;
and that makes going on pilgrimage of so little esteem as it is.

GREAT. You have said the truth, and it is to be lamented; but he that
feareth the King of Paradise shall come out of them all.

CHR. There are strange opinions in the world. I know one that said it
was time enough to turn from sin when they come to die.

GREAT. Such are not overwise. That man would have been loth, might he
have had a week to run twenty miles in for his life, to have deferred
that journey to the last hour of that week.

HON. You say right; and yet the most of them who count themselves
pilgrims do indeed do thus. I am, as you see, an old man, and have been
a traveller in this road many a day, and I have taken notice of many
things. I have seen some that have set out as if they would drive all
the world afore them, who yet have, in a few days, died as they in the
wilderness, and so never got sight of the promised land. I have seen
some that have promised nothing at first, setting out to be pilgrims,
and that one would have thought could not have lived a day, that have
yet proved very good pilgrims. I have seen some that have run hastily
forward, that again have, after a little time, run just as fast back
again. I have seen some who have spoken very well of a pilgrim's life at
first, that, after a while, have spoken as much against it. I have heard
some, when they first set out for Paradise, say positively there is such
a place, who, when they have been almost there, have come back again,
and said there is none. I have heard some boast what they would do in
case they should be opposed, that have, even at a false alarm, fled
faith, the pilgrim's way, and all.

Now, as they were thus in their way, there came one running to meet
them, and said, "Gentlemen, and you of the weaker sort, if you love
life, shift for yourselves, for the robbers are before you."

GREAT. "They be the three that set upon Little-Faith heretofore. Well,"
said he, "we are ready for them."

[Sidenote: THE PILGRIMS PROCEED]

So they went on their way. Now they looked at every turning when they
should have met with the villains; but whether they heard of Mr.
Great-heart, or whether they had some other game, they came not up to
the pilgrims.




CHAPTER VII.

ENTERTAINED BY GAIUS.


Christiana then wished for an inn for herself and her children, because
they were weary.

Then said Mr. Honest, "There is one a little before us, where a very
honorable disciple, one Gaius, dwells." So they all concluded to turn in
thither, and the rather because the old gentleman gave him so good a
report. When they came to the door, they went in, not knocking, for
folks use not to knock at the door of an inn. Then they called for the
master of the house, and he came to them; so they asked if they might
lie there that night.

GAIUS. Yes, gentlemen, if you be true men, for my house is for none but
pilgrims.

Then were Christiana, Mercy, and the boys the more glad, for that the
Innkeeper was a lover of pilgrims. So they called for rooms, and he
showed them one for Christiana, and her children, and Mercy, and another
for Mr. Great-heart and the old gentleman.

GREAT. "Good Gaius, what hast thou for supper? for these pilgrims have
come far to-day, and are weary."

GAIUS. "It is late, so we cannot conveniently go out to seek food; but
such as we have you shall be welcome to, if that will content."

GREAT. We will be content with what thou hast in the house; forasmuch as
I have proved thee, thou art never without that which is suitable.

Then he went down and spake to the cook, whose name was
Taste-that-which-is-good, to get ready supper for so many pilgrims. This
done, he came up again, saying, "Come, my good friends, you are welcome
to me, and I am glad that I have a house to entertain you in; and, while
supper is making ready, if you please, let us entertain one another with
some good talking together."

So they all said, "Content."

GAIUS. "Whose wife is this aged matron? and whose daughter is this young
damsel?"

GREAT. The woman is the wife of one Christian, a pilgrim of former
times; and these are his four children. The maid is one of her
acquaintance, one that she hath persuaded to come with her on
pilgrimage. The boys take all after their father, and wish to tread in
his steps; yea, if they do but see any place where the old pilgrim hath
lain, or any print of his foot, it bringeth joy to their hearts, and
they are eager to lie or tread in the same.

[Sidenote: FAMILY OF THE CHRISTIANS]

GAIUS. "Is this Christian's wife, and are these Christian's children? I
knew your husband's father; yea, also his father's father. Many have
been good of this stock; their ancestors dwelt first at Antioch.
Christian's ancestors, the early fathers from whom he came (I suppose
you have heard your husband talk of them) were very worthy men. They
have, above any that I know, showed themselves men of great virtue and
courage, for the Lord of pilgrims, His ways, and them that loved Him. I
have heard of many of your husband's relations that have stood all
trials for the sake of the truth. Stephen, who was one of the first of
the family from whence your husband sprang, was knocked on the head with
stones. James, another of this generation, was slain with the edge of
the sword. To say nothing of Paul and Peter, men anciently of the family
from whence your husband came; there was Ignatius, who was cast to the
lions; Romanus, whose flesh was cut by pieces from his bones; and
Polycarp, that played the man in the fire; there was he that was hanged
up in a basket in the sun for the wasps to eat; and he whom they put
into a sack, and cast him into the sea to be drowned. It would be
utterly impossible to count up all of that family who have suffered
injuries and death for the love of a pilgrim's life. Nor can I but be
glad to see that thy husband has left behind him four such boys as
these. I hope they will bear out their father's name, and tread in their
father's steps, and come to their father's end."

GREAT. Indeed, sir, they are likely lads; they seem to choose heartily
their father's ways.

GAIUS. That is it that I said; wherefore Christian's family is like
still to spread abroad upon the face of the ground, and yet to be
numerous upon the face of the earth. Wherefore let Christiana look out
some damsels for her sons, to whom they may be married, etc., that the
name of their father and the house of his family may never be forgotten
in the world.

HON. 'Tis pity this family should fall and die out of the world.

GAIUS. Fall it cannot, but be diminished it may; but let Christiana take
my advice, and that is the way to uphold it. "And Christiana," said this
Innkeeper, "I am glad to see thee and thy friend Mercy together here, a
lovely couple. And may I advise, take Mercy into a nearer relation to
thee; if she will, let her be given to Matthew, thy eldest son. It is
the way to give you a family in the earth."

So this match was arranged, and in process of time they were married;
but more of that hereafter.

Gaius also proceeded, and said, "I will now speak on the behalf of
women, to take away their reproach. For as death and the curse came into
the world by a woman, so also did life and health: 'God sent forth His
Son, born of a woman.' I will say again, that when the Saviour was come,
women rejoiced in Him before either man or angel. I read not that man
ever gave unto Christ so much as one penny; but the women followed Him,
and ministered to Him of their substance. 'Twas a woman that washed His
feet with tears, and a woman that anointed His body to the burial. They
were women that wept when He was going to the cross, and women that
followed Him from the cross; and that sat over against the sepulchre
when He was buried. They were women that were first with Him at His
resurrection-morn, and women that brought tidings first to His disciples
that He was risen from the dead. Women, therefore, are highly favored,
and show by these things that they are sharers with us in the grace of
life."

[Sidenote: THE SUPPER AT GAIUS'S HOUSE]

Now the cook sent up to signify that supper was almost ready, and sent
one to lay the cloth, the dishes, and to set the salt and bread in
order.

Then said Matthew, "The sight of this cloth, and of this forerunner of
the supper, awaketh in me a greater appetite to my food than I had
before."

GAIUS. So let all teaching truth to thee in this life awaken in thee a
greater desire to sit at the supper of the great King in His kingdom;
for all preaching, books, and services here, are but as the laying of
the dishes, and as setting of salt upon the board, when compared with
the feast which our Lord will make for us when we come to His house.

So supper came up. And first a heave-shoulder and a wave-breast were set
on the table before them, to show that they must begin their meal with
prayer and praise to God. The heave-shoulder David lifted up his heart
to God with; and with the wave-breast, where his heart lay, he used to
lean upon his harp when he played. These two dishes were very fresh and
good, and they all ate heartily well thereof.

The next they brought up was a bottle of wine, red as blood. So Gaius
said to them, "Drink freely: this is the true juice of the vine, that
makes glad the heart of God and man." So they drank and were merry. The
next was a dish of milk, well crumbed; but Gaius said, "Let the boys
have that, that they may grow thereby."

Then they brought up in course of dish of butter and honey. Then said
Gaius, "Eat freely of this, for this is good to cheer up and strengthen
your judgments and understandings. This was our Lord's dish when He was
a child: 'Butter and honey shall He eat, that He may know to refuse the
evil and choose the good.'"

Then they brought them up a dish of apples, and they were very good
tasted fruit. Then said Matthew, "May we eat apples, since they were
such by and with which the serpent deceived our first mother Eve?"

Then said Gaius:

  "Apples were they with which we were beguiled;
  Yet sin, not apples, hath our souls defiled.
  Apples forbid, if ate, corrupt the blood;
  To eat such, when commanded, does us good.
  Drink of His flagons, then, thou Church, His dove,
  And eat His apples who are sick of love."

Then said Matthew, "I made the objection, because I, a while since, was
sick with eating of fruit."

GAIUS. Forbidden fruit will make you sick; but not what our Lord has
allowed.

While they were thus talking, they were presented with another dish, and
it was a dish of nuts. Then said some at the table, "Nuts spoil tender
teeth, specially the teeth of children;" which, when Gaius heared, he
said;

  "Hard texts are nuts (I will not call them cheaters),
  Whose shells do keep their kernels from the eaters;
  Ope then the shells, and you shall have the meat:
  They here are brought for you to crack and eat."

Then were they very merry, and sat at the table a long time, talking of
many things. Then said the old gentleman, "My good landlord, while we
are cracking your nuts, if you please, do you open this riddle;

  "A man there was, though some did count him mad,
  The more he cast away, the more he had."

Then they all gave good heed, wondering what good Gaius would say: so he
sat still awhile, and then thus replied:

  "He that bestows his goods upon the poor
  Shall have as much again, and ten times more."

Then said Joseph, "I dare say, sir, I did not think you could have found
it out."

"Oh!" said Gaius, "I have been trained up in this way a great while:
nothing teaches like experience, I have learned of my Lord to be kind,
and have found by experience that I have gained thereby. 'There is that
scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that withholdeth more than
is meet, but it tendeth to poverty.' 'There is that maketh himself rich,
yet hath nothing; there is that maketh himself poor, yet hath great
riches.'"

[Sidenote: MERCY AND MATTHEW]

Then Samuel whispered to Christiana, his mother, and said, "Mother, this
is a very good man's house; let us stay here a good while, and let my
brother Matthew be married here to Mercy before we go any farther." The
which Gaius, the host, overhearing, said, "With a very good will, my
child."

So they stayed there more than a month, and Mercy was given to Matthew
to wife. While they stayed here, Mercy, as her custom was, would be
making coats and garments to give to the poor, by which she brought up a
very good report upon the pilgrims.

But to return again to our story. After supper, the lads desired a bed,
for that they were weary with travelling. Then Gaius called to show them
their chamber; but said Mercy, "I will have them to bed." So she had
them to bed, and they slept well; but the rest sat up all night, for
Gaius and they were such suitable company, that they could not tell how
to part.

Then, after much talk of their Lord, themselves, and their journey, old
Mr. Honest, he that put forth the riddle to Gaius, began to nod.

Then said Great-heart, "What, sir! you begin to be drowsy? Come, rub up.
Now, here's a riddle for you."

Then said Mr. Honest, "Let us hear it."

Then said Mr. Great-heart:

  "He that will kill, must first be overcome;
  Who live abroad would, first must die at home."

"Ha!" said Mr. Honest, "it is a hard one; hard to explain, and harder to
do. But come, landlord," said he, "I will, if you please, leave my part
to you: do you expound it, and I will hear what you say."

"No," said Gaius, "it was put to you, and it is expected you should
answer it." Then said the old gentleman:

  "He first by grace must conquered be,
    That sin would mortify;
  And who that lives would convince me,
    Unto himself must die."

Thus they sat talking till break of day. Now, when the family were up,
Christiana bade her son James read a chapter; so he read the fifty-third
of Isaiah.

"Well," said Gaius, "now you are here, and since, as I know Mr.
Great-heart is good at his weapons, if you please, after we have
refreshed ourselves we will walk into the fields, to see if we can do
any good. About a mile from hence there is one Slay-good, a giant, that
doth much annoy the King's highway in these parts; and I know
whereabout his haunt is. He is master of a number of thieves: 'twould be
well if we could clear these parts of him."

So they consented and went; Mr. Great-heart with his sword, helmet, and
shield, and the rest with spears and staves.

[Sidenote: SLAY-GOOD DESTROYED]

When they were come to the place where he was, they found him with one
Feeble-minded in his hands, whom his servants had brought unto him,
having taken him in the way. Now the giant was picking his pockets, with
a purpose after that to pick his bones; for he was of the nature of
flesh-eaters.

Well, so soon as he saw Mr. Great-heart and his friends at the mouth of
his cave with their weapons, he demanded what they wanted.

GREAT. We want thee, for we are come to revenge the quarrel of the many
that thou hast slain of the pilgrims, when thou has dragged them out of
the King's highway; wherefore come out of thy cave.

So he armed himself and came out; and to battle they went, and fought
for above an hour, and then stood still to take wind.

SLAY. Then said the giant, "Why are you here on my ground?"

GREAT. To revenge the blood of pilgrims, as I told thee before.

[Sidenote: FEEBLE-MIND RESCUED]

So they went to it again, and the giant made Mr. Great-heart give back;
but he came up again, and in the greatness of his mind he let fly with
such stoutness at the giant's head and sides, that he made him let his
weapon fall out of his hand. So he smote him, and slew him, and cut off
his head, and brought it away to the inn. He also took Feeble-mind, the
pilgrim, and brought him with him to his lodgings. When they were come
home, they showed his head to the family, and then set it up as they had
done others before, for a terror to those that should attempt to do as
he hereafter.

Then they asked Mr. Feeble-mind how he fell into his hands.

FEEBLE. Then said the poor man, "I am a sickly man, as you see; and
because death did usually once a day knock at my door, I thought I
should never be well at home: so I betook myself to a pilgrim's life,
and have travelled hither from the town of Uncertain, where I and my
father were born. I am a man of no strength at all of body, nor yet of
mind, but would, if I could, though I can but crawl, spend my life in
the pilgrims' way. When I came at the gate that is at the head of the
way, the Lord of that place did entertain me freely; neither objected He
against my weakly looks, nor against my feeble mind, but gave me such
things as were necessary for my journey, and bid me hope to the end.
When I came to the house of the Interpreter, I received much kindness
there; and because the Hill Difficulty was judged too hard for me, I was
carried up that by one of his servants. Indeed, I have found much
relief from pilgrims: though none were willing to go so softly as I am
forced to do, yet still as they came on they bid me be of good cheer,
and said that it was the will of their Lord that comfort should be given
to the feeble-minded, and so went on their own pace. When I was come to
Assault Lane, then this giant met with me, and bid me prepare for an
encounter. But, alas! feeble one that I was, I had more need of a
cordial; so he came up and took me. I believed not that he should kill
me. Also when he got me into his den, since I went not with him
willingly, I believed I should come out alive again; for I have heard
that not any pilgrim that is taken captive by violent hands, if he keeps
heart-whole towards his Master, is, by the laws of Providence, to die by
the hands of the enemy. Robbed I looked to be, and robbed to be sure I
am; but I have, as you see, escaped with life, for the which I thank my
King as author, and you as the means. Other brunts I also look for; but
this I have resolved on--to wit, to run when I can, to go when I cannot
run, and to creep when I cannot go. As to the principal thing, I thank
Him that loves me, I am fixed: my way is before me, my mind is beyond
the river that has no bridge, though I am, as you see, but of a feeble
mind."

HON. Then said old Mr. Honest, "Have not you some time ago been
acquainted with one Mr. Fearing, a pilgrim?"

FEEBLE. Acquainted with him! yes; he came from the town of Stupidity,
which lies four degrees northward of the City of Destruction, and as
many off of where I was born; yet we were well acquainted, for indeed he
was my uncle, my father's brother. He and I have been much of a temper:
he was a little shorter than I, but yet we were much of a complexion.

HON. I perceive you know him, and I am apt to believe also that you are
related one to another; for you have his whitely look, a cast like his
with your eye, and your speech is much alike.

FEEBLE. Most have said so that have known us both; and besides, what I
have read in him I have for the most part found in myself.

GAIUS. "Come, sir," said good Gaius, "be of good cheer: you are welcome
to me and to my house. What thou hast a mind to, call for freely; and
what thou wouldst have my servants do for thee, they will do it with a
ready mind."

Then said Mr. Feeble-mind, "This is an unexpected favor, and as the sun
shining out of a very dark cloud. Did Giant Slay-good intend me this
favor when he stopped me, and resolved to let me go no farther? Did he
intend that, after he had rifled my pockets, I should go to Gaius, mine
host? Yet so it is."

Now, just as Feeble-mind and Gaius were thus in talk, there came one
running, and called at the door, and said, that "About a mile and a half
off there was one Mr. Not-right, a pilgrim, struck dead upon the place
where he was, with a thunderbolt."

FEEBLE. "Alas!" said Mr. Feeble-mind, "is he slain? He overtook me some
days before I came so far as hither, and would be my company-keeper. He
also was with me when Slay-good, the giant, took me; but he was nimble
of his heels, and escaped; but it seems he escaped to die, and I was
taken to live.

  "What, one would think, doth seek to slay outright,
  Ofttimes delivers from the saddest plight,
  That very Providence, whose face is death,
  Doth ofttimes to the lowly life bequeath.
  I was taken, he did escape and flee;
  Hands crossed gives death to him, and life to me."

[Sidenote: PHOEBE AND JAMES]

Now, about this time, Matthew and Mercy were married; also Gaius gave
his daughter Phoebe to James, Matthew's brother, to wife; after which
time, they yet stayed about ten days at Gaius's house, spending their
time and the seasons like as pilgrims use to do.

When they were to depart, Gaius made them a feast, and they did eat and
drink and were merry. Now, the hour was come that they must be gone,
wherefore Mr. Great-heart called for the bill of charges. But Gaius told
him that at his house it was not the custom of pilgrims to pay for their
entertainment. He boarded them by the year, but looked for his pay from
the Good Samaritan, who had promised him, at His return, whatsoever
charge he was at with them, faithfully to repay him.

Then said Mr. Great-heart to him,

GREAT. Beloved, thou doest faithfully, whatsoever thou doest to the
brethren and to strangers, which have borne witness of thy liberal
giving before the Church; whom if thou yet bring forward on their
journey after a godly sort, thou shalt do well.

Then Gaius took his leave of them all, and his children, and
particularly of Mr. Feeble-mind. He also gave him something to drink by
the way.

Now, Mr. Feeble-mind, when they were going out of the door, made as if
he intended to linger. The which when Mr. Great-heart espied, he said,
"Come, Mr. Feeble-mind, pray do you go along with us: I will be your
conductor, and you shall fare as the rest."

FEEBLE. Alas! I want a suitable companion. You are all lusty and strong,
but I, as you see, am weak; I choose, therefore, rather to come behind,
lest, by reason of my many weaknesses, I should be both a burden to
myself and to you. I am, as I said, a man of a weak and feeble mind, and
shall be injured and made weak at that which others can bear. I shall
like no laughing; I shall like no gay attire; I shall like no
unprofitable questions. Nay, I am so weak a man as to be harmed with
that which others have a liberty to do. I do not yet know all the truth;
I am a very ignorant Christian man. Sometimes, if I hear any rejoice in
the Lord, it troubles me, because I cannot do so too. It is with me as
it is with a weak man among the strong, or as with a sick man among the
healthy, or as a lamp despised. "He that is ready to slip with his feet
is as a lamp despised in the thought of him that is at ease;" so that I
know not what to do.

GREAT. "But, brother," said Mr. Great-heart, "I have it in my work to
comfort the feeble-minded and to support the weak. You must needs go
along with us: we will wait for you; we will lend you our help; we will
deny ourselves of some things, for your sake; we will not enter into
doubtful questions before you! we will be made all things to you, rather
than you shall be left behind."

Now, all this while they were at Gaius's door, and, behold, as they were
thus in the heat of their discourse, Mr. Ready-to-halt came by, with his
crutches in his hands; and he also was going on pilgrimage.

FEEBLE. Then said Mr. Feeble-mind to him, "How camest thou hither? I was
but now complaining that I had not a suitable companion, but thou art
according to my wish. Welcome, welcome, good Mr. Ready-to-halt; I hope
thou and I may be some help."

READY. "I shall be glad of thy company," said the other; "and, good Mr.
Feeble-mind, rather than we will part, since we are thus happily met, I
will lend thee one of my crutches."

FEEBLE. "Nay," said he, "though I thank thee for thy good-will, I am not
inclined to halt before I am lame. Howbeit, I think, when occasion is,
it may help me against a dog."

READY. If either myself or my crutches can do thee a pleasure, we are
both at thy command, good Mr. Feeble-mind.

Thus, therefore, they went on. Mr. Great-heart and Mr. Honest went
before, Christiana and her children went next, and Mr. Feeble-mind came
behind, and Mr. Ready-to-halt with his crutches. Then said Mr. Honest,

HON. Pray, sir, now that we are upon the road, tell us some profitable
things of some that have gone on pilgrimage before us.

[Sidenote: REVIEWS OTHER PILGRIMAGES]

GREAT. With a good will. I suppose you have heard how Christian of old
did meet with Apollyon in the Valley of Humiliation, and also what hard
work he had to go through the Valley of the Shadow of Death. Also I
think you cannot but have heard how Faithful was put to it by Madam
Wanton, with Adam the first, with one Discontent, and Shame; four as
deceitful villains as a man can meet with upon the road.

HON. Yes, I believe I have heard of all this; but, indeed, good Faithful
was hardest put to it with Shame: he was an unwearied one.

GREAT. Ay; for, as the pilgrim well said, he of all men had the wrong
name.

HON. But pray, sir, where was it that Christian and Faithful met
Talkative? That same was also a notable one.

GREAT. He was a confident fool; yet many follow his ways.

HON. He had liked to have deceived Faithful.

GREAT. Ay, but Christian put him into a way quickly to find him out.

Thus they went on till they came to the place where Evangelist met with
Christian and Faithful, and foretold them what should befall them at
Vanity Fair. Then said their guide, "Hereabouts did Christian and
Faithful meet with Evangelist, who foretold them of their troubles which
they should meet with at Vanity Fair."

HON. Say you so? I dare say it was a hard chapter, then, that he did
read unto them!

GREAT. It was; but he gave them encouragement withal. But what do we
talk of them? they were a couple of lion-like men: they had set their
faces like flint. Do not you remember how undaunted they were when they
stood before the judge?

HON. Well. Faithful bravely suffered.

GREAT. So he did, and as brave things came on't; for Hopeful and some
others, as the story relates it, were converted by his death.

HON. Well, but pray go on, for you are well acquainted with things.

GREAT. Above all that Christian met with after he had passed through
Vanity Fair, one By-ends was the arch one.

HON. By-ends! what was he?

GREAT. A very arch fellow--a downright deceiver; one that would be
religious, which way soever the world went; but so cunning that he would
be sure never to lose or suffer for it. He had his mode of religion for
every fresh occasion, and his wife was as good at it as he. And he would
turn and change from opinion to opinion; yea, and plead for so doing,
too. But, as far as I could learn, he came to an ill end with his
by-ends; nor did I ever hear that any of his children were ever of any
esteem with any that truly feared God.

[Sidenote: THEY ARRIVE AT VANITY FAIR]

Now, by this time they were come within sight of the town of Vanity,
where Vanity Fair is kept. So, when they saw that they were so near the
town, they consulted with one another how they should pass through the
town; and some said one thing, and some another. At last Mr. Great-heart
said, "I have, as you may understand, often been a conductor of pilgrims
through this town. Now, I am acquainted with one Mr. Mnason, a Cyprusian
by nature, an old disciple, at whose house we may lodge. If you think
good," said he, "we will turn in there."

[Sidenote: MNASON ENTERTAINS PILGRIMS]

"Content," said old Honest; "Content," said Christiana; "Content," said
Mr. Feeble-mind; and so they said all. Now, you must think it was
eventide by that they got to the outside of the town; but Mr.
Great-heart knew the way to the old man's house. So thither they came,
and he called at the door; and the old man within knew his tongue so
soon as ever he heard it; so he opened the door, and they all came in.
Then said Mnason, their host, "How far have ye come to-day?"

So they said, "From the house of Gaius, our friend."

"I promise you," said he, "you have come a good stitch: you may well be
weary. Sit down." So they sat down.

GREAT. Then said their guide, "Come, what cheer, sirs? I dare say you
are welcome to my friend."

MNAS. "I also," said Mr. Mnason, "do bid you welcome; and whatever you
want, do but say, and we will do what we can to get it for you."

HON. Our great want a while since was a resting-place and good company,
and now I hope we have both.

MNAS. For resting-place, you see what it is; but for good company, that
will appear in the trial.

GREAT. "Well," said Great-heart, "will you have the pilgrims up into
their lodging?"

MNAS. "I will," said Mr. Mnason. So he had them up to their several
places, and also showed them a very fair dining-room, where they might
be, and sup together, until time should come to go to rest.

Now, when they were set in their places, and were a little cheery after
their journey, Mr. Honest asked his landlord if there were any store of
good people in the town.

MNAS. We have a few; for, indeed, they are but a few when compared with
them on the other side.

HON. But how shall we do to see some of them? for the sight of good men
to them that are going on pilgrimage is like the appearing of the moon
and stars to them that are sailing upon the seas.

[Sidenote: FRIENDS CALL ON THE PILGRIMS]

MNAS. Then Mr. Mnason stamped with his foot, and his daughter Grace came
up. So he said unto her, "Grace, go you, tell my friends, Mr. Contrite,
Mr. Holy-man, Mr. Love-saint, Mr. Dare-not-lie, and Mr. Penitent, that I
have a friend or two at my house who have a mind this evening to see
them." So Grace went to call them, and they came; and, after salutation
made, they sat down together at the table.

Then said Mr. Mnason, their landlord, "My neighbors, I have, as you see,
a company of strangers come to my house: they are pilgrims; they come
from afar, and are going to Mount Zion. But who," quoth he, "do you
think this is?" pointing with his finger to Christiana. "It is
Christiana, the wife of Christian, that famous pilgrim who, with
Faithful his brother, was so shamefully handled in our town."

At that they stood amazed, saying, "We little thought to see Christiana
when Grace came to call us; wherefore this is a very comfortable
surprise." They then asked her of her welfare, and if these young men
were her husband's sons. And when she told them they were, they said,
"The King whom you love and serve, make you as your father, and bring
you where he is in peace!"

HON. Then Mr. Honest (when they had all sat down) asked Mr. Contrite and
the rest, in what posture their town was at present.

CONTRITE. You may be sure we are full of hurry in fair-time. 'Tis hard
keeping our hearts and spirits in good order when we are in a cumbered
condition. He that lives in such a place as this, and has to do with
such as we have, has need of a hint to caution him to take heed, every
moment of the day.

HON. But how are your neighbors for quietness?

CONTR. They are much more moderate now than formerly. You know how
Christian and Faithful were used at our town; but of late, I say, they
have been far more moderate. I think the blood of Faithful lieth as a
load upon them till now; for since they burned him they have been
ashamed to burn any more. In those days we were afraid to walk the
street; but now we can show our heads. Then the name of a Christian was
hated; now, specially in some parts of our town (for you know our town
is large), religion is counted honorable.

Then said Mr. Contrite to them, "Pray, how fareth it with you in your
pilgrimage? how stands the country towards you?"

HON. It happens to us as it happeneth to wayfaring men: sometimes our
way is clean, sometimes up-hill, sometimes down-hill: we are seldom at a
certainty. The wind is not always on our back, nor is every one a friend
that we meet with in the way. We have met with some notable rubs
already, and what are yet behind we know not; but, for the most part we
find it true that has been talked of, of old, "A good man must suffer
trouble."

CONTR. You talk of rubs; what rubs have you met withal?

HON. Nay, ask Mr. Great-heart, our guide; for he can give the best
account of that.

GREAT. We have been beset three or four times already. First, Christiana
and her children were beset by two ruffians, who, they feared, would
take away their lives. We were beset by Giant Bloody-man, Giant Maul,
and Giant Slay-good. Indeed, we did rather beset the last, than were
beset of him. And thus it was: After we had been some time at the house
of Gaius mine host, and of the whole Church, we were minded upon a time
to take our weapons with us, and go and see if we could light upon any
of those that were enemies to pilgrims; for we heard that there was a
notable one thereabouts. Now Gaius knew his haunt better than I, because
he dwelt thereabout. So we looked, and looked, till at last we saw the
mouth of his cave; then we were glad and plucked up our spirits. So we
approached up to his den; and, lo! when we came there, he had dragged,
by mere force, into his net, this poor man, Mr. Feeble-mind, and was
about to bring him to his end. But, when he saw us, supposing, as he
thought, he had had another prey, he left the poor man in his house, and
came out. So we fell to it full sore, and he lustily laid about him;
but, in conclusion, he was brought down to the ground, and his head cut
off, and set up by the wayside, for terror to such as should after
practice such ungodliness. That I tell you the truth, here is the man
himself to affirm it, who was as a lamb taken out of the mouth of the
lion.

FEEBLE. Then said Mr. Feeble-mind, "I found this true, to my cost and
comfort: to my cost, when he threatened to pick my bones every moment;
and to my comfort, when I saw Mr. Great-heart and his friends with their
weapons approach so near for my deliverance."

HOLY. Then said Mr. Holy-man, "There are two things that they have need
to possess who go on pilgrimage--courage and an unspotted life. If they
have not courage, they can never hold on their way; and if their lives
be loose, they will make the very name of the pilgrim stink."

LOVE. Then said Mr. Love-saint, "I hope this caution is not needful
among you. But truly there are many that go upon the road, who rather
declare themselves strangers to pilgrimage than strangers and pilgrims
in the earth."

DARE. Then said Mr. Dare-not-lie, "'Tis true. They have neither the
pilgrim's weed nor the pilgrim's courage: they go not uprightly, but all
awry with their feet; one shoe goeth inward, another outward, and their
hosen out behind; there is here a rag, and there a rent, to the
disparagement of their Lord."

PEN. "These things," said Mr. Penitent, "they ought to be troubled for;
nor are the pilgrims like to have that grace upon them and their
pilgrim's progress as they desire, until the way is cleared of such
spots and blemishes."

Thus they sat talking and spending the time until supper was set upon
the table, unto which they went, and refreshed their weary bodies; so
they went to rest.

[Sidenote: GRACE AND SAMUEL]

Now, they stayed in this fair a great while, at the house of Mnason,
who, in process of time, gave his daughter Grace unto Samuel,
Christiana's son, to wife; and his daughter Martha to Joseph.

The time, as I said, that they stayed here was long; for it was not now
as in former times. Wherefore the pilgrims grew acquainted with many of
the good people of the town, and did them what service they could.
Mercy, as she was wont, labored much for the poor; wherefore their
bodies and backs blessed her, and she was there an ornament to her
profession. And to say the truth for Grace, Phoebe, and Martha, they
were all of a very good nature, and did much good in their places. They
were also all of them very fruitful; so that Christian's name, as was
said before, was like to live in the world.

While they lay here, there came a monster out of the woods, and slew
many of the people of the town. It would also carry away their children,
and teach them to suck its whelps. Now, no man in the town durst so much
as face this monster, but all fled when they heard the noise of his
coming.

The monster was like unto no one beast on the earth. Its body was like a
dragon, and it had seven heads and ten horns. It made great havoc of
children, and yet it was governed by a woman. This monster gave
conditions to men, and such men as loved their lives more than their
souls accepted of those conditions; so they came under.

Now, this Mr. Great-heart, together with those that came to visit the
pilgrims at Mr. Mnason's house, entered into a covenant to go and engage
this beast, if perhaps they might deliver the people of this town from
the paws and mouth of this so devouring a serpent.

Then did Mr. Great-heart, Mr. Contrite, Mr. Holy-man, Mr. Dare-not-lie,
and Mr. Penitent, with their weapons, go forth to meet him. Now, the
monster was at first very rampant, and looked upon these enemies with
great disdain; but they so belabored him, being sturdy men-at-arms, that
they made him make a retreat. So they came home to Mr. Mnason's house
again.

[Sidenote: MARTHA AND JOSEPH]

The monster, you must know, had his certain seasons to come out in, and
to make his attempts upon the children of the people of the town. Also,
these seasons did these valiant worthies watch him in, and did still
continually assault him; insomuch that in process of time he became not
only wounded, but lame. Also he has not made that havoc of the
townsmen's children as formerly he had done; and it is verily believed
by some that this beast will die of his wounds.

This, therefore, made Mr. Great-heart and his fellows of great fame in
this town; so that many of the people that wanted their taste of things,
yet had a reverent esteem and respect for them. Upon this account,
therefore, it was that these pilgrims got not much hurt here. True,
there were some of the baser sort, that could see no more than a mole,
nor understand any more than a beast; these had no reverence for these
men, and took no notice of their valor or adventures.

Well, the time grew on that the pilgrims must go on their way; wherefore
they prepared for their journey. They sent for their friends; they
talked with them; they had some time set apart, therein to commit each
other to the protection of their Prince. There were again that brought
them of such things as they had, that were fit for the weak and the
strong, for the women and the men, and so laded them with such things as
were necessary. Then they set forward on their way; and, their friends
accompanying them so far as was convenient, they again committed each
other to the protection of their King, and parted.

They, therefore, that were of the pilgrims' company, went on, and Mr.
Great-heart went before them. Now, the women and children being weakly,
they were forced to go as they could bear; by which means, Mr.
Ready-to-halt and Mr. Feeble-mind had more to sympathize with their
condition.

When they were gone from the townsmen, and when their friends had bid
them farewell, they quickly came to the place where Faithful was put to
death. There, therefore, they made a stand, and thanked Him that had
enabled him to bear his cross so well; and the rather, because they now
found that they had a benefit by such manly suffering as his was.

They went on, therefore, after this a good way farther, talking of
Christian and Faithful, and how Helpful joined himself to Christian
after that Faithful was dead.

Now they were come up with the Hill Lucre, where the silver mine was
which took Demas off from his pilgrimage, and into which, as some think,
By-ends fell and perished; wherefore they considered that. But, when
they were come to the old monument that stood over against the Hill
Lucre, to wit, the pillar of salt, that stood also within view of Sodom
and its stinking lake, they marvelled, as did Christian before, that men
of that knowledge and ripeness of wit as they were, should be so blind
as to turn aside here.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE DELECTABLE MOUNTAINS AND THE SHEPHERDS.


I saw now that they went on till they came at the river that was on this
side of the Delectable Mountains; to the river where the fine trees grow
on both sides, and whose leaves, if taken inwardly, are good against
sickness; where the meadows are green all the year long, and where they
might lie down safely.

By this river-side, in the meadow, there were cotes and folds for sheep,
a house built for the nourishing and bringing up of those lambs, the
babes of those women that go on pilgrimage. Also there was here One that
was entrusted with them, who could have pity, and that could gather
these lambs with His arm, and carry them in His bosom, and that could
gently lead those that were with young.

Now, to the care of this Man Christiana admonished her four daughters to
commit their little ones, that by these waters they might be housed,
cared for, helped and nourished, and that none of them might be lacking
in time to come. This Man, if any of them go astray or be lost, He will
bring them again; He will also bind up that which was broken, and will
strengthen them that are sick. Here they will never want food and drink
and clothing; here they will be kept from thieves and robbers; for this
Man will die before one of those committed to His trust shall be lost.
Besides, here they shall be sure to have good nurture and training, and
shall be taught to walk in right paths; and that, you know, is a favor
of no small account. Also here, as you see, are delicate waters,
pleasant meadows, dainty flowers, variety of trees, and such as bear
wholesome fruit--fruit not like that that Matthew ate of, that fell over
the wall out of Beelzebub's garden; but fruit that giveth health where
there is none, and that continueth and increaseth it where it is. So
they were content to commit their little ones to Him; and that which was
also an encouragement to them so to do, was, for that all this was to be
at the charge of the King, and so was as an hospital for young children
and orphans.

[Sidenote: DOUBTING CASTLE]

Now they went on. And, when they were come to By-path Meadow, to the
stile over which Christian went with his fellow Hopeful, when they were
taken by Giant Despair and put into Doubting Castle, they sat down, and
consulted what was best to be done; to wit, now they were so strong, and
had got such a man as Mr. Great-heart for their conductor, whether they
had not best make an attempt upon the giant, demolish his castle, and if
there were any pilgrims in it, to set them at liberty, before they went
any farther. So one said one thing, and another said the contrary. One
questioned if it were lawful to go upon ground that was not the King's;
another said they might providing their end was good; but Mr.
Great-heart said, "Though that reason given last cannot be always true,
yet I have a commandment to resist sin, to overcome evil, to fight the
good fight of faith; and, I pray, with whom should I fight this good
fight, if not with Giant Despair? I will therefore attempt the taking
away of his life and the demolishing of Doubting Castle." Then said he,
"Who will go with me?" Then said old Honest, "I will." "And so will we,
too," said Christiana's four sons, Matthew, Samuel, Joseph, and James;
for they were young men and strong. So they left the women in the road,
and with them Mr. Feeble-mind and Mr. Ready-to-halt, with his crutches,
to be their guard until they came back; for, in that place, though Giant
Despair dwelt so near, they keeping in the road, "a little child might
lead them."

So Mr. Great-heart, old Honest, and the four young men went to go up to
Doubting Castle, to look for Giant Despair. When they came at the castle
gate, they knocked for entrance with an unusual noise. At that, the old
giant comes to the gate, and Diffidence his wife follows. Then said he,
"Who and what is he that is so hardy as after this manner to disturb the
Giant Despair?"

Mr. Great-heart replied, "It is I, Great-heart, one of the King of the
Celestial Country's conductors of pilgrims to their place; and I demand
of thee that thou open thy gates for my entrance; prepare thyself also
to fight, for I am come to take away thy head, and to demolish Doubting
Castle."

[Sidenote: GIANT DESPAIR IS BEHEADED]

Now, Giant Despair, because he was a giant, thought no man could
overcome him; and again thought he, "Since heretofore I have made a
conquest of angels, shall Great-heart make me afraid?" So he harnessed
himself with his armor, and went out. He had a cap of steel upon his
head, a breast-plate of fire girded to him, and he came out in iron
shoes, with a great club in his hand. Then these six men made up to him,
and beset him behind and before; also when Diffidence, the giantess,
came up to help him, old Mr. Honest cut her down at one blow. Then they
fought for their lives, and Giant Despair was brought down to the
ground, but was very loath to die. He struggled hard, and had, as they
say, as many lives as a cat; but Great-heart was his death, for he left
him not till he had severed his head from his shoulders.

Then they fell to demolishing Doubting Castle, and that, you know, might
with ease be done, since Giant Despair was dead. They were seven days in
destroying of that; and in it of pilgrims, they found one Mr.
Despondency, almost starved to death, and one Much-afraid, his daughter:
these two they saved alive. But it would have made you wonder to have
seen the dead bodies that lay here and there in the castle-yard, and how
full of dead men's bones the dungeon was.

When Mr. Great-heart and his companions had performed this great work
they took Mr. Despondency and his daughter Much-afraid into their care;
for they were honest people, though they were prisoners in Doubting
Castle to that tyrant Giant Despair.

They therefore, I say, took with them the head of the giant (for his
body they had buried under a heap of stones), and down to the road and
to their companions they came, and showed them what they had done. Now,
when Feeble-mind and Ready-to-halt saw that it was the head of Giant
Despair indeed, they were very jocund and merry. Now, Christiana, if
need was, could play upon the viol, and her daughter Mercy upon the
lute; so, since they were so merry disposed, she played them a lesson,
and Ready-to-halt would dance. So he took Despondency's daughter
Much-afraid by the hand, and to dancing they went in the road. True, he
could not dance without one crutch in his hand; but I promise you he
footed it well; also the girl was to be commended, for she answered the
music handsomely.

As for Mr. Despondency, the music was not so much to him; he was for
feeding rather than dancing, for that he was almost starved. So
Christiana gave him some of her bottle of spirits for present relief,
and then prepared him something to eat; and in a little time the old
gentleman came to himself, and began to be finely revived.

Now, I saw in my dream, when all these things were finished, Mr.
Great-heart took the head of Giant Despair, and set it upon a pole by
the highway-side, right over against the pillar that Christian erected
for a caution to pilgrims that came after to take heed of entering into
his grounds. Then he writ under it, upon a marble stone, these verses
following:

  "This is the head of him whose name only
  In former times did pilgrims terrify;
  His castle's down, and Diffidence his wife
  Brave Mr. Great-heart has bereft of life.
  Despondency, his daughter Much-afraid,
  Great-heart for them also the man has played.
  Who hereof doubts, if he'll but cast his eye
  Up hither, may his scruples satisfy.
  This head also, when doubting cripples dance,
  Doth show from fears they have deliverance."

[Sidenote: THE DELECTABLE MOUNTAINS]

When these men had thus bravely showed themselves against Doubting
Castle, and had slain Giant Despair, they went forward, and went on till
they came to the Delectable Mountains, where Christian and Hopeful
refreshed themselves with the varieties of the place. They also
acquainted themselves with the shepherds there, who welcomed them, as
they had done Christian before, unto the Delectable Mountains.

Now, the shepherds seeing so great a train follow Mr. Great-heart (for
with him they were well acquainted), they said unto him, "Good sir, you
have got a goodly company here; pray, where did you find all these?"

Then Mr. Great-heart replied:

  "First, here is Christiana and her train,
  Her sons, and her sons' wives, who, like the wain,
  Keep by the pole, and do by compass steer
  From sin to grace; else they had not been here.
  Next, here's old Honest come on pilgrimage,
  Ready-to-halt too, who I dare engage
  True-hearted is, and so is Feeble-mind,
  Who willing was not to be left behind.
  Despondency, good man, is coming after
  And so also is Much-afraid his daughter.
  May we have entertainment here, or must
  We farther go? Let's know whereon to trust."

[Sidenote: THE SHEPHERDS ENTERTAIN]

Then said the shepherds, "This is a comfortable company. You are welcome
to us, for we have care for the feeble, as well as for the strong. Our
Prince has an eye to what is done, to the least of these; therefore
weakness must not be a block to our entertainment." So they had them to
the palace door, and then said unto them, "Come in, Mr. Feeble-mind;
come in, Mr. Ready-to-halt; come in, Mr. Despondency and Mrs.
Much-afraid, his daughter. These, Mr. Great-heart," said the shepherds
to the guide, "we call in by name, for that they are most subject to
draw back; but as for you and the rest that are strong, we leave you to
your wonted liberty."

Then said Mr. Great-heart, "This day I see that grace doth shine in your
faces, and that you are my Lord's shepherds indeed; for that you have
not pushed these helpless ones neither with side nor shoulder, but have
rather strewed their way into the palace with flowers, as you should."

So the feeble and weak went in, and Mr. Great-heart and the rest did
follow. When they were also sat down, the shepherds said to those of the
weaker sort, "What is it that you would have? for," said they, "all
things must be managed here for the supporting of the weak, as well as
the warning of the unruly." So they made them a feast of things easy of
digestion, and that were pleasant to the palate, and nourishing; the
which when they had received, they went to their rest, each one
separately unto his proper place.

When morning was come, because the mountains were nigh and the day
clear, and because it was the custom of the shepherds to show the
pilgrims before their departure some rarities; therefore, after they
were ready and had refreshed themselves, the shepherds took them out
into the fields, and showed them first what they had showed to Christian
before.

Then they had them to some new places. The first was to Mount Marvel,
where they looked, and beheld a man at a distance that tumbled the hills
about with words. Then they asked the shepherds what that should mean.
So they told them that that man was the son of Mr. Great-grace of whom
you read in the first part of the records of the Pilgrim's Progress; and
he is set down there to teach the pilgrims how to believe, or to tumble
out of their ways what difficulties they should meet with, by faith.
Then said Mr. Great-heart, "I know him; he is a man above many."

Then they had them to another place, called Mount Innocent; and there
they saw a man clothed all in white, and two men, Prejudice and
Ill-will, continually casting dirt upon them. Now, behold, the dirt,
whatsoever they cast at him, would in a little time fall off again, and
his garment would look as clear as if no dirt had been cast thereat.
Then said the pilgrims, "What means this?"

The shepherds answered, "This man is named Godly-man, and this garment
is to show the innocency of his life. Now, those that throw dirt at him
are such as hate his well-doing; but, as you see, the dirt will not
stick upon his clothes: so it shall be with him that liveth truly
innocently in the world. Whoever they be that would make such men dirty,
they labor all in vain; for God, by that a little time is spent, will
cause that their innocence shall break forth as the light, and their
righteousness as the noon-day."

Then they took them, and had them to Mount Charity, where they showed
them a man that had a bundle of cloth lying before him, out of which he
cut coats and garments for the poor that stood about him; yet his bundle
or roll of cloth was never the less.

Then said they, "What should this be?"

"This is," said the shepherds, "to show you that he who has a heart to
give of his labor to the poor, shall never want wherewithal. He that
watereth shall be watered himself. And the cake that the widow gave to
the prophet did not cause that she had ever the less in her barrel."

They had them also to a place where they saw one Fool, and one Want-wit,
washing of an Ethiopian, with intention to make him white; but the more
they washed him the blacker he was. Then they asked the shepherds what
that should mean. So they told them, saying, "Thus shall it be with the
vile person: all means used to get such an one a good name, shall, in
the end tend but to make him more abominable. Thus it was with the
Pharisees, and so shall it be with all pretenders to religion."

Then said Mercy, the wife of Matthew, to Christiana her mother, "Mother,
I would, if it might be, see the hole in the hill, or that commonly
called the By-way to Hell." So her mother brake her mind to the
shepherds. Then they went to the door: it was in the side of a hill; and
they opened it, and bid Mercy hearken awhile. So she hearkened, and
heard one saying, "Cursed be my father for holding of my feet back from
the way of peace and life." And another said, "Oh that I had been torn
in pieces before I had, to save my life, lost my soul!" And another
said, "If I were to live again, how would I deny myself rather than come
to this place!" Then there was as if the very earth groaned and quaked
under the feet of this young woman for fear; so she looked white, and
came trembling away, saying, "Blessed be he and she that are delivered
from this place."

[Sidenote: THE GREAT GLASS]

Now, when the shepherds had shown them all these things, then they had
them back to the palace, and entertained them with what the house would
afford. But Mercy longed for something that she saw there, but was
ashamed to ask. Her mother-in-law then asked her what she ailed, for she
looked as one not well. Then said Mercy, "There is a looking-glass hangs
up in the dining-room, off of which I cannot take my mind; if,
therefore, I have it not, I think I shall be unhappy." Then said her
mother, "I will mention thy wants to the shepherds, and they will not
deny it thee." But she said, "I am ashamed that these men should know
that I longed." "Nay, my daughter," said she, "it is no shame, but a
virtue, to long for such a thing as that." So Mercy said, "Then, mother,
if you please, ask the shepherds if they are willing to sell it."

Now, the glass was one of a thousand. It would present a man, one way,
with his own features exactly; and, turn it but another way, and it
would show one the very face and likeness of the Prince of pilgrims
Himself. Yea, I have talked with them that can tell, and they have said
that they have seen the very crown of thorns upon His head, by looking
in that glass; they have therein also seen the holes in His hands, in
His feet, and in His side. Yea, such an excellency is there in this
glass, that it will show Him to one where they have a mind to see Him,
whether living or dead, whether in earth or in heaven, whether in a
state of lowliness or in His kingliness, whether coming to suffer or
coming to reign.

Christiana, therefore went to the shepherds apart--(now, the names of
the shepherds were Knowledge, Experience, Watchful, and Sincere),--and
said unto them, "There is one of my daughters, that I think doth long
for something that she hath seen in this house, and she thinks that she
shall be unhappy if she should by you be denied."

EXPERIENCE. Call her, call her; she shall assuredly have what we can
help her to. So they called her, and said to her, "Mercy, what is that
thing thou wouldst have?" Then she blushed, and said, "The great glass
that hangs up in the dining-room." So Sincere ran and fetched it; and
with a joyful consent it was given her. Then she bowed her head, and
gave thanks, and said, "By this I know that I have obtained favor in
your eyes."

They also gave to the other young women such things as they desired, and
to their husbands great praise for that they joined with Great-heart to
the slaying of Giant Despair and the destroying of Doubting Castle.

About Christiana's neck the shepherds put a necklace, and so they did
about the necks of her four daughters; also they put ear-rings in their
ears, and jewels on their foreheads.

[Illustration: Turn-away Resisting Evangelist.
                                   Page 357]

[Sidenote: THEY LEAVE THE SHEPHERDS]

When they were minded to go hence, they let them go in peace, but gave
not to them those certain cautions which before were given to Christian
and his companion. The reason was, for that these had Great-heart to be
their guide, who was one that was well acquainted with things, and so
could give them their cautions more seasonably; that is, even then when
the danger was nigh the approaching. What cautions Christian and his
companion had received of the shepherds, they had also lost by that the
time was come that they had need to put them in practice. Wherefore,
here was the advantage that this company had over the other.

From hence they went on singing, and they said:

  "Behold, how fitly are the stages set,
    For their relief that pilgrims are become,
  And how they us receive without one let[11]
    That make the other life our mark and home!

  "What novelties they have, to us they give,
    That we, though pilgrims, joyful lives may live;
  They do upon us, too, such things bestow,
    That show we pilgrims are, where'er we go."

  [11] The word "let" here means "hindrance."

When they were gone from the shepherds, they quickly came to the place
where Christian met with one Turn-away, that dwelt in the town of
Apostasy. Wherefore of him Mr. Great-heart, their guide, did now put
them in mind, saying, "This is the place where Christian met with one
Turn-away, who carried with him the character of his rebellion at his
back. And this I have to say concerning this man: he would hearken to no
counsel, but, once falling, persuasion could not stop him. When he came
to the place where the Cross and the sepulchre were, he did meet with
one that bid him look there; but he gnashed with his teeth, and stamped,
and said he was resolved to go back to his own town. Before he came to
the gate, he met with Evangelist, who offered to lay hands on him, to
turn him into the way again. But this Turn-away resisted him; and having
done much harm unto him, he got away over the wall, and so escaped his
hand."

[Sidenote: MEET VALIANT FOR TRUTH]

Then they went on; and just at the place where Little-Faith formerly was
robbed, there stood a man with his sword drawn, and his face all bloody.
Then said Mr. Great-heart, "Who art thou?" The man made answer, saying,
"I am one whose name is Valiant-for-truth. I am a pilgrim, and am going
to the Celestial City. Now, as I was in my way, there were three men did
beset me, and propounded unto me these three things: 1. Whether I would
become one of them? 2. Or go back to the place from whence I came? 3. Or
die upon the place? To the first I answered, I had been a true man a
long season, and therefore it could not be expected that I should now
cast in my lot with thieves. Then they demanded what I should say to the
second. So I told them that the place from whence I came, had I not
found it unsatisfactory I had not forsaken at all; but, finding it
altogether unsuitable to me, and very unprofitable for me, I forsook it
for this way. Then they asked me what I said to the third. And I told
them my life cost more dear far than that I should lightly give it away.
Besides you have nothing to do thus to put things to my choice,
wherefore at your peril be it if you meddle. Then these three, to wit,
Wild-head, Inconsiderate, and Pragmatic, drew their weapons upon me, and
I also drew upon them. So we fell to it, one against three, for the
space of above three hours. They have left upon me, as you see, some of
the marks of their valor, and have also carried away with them some of
mine. They are but just now gone: I suppose they might, as the saying
is, hear your horse dash, and so they betook them to flight."

GREAT. But here was great odds, three against one.

[Sidenote: HOW VALIANT BORE HIMSELF]

VALIANT. 'Tis true; but little or more are nothing to him that has the
truth on his side. "Though an host should encamp against me," said one,
"my heart shall not fear: though war should rise against me, in this
will I be confident. Besides," said he, "I have read in some records
that one man has fought an army; and how many did Samson slay with the
jaw-bone of an ass?"

GREAT. Then said the guide, "Why did you not cry out, that some might
have come in for your succor?"

VALIANT. So I did, to my King, who, I knew, could hear me, and afford
invisible help; and that was sufficient for me.

GREAT. Then said Great-heart to Mr. Valiant-for-truth, "Thou hast
worthily behaved thyself. Let me see thy sword." So he showed it him.
When he had taken it in his hand, and looked thereon a while, he said,
"Ha! it is a right Jerusalem blade."

VALIANT. It is so. Let a man have one of these blades, with a hand to
wield it and skill to use it, and he may venture upon an angel with it.
He need not fear its holding, if he can but tell how to lay on. Its
edges will never blunt. It will cut flesh and bones, and soul and
spirit, and all.

GREAT. But you fought a great while. I wonder you were not weary.

VALIANT. I fought till my sword did cleave to my hand; and when they
were joined together, as if a sword grew out of my arm, and when the
blood ran through my fingers, then I fought with most courage.

GREAT. Thou hast done well; thou hast resisted unto blood, striving
against sin. Thou shalt abide by us, come in and go out with us, for we
are thy companions.

Then they took him, washed his wounds, and gave him of what they had, to
refresh him; and so they went on together.

Now, as they went on, because Mr. Great-heart was delighted in him (for
he loved one greatly that he found to be a man of his own sort), and
because there were in company them that were feeble and weak, therefore
he questioned with him about many things; as, first, what countryman he
was.

VALIANT. I am of Dark-land; for there I was born, and there my father
and mother are still.

GREAT. "Dark-land!" said the guide; "doth not that lie upon the same
coast with the City of Destruction?"

VALIANT. Yes, it doth. Now, that which caused me to come on pilgrimage
was this. We had one Mr. Tell-true come into our parts, and he told it
about what Christian had done, that went from the City of Destruction;
namely, how he had forsaken his wife and children, and had betaken
himself to a pilgrim's life. It was also reported, and believed, how he
had killed a serpent that did come out to resist him in his journey; and
how he got through to whither he intended. It was also told what welcome
he had at all his Lord's lodgings, specially when he came to the gates
of the Celestial City; "For there," said the man, "he was received with
sound of trumpet by a company of Shining Ones." He told also how all the
bells in the City did ring for joy at his entering in, and what golden
garments he was clothed with; with many other things that now I shall
forbear to relate. In a word, that man so told the story of Christian
and his travels, that my heart fell into a burning haste to be gone
after him; nor could father or mother stay me. So I got from them, and
am come thus far on my way.

GREAT. You came in at the gate, did you not?

VALIANT. Yes, yes; for the same man also told us, that all would be
nothing if we did not begin to enter this way at the gate.

GREAT. "Look you," said the guide to Christiana, "the pilgrimage of your
husband, with what he has gotten thereby, is spread abroad far and
near."

VALIANT. Why, is this Christian's wife?

GREAT. Yes, that it is, and these also are his four sons.

VALIANT. What! and going on pilgrimage too?

GREAT. Yes, verily, they are following after.

VALIANT. It glads me at heart. Good man, how joyful will he be when he
shall see them that would not go with him, yet to enter after him in at
the gates into the City!

GREAT. Without doubt it will be a comfort to him; for, next to the joy
of seeing himself there, it will be a joy to meet there his wife and
children.

VALIANT. But, now you are upon that, pray let me hear your opinion about
it. Some make a question whether we shall know one another when we are
there.

[Sidenote: VALIANT'S OBSTACLES]

GREAT. Do they think they shall know themselves, then? or that they
shall rejoice to see themselves in that happiness? And if they think
they shall know and do this, why not know others, and rejoice in their
welfare also? Again, since relations are our second self, though that
state will cease there, yet why may it not be wisely concluded that we
shall be more glad to see them there than to see they are wanting?

VALIANT. Well, I perceive whereabouts you are as to this. Have you any
more things to ask me about my beginning to come on pilgrimage?

GREAT. Yes. Were your father and mother willing that you should become a
pilgrim?

VALIANT. Oh, no; they used all means imaginable to persuade me to stay
at home.

GREAT. Why, what could they say against it?

VALIANT. They said it was an idle life; and, if I myself were not
inclined to sloth and laziness, I would never favor a pilgrim's
condition.

GREAT. And what did they say else?

VALIANT. Why, they told me that it was a dangerous way: "Yea, the most
dangerous way in the world," said they, "is that which the pilgrims go."

GREAT. Did they show you wherein this way is so dangerous?

VALIANT. Yes; and that in many particulars.

GREAT. Name some of them.

[Sidenote: VALIANT'S DISCOURAGEMENTS]

VALIANT. They told me of the Slough of Despond, where Christian was
well-nigh smothered. They told me that there were archers standing ready
in Beelzebub's castle to shoot them who should knock at the wicket-gate
for entrance. They told me also of the wood and dark mountains of the
Hill Difficulty; of the lions; and also of the three giants, Bloody-man,
Maul, and Slay-good. They said moreover that there was a foul fiend
haunted the Valley of Humiliation, and that Christian was by him almost
bereft of life. "Besides," said they, "you must go over the Valley of
the Shadow of Death, where the hobgoblins are, where the light is
darkness, where the way is full of snares, pits, traps, and gins." They
told me also of Giant Despair, of Doubting Castle, and of the ruin that
the pilgrims met with there. Further, they said I must go over the
Enchanted Ground, which was dangerous; and that, after all this, I
should find a river, over which I should find no bridge, and that that
river did lie betwixt me and the Celestial Country.

GREAT. And was this all?

VALIANT. No. They also told me that this way was full of deceivers, and
of persons that laid wait there to turn good men out of the path.

GREAT. But how did they make that out?

VALIANT. They told me that Mr. Worldly Wiseman did there lie in wait to
deceive. They also said that there were Formality and Hypocrisy
continually on the road. They said also that By-ends, Talkative, or
Demas would go near to gather me up; that the Flatterer would catch me
in his net; or that, with green-headed Ignorance, I would presume to go
on to the gate, from whence he was sent back to the hole that was in the
side of the hill, and made to go the by-way to hell.

GREAT. I promise you, this was enough to discourage you; but did they
make an end here?

VALIANT. No stay. They told me also of many that had tried that way of
old, and that had gone a great way therein, to see if they could find
something of the glory there that so many had so much talked of from
time to time; and how they came back again, and befooled themselves for
setting a foot out of doors in that path, to the satisfaction of all the
country. And they named several that did so, as Obstinate and Pliable,
Mistrust and Timorous, Turn-away and old Atheist; with several more,
who, they said, had some of them gone far to see what they could find,
but not one of them found so much advantage by going as amounted to the
weight of a feather.

GREAT. Said they anything more to discourage you?

VALIANT. Yes; they told me of one Mr. Fearing, who was a pilgrim, and
how he found this way so solitary, that he never had a comfortable hour
therein; also that Mr. Despondency had like to have been starved
therein; yea, and also (which I had almost forgot) that Christian
himself, about whom there had been such a noise, after all his ventures
for a celestial crown, was certainly drowned in the Black River, and
never went a foot farther, however it was smothered up.

GREAT. And did none of these things discourage you?

VALIANT. No; they seemed but as so many nothings to me.

GREAT. How came that about?

VALIANT. Why, I still believed what Mr. Tell-true had said; and that
carried me beyond them all.

GREAT. Then this was your victory, even your faith.

VALIANT. It was so. I believed, and therefore came out, got into the
way, fought all that set themselves against me, and, by believing, am
come to this place.

  "Who would true valor see,
    Let him come hither;
  One here will constant be,
    Come wind, come weather;
  There's no discouragement
  Shall make him once relent
  His first avowed intent
                To be a pilgrim.

  "Whoso beset him round
    With dismal stories,
  Do but themselves confound--
    His strength the more is.
  No lion can him fright;
  He'll with a giant fight,
  But he will have a right
                To be a pilgrim.

  "Hobgoblin nor foul fiend
    Can daunt his spirit;
  He knows he at the end
    Shall life inherit.
  Then, fancies fly away,
  He'll fear not what men say;
  He'll labor night and day
                To be a pilgrim."




CHAPTER IX.

THE ENCHANTED GROUND.


By this time they were got to the Enchanted Ground, where the air
naturally tended to make one drowsy. And that place was all grown over
with briers and thorns, excepting here and there, where was an enchanted
arbor, upon which if a man sits, or in which if a man sleeps, it is a
question, say some, whether ever he shall rise or wake again in this
world. Over this forest, therefore, they went, both one and another; and
Mr. Great-heart went before, for that he was the guide, and Mr.
Valiant-for-truth came behind, being rear-guard, for fear lest
peradventure some fiend, or dragon, or giant, or thief, should fall upon
their rear, and so do mischief. They went on here, each man with his
sword drawn in his hand, for they knew it was a dangerous place. Also
they cheered up one another as well as they could. Feeble-mind, Mr.
Great-heart commanded, should come up after him; and Mr. Despondency was
under the eye of Mr. Valiant.

Now, they had not gone far, but a great mist and darkness fell upon them
all, so that they could scarce, for a great while, see the one the
other; wherefore they were forced, for some time, to feel for one
another by words; for they walked not by sight. But any one must think
that here was but sorry going for the best of them all; but how much
worse for the women and children, who both of feet and heart were but
tender! Yet so it was, that through the encouraging words of him that
led in the front, they made a pretty good shift to wag along.

The way also was here very wearisome through dirt and slabbiness. Nor
was there on all this ground so much as one inn or victualling-house,
therein to refresh the feebler sort. Here, therefore, was grunting, and
puffing and sighing. While one tumbleth over a brush, another sticks
fast in the dirt; and the children, some of them, lost their shoes in
the mire. While one cries out, "I am down!" and another, "Ho! where are
you?" and a third, "The bushes have got such fast hold on me, I think I
cannot get away from them."

Then they came at an arbor, warm, and promising much refreshing to the
pilgrims; for it was finely wrought above head, beautified with greens,
furnished with benches and settles. It also had in it a soft couch,
whereon the weary might lean. This, you must think, all things
considered, was tempting; for the pilgrims already began to be foiled
with the badness of the way; but there was not one of them that made so
much as a motion to stop there. Yea, for aught I could perceive, they
continually gave so good heed to the advice of their guide, and he did
so faithfully tell them of dangers, and of the nature of dangers when
they were at them, that usually, when they were nearest to them, they
did most pluck up their spirits, and hearten one another to deny the
flesh. This arbor was called "The Slothful's Friend," on purpose to
allure, if it might be, some of the pilgrims there to take up their rest
when weary.

I saw then in my dream, that they went on in this their solitary ground,
till they came to a place at which a man is apt to lose his way. Now,
though when it was light their guide could well enough tell how to miss
those ways that led wrong, yet, in the dark, he was put to a stand. But
he had in his pocket a map of all ways leading to or from the Celestial
City; wherefore he struck a light (for he also never goes without his
tinder-box), and takes a view of his book or map, which bids him be
careful in that place to turn to the right-hand way. And had he not here
been careful to look in his map, they had, in all probability been
smothered in the mud; for, just a little before them, and that at the
end of the cleanest way too, was a pit, none knows how deep, full of
nothing but mud, there made on purpose to destroy the pilgrims in.

Then thought I with myself, "Who that goeth on pilgrimage but would have
one of those maps about him, that he may look, when he is at a stand,
which is the way he must take?"

They went on then in this Enchanted Ground till they came to where was
another arbor, and it was built by the highway-side. And in that arbor
there lay two men, whose names were Heedless and Too-bold. These two
went thus far on pilgrimage; but here, being wearied with their journey,
they sat down to rest themselves, and so fell fast asleep. When the
pilgrims saw them, they stood still, and shook their heads; for they
knew that the sleepers were in a pitiful case. Then they consulted what
to do,--whether to go on, and leave them in their sleep, or to step to
them, and try to awake them. So they concluded to go to them and wake
them; that is, if they could; but with this caution, namely, to take
heed that themselves did not sit down nor embrace the offered benefit of
that arbor.

So they went in and spake to the men, and called each one by his name
(for the guide, it seems, did know them); but there was no voice or
answer. Then the guide did shake them, and do what he could to disturb
them. Then said one of them, "I will pay you when I take my money." At
which the guide shook his head. "I will fight so long as I can hold my
sword in my hand," said the other. At that, one of the children laughed.

[Sidenote: THE LAND OF BEULAH]

Then said Christiana, "What is the meaning of this?" The guide said,
"They talk in their sleep. If you strike them, beat them, or whatever
else you do to them, they will answer you after this fashion; or, as one
of them said in old time, when the waves of the sea did beat upon him,
and he slept as one upon the mast of a ship, 'When shall I awake? I will
seek it yet again.' You know, when men talk in their sleep, they say
anything, but their words are not governed either by faith or reason.
There is an unsuitableness in their words now, as there was before
betwixt their going on pilgrimage and sitting down there. This, then, is
the mischief of it: when heedless ones go on pilgrimage, 'tis twenty to
one but they are served thus. For this Enchanted Ground is one of the
last refuges that the enemy to pilgrims has; wherefore, it is, as you
see, placed almost at the end of the way, and so it standeth against us
with the more advantage. For when, thinks the enemy, will these fools be
so desirous to sit down as when they are weary? and when so like to be
weary as when almost at their journey's end? Therefore it is, I say,
that the Enchanted Ground is placed so near to the Land of Beulah, and
so near the end of their race. Wherefore, let pilgrims look to
themselves, lest it happen to them as it has done to these, that, as you
see, are fallen asleep, and none can wake them."

Then the pilgrims desired, with trembling, to go forward; only they
prayed their guide to strike a light, that they might go the rest of
their way by the help of the light of a lantern. So he struck a light,
and they went by the help of that through the rest of this way, though
the darkness was very great. But the children began to be sorely weary;
and they cried out to Him that loveth pilgrims to make their way more
comfortable. So, by that they had gone a little farther, a wind arose
that drove away the fog; so the air became more clear. Yet they were
not off, by much, of the Enchanted Ground; only now they could see one
another better, and the way wherein they should walk.

Now, when they were almost at the end of this ground, they perceived
that a little before them was a solemn noise, as of one that was much
concerned. So they went on, and looked before them; and behold, they
saw, as they thought, a man upon his knees, with hands and eyes lift up,
and speaking, as they thought, earnestly to One that was above. They
drew nigh, but could not tell what he said; so they went softly till he
had done. When he had done, he got up, and began to run towards the
Celestial City.

Then Mr. Great-heart called after him, saying, "So-ho, friend! let us
have your company, if you go, as I suppose you do, to the Celestial
City."

So the man stopped, and they came up to him. But, as soon as Mr. Honest
saw him, he said, "I know this man."

Then said Mr. Valiant-for-truth, "Prithee, who is it?"

"It is one," said he, "that comes from whereabout I dwelt. His name is
Stand-fast; he is certainly a right good pilgrim."

So they came up one to another. And presently Stand-fast said to old
Honest, "Ho, father Honest, are you there?"

"Ay," said he, "that I am, as sure as you are there."

[Sidenote: HEEDLESS AND TOO-BOLD]

"Right glad am I," said Mr. Stand-fast, "that I have found you on this
road."

"And as glad am I," said the other, "that I espied you upon your knees."

Then Mr. Stand-fast blushed, and said, "But why? did you see me?"

"Yes, that I did," quoth the other, "and with my heart was glad at the
sight."

"Why, what did you think?" said Stand-fast.

"Think!" said old Honest; "what should I think? I thought we had an
honest man upon the road, and therefore should have his company
by-and-by."

"If you thought not amiss," said Stand-fast, "how happy am I! But, if I
be not as I should, I alone must bear it."

"That is true," said the other; "but your fear doth further show me that
things are right betwixt the Prince of pilgrims and your soul; for He
saith, 'Blessed is the man that feareth always.'"

VALIANT. Well, but, brother, I pray thee, tell us what was it that was
the cause of thy being upon thy knees even now: was it for that some
special mercy laid upon thee, the need of prayer, or how?

STAND. Why, we are, as you see, upon the Enchanted Ground; and as I was
coming along, I was musing with myself of what a dangerous road the road
in this place was, and how many that had come even thus far on
pilgrimage, had here been stopped and been destroyed. I thought also of
the manner of the death with which this place destroyeth men. Those that
die here die of no violent, painful disease: the death which such die is
not grievous to them. For he that goeth away in such a sleep, begins
that journey with desire and pleasure. Yea, such sink into the will of
that disease.

HON. Then Mr. Honest, interrupting of him, said, "Did you see the two
men asleep in the arbor?"

[Sidenote: STAND-FAST REPULSES MADAM]

STAND. Ay, ay, I saw Heedless and Too-bold there; and, for aught I know,
there they will lie till they rot. But let me go on in my tale. As I was
thus musing, as I said, there was one in very pleasant attire, but old,
who presented herself to me, and offered me three things; to wit, her
body, her purse, and her bed. Now, the truth is, I was both aweary and
sleepy; I am also as poor as an owlet, and that, perhaps, the witch
knew. Well, I repulsed her once or twice; but she put by my repulses,
and smiled. Then I began to be angry; but she mattered that nothing at
all. Then she made offers again, and said, if I would be ruled by her,
she would make me great and happy. "For," said she, "I am the mistress
of the world, and men are made happy by me." Then I asked her name, and
she told me it was Madam Bubble. This set me farther from her; but she
still followed me with enticements. Then I betook me, as you saw, to my
knees; and, with hands lift up, and cries, I prayed to Him that had said
He would help. So, just as you came up, the gentlewoman went her way.
Then I continued to give thanks for this my great deliverance; for I
verily believe she intended no good, but rather sought to make stop of
me in my journey.

HON. Without doubt her designs were bad. But stay: now you talk of her,
methinks I either have seen her, or have read some story of her.

STAND. Perhaps you have done both.

HON. Madam Bubble? Is she not a tall, comely dame, somewhat of a swarthy
complexion?

STAND. Right, you hit it: she is just such a one.

HON. Does she not speak very smoothly, and give you a smile at the end
of a sentence?

STAND. You fall right upon it again, for these are her very actions.

HON. Doth she not wear a great purse by her side, and is not her hand
often in it, fingering her money, as if that was her heart's delight?

STAND. 'Tis just so. Had she stood by all this while, you could not more
amply have set her forth before me, nor have better described her
features.

HON. Then he that drew her picture was a good artist, and he that wrote
of her said true.

[Sidenote: MADAM BUBBLE'S INFLUENCE]

GREAT. This woman is a witch, and it is by virtue of her witchcraft that
this ground is enchanted. Whoever doth lay his head down in her lap, had
as good lay it down upon that block over which the axe doth hang; and
whoever lay their eyes upon her beauty, are accounted the enemies of
God. This is she that maintaineth in their splendor all those that are
the enemies of pilgrims. Yea, this is she that hath bought off many a
man from a pilgrim's life. She is a great gossiper: she is always, both
she and her daughters, at one pilgrim's heels or other; now commanding,
and then preferring the excellences of this life. She is a bold and
impudent creature; she will talk with any man. She always laugheth poor
pilgrims to scorn, but highly commends the rich. If there be one cunning
to get money in a place, she will speak well of him from house to house.
She loveth banqueting and feasting mainly well; she is always at one
full table or another. She has given it out in some places that she is a
goddess, and therefore some do worship her. She has her times and open
places of cheating; and she will say and avow it, that none can show a
good comparable to hers. She promiseth to dwell with children's
children, if they will but love her and make much of her. She will cast
out of her purse gold like dust, in some places and to some persons. She
loves to be sought after, spoken well of, and to lie in the bosoms of
men. She is never weary of praising her gifts and she loves them most
that think best of her. She will promise, to some, crowns and kingdoms,
if they will but take her advice; yet many hath she brought to the
halter, and ten thousand times more to hell.

STAND. "Oh," said Mr. Stand-fast, "what a mercy it is that I did resist
her! for whither might she have drawn me?"

GREAT. Whither! nay, none but God knows whither; but in general, to be
sure, she would have drawn thee into many foolish and hurtful lusts,
which drown men in destruction and ruin. 'Twas she that set Absalom
against his father, and Jeroboam against his master. 'Twas she that
persuaded Judas to sell his Lord, and that prevailed with Demas to
forsake the godly pilgrim's life. None can tell of the mischief that she
doth. She makes variance betwixt rulers and subjects, betwixt parents
and children, betwixt neighbor and neighbor, betwixt a man and his wife,
betwixt a man and himself, betwixt the flesh and the heart. Wherefore,
good Master Stand-fast, be as your name is, and when you have done all,
stand.

At this course there was among the pilgrims a mixture of joy and
trembling; but at length they brake out, and sang:

  "What danger is the pilgrim in!
    How many are his foes!
  How many ways there are to sin
    No living mortal knows.

  "Some of the ditch shy are, yet can
    Lie tumbling in the mire;
  Some, though they shun the frying-pan,
    Do leap into the fire."




CHAPTER X.

THE PILGRIMS AT HOME.


After this, I beheld until they were come unto the Land of Beulah, where
the sun shineth night and day. Here, because they were weary, they
betook themselves awhile to rest. And because this country was common
for pilgrims, and because the orchards and vineyards that were here
belong to the King of the Celestial Country, therefore they were
permitted to make bold with any of His things. But a little while soon
refreshed them here; for the bells did so ring, and the trumpets
continually sound so melodiously, that they could not sleep and yet they
received as much refreshing as if they had slept their sleep never so
soundly. Here also the noise of them that walked in the streets was,
"More pilgrims are come to town!" And another would answer, saying, "And
so many went over the water, and were let in at the golden gates,
to-day!" They would cry again, "There is now a legion of Shining Ones
just come to town, by which we know that there are more pilgrims upon
the road; for here they come to wait for them, and comfort them after
all their sorrow!" Then the pilgrims got up, and walked to and fro. But
how were their ears now filled with heavenly voices, and their eyes
delighted with celestial visions! In this land they heard nothing, saw
nothing, felt nothing, smelt nothing, tasted nothing, that was offensive
to their stomach or mind; only when they tasted of the water of the
river over which they were to go, they thought that it tasted a little
bitterish to the palate, but it proved sweeter when it was down.

In this place there was a record kept of the names of them that had been
pilgrims of old, and a history of all the famous acts that they had
done. It was here also much spoken of, how the river to some had had its
flowings, and what ebbings it had had while others have gone over. It
has been in a manner dry for some, while it has overflowed its banks for
others.

In this place, the children of the town would go into the King's
gardens, and gather nosegays for the pilgrims, and bring them to them
with much affection. Here also grew camphire, with spikenard, and
saffron, calamus, and cinnamon, with all the trees of frankincense,
myrrh, and aloes, with all chief spices. With these the pilgrims'
chambers were perfumed while they stayed here; and with these were their
bodies anointed, to prepare them to go over the river, when the time
appointed was come.

[Sidenote: CHRISTIANA RECEIVES MESSAGE]

Now, while they lay here, and waited for the good hour, there was a
noise in the town that there was a messenger come from the Celestial
City with matter of great importance to one Christiana, the wife of
Christian the pilgrim. So inquiry was made for her, and the house was
found out where she was. So the messenger presented her with a letter;
the contents whereof were, "Hail, good woman! I bring thee tidings that
the Master calleth for thee, and expecteth that thou shouldest stand in
His presence, in clothes of everlasting life, within these ten days."

When he had read this letter to her, he gave her therewith a sure token
that he was a true messenger, and was come to bid her make haste to be
gone. The token was an arrow, with a point sharpened with love, let
easily into her heart, which by degrees wrought so effectually with her,
that at the time appointed she must be gone.

When Christiana saw that her time was come, and that she was the first
of this company that was to go over, she called for Mr. Great-heart, her
guide, and told him how matters were. So he told her he was heartily
glad of the news, and could have been glad had the post come for him.
Then she bid that he should give advice how all things should be
prepared for her journey. So he told her, saying, "Thus and thus it must
be; and we that are left will accompany you to the river-side."

Then she called for her children, and gave them her blessing, and told
them that she yet read with comfort the mark that was set in their
foreheads, and was glad to see them with her there, and that they had
kept their garments so white. Lastly, she gave to the poor that little
she had, and commanded her sons and her daughters to be ready against
the messenger should come for them.

When she had spoken these words to her guide and to her children, she
called for Mr. Valiant-for-truth, and said unto him, "Sir, you have in
all places shown yourself true-hearted. Be faithful unto death, and my
King will give you a crown of life. I would also entreat you to have an
eye to my children; and if at any time you see them faint, speak
comfortably to them. For my daughters, my sons' wives, they have been
faithful; and a fulfilling of the promise upon them will be their end."
But she gave Mr. Stand-fast a ring.

Then she called for old Mr. Honest, and said of him, "Behold an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile."

Then said he, "I wish you a fair day when you set out for Mount Zion,
and shall be glad to see that you go over the river dry shod."

But she answered, "Come wet, come dry, I long to be gone; for, however
the weather is in my journey, I shall have time enough when I come there
to sit down and rest me and dry me."

Then came in that good man, Mr. Ready-to-halt, to see her. So she said
to him, "Thy travel hitherto has been with difficulty; but that will
make thy rest the sweeter. But watch and be ready; for, at an hour when
you think not, the messenger may come."

After him came in Mr. Despondency and his daughter Much-afraid; to whom
she said, "You ought with thankfulness for ever to remember your
deliverance from the hands of Giant Despair and out of Doubting Castle.
The effect of that mercy is that you are brought with safety hither. Be
ye watchful, and cast away fear; be sober, and hope to the end."

Then she said to Mr. Feeble-mind, "Thou wast delivered from the mouth of
Giant Slay-good, that thou mightest live in the light of the living for
ever, and see thy King with comfort. Only I advise thee to turn thee of
thy aptness to fear and doubt of His goodness, before He sends for thee;
lest thou shouldest, when He comes, be forced to stand before Him for
that fault with blushing."

[Sidenote: CHRISTIANA CROSSES THE RIVER]

Now, the day drew on that Christiana must be gone. So the road was full
of people to see her take her journey. But, behold, all the banks beyond
the river were full of horses and chariots, which were come down from
above to accompany her to the City gate. So she came forth and entered
the river, with a beckon of farewell to those that followed her to the
river-side. The last words that she was heard to say were, "I come,
Lord, to be with Thee, and bless Thee!"

So her children and friends returned to their place, for that those that
waited for Christiana had carried her out of their sight. So she went
and called, and entered in at the gate with all the tokens of joy that
her husband Christian had done before her. At her departure her
children wept. But Mr. Great-heart and Mr. Valiant played upon the
well-tuned cymbal and harp for joy. So all departed to their respective
places.

[Sidenote: PILGRIMS RECEIVE MESSAGES]

In process of time, there came a messenger to the town again, and his
business was with Mr. Ready-to-halt. So he inquired him out, and said to
him, "I am come to thee from Him whom thou hast loved and followed,
though upon crutches; and my message is to tell thee, that He expects
thee at His table, to sup with Him in His kingdom, the next day after
Easter; wherefore prepare thyself for this journey." Then he also gave
him a token that he was a true messenger, saying, "I have broken thy
golden bowl and loosed thy silver cord."

After this Mr. Ready-to-halt called for his fellow-pilgrims, and told
them, saying, "I am sent for, and God shall surely visit you also." So
he desired Mr. Valiant to make his will. And because he had nothing to
bequeath to them that should survive him but his crutches and his good
wishes, therefore thus he said: "These crutches I bequeath to my son
that shall tread in my steps, with a hundred warm wishes that he may
prove better than I have done." Then he thanked Mr. Great-heart for his
conduct and kindness, and so addressed himself to his journey. When he
came to the brink of the river, he said, "Now I shall have no more need
of these crutches, since yonder are chariots and horses for me to ride
on." The last words he was heard to say were, "Welcome life!" So he
went his way.

After this, Mr. Feeble-mind had tidings brought him, that the messenger
sounded his horn at his chamber-door. Then he came in, and told him,
saying, "I am come to tell thee that thy Master has need of thee, and
that in a very little time thou must behold His face in brightness. And
take this as a token of the truth of my message: 'Those that look out at
the windows shall be darkened.'" Then Mr. Feeble-mind called for his
friends, and told them what errand had been brought unto him, and what
token he had received of the truth of the message. Then he said, "Since
I have nothing to bequeath to any, to what purpose should I make a will?
As for my feeble mind, that I will leave behind me, for that I shall
have no need of in the place whither I go, nor is it worth bestowing
upon the poorest pilgrim: wherefore, when I am gone, I desire that you,
Mr. Valiant, would bury it in a dunghill." This done, and the day being
come on which he was to depart, he entered the river as the rest. His
last words were, "Hold out, faith and patience!" So he went over to the
other side.

When days had many of them passed away, Mr. Despondency was sent for;
for a messenger was come, and brought this message to him: "Trembling
man, these are to summon thee to be ready with thy King by the next
Lord's day, to shout for joy for thy deliverance from all thy
doubtings. And," said the messenger, "that my message is true, take
this for a proof." So he gave him the grasshopper to be a burden unto
him.

Now, Mr. Despondency's daughter, whose name was Much-afraid, said when
she heard what was done, that she would go with her father. Then Mr.
Despondency said to his friends, "Myself and my daughter, you know what
we have been, and how troublesomely we have behaved ourselves in every
company. My will and my daughter's is, that our discouraged feelings and
slavish fears be by no man received, from the day of our departure for
ever; for I know that after my death they will offer themselves to
others. For, to be plain with you, they are ghosts the which we
entertained when we first began to be pilgrims, and could never shake
them off after; and they will walk about and seek entertainment of the
pilgrims; but, for our sakes, shut ye the doors upon them." When the
time was come for them to depart, they went to the brink of the river.
The last words of Mr. Despondency were, "Farewell, night! welcome, day!"
His daughter went through the river singing, but none could understand
what she said.

Then it came to pass a while after, that there was a messenger in the
town that inquired for Mr. Honest. So he came to his house where he was,
and delivered to his hand these lines: "Thou art commanded to be ready
against this day seven-night, to present thyself before thy Lord at His
Father's house. And for a token that my message is true, 'All thy
daughters of music shall be brought low.'" Then Mr. Honest called for
his friends, and said unto them, "I die, but shall make no will. As for
my honesty, it shall go with me: let them that come after me be told
this." When the day that he was to be gone was come, he prepared himself
to go over the river. Now, the river at that time overflowed its banks
in some places; but Mr. Honest in his lifetime had spoken to one
Good-conscience to meet him there; the which also he did, and lent him
his hand, and so helped him over. The last words of Mr. Honest were,
"Grace reigns!" So he left the world.

[Sidenote: THE FINAL SUMMONS]

After this, it was noised abroad that Mr. Valiant-for-truth was taken
with a summons by the same messenger as the other, and had this for a
token that the summons was true, that his pitcher was broken at the
fountain. When he understood it, he called for his friends, and told
them of it. Then said he, "I am going to my Father's; and though with
great difficulty I am got hither, yet now I do not repent me of all the
trouble I have been at to arrive where I am. My sword I give to him that
shall succeed me in my pilgrimage, and my courage and skill to him that
can get it. My marks and scars I carry with me, to be a witness for me
that I have fought His battles who now will be my rewarder." When the
day that he must go hence was come, many accompanied him to the
river-side, into which as he went he said, "Death, where is thy sting?"
And, as he went down deeper, he said, "Grave, where is thy victory?" So
he passed over, and all the trumpets sounded for him on the other side.

Then there came forth a summons for Mr. Stand-fast (this Mr. Stand-fast
was he whom the pilgrims found upon his knees in the Enchanted Ground),
for the messenger brought it him open in his hands; the contents thereof
were, that he must prepare for a change of life, for his Master was not
willing that he should be so far from Him any longer. At this Mr.
Stand-fast was put into a muse.

"Nay," said the messenger, "you need not doubt the truth of my message,
for here is a token of the truth thereof: 'Thy wheel is broken at the
cistern.'"

Then he called to him Mr. Great-heart, who was their guide, and said
unto him, "Sir, although it was not my hap to be much in your good
company in the days of my pilgrimage, yet, since the time I knew you,
you have been profitable to me. When I came from home, I left behind me
a wife and five small children: let me entreat you at your return (for I
know that you will go and return to your master's house, in hopes that
you may yet be a conductor to more of the holy pilgrims), that you send
to my family, and let them be acquainted with all that hath or shall
happen unto me. Tell them moreover of my happy arrival to this place,
and of the present and late blessed condition that I am in. Tell them
also of Christian and Christiana his wife, and how she and her children
came after her husband. Tell them also what a happy end she made, and
whither she is gone. I have little or nothing to send to my family,
unless it be my prayers and tears for them; of which it will suffice
that you acquaint them, if peradventure they may prevail."

[Sidenote: END OF THE PILGRIMAGE]

When Mr. Stand-fast had thus set things in order, and the time being
come for him to haste him away, he also went down to the river. Now,
there was a great calm at that time in the river; wherefore Mr.
Stand-fast, when he was about half-way in, stood a while, and talked to
his companions that had waited upon him thither. And he said, "This
river has been a terror to many; yea, the thoughts of it have also
frighted me; but now methinks I stand easy; my foot is fixed upon that
on which the feet of the priests that bare the ark of the covenant stood
while Israel went over Jordan. The waters, indeed, are to the palate
bitter, and to the stomach cold; yet the thought of what I am going to,
and of the conduct that waits for me on the other side, doth lie as a
glowing coal at my heart. I see myself now at the end of my journey; my
toilsome days are ended. I am going to see that head which was crowned
with thorns, and that face which was spit upon for me. I have formerly
lived by hearsay and faith; but now I go where I shall live by sight,
and shall be with Him in whose company I delight myself. I have loved to
hear my Lord spoken of; and wherever I have seen the print of His shoe
in the earth, there I have coveted to set my foot too. His name has been
to me as a perfume box; yea, sweeter than all sweet smells. His voice to
me has been most sweet, and His countenance I have more desired than
they that have most desired the light of the sun. His Word I did use to
gather for my food, and for medicine against my faintings. He has held
me, and hath kept me from my sins; yea, my steps hath He strengthened in
His way."

Now, while he was thus speaking, his countenance changed, his strong man
bowed under him; and, after he had said, "Take me, for I come unto
Thee!" he ceased to be seen of them.

But glorious it was to see how the open region was filled with horses
and chariots, with trumpeters and pipers, with singers and players on
stringed instruments to welcome the pilgrims as they went up, and
followed one another in at the beautiful gate of the City.

As for Christian's children, the four boys that Christiana brought with
her, with their wives and children, I did not stay where I was till they
were gone over. Also, since I came away, I heard one say that they were
yet alive, and so would be for the help of the Church in that place
where they were for a time.

Shall it be my lot to go that way again, I may give those that desire it
an account of what I here am silent about: meantime I bid my reader

  ADIEU.




THE LITTLE PILGRIM.

THE STORY OF A LITTLE GIRL WHO TRIED TO GO ON PILGRIMAGE.


  In a large old house, with two kind aunts,
    The little Marian dwelt;
  And a happy child she was, I ween,
    For though at times she felt
  That playmates would be better far
    Than either birds or flowers,
  Yet her kind old aunts, and story books,
    Soothed many lonely hours.

  Her favorite haunt, in the summer-time,
    Was a large old apple-tree;
  And oft amid the boughs she sat,
    With her pet book on her knee.
  The "Pilgrim's Progress" was its name,
    And Marian loved it much;
  It is, indeed, a glorious book,
    There are not many such!

  She read it in her little bed,
    Beside the winter fire,
  And in summer-time, in the apple-tree,
    As though she would never tire.

  But, unexplained, 'tis just the book
    To puzzle the young brain;
  And the poor child had no kind friend,
    Its meaning to explain.

  For though her aunts were very kind,
    They were not overwise,
  And only said, "Don't read so, child,
    I'm sure you'll spoil your eyes."

  But Marian still went reading on,
    And visions strange and wild
  Began to fill the little head
    Of the lonely, dreaming child;
  For she thought that Christian and his wife,
    And all their children too,
  Had left behind their pleasant home,
    And done what she must do.

  "I'll take my Bible," said the child,
    "And seek the road to heaven;
  I'll try to find the Wicket Gate,
    And hope to be forgiven.
  I wish my aunts would go with me,
    But 'tis in vain to ask;
  They are so deaf and rather lame,
    They'd think it quite a task.

  "No! I must go alone, I see,
    So I'll not let them know;
  Or, like poor Christian's friends, they'll say,
    'My dear, you must not go.'

  "But I must wait till some grand scheme
    Can all their thoughts engage;
  And then I'll leave my pleasant home,
    And go on pilgrimage."

  She had not waited long, before,
    One fine autumnal day,
  She saw the large old coach arrive,
    To take her aunts away.
  "We're going out to spend the day,"
    The two old ladies said;
  "We mean to visit Mrs. Blair--
    Poor soul!--she's ill in bed.

  "But, Marian, you must stay at home,
    For the lady's ill, you see;
  You can have your dinner, if you like,
    In the large old apple-tree,
  And play in the garden all the day,
    Quite happy and content."
  A few more parting words were said,
    And off the ladies went.

  The servants, too, were all engaged;
    "The day is come at last,"
  Said Marian, "but oh, I wish,
    My pilgrimage was past."
  She knelt beside the apple-tree,
    And for God's assistance prayed;
  Then, with her basket in her hand,
    Forth tripped the little maid.

  Behind the house where Marian dwelt,
    Far off in the distance, lay
  A high steep hill, which the sun at morn
    Tinged with its earliest ray.
  "Difficulty" was its rightful name,
    The child had often thought;
  Towards this hill she turned her steps,
    With hopeful visions fraught.

  The flowers seemed to welcome her,
    'Twas a lovely autumn morn,
  The little lark sang merrily,
    Above the waving corn.
  "Ah, little lark, you sing," said she,
    "On your early pilgrimage;
  I, too, will sing, for pleasant thoughts
    Should now my mind engage."

  In clear, sweet strains she sang a hymn,
    And tripped lightly on her way;
  Until a pool of soft, thick mud
    Across her pathway lay.
  "This is the Slough of Despond," she cried,
    But she bravely ventured through;
  And safely reached the other side,
    But she lost one little shoe.

  On an old gray stone she sat her down,
    To eat some fruit and bread;
  Then took her little Bible out,
    And a cheering psalm she read.

  Then with fresh hope she journeyed on,
    For many miles away;
  And she reached the bottom of the hill,
    Before the close of day.

  She clambered up the steep ascent,
    Though faint and weary, too;
  But firmly did our Marian keep
    Her purpose still in view.

  "I'm glad, at least, the arbor's past,"
    Said the little tired soul;
  "I'm sure I should have sat me down
    And lost my little roll!"
  On the high hill-top she stands at last,
    And our weary Pilgrim sees
  A porter's lodge, of ample size,
    Half hid by sheltering trees.

  She clapped her hands with joy, and cried,
    "Oh, there's the Wicket Gate,
  And I must seek admittance there,
    Before it is too late."
  Gently she knocks--'tis answered soon,
    And at the open door
  Stands a tall, stout man--poor Marian felt
    As she ne'er had felt before.

  With tearful eyes, and trembling hand,
    Flushed cheek, and anxious brow,
  She said, "I hope you're Watchful, Sir,
    I want Discretion now."

  "Oh yes, I'm watchful," said the man,
    "As a porter ought to be;
  I s'pose you've lost your way, young Miss,
    You've lost your shoe, I see.

  "Missus," he cried to his wife within,
    "Here's a child here, at the door,
  You'll never see such a one again,
    If you live to be fourscore.
  She wants discretion, so she says,
    Indeed I think 'tis true;
  But I know some who want it more,
    Who will not own they do."

  "Go to the Hall," his wife replies,
    "And take the child with you,
  The ladies there are all so wise,
    They'll soon know what to do."
  The man complied, and led the child
    Through many a flowery glade;
  "Is that the Palace Beautiful?"
    The little Pilgrim said.

  "There, to the left, among the trees?
    Why, Miss, 'tis mighty grand;
  Call it a palace, if you please,
    'Tis the finest in the land.
  Now we be come to the fine old porch,
    And this is the Marble Hall;
  Here, little lady, you must stay,
    While I the servants call."

  Tired and sad he left the child,
    But he quickly re-appeared,
  And with him the lady of the house--
    Poor Marian's heart was cheered.
  "Sweet little girl," the lady said,
    In accents soft and kind,
  "I'm sure you sadly want some rest,
    And rest you soon shall find."

  To a room where three young ladies sat,
    The child was quickly led;
  "Piety, Prudence, and Charity,"
    To herself she softly said.
  "What is your name, my little dear?"
    Said the eldest of the three,
  Whom Marian, in her secret thought,
    Had christened Piety.

  "We'll send a servant to your friends,
    How uneasy they must be!"
  Admiringly she watched the child,
    Who, indeed, was fair to see;
  Around her bright and lovely face
    Fell waves of auburn hair,
  As modestly she told her name,
    With whom she lived and where.

  "How did you lose your way, my love?"
    She gently raised her head;
  "I do not think I've lost my way,"
    The little Pilgrim said.

  "This is the Palace Beautiful,
    May I stay here to-night?"
  They smiled and said, "We're glad our house
    Finds favor in your sight:--

  "Yes, gladly will we keep you here,
    For many nights to come."
  "Thank you," said Marian, "but I soon
    Must seek my heavenly home.
  The Valley of the Shadow of Death
    Is near this house, I know"--
  She stopped, for she saw, with great surprise,
    Their tears began to flow.

  She little thought the mourning dress,
    Which all the ladies wore,
  Was for one whom they had dearly loved,
    And should see on earth no more.
  Their brother had been called away,
    Their brightest and their best;
  No wonder, then, that Marian's words
    Roused grief in every breast.

  Sobs only for awhile were heard;
    At length the ladies said,
  "My, love, you have reminded us
    Of our loved and early dead;
  But this you could not know, my dear,
    And it indeed is true;
  We are all near to Death's dark door,
    Even little girls like you."

  "Yes," said the timid, trembling child,
    "I know it must be so;
  But, ma'am, I hope that Piety
    May be with me when I go.
  And will you show me your armory,
    When you have time to spare?
  I hope you have some small enough
    For a little girl to wear."

  No more she said, for Piety,
    As Marian called her, cast
  Her arms around the Pilgrim's neck,
    The secret's out at last.
  "You puzzled all," said Piety;
    "But now, I see, you've read
  A glorious book, which, unexplained,
    Has turned your little head.

  "Oh, dearly, when I was a child,
    I loved that Pilgrim Tale;
  But then mamma explained it well--
    And if we can prevail
  On your kind aunts to let you stay
    Some time with us, my dear,
  You shall read that book with my mamma,
    And she will make it clear."

  Now we'll return to Marian's home,
    And see what's passing there.
  The servants all had company,
    And a merry group they were.

  They had not missed our Pilgrim long,
    For they knew she oft would play
  In that old garden, with a book,
    The whole of the livelong day.

  "Betty," at last, said the housekeeper,
    "Where can Miss Marian be?
  Her dinner was in the basket packed,
    But sure, she'll come in to tea!"
  They sought her here, they sought her there,
    But they could not find the child;
  And her poor old aunts, when they came home,
    With grief were almost wild.

  The coachman and the footman too,
    In different ways were sent;
  But none thought of the narrow way
    In which the Pilgrim went.
  "Perhaps she followed us to town,"
    Poor Aunt Rebecca said,
  "I wish we had not left our home;
    I fear the child is dead."

  And to the town the coachman went,
    For they knew not what to do;
  And night drew on, when a country boy
    Brought Marian's little shoe.
  With the shoe in her hand, the housekeeper
    Into the parlor ran,
  "Oh, Mistress, here is all that's left
    Of poor Miss Marian.

  "It was found sticking in the mud,
    Just above Harlem Chase;
  I fear the poor child's perished there,
    For 'tis a frightful place."
  Then louder grew the ladies' grief;
    But soon their hearts were cheered,
  When a footman grand, with a note in his hand,
    From the distant Hall appeared.

  Aunt Ruth now read the note, and cried,
    "Oh, sister, all is well!
  The child is safe at Brookland Hall,
    With Lady Arundel,
  Who wants to keep her for a month;
    Why, yes; I think she may--
  Such friends as Lady Arundel
    Are not met with every day.

  "Our compliments, and thanks to her,
    When you return, young man;
  We'll call to-morrow at the Hall,
    And see Miss Marian."
  Then came a burst of grateful joy,
    That could not be suppressed,
  And, with thankful hearts and many tears,
    The ladies went to rest.

  We'll take a peep at our Marian now,
    There in her bed lies she;
  How blissful were her dreams that night,
    In the arms of Piety.

  Oh, that happy month at Brookland Hall,
    How soon it passed away!
  Cheerful and good were Marian's friends,
    And who so kind as they?

  And, more than all, while there she stayed
    They did their best to bring
  The little lamb to that blest fold
    Where reigns the Shepherd King.
  For many a lesson ne'er forgot,
    The little Marian learned;
  And a thoughtful and a happier child
    She to her home returned.

  Years rolled away, the scene has changed,
    A wife and mother now,
  Marian has found the Wicket Gate,
    She and her children too.
  And oh! how sweet it is to see
    This little Pilgrim band,
  As on towards their heavenly home,
    They travel hand in hand.
  When cloudy days fall to their lot,
    They see a light afar,
  The light that shone on Bethlehem's plain,
    The Pilgrim's guiding star.

  And now, dear children, whosoe'er,
    Or whereso'er you be,
  Who ponder o'er this strange, true tale
    Of Marian's history,--

  If to the Flowers of your young hearts,
    Instructions dews are given,
  Oh! be earnest as our Marian was,
    To find the road to Heaven.


       *       *       *       *       *


Transriber's note:

Minor typographical errors, punctuation and inconsistencies have been
silently normalized. Archaic spelling has been retained.

Page 365: 'Tell-truth' has been changed to 'Tell-true'.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pilgrim's Progress by John Bunyan, by 
John Bunyan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS ***

***** This file should be named 39452-8.txt or 39452-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/4/5/39452/

Produced by Julia Neufeld and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
