Project Gutenberg's Wagner, the Wehr-Wolf, by George W. M. Reynolds

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Wagner, the Wehr-Wolf

Author: George W. M. Reynolds

Release Date: November 8, 2008 [EBook #27202]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAGNER, THE WEHR-WOLF ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





                         WAGNER, THE WEHR-WOLF.


                       By GEORGE W. M. REYNOLDS.


                                NEW YORK
                            HURST & COMPANY
                               PUBLISHERS




_PART I._




PROLOGUE.


It was the month of January, 1516.

The night was dark and tempestuous; the thunder growled around; the
lightning flashed at short intervals: and the wind swept furiously along
in sudden and fitful gusts.

The streams of the great Black Forest of Germany babbled in playful
melody no more, but rushed on with deafening din, mingling their torrent
roar with the wild creaking of the huge oaks, the rustling of the firs,
the howling of the affrighted wolves, and the hollow voices of the
storm.

The dense black clouds were driving restlessly athwart the sky; and when
the vivid lightning gleamed forth with rapid and eccentric glare, it
seemed as if the dark jaws of some hideous monster, floating high above,
opened to vomit flame.

And as the abrupt but furious gusts of wind swept through the forest,
they raised strange echoes--as if the impervious mazes of that mighty
wood were the abode of hideous fiends and evil spirits, who responded in
shrieks, moans, and lamentations to the fearful din of the tempest.

It was, indeed, an appalling night!

An old--old man sat in his cottage on the verge of the Black Forest.

He had numbered ninety years; his head was completely bald--his mouth
was toothless--his long beard was white as snow, and his limbs were
feeble and trembling.

He was alone in the world; his wife, his children, his grandchildren,
all his relations, in fine, _save one_, had preceded him on that long,
last voyage, from which no traveler returns.

And that _one_ was a grand-daughter, a beauteous girl of sixteen, who
had hitherto been his solace and his comfort, but who had suddenly
disappeared--he knew not how--a few days previously to the time when we
discover him seated thus lonely in his poor cottage.

But perhaps she also was dead! An accident might have snatched her away
from him, and sent her spirit to join those of her father and mother,
her sisters and her brothers, whom a terrible pestilence--_the Black
Death_--hurried to the tomb a few years before.

No: the old man could not believe that his darling granddaughter was no
more--for he had sought her throughout the neighboring district of the
Black Forest, and not a trace of her was to be seen. Had she fallen down
a precipice, or perished by the ruthless murderer's hand, he would have
discovered her mangled corpse: had she become the prey of the ravenous
wolves, certain signs of her fate would have doubtless somewhere
appeared.

The sad--the chilling conviction therefore, went to the old man's heart,
that the only being left to solace him on earth, had deserted him; and
his spirit was bowed down in despair.

Who now would prepare his food, while he tended his little flock? who
was there to collect the dry branches in the forest, for the winter's
fuel, while the aged shepherd watched a few sheep that he possessed? who
would now spin him warm clothing to protect his weak and trembling
limbs?

"Oh! Agnes," he murmured, in a tone indicative of a breaking heart, "why
couldst thou have thus abandoned me? Didst thou quit the old man to
follow some youthful lover, who will buoy thee up with bright hopes, and
then deceive thee? O Agnes--my darling! hast thou left me to perish
without a soul to close my eyes?"

It was painful how that ancient shepherd wept.

Suddenly a loud knock at the door of the cottage aroused him from his
painful reverie; and he hastened, as fast as his trembling limbs would
permit him, to answer the summons.

He opened the door; and a tall man, apparently about forty years of age,
entered the humble dwelling. His light hair would have been magnificent
indeed, were it not sorely neglected; his blue eyes were naturally fine
and intelligent, but fearful now to meet, so wild and wandering were
their glances: his form was tall and admirably symmetrical, but
prematurely bowed by the weight of sorrow, and his attire was of costly
material, but indicative of inattention even more than it was
travel-soiled.

The old man closed the door, and courteously drew a stool near the fire
for the stranger who had sought in his cottage a refuge against the fury
of the storm.

He also placed food before him; but the stranger touched it not--horror
and dismay appearing to have taken possession of his soul.

Suddenly the thunder which had hitherto growled at a distance, burst
above the humble abode; and the wind swept by with so violent a gust,
that it shook the little tenement to its foundation, and filled the
neighboring forest with strange, unearthly noises.

Then the countenance of the stranger expressed such ineffable horror,
amounting to a fearful agony, that the old man was alarmed, and
stretched out his hand to grasp a crucifix that hung over the
chimney-piece; but his mysterious guest made a forbidding sign of so
much earnestness mingled with such proud authority, that the aged
shepherd sank back into his seat without touching the sacred symbol.

The roar of the thunder past--the shrieking, whistling, gushing wind
became temporarily lulled into low moans and subdued lamentations, amid
the mazes of the Black Forest; and the stranger grew more composed.

"Dost thou tremble at the storm?" inquired the old man.

"I am unhappy," was the evasive and somewhat impatient reply. "Seek not
to know more of me--beware how you question me. But you, old man, are
_not_ happy! The traces of care seem to mingle with the wrinkles of age
upon your brow!"

The shepherd narrated, in brief and touching terms, the unaccountable
disappearance of his much-beloved granddaughter Agnes.

The stranger listened abstractedly at first; but afterward he appeared
to reflect profoundly for several minutes.

"Your lot is wretched, old man," said he at length: "if you live a few
years longer, that period must be passed in solitude and
cheerlessness:--if you suddenly fall ill you must die the lingering
death of famine, without a soul to place a morsel of food, or the
cooling cup to your lips; and when you shall be no more, who will follow
you to the grave? There are no habitations nigh; the nearest village is
half-a-day's journey distant; and ere the peasants of that hamlet, or
some passing traveler, might discover that the inmate of this hut had
breathed his last, the wolves from the forest would have entered and
mangled your corpse."

"Talk not thus!" cried the old man, with a visible shudder; then darting
a half-terrified, half-curious glance at his guest, he said, "but who
are you that speak in this awful strain--this warning voice?"

Again the thunder rolled, with crashing sound, above the cottage; and
once more the wind swept by, laden, as it seemed, with the shrieks and
groans of human beings in the agonies of death.

The stranger maintained a certain degree of composure only by means of a
desperate effort, but he could not altogether subdue a wild flashing of
the eyes and a ghastly change of the countenance--signs of a profoundly
felt terror.

"Again I say, ask me not who I am!" he exclaimed, when the thunder and
the gust had passed. "My soul recoils from the bare idea of pronouncing
my own accursed name! But--unhappy as you see me--crushed, overwhelmed
with deep affliction as you behold me--anxious, but unable to repent for
the past as I am, and filled with appalling dread for the future as I
now proclaim myself to be, still is my power far, far beyond that limit
which hems mortal energies within so small a sphere. Speak, old
man--wouldst thou change thy condition? For to me--and to me alone of
all human beings--belongs the means of giving thee new life--of
bestowing upon thee the vigor of youth, of rendering that stooping form
upright and strong, of restoring fire to those glazing eyes, and beauty
to that wrinkled, sunken, withered countenance--of endowing thee, in a
word, with a fresh tenure of existence and making that existence sweet
by the aid of treasures so vast that no extravagance can dissipate
them!"

A strong though indefinite dread assailed the old man as this astounding
proffer was rapidly opened, in all its alluring details, to his
mind;--and various images of terror presented themselves to his
imagination;--but these feelings were almost immediately dominated by a
wild and ardent hope, which became the more attractive and exciting in
proportion as a rapid glance at his helpless, wretched, deserted
condition led him to survey the contrast between what he then was, and
what, if the stranger spoke truly, he might so soon become.

The stranger saw that he had made the desired impression; and he
continued thus:

"Give but your assent, old man, and not only will I render thee young,
handsome, and wealthy; but I will endow thy mind with an intelligence to
match that proud position. Thou shalt go forth into the world to enjoy
all those pleasures, those delights, and those luxuries, the names of
which are even now scarcely known to thee!"

"And what is the price of this glorious boon?" asked the old man,
trembling with mingled joy and terror through every limb.

"There are two conditions," answered the stranger, in a low, mysterious
tone. "The first is, that you become the companion of my wanderings for
one year and a half from the present time, until the hour of sunset, on
the 30th of July, 1517, when we must part forever, you to go
whithersoever your inclinations may guide you, and I---- But of _that_,
no matter!" he added, hastily, with a sudden motion as if of deep mental
agony, and with wildly flashing eyes.

The old man shrank back in dismay from his mysterious guest: the thunder
rolled again, the rude gust swept fiercely by, the dark forest rustled
awfully, and the stranger's torturing feelings were evidently prolonged
by the voices of the storm.

A pause ensued; and the silence was at length broken by the old man, who
said, in a hollow and tremulous tone, "To the first condition I would
willingly accede. But the second?"

"That you prey upon the human race, whom I hate; because of all the
world I alone am so deeply, so terribly accurst!" was the ominously
fearful yet only dimly significant reply.

The old man shook his head, scarcely comprehending the words of his
guest, and yet daring not to ask to be more enlightened.

"Listen!" said the stranger, in a hasty but impressive voice: "I require
a companion, one who has no human ties, and who still ministers to my
caprices,--who will devote himself wholly and solely to watch me in my
dark hours, and endeavor to recall me back to enjoyment and pleasure,
who, when he shall be acquainted with my power, will devise new means in
which to exercise it, for the purpose of conjuring up those scenes of
enchantment and delight that may for a season win me away from thought.
Such a companion do I need for a period of one year and a half; and you
are, of all men, the best suited to my design. But the Spirit whom I
must invoke to effect the promised change in thee, and by whose aid you
can be given back to youth and comeliness, will demand some fearful
sacrifice at your hands. And the nature of that sacrifice--the nature of
the condition to be imposed--I can well divine!"

"Name the sacrifice--name the condition!" cried the old man, eagerly. "I
am so miserable--so spirit-broken--so totally without hope in this
world, that I greedily long to enter upon that new existence which you
promised me! Say, then, what is the condition?"

"That you prey upon the human race, whom _he_ hates as well as I,"
answered the stranger.

"Again these awful words!" ejaculated the old man, casting trembling
glances around him.

"Yes--again those words," echoed the mysterious guest, looking with his
fierce burning eyes into the glazed orbs of the aged shepherd. "And now
learn their import!" he continued, in a solemn tone. "Knowest thou not
that there is a belief in many parts of our native land that at
particular seasons certain doomed men throw off the human shape and take
that of ravenous wolves?"

"Oh, yes--yes--I have indeed heard of those strange legends in which the
Wehr-Wolf is represented in such appalling colors!" exclaimed the old
man, a terrible suspicion crossing his mind.

"'Tis said that at sunset on the last day of every month the mortal, to
whom belongs the destiny of the Wehr-Wolf, must exchange his natural
form for that of the savage animal; in which horrible shape he must
remain until the moment when the morrow's sun dawns upon the earth."

"The legend that told thee this spoke truly," said the stranger. "And
now dost thou comprehend the condition which must be imposed upon thee?"

"I do--I do!" murmured the old man with a fearful shudder. "But he who
accepts that condition makes a compact with the evil one, and thereby
endangers his immortal soul!"

"Not so," was the reply. "There is naught involved in this condition
which---- But hesitate not," added the stranger, hastily: "I have no
time to waste in bandying words. Consider all I offer you: in another
hour you shall be another man!"

"I accept the boon--and on the conditions stipulated!" exclaimed the
shepherd.

"'Tis well, Wagner----"

"What! you know my name!" cried the old man. "And yet, meseems, I did
not mention it to thee."

"Canst thou not already perceive that I am no common mortal?" demanded
the stranger, bitterly. "And who I am, and whence I derive my power, all
shall be revealed to thee so soon as the bond is formed that must link
us for eighteen months together! In the meantime, await me here!"

And the mysterious stranger quitted the cottage abruptly, and plunged
into the depths of the Black Forest.

One hour elapsed ere he returned--one mortal hour, during which Wagner
sat bowed over his miserably scanty fire, dreaming of pleasure, youth,
riches, and enjoyment; converting, in imagination, the myriad sparks
which shone upon the extinguishing embers into piles of gold, and
allowing his now uncurbed fancy to change the one single room of the
wretched hovel into a splendid saloon, surrounded by resplendent mirrors
and costly hangings, while the untasted fare for the stranger on the
rude fir-table, became transformed, in his idea, into a magnificent
banquet laid out, on a board glittering with plate, lustrous with
innumerable lamps, and surrounded by an atmosphere fragrant with the
most exquisite perfumes.

The return of the stranger awoke the old man from his charming dream,
during which he had never once thought of the conditions whereby he was
to purchase the complete realization of the vision.

"Oh! what a glorious reverie you have dissipated!" exclaimed Wagner.
"Fulfill but one tenth part of that delightful dream----"

"I will fulfill it all!" interrupted the stranger: then, producing a
small vial from the bosom of his doublet, he said, "Drink!"

The old man seized the bottle, and speedily drained it to the dregs.

He immediately fell back upon the seat, in a state of complete lethargy.

But it lasted not for many minutes; and when he awoke again, he
experienced new and extraordinary sensations. His limbs were vigorous,
his form was upright as an arrow; his eyes, for many years dim and
failing, seemed gifted with the sight of an eagle, his head was warm
with a natural covering; not a wrinkle remained upon his brow nor on his
cheeks; and, as he smiled with mingled wonderment and delight, the
parting lips revealed a set of brilliant teeth. And it seemed, too, as
if by one magic touch the long fading tree of his intellect had suddenly
burst into full foliage, and every cell of his brain was instantaneously
stored with an amount of knowledge, the accumulation of which stunned
him for an instant, and in the next appeared as familiar to him as if he
had never been without it.

"Oh! great and powerful being, whomsoever thou art," exclaimed Wagner,
in the full, melodious voice of a young man of twenty-one, "how can I
manifest to thee my deep, my boundless gratitude for this boon which
thou hast conferred upon me!"

"By thinking no more of thy lost grand-child Agnes, but by preparing to
follow me whither I shall now lead thee," replied the stranger.

"Command me: I am ready to obey in all things," cried Wagner. "But one
word ere we set forth--who art thou, wondrous man?"

"Henceforth I have no secrets from thee, Wagner," was the answer, while
the stranger's eyes gleamed with unearthly luster; then, bending
forward, he whispered a few words in the other's ear.

Wagner started with a cold and fearful shudder as if at some appalling
announcement; but he uttered not a word of reply--for his master
beckoned him imperiously away from the humble cottage.




CHAPTER I.

THE DEATH-BED--THE OATH--THE LAST INJUNCTIONS.


Our tale commences in the middle of the month of November, 1520, and at
the hour of midnight.

In a magnificently furnished chamber, belonging to one of the largest
mansions of Florence, a nobleman lay at the point of death.

The light of the lamp suspended to the ceiling played upon the ghastly
countenance of the dying man, the stern expression of whose features was
not even mitigated by the fears and uncertainties attendant on the hour
of dissolution.

He was about forty-eight years of age, and had evidently been wondrously
handsome in his youth: for though the frightful pallor of death was
already upon his cheeks, and the fire of his large black eyes was dimmed
with the ravages of a long-endured disease, still the faultless outlines
of the aquiline profile remained unimpaired.

The most superficial observer might have read the aristocratic pride of
his soul in the haughty curl of his short upper lip,--the harshness of
his domineering character in the lines that marked his forehead,--and
the cruel sternness of his disposition in the expression of his entire
countenance.

Without absolutely scowling as he lay on that bed of death, his features
were characterized by an inexorable severity which seemed to denote the
predominant influence of some intense passion--some evil sentiment
deeply rooted in his mind.

Two persons leant over the couch to which death was so rapidly
approaching.

One was a lady of about twenty-five: the other was a youth of nineteen.

The former was eminently beautiful; but her countenance was marked with
much of that severity--that determination--and even of that sternness,
which characterized the dying nobleman. Indeed, a single glance was
sufficient to show that they stood in the close relationship of father
and daughter.

Her long, black, glossy hair now hung disheveled over the shoulders that
were left partially bare by the hasty negligence with which she had
thrown on a loose wrapper; and those shoulders were of the most dazzling
whiteness.

The wrapper was confined by a broad band at the waist; and the slight
drapery set off, rather than concealed, the rich contours of a form of
mature but admirable symmetry.

Tall, graceful, and elegant, she united easy motion with fine
proportion; thus possessing the lightness of the Sylph and the luxuriant
fullness of the Hebe.

Her countenance was alike expressive of intellectuality and strong
passions. Her large black eyes were full of fire, and their glances
seemed to penetrate the soul. Her nose, of the finest aquiline
development,--her lips, narrow, but red and pouting, with the upper one
short and slightly projecting over the lower,--and her small, delicately
rounded chin, indicated both decision and sensuality: but the insolent
gaze of the libertine would have quailed beneath the look of sovereign
hauteur which flashed from those brilliant eagle eyes.

In a word, she appeared to be a woman well adapted to command the
admiration--receive the homage--excite the passions--and yet repel the
insolence of the opposite sex.

But those appearances were to some degree deceitful; for never was
homage offered to her--never was she courted nor flattered.

Ten years previously to the time of which we are writing--and when she
was only fifteen--the death of her mother, under strange and mysterious
circumstances, as it was generally reported, made such a terrible
impression on her mind, that she hovered for months on the verge of
dissolution; and when the physician who attended upon her communicated
to her father the fact that her life was at length beyond danger, that
assurance was followed by the sad and startling declaration, that she
had forever lost the sense of hearing and the power of speech.

No wonder, then, that homage was never paid nor adulation offered to
Nisida--the deaf and dumb daughter of the proud Count of Riverola!

Those who were intimate with this family ere the occurrence of that sad
event--especially the physician, Dr. Duras, who had attended upon the
mother in her last moments, and on the daughter during her
illness--declared that, up to the period when the malady assailed her,
Nisida was a sweet, amiable and retiring girl; but she had evidently
been fearfully changed by the terrible affliction which that malady had
left behind. For if she could no longer express herself in words, her
eyes darted lightnings upon the unhappy menials who had the misfortune
to incur her displeasure; and her lips would quiver with the violence of
concentrated passion, at the most trifling neglect or error of which the
female dependents immediately attached to her own person might happen to
be guilty.

Toward her father she often manifested a strange ebullition of
anger--bordering even on inveterate spite, when he offended her: and
yet, singular though it were, the count was devotedly attached to his
daughter. He frequently declared that, afflicted as she was, he was
proud of her: for he was wont to behold in her flashing eyes--her
curling lip--and her haughty air, the reflection of his own proud--his
own inexorable spirit.

The youth of nineteen to whom we have alluded was Nisida's brother; and
much as the father appeared to dote upon the daughter, was the son
proportionately disliked by that stern and despotic man.

Perhaps this want of affection--or rather this complete aversion--on the
part of the Count of Riverola toward the young Francisco, owed its
origin to the total discrepancy of character existing between the father
and son. Francisco was as amiable, generous-hearted, frank and agreeable
as his sire was austere, stern, reserved and tyrannical. The youth was
also unlike his father in personal appearance, his hair being of a rich
brown, his eyes of a soft blue, and the general expression of his
countenance indicating the fairest and most endearing qualities which
can possibly characterize human nature.

We must, however, observe, before we pursue our narrative, that Nisida
imitated not her father in her conduct toward Francisco; for she loved
him--she loved him with the most ardent affection--such an affection as
a sister seldom manifests toward a brother. It was rather the attachment
of a mother for her child; inasmuch as Nisida studied all his
comforts--watched over him, as it were, with the tenderest
solicitude--was happy when he was present, melancholy when he was
absent, and seemed to be constantly racking her imagination to devise
new means to afford him pleasure.

To treat Francisco with the least neglect was to arouse the wrath of a
fury in the breast of Nisida; and every unkind look which the count
inflicted upon his son was sure, if perceived by his daughter, to evoke
the terrible lightnings of her brilliant eyes.

Such were the three persons whom we have thus minutely described to our
readers.

The count had been ill for some weeks at the time when this chapter
opens; but on the night which marks that commencement, Dr. Duras had
deemed it his duty to warn the nobleman that he had not many hours to
live.

The dying man had accordingly desired that his children might be
summoned; and when they entered the apartment, the physician and the
priest were requested to withdraw.

Francisco now stood on one side of the bed, and Nisida on the other;
while the count collected his remaining strength to address his last
injunctions to his son.

"Francisco," he said, in a cold tone, "I have little inclination to
speak at any great length; but the words I am about to utter are
solemnly important. I believe you entertain the most sincere and earnest
faith in that symbol which now lies beneath your hand."

"The crucifix!" ejaculated the young man. "Oh, yes, my dear father!--it
is the emblem of that faith which teaches us how to live and die!"

"Then take it up--press it to your lips--and swear to obey the
instructions which I am about to give you," said the count.

Francisco did as he was desired; and, although tears were streaming from
his eyes, he exclaimed, in an emphatic manner, "I swear most solemnly to
fulfill your commands, my dear father, so confident am I that you will
enjoin nothing that involves aught dishonorable!"

"Spare your qualifications," cried the count, sternly; "and swear
without reserve--or expect my dying curse, rather than my blessing."

"Oh! my dear father," ejaculated the youth, with intense anguish of
soul; "talk not of so dreadful a thing as bequeathing me your dying
curse! I swear to fulfill your injunctions--without reserve."

And he kissed the holy symbol.

"You act wisely," said the count, fixing his glaring eyes upon the
handsome countenance of the young man, who now awaited, in breathless
suspense, a communication thus solemnly prefaced. "This key," continued
the nobleman, taking one from beneath his pillow as he spoke, "belongs
to the door in yonder corner of the apartment."

"That door which is never opened!" exclaimed Francisco, casting an
anxious glance in the direction indicated.

"Who told you that the door was never opened," demanded the count,
sternly.

"I have heard the servants remark----" began the youth in a timid, but
still frank and candid manner.

"Then, when I am no more, see that you put an end to such impertinent
gossiping," said the nobleman, impatiently; "and you will be the better
convinced of the propriety of thus acting, as soon as you have learned
the nature of my injunctions. That door," he continued, "communicates
with a small closet, which is accessible by no other means. Now my
wish--my command is this:--Upon the day of your marriage, whenever such
an event may occur--and I suppose you do not intend to remain unwedded
all your life--I enjoin you to open the door of that closet. You must be
accompanied by your bride--and by no other living soul. I also desire
that this may be done with the least possible delay--the very
morning--within the very hour after you quit the church. That closet
contains the means of elucidating a mystery profoundly connected with
me--with you--with the family--a mystery, the developments of which may
prove of incalculable service alike to yourself and to her who may share
your title and your wealth. But should you never marry, then must the
closet remain unvisited by _you_; nor need you trouble yourself
concerning the eventual discovery of the secret which it contains, by
any person into whose hands the mansion may fall at your death. It is
also my wish that your sister should remain in complete ignorance of the
instructions which I am now giving you. Alas! poor girl--she cannot hear
the words which fall from my lips! neither shall you communicate their
import to her by writing, nor by the language of the fingers. And
remember that while I bestow upon you my blessing--my dying
blessing--may that blessing become a withering curse--the curse of hell
upon you--if in any way you violate one tittle of the injunctions which
I have now given you."

"My dearest father," replied the weeping youth, who had listened with
the most profound attention, to these extraordinary commands; "I would
not for worlds act contrary to your wishes. Singular as they appear to
me, they shall be fulfilled to the very letter."

He received from his father's hand the mysterious key, which he had
secured about his person.

"You will find," resumed the count after a brief pause, "that I have
left the whole of my property to you. At the same time my will specifies
certain conditions relative to your sister Nisida, for whom I have made
due provision only in the case--which is, alas! almost in defiance of
every hope!--of her recovery from that dreadful affliction which renders
her so completely dependent upon your kindness."

"Dearest father, you know how sincerely I am attached to my sister--how
devoted she is to me----"

"Enough, enough!" cried the count; and overcome by the effort he had
made to deliver his last injunction, he fell back insensible on his
pillow.

Nisida, who had retained her face buried in her hands during the whole
time occupied in the above conversation, happened to look up at that
moment; and, perceiving the condition of her father, she made a hasty
sign to Francisco to summon the physician and the priest from the room
to which they had retired.

This commission was speedily executed, and in a few minutes the
physician and the priest were once more by the side of the dying noble.

But the instant that Dr. Duras--who was a venerable looking man of about
sixty years of age--approached the bed, he darted, unseen by Francisco,
a glance of earnest inquiry toward Nisida, who responded by one of
profound meaning, shaking her head gently, but in a manner expressive of
deep melancholy, at the same time.

The physician appeared to be astonished at the negative thus conveyed by
the beautiful mute; and he even manifested a sign of angry impatience.

But Nisida threw upon him a look of so imploring a nature, that his
temporary vexation yielded to a feeling of immense commiseration for
that afflicted creature: and he gave her to understand, by another rapid
glance, that her prayer was accorded.

This interchange of signs of such deep mystery scarcely occupied a
moment, and was altogether unobserved by Francisco.

Dr. Duras proceeded to administer restoratives to the dying
nobleman--but in vain!

The count had fallen into a lethargic stupor, which lasted until four in
the morning, when his spirit passed gently away.

The moment Francisco and Nisida became aware that they were orphans,
they threw themselves into each other's arms, and renewed by that tender
embrace the tacit compact of sincere affection which had ever existed
between them.

Francisco's tears flowed freely; but Nisida did not weep!

A strange--an almost portentous light shone in her brilliant black eyes;
and though that wild gleaming denoted powerful emotions, yet it shed no
luster upon the depths of her soul--afforded no clew to the real nature
of these agitated feelings.

Suddenly withdrawing himself from his sister's arms, Francisco conveyed
to her by the language of the fingers the following tender
sentiment:--"You have lost a father, beloved Nisida, but you have a
devoted and affectionate brother left to you!"

And Nisida replied through the same medium, "Your happiness, dearest
brother, has ever been my only study, and shall continue so."

The physician and Father Marco, the priest, now advanced, and taking the
brother and sister by the hands, led them from the chamber of death.

"Kind friends," said Francisco, now Count of Riverola, "I understand
you. You would withdraw my sister and myself from a scene too mournful
to contemplate. Alas! it is hard to lose a father; but especially so at
my age, inexperienced as I am in the ways of the world!"

"The world is indeed made up of thorny paths and devious ways, my dear
young friend," returned the physician; "but a stout heart and integrity
of purpose will ever be found faithful guides. The more exalted and the
wealthier the individual, the greater the temptations he will have to
encounter. Reflect upon this, Francisco: it is advice which I, as an
old--indeed, the oldest friend of your family--take the liberty to
offer."

With these words, the venerable physician wrung the hands of the brother
and sister, and hurried from the house, followed by the priest.

The orphans embraced each other, and retired to their respective
apartments.




CHAPTER II.

NISIDA--THE MYSTERIOUS CLOSET.


The room to which Nisida withdrew, between four and five o'clock on that
mournful winter's morning, was one of a suit entirely appropriated to
her own use.

This suit consisted of three apartments, communicating with each other,
and all furnished in the elegant and tasteful manner of that age.

The innermost of the three rooms was used as her bed-chamber, and when
she now entered it, a young girl of seventeen, beautiful as an angel,
but dressed in the attire of a dependent, instantly arose from a seat
near the fire that blazed on the hearth, and cast a respectful but
inquiring glance toward her mistress.

Nisida gave her to understand, by a sign, that all was over.

The girl started, as if surprised that her lady indicated so little
grief; but the latter motioned her, with an impatient gesture, to leave
the room.

When Flora--such was the name of the dependent--had retired Nisida threw
herself into a large arm-chair near the fire, and immediately became
buried in a deep reverie. With her splendid hair flowing upon her white
shoulders--her proud forehead supported on her delicate hand--her lips
apart, and revealing the pearly teeth--her lids with their long black
fringes half-closed over the brilliant eyes--and her fine form cast in
voluptuous abandonment upon the soft cushions of the chair--she indeed
seemed a magnificent creature!

But when, suddenly awaking from that profound meditation, she started
from her seat with flashing eyes--heaving bosom--and an expression of
countenance denoting a fixed determination to accomplish some deed from
which her better feelings vainly bade her to abstain:--when she drew her
tall--her even majestic form up to its full height, the drapery
shadowing forth every contour of undulating bust and exquisitely modeled
limb--while her haughty lip curled in contempt of any consideration save
her own indomitable will--she appeared rather a heroine capable of
leading an Amazonian army, than a woman to whom the sighing swain might
venture to offer up the incense of love.

There was something awful in the aspect of this mysterious
being--something ineffably grand and imposing in her demeanor--as she
thus suddenly rose from her almost recumbent posture, and burst into the
attitude of a resolute and energetic woman.

Drawing the wrapper around her form, she lighted a lamp, and was about
to quit the chamber, when her eyes suddenly encountered the mild and
benignant glance which the portrait of a lady appeared to cast upon her.

This portrait, which hung against the wall precisely opposite to the
bed, represented a woman of about thirty years of age--a woman of a
beauty much in the same style as that of Nisida, but not marred by
anything approaching to a sternness of expression. On the contrary, if
an angel had looked through those mild black eyes, their glances could
not have been endowed with a holier kindness; the smiles of good spirits
could not be more plaintively sweet than those which the artist had made
to play upon the lips of that portrait.

Yet, in spite of this discrepancy between the expression of Nisida's
countenance and that of the lady who had formed the subject of the
picture, it was not difficult to perceive a certain physical likeness
between the two; nor will the reader be surprised when we state that
Nisida was gazing on the portrait of her deceased mother.

And that gaze--oh! how intent, how earnest, how enthusiastic it was! It
manifested something more than love--something more impassioned and
ardent than the affection which a daughter might exhibit toward even a
living mother; it showed a complete devotion--an adoration--a worship!

Long and fixedly did Nisida gaze upon that portrait; till suddenly from
her eyes, which shot forth such burning glances, gushed a torrent of
tears.

Then--probably fearful lest this weakness on her part might impair the
resolution necessary to execute the purpose which she had in
view--Nisida dashed away the tears from her long lashes, hastily quitted
the room.

Having traversed the other two apartments of her own suit, she cast a
searching glance along the passage which she now entered; and, satisfied
that none of the domestics were about, for it was not yet six o'clock on
that winter's morning, she hastened to the end of the corridor.

The lamp flared with the speed at which she walked; and its uncertain
light enhanced the pallor that now covered her countenance.

At the bottom of the passage she cautiously opened the door, and entered
the room with which it communicated.

This was the sleeping apartment of her brother.

A single glance convinced her that he was wrapt in the arms of slumber.

He slept soundly too--for he was wearied with the vigil which he had
passed by the death-bed of his father--worn out also by the thousand
conflicting and unsatisfactory conjectures that the last instructions of
his parent had naturally excited in his mind.

He had not, however, been asleep a quarter of an hour when Nisida stole,
in the manner described, into his chamber.

A smile of mingled joy and triumph animated her countenance, and a
carnation tinge flushed her cheeks when she found he was fast locked in
the embrace of slumber.

Without a moment's hesitation, she examined his doublet, and clutched
the key that his father had given to him scarcely six hours before.

Then, light as the fawn, she left the room.

Having retraced her steps half-way up the passage, she paused at the
door of the chamber in which the corpse of her father lay.

For an instant--a single instant--she seemed to revolt from the
prosecution of her design, then, with a stern contraction of the brows,
and an imperious curl of the lip--as if she said within herself, "_Fool
that I am to hesitate!_"--she entered the room.

Without fear--without compunction, she approached the bed. The body was
laid out: stretched in its winding sheet, stiff and stark did it seem to
repose on the mattress--the countenance rendered more ghastly than even
death could make it, by the white band which tied up the under jaw.

The nurse who had thus disposed the corpse, had retired to snatch a few
hours of rest; and there was consequently no spy upon Nisida's actions.

With a fearless step she advanced toward the closet--the mysterious
closet relative to which such strange injunctions had been given.




CHAPTER III.

THE MANUSCRIPT--FLORA FRANCATELLI.


Nisida's hand trembled not as she placed the key in the lock; but when
it turned, and she knew that in another instant she might open that door
if she chose, she compressed her lips firmly together--she called all
her courage to her aid--for she seemed to imagine that it was necessary
to prepare herself to behold something frightfully appalling.

And now again her cheeks were deadly pale; but the light that burned in
her eyes was brilliant in the extreme.

White as was her countenance, her large black orbs appeared to shine--to
glow--to burn, as if with a violent fever.

Advancing with her left hand, she half-opened the door of the closet
with her right.

Then she plunged her glances with rapidity into the recess.

But, holy God! what a start that courageous, bold, and energetic woman
gave--a start as if the cold hand of a corpse had been suddenly thrust
forth to grasp her.

And oh! what horror convulsed her countenance--while her lips were
compressed as tightly as if they were an iron vise.

Rapidly and instantly recoiling as that glance was, it had nevertheless
revealed to her an object of interest as well as of horror; for with
eyes now averted, she seized something within the closet, and thrust it
into her bosom.

Then, hastily closing the door, she retraced her way to her brother's
chamber.

He still slept soundly; Nisida returned the key to the pocket whence she
had taken it, and hurried back to her own room, from which she had
scarcely been absent five minutes.

And did she seek her couch? did she repair to rest?

No; that energetic woman experienced no weariness--yielded to no
lassitude.

Carefully bolting the door of her innermost chamber, she seated herself
in the arm-chair and drew from her bosom the object which she had taken
from the mysterious closet.

It was a manuscript, consisting of several small slips of paper,
somewhat closely written upon.

The paper was doubtless familiar to her; for she paused not to consider
its nature, but greedily addressed herself to the study of the meaning
which it conveyed. And of terrible import seemed that manuscript to be;
for while Nisida read, her countenance underwent many and awful
changes--and her bosom heaved convulsively at one instant, while at
another it remained motionless, as if respiration were suspended.

At length the perusal was completed; and grinding her teeth with
demoniac rage, she threw the manuscript upon the floor. But at the same
moment her eyes, which she cast wildly about her, caught the mild and
benign countenance of her mother's portrait; and, as oil stills the fury
of the boiling billows, did the influence of that picture calm in an
instant the tremendous emotions of Nisida's soul.

Tears burst from her eyes, and she suddenly relapsed from the incarnate
fiend into the subdued woman.

Then stooping down, she picked up the papers that lay scattered on the
floor: but as she did so she averted her looks, with loathing and
disgust, as much as possible from the pages that her hands collected
almost at random.

And now another idea struck her--an idea the propriety of which
evidently warred against her inclination.

She was not a woman of mere impulses--although she often acted speedily
after a thought had entered her brain. But she was wondrously quick at
weighing all reasons for or against the suggestions of her imagination;
and thus, to any one who was not acquainted with her character, she
might frequently appear to obey the first dictates of her impetuous
passions.

Scarcely three minutes after the new idea had struck her, her resolution
was fixed.

Once more concealing the papers in her bosom, she repaired with the lamp
to her brother's room--purloined the key a second time--hastened to the
chamber of death--opened the closet again--and again sustained the shock
of a single glance at its horrors, as she returned the manuscript to the
place whence she had originally taken it.

Then, having once more retraced her way to Francisco's chamber, she
restored the key to the folds of his doublet--for he continued to sleep
soundly; and Nisida succeeded in regaining her own apartments just in
time to avoid the observation of the domestics, who were now beginning
to move about.

Nisida sought her couch and slept until nearly ten o'clock, when she
awoke with a start--doubtless caused by some unpleasant dream.

Having ascertained the hour by reference to a water-clock, or clepsydra,
which stood on a marble pedestal near the head of the bed, she
arose--unlocked the door of her apartment--rang a silver bell--and then
returned to her bed.

In a few minutes Flora, who had been waiting in the adjoining room,
entered the chamber.

Nisida, on regaining her couch, had turned her face toward the wall, and
was therefore unable to perceive anything that took place in the
apartment.

The mere mention of such a circumstance would be trivial in the extreme,
were it not necessary to record it in consequence of an event which now
occurred.

For, as Flora advanced into the room, her eyes fell on a written paper
that lay immediately beneath the arm-chair; and conceiving from its
appearance that it had not been thrown down on purpose, as it was in
nowise crushed nor torn, she mechanically picked it up and placed it on
the table.

She then proceeded to arrange the toilet table of her mistress,
preparatory to that lady's rising; and while she is thus employed, we
will endeavor to make our readers a little better acquainted with her
than they can possibly yet be.

Flora Francatelli was the orphan daughter of parents who had suddenly
been reduced from a state of affluence to a condition of extreme
poverty. Signor Francatelli could not survive this blow: he died of a
broken heart; and his wife shortly afterward followed him to the
tomb--also the victim of grief. They left two children behind them:
Flora, who was then an infant, and a little boy, named Alessandro, who
was five years old. The orphans were entirely dependent upon the
kindness of a maiden aunt--their departed father's sister. This
relative, whose name was, of course, also Francatelli, performed a
mother's part toward the children: and deprived herself, not only of
comforts, but at times even of necessaries, in order that they should
not want. Father Marco, a priest belonging to one of the numerous
monasteries of Florence, and who was a worthy man, took compassion upon
this little family; and not only devoted his attention to teach the
orphans to read and write--great accomplishments among the middle
classes in those days--but also procured from a fund at the disposal of
his abbot, certain pecuniary assistance for the aunt.

The care which this good relative took of the orphans, and the kindness
of Father Marco, were well rewarded by the veneration and attachment
which Alessandro and Flora manifested toward them. When Alessandro had
numbered eighteen summers, he was fortunate enough to procure, through
the interest of Father Marco, the situation of secretary to a Florentine
noble, who was charged with a diplomatic mission to the Ottoman Porte;
and the young man proceeded to Leghorn, whence he embarked for
Constantinople, attended by the prayers, blessings, and hopes of the
aunt and sister, and of the good priest, whom he left behind.

Two years after his departure, Father Marco obtained for Flora a
situation about the person of the Lady Nisida; for the monk was
confessor to the family of Riverola, and his influence was sufficient to
secure that place for the young maiden.

We have already said that Flora was sweetly beautiful. Her large blue
eyes were fringed with dark lashes, which gave them an expression of the
most melting softness; her dark brown hair, arranged in the modest
bands, seemed of even a darker hue when contrasted with the brilliant
and transparent clearness of her complexion, and though her forehead was
white and polished as alabaster, yet the rose-tint of health was upon
her cheeks, and her lips had the rich redness of coral. Her nose was
perfectly straight; her teeth were white and even, and the graceful
arching of her swan-neck imparted something of nobility to her tall,
sylph-like, and exquisitely proportioned figure.

Retiring and bashful in her manners, every look which fell from her
eyes--every smile which wreathed her lips, denoted the chaste purity of
her soul. With all her readiness to oblige--with all her anxiety to do
her duty as she ought, she frequently incurred the anger of the
irascible Nisida; but Flora supported those manifestations of wrath with
the sweetest resignation, because the excellence of her disposition
taught her to make every allowance for one so deeply afflicted as her
mistress.

Such was the young maiden whom the nature of the present tale compels us
thus particularly to introduce to our readers.

Having carefully arranged the boudoir, so that its strict neatness might
be welcome to her mistress when that lady chose to rise from her couch,
Flora seated herself near the table, and gave way to her reflections.

She thought of her aunt, who inhabited a neat little cottage on the
banks of the Arno, and whom she was usually permitted to visit every
Sabbath afternoon--she thought of her absent brother, who was still in
the service of the Florentine Envoy to the Ottomon Porte, where that
diplomatist was detained by the tardiness that marked the negotiations
with which he was charged; and then she thought--thought too, with an
involuntary sigh--of Francisco, Count of Riverola.

She perceived that she had sighed--and, without knowing precisely
wherefore, she was angry with herself.

Anxious to turn the channel of her meditations in another direction, she
rose from her seat to examine the clepsydra. That movement caused her
eyes to fall upon the paper which she had picked up a quarter of an hour
previously.

In spite of herself the image of Francisco was still uppermost in her
thoughts; and, in the contemplative vein thus encouraged, her eyes
lingered, unwittingly--and through no base motive of curiosity--upon the
writing which that paper contained.

Thus she actually found herself reading the first four lines of the
writing, before she recollected what she was doing.

The act was a purely mechanical one, which not the most rigid moralist
could blame.

And had the contents of the paper been of no interest, she might even
have continued to read more in that same abstracted mood; but those four
first lines were of a nature which sent a thrilling sensation of horror
through her entire frame; the feeling terminating with an icy coldness
of the heart.

She shuddered without starting--shuddered as she stood; and not even a
murmur escaped her lips.

The intenseness of that sudden pang of horror deprived her alike of
speech and motion during the instant that it lasted.

And those lines, which produced so strange an impression upon the young
maiden, ran thus:

    "merciless scalpel hacked and hewed away at the still almost
    palpitating flesh of the murdered man, in whose breast the
    dagger remained buried--a ferocious joy--a savage hyena-like
    triumph----"

Flora read no more; she could not--even if she had wished.

For a minute she remained rooted to the spot; then she threw herself
into the chair, bewildered and dismayed at the terrible words which had
met her eyes.

She thought that the handwriting was not unknown to her; but she could
not recollect whose it was. One fact was, however, certain--it was not
the writing of her mistress.

She was musing upon the horrible and mysterious contents of the paper,
when Nisida rose from her couch.

Acknowledging with a slight nod of the head the respectful salutation of
her attendant, she hastily slipped on a loose wrapper, and seated
herself in the arm-chair which Flora had just abandoned.

The young girl then proceeded to comb out the long raven hair of her
mistress.

But this occupation was most rudely interrupted: for Nisida's eyes
suddenly fell upon the manuscript page on the table; and she started up
in a paroxysm of mingled rage and alarm.

Having assured herself by a second glance that it was indeed a portion
of the writings which had produced so strange an effect upon her a few
hours previously, she turned abruptly toward Flora; and, imperiously
confronting the young maiden, pointed to the paper in a significant
manner.

Flora immediately indicated by a sign that she had found it on the
floor, beneath the arm-chair.

"And you have read it!" was the accusation which, with wonderful
rapidity, Nisida conveyed by means of her fingers--fixing her piercing,
penetrating eyes on Flora's countenance at the same time.

The young maiden scorned the idea of a falsehood; although she perceived
that her reply would prove far from agreeable to her mistress, she
unhesitatingly admitted, by the language of the hands. "I read the first
four lines, and no more."

A crimson glow instantly suffused the face, neck, shoulders, and bosom
of Nisida; but instantly compressing her lips--as was her wont when
under the influence of her boiling passions, she turned her flashing
eyes once more upon the paper, to ascertain which leaf of the manuscript
it was.

That rapid glance revealed to her the import, the dread, but profoundly
mysterious import of the four first lines on that page; and, again
darting her soul-searching looks upon the trembling Flora, she demanded,
by the rapid play of her delicate taper fingers "Will you swear that you
read no more?"

"As I hope for salvation!" was Flora's symbolic answer.

The penetrating, imperious glance of Nisida dwelt long upon the maiden's
countenance; but no sinister expression--no suspicious change on that
fair and candid face contradicted the assertion which she had made.

"I believe you; but beware how you breathe to a living soul a word of
what you did read!"

Such was the injunction which Nisida now conveyed by her usual means of
communication; and Flora signified implicit obedience.

Nisida then secured the page of writing in her jewel casket; and the
details of the toilet were resumed.




CHAPTER IV.

THE FUNERAL--THE INTERRUPTION OF THE CEREMONY.


Eight days after the death of the Count of Riverola, the funeral took
place.

The obsequies were celebrated at night, with all the pomp observed
amongst noble families on such occasions. The church in which the corpse
was buried, was hung with black cloth; and even the innumerable wax
tapers which burned upon the altar and around the coffin failed to
diminish the lugubrious aspect of the scene.

At the head of the bier stood the youthful heir of Riverola; his pale
countenance of even feminine beauty contrasting strangely with the
mourning garments which he wore, and his eyes bent upon the dark chasm
that formed the family vault into which the remains of his sire were
about to be lowered.

Around the coffin stood Dr. Duras and other male friends of the
deceased: for the females of the family were not permitted, by the
custom of the age and the religion, to be present on occasions of this
kind.

It was eleven o'clock at night: and the weather without was stormy and
tempestuous.

The wind moaned through the long aisles, raising strange and ominous
echoes, and making the vast folds of sable drapery wave slowly backward
and forward, as if agitated by unseen hands. A few spectators, standing
in the background, appeared like grim figures on a black tapestry; and
the gleam of the wax tapers, oscillating on their countenances, made
them seem death-like and ghastly.

From time to time the shrill wail of the shriek-owl, and the flapping of
its wings against the diamond-paned windows of the church, added to the
awful gloom of the funeral scene.

And now suddenly arose the chant of the priests--the parting hymn for
the dead!

Francisco wept, for though his father had never manifested toward him an
affection of the slightest endearing nature, yet the disposition of the
young count was excellent; and, when he gazed upon the coffin, he
remembered not the coldness with which its inmate in his lifetime had
treated him--he thought only of a parent whom he had lost, and whose
remains were there!

And truly, on the brink of the tomb no animosity should ever find a
resting-place in the human heart. Though elsewhere men yield to the
influence of their passions and their feelings, in pursuing each his
separate interests--though, in the great world, we push and jostle each
other, as if the earth were not large enough to allow us to follow our
separate ways--yet, when we meet around the grave, to consign a fellow
creature to his last resting-place, let peace and holy forgiveness
occupy our souls. There let the clash of interests and the war of
jealousies be forgotten; and let us endeavor to persuade ourselves that,
as all the conflicting pursuits of life must terminate at this point at
last, so should our feelings converge to the one focus of amenity and
Christian love. And, after all, how many who have considered themselves
to be antagonists must, during a moment of solemn reflection, become
convinced that, when toiling in the great workshop of the world, they
have been engaged, in unconscious fraternity, in building up the same
fabric!

The priests were in the midst of their solemn chant--a deathlike silence
and complete immovability prevailed among the mourners and the
spectators--and the wind was moaning beneath the vaulted roofs, awaking
those strange and tomb-like sounds which are only heard in large
churches,--when light but rushing footsteps were heard on the marble
pavement; and in another minute a female, not clothed in a mourning
garb, but splendidly as for a festival, precipitated herself toward the
bier.

There her strength suddenly seemed to be exhausted; and, with a piercing
scream, she sank senseless on the cold stones.

The chant of the priest was immediately stilled; and Francisco hurrying
forward, raised the female in his arms, while Dr. Duras asked for water
to sprinkle on her countenance.

Over her head the stranger wore a white veil of rich material, which was
fastened above her brow by a single diamond of unusual size and
brilliant luster. When the veil was drawn aside, shining auburn tresses
were seen depending in wanton luxuriance over shoulders of alabaster
whiteness: a beautiful but deadly pale countenance was revealed; and a
splendid purple velvet dress delineated the soft and flowing outlines of
a form modeled to the most perfect symmetry.

She seemed to be about twenty years of age,--in the full splendor of
loveliness, and endowed with charms which presented to the gaze of those
around a very incarnation of the ideal beauty which forms the theme of
raptured poets.

And now, as the vacillating and uncertain light of the wax-candles
beamed upon her, as she lay senseless in the arms of the Count Riverola,
her pale, placid face appeared that of a classic marble statue; but
nothing could surpass the splendid effects which the funeral tapers
produced on the rich redundancy of her hair, which seemed dark where the
shadows rested on it, but glittering as with a bright glory where the
luster played on its shining masses.

In spite of the solemnity of the place and the occasion, the mourners
were struck by the dazzling beauty of that young female, who had thus
appeared so strangely amongst them; but respect still retained at a
distance those persons who were merely present from curiosity to witness
the obsequies of one of the proudest nobles of Florence.

At length the lady opened her large hazel eyes, and glanced wildly
around, a quick spasm passing like an electric shock over her frame at
the same instant; for the funeral scene burst upon her view, and
reminded her where she was, and why she was there.

Recovering herself almost as rapidly as she had succumbed beneath
physical and mental exhaustion, she started from Francisco's arms; and
turning upon him a beseeching, inquiring glance, exclaimed in a voice
which ineffable anguish could not rob of its melody: "Is it true--oh,
tell me is it true that the Count Riverola is no more?"

"It is, alas! too true, lady," answered Francisco, in a tone of the
deepest melancholy.

The heart of the fair stranger rebounded at the words which thus seemed
to destroy a last hope that lingered in her soul; and a hysterical
shriek burst from her lips as she threw her snow-white arms, bare to the
shoulders, around the head of the pall-covered coffin.

"Oh! my much-loved--my noble Andrea!" she exclaimed, a torrent of tears
now gushing from her eyes.

"That voice!--is it possible?" cried one of the spectators who had been
hitherto standing, as before said, at a respectful distance: and the
speaker--a man of tall, commanding form, graceful demeanor, wondrously
handsome countenance, and rich attire--immediately hurried toward the
spot where the young female still clung to the coffin, no one having the
heart to remove her.

The individual who had thus stepped forward, gave one rapid but
searching glance at the lady's countenance; and, yielding to the
surprise and joy which suddenly animated him, he exclaimed: "Yes--it is,
indeed, the lost Agnes!"

The young female started when she heard her name thus pronounced in a
place where she believed herself to be entirely unknown; and
astonishment for an instant triumphed over the anguish of her heart.

Hastily withdrawing her snow-white arms from the head of the coffin, she
turned toward the individual who had uttered her name, and he instantly
clasped her in his arms, murmuring, "Dearest--dearest Agnes, art thou
restored----"

But the lady shrieked, and struggled to escape from that tender embrace,
exclaiming, "What means this insolence? will no one protect me?"

"That will I," said Francisco, darting forward, and tearing her away
from the stranger's arms. "But, in the name of Heaven! let this
misunderstanding be cleared up elsewhere. Lady--and you, signor--I call
on you to remember where you are, and how solemn a ceremony you have
both aided to interrupt."

"I know not that man!" ejaculated Agnes, indicating the stranger. "I
come hither, because I heard--but an hour ago--that my noble Andrea was
no more. And I would not believe those who told me. Oh! no--I could not
think that Heaven had thus deprived me of all I loved on earth!"

"Lady, you are speaking of my father," said Francisco, in a somewhat
severe tone.

"Your father!" cried Agnes, now surveying the young count with interest
and curiosity. "Oh! then, my lord, you can pity--you can feel for me,
who in losing your father have lost all that could render existence
sweet!"

"No--you have not lost all!" exclaimed the handsome stranger, advancing
toward Agnes, and speaking in a profoundly impressive tone. "Have you
not one single relative left in the world? Consider, lady--an old, old
man--a shepherd in the Black Forest of Germany----"

"Speak not of him!" cried Agnes, wildly. "Did he know all, he would
curse me--he would spurn me from him--he would discard me forever! Oh!
when I think of that poor old man, with his venerable white hair,--that
aged, helpless man, who was so kind to me, who loved me so well, and
whom I so cruelly abandoned. But tell me, signor," she exclaimed, in
suddenly altered tone, while her breath came with the difficulty of
acute suspense,--"tell me, signor, does that old man still live?"

"He lives, Agnes," was the reply. "I know him well; at this moment he is
in Florence!"

"In Florence!" repeated Agnes; and so unexpectedly came this
announcement, that her limbs seemed to give way under her, and she would
have fallen on the marble pavement, had not the stranger caught her in
his arms.

"I will bear her away," he said; "she has a true friend in me."

And he was moving off with his senseless burden, when Francisco, struck
by a sudden idea, caught him by the elegantly slashed sleeve of his
doublet, and whispered thus, in a rapid tone: "From the few, but
significant words which fell from that lady's lips, and from her still
more impressive conduct, it would appear, alas! that my deceased father
had wronged her. If so, signor, it will be my duty to make her all the
reparation that can be afforded in such a case."

"'Tis well, my lord," answered the stranger, in a cold and haughty tone.
"To-morrow evening I will call upon you at your palace."

He then hurried on with the still senseless Agnes in his arms; and the
Count of Riverola retraced his steps to the immediate vicinity of the
coffin.

This scene, which so strangely interrupted the funeral ceremony, and
which has taken so much space to describe, did not actually occupy ten
minutes from the moment when the young lady first appeared in the
church, until that when she was borne away by the handsome stranger. The
funeral obsequies were completed; the coffin was lowered into the family
vault; the spectators dispersed, and the mourners, headed by the young
count, returned in procession to the Riverola mansion, which was
situated at no great distance.




CHAPTER V.

THE READING OF THE WILL.


When the mourners reached the palace, Francisco led the way to an
apartment where Nisida was awaiting their coming.

Francisco kissed her affectionately upon the forehead; and then took his
seat at the head of the table, his sister placing herself on his right
hand.

Dressed in deep mourning, and with her countenance unusually pale,
Nisida's appearance inspired a feeling of profound interest in the minds
of those who did not perceive that, beneath her calm and mournful
demeanor, feelings of painful intensity agitated within her breast. But
Dr. Duras, who knew her well--better, far better than even her own
brother--noticed an occasional wild flashing of the eye, a nervous
motion of the lips, and a degree of forced tranquillity of mien, which
proved how acute was the suspense she in reality endured.

On Francisco's left hand the notary-general, who had acted as one of the
chief mourners, took a seat. He was a short, thin, middle-aged man, with
a pale complexion, twinkling gray eyes, and a sharp expression of
countenance. Before him lay a sealed packet, on which the eyes of Nisida
darted, at short intervals, looks, the burning impatience of which were
comprehended by Dr. Duras alone; for next to Signor Vivaldi, the
notary-general--and consequently opposite to Nisida--sat the physician.

The remainder of the company consisted of Father Marco and those most
intimate friends of the family who had been invited to the funeral; but
whom it is unnecessary to describe more particularly.

Father Marco having recited a short prayer, in obedience to the custom
of the age, and the occasion, the notary-general proceeded to break the
seals of the large packet which lay before him: then, in a precise and
methodical manner, he drew forth a sheet of parchment, closely written
on.

Nisida leaned her right arm upon the table, and half-buried her
countenance in the snowy cambric handkerchief which she held.

The notary-general commenced the reading of the will.

After bestowing a few legacies, one of which was in favor of Dr. Duras,
and another in that of Signor Vivaldi himself, the testamentary document
ordained that the estates of the late Andrea, Count of Riverola, should
be held in trust by the notary-general and the physician, for the
benefit of Francisco, who was merely to enjoy the revenues produced by
the same until the age of thirty, at which period the guardianship was
to cease, and Francisco was then to enter into full and uncontrolled
possession of those immense estates.

But to this clause there was an important condition attached; for the
testamentary document ordained that should the Lady Nisida--either by
medical skill, or the interposition of Heaven--recover the faculties of
hearing and speaking at any time during the interval which was to elapse
ere Francisco would attain the age of thirty, then the whole of the
estates, with the exception of a very small one in the northern part of
Tuscany, were to be immediately made over to her; but without the power
of alienation on her part.

It must be observed that, in the middle ages many titles of nobility
depended only on the feudal possession of a particular property. This
was the case with the Riverola estates; and the title of Count of
Riverola was conferred simply by the fact of the ownership of the landed
property. Thus, supposing that Nisida became possessed of the estates,
she would have enjoyed the title of countess, while her brother
Francisco would have lost that of count.

We may also remind our readers that Francisco was now nineteen; and
eleven years must consequently elapse ere he could become the lord and
master of the vast territorial possessions of Riverola.

Great was the astonishment experienced by all who heard the provisions
of this strange will--with the exception of the notary-general and
Father Marco, the former of whom had drawn it up, and the latter of whom
was privy to its contents (though under a vow of secrecy) in his
capacity of father-confessor to the late count.

Francisco was himself surprised, and, in one sense, hurt; because the
nature of the testamentary document seemed to imply that the property
would have been inevitably left to his sister, with but a very small
provision for himself, had she not been so sorely afflicted as she was;
and this fact forced upon him the painful conviction that even when
contemplating his departure to another world, his father had not
softened toward his son!

But, on the other hand, Francisco was pleased that such consideration
had been shown toward a sister whom he so devotedly loved; and he
hastened, as soon as he could conquer his first emotions, to request the
notary-general to permit Nisida to peruse the will, adding, in a
mournful tone, "For all that your excellency has read has been, alas!
unavailing in respect to her."

Signor Vivaldi handed the document to the young count, who gently
touched his sister's shoulder and placed the parchment before her.

Nisida started as if convulsively, and raised from her handkerchief a
countenance so pale, so deadly pale, that Francisco shrank back in
alarm.

But instantly reflecting that the process of reading aloud a paper had
been as it were a kind of mockery in respect to his afflicted sister, he
pressed her hand tenderly, and made a sign for her to peruse the
document.

She mechanically addressed herself to the task; but ere her eyes--now of
burning, unearthly brilliancy--fell upon the parchment, they darted one
rapid, electric glance of ineffable anguish toward Dr. Duras, adown
whose cheeks large tears were trickling.

In a few minutes Nisida appeared to be absorbed in the perusal of the
will; and the most solemn silence prevailed throughout the apartment!

At length she started violently, tossed the paper indignantly to the
notary-general, and hastily wrote on a slip of paper these words:

"Should medical skill or the mercy of Heaven restore my speech and
faculty of hearing, I will abandon all claim to the estates and title of
Riverola to my dear brother Francisco."

She then handed the slip of paper to the notary-general, who read the
contents aloud.

Francisco darted upon his sister a look of ineffable gratitude and love,
but shook his head, as much as to imply that he could not accept the
boon even if circumstances enabled her to confer it!

She returned the look with another, expressive of impatience at his
refusal: and her eyes seemed to say, as eyes never yet spoke, "Oh, that
I had the power to give verbal utterance to my feelings!"

Meantime the notary-general had written a few words beneath those penned
by Nisida, to whom he had handed back the slip; and she hastened to read
them, thus: "Your ladyship has no power to alienate the estates, should
they come into your possession."

Nisida burst into an agony of tears and rushed from the room.

Her brother immediately followed to console her; and the company
retired, each individual to his own abode.

But of all that company who had been present at the reading of the will,
none experienced such painful emotions as Dr. Duras.




CHAPTER VI.

THE PICTURES--AGNES AND THE UNKNOWN--MYSTERY.


When Agnes awoke from the state of stupor in which she had been conveyed
from the church, she found herself lying upon an ottoman, in a large and
elegantly furnished apartment.

The room was lighted by two silver lamps suspended to the ceiling, and
which, being fed with aromatic oil of the purest quality, imparted a
delicious perfume to the atmosphere.

The walls were hung with paintings representing scenes of strange
variety and interest, and connected with lands far--far away. Thus, one
depicted a council of red men assembled around a blazing fire, on the
border of one of the great forests of North America; another showed the
interior of an Esquimaux hut amidst the eternal ice of the Pole;--a
third delineated, with fearfully graphic truth, the writhing of a human
victim in the folds of the terrific anaconda in the island of Ceylon; a
fourth exhibited a pleasing contrast to the one previously cited, by
having for its subject a family meeting of Chinese on the terraced roof
of a high functionary's palace at Perkin; a fifth represented the
splendid court of King Henry the Eighth in London; a sixth showed the
interior of the harem of the Ottoman Sultan.

But there were two portraits amongst this beautiful and varied
collection of pictures, all of which, we should observe, appeared to
have been very recently executed--two portraits which we must pause to
describe. One represented a tall man of about forty years of age, with
magnificent light hair--fine blue eyes, but terrible in expression--a
countenance indisputably handsome, though every lineament denoted horror
and alarm--and a symmetrical form, bowed by the weight of sorrow.
Beneath this portrait was the following inscription:--"F., _Count of_
A., _terminated his career on the 1st of August, 1517_."

The other portrait alluded to was that of an old--old man, who had
apparently numbered ninety winters. He was represented as cowering over
a few embers in a miserable hovel, while the most profound sorrow was
depicted on his countenance. Beneath this picture was the ensuing
inscription:--"F. W., _January 7th, 1516. His last day thus._"

There was another feature in that apartment to which we must likewise
direct our reader's attention, ere we pursue the thread of our
narrative. This was an object hanging against the wall, next to the
second portrait just now described. It also had the appearance of being
a picture--or at all events a frame of the same dimensions as the
others; but whether that frame contained a painting, or whether it were
empty, it was impossible to say, so long as it remained concealed by the
large black cloth which covered it, and which was carefully fastened by
small silver nails at each corner.

This strange object gave a lugubrious and sinister appearance to a room
in other respects cheerful, gay, and elegant.

But to resume our tale.

When Agnes awoke from her stupor, she found herself reclining on a soft
ottoman of purple velvet, fringed with gold; and the handsome stranger,
who had borne her from the church, was bathing her brow with water which
he took from a crystal vase on a marble table.

As she slowly and languidly opened her large hazel eyes, her thoughts
collected themselves in the gradient manner; and when her glance
encountered that of her unknown friend, who was bending over her with an
expression of deep interest on his features, there flashed upon her mind
a recollection of all that had so recently taken place.

"Where am I?" she demanded, starting up, and casting her eyes wildly
around her.

"In the abode of one who will not injure you," answered the stranger, in
a kind and melodious tone.

"But who are you? and wherefore have you brought me hither?" exclaimed
Agnes. "Oh! remember--you spoke of that old man--my grandfather--the
shepherd of the Black Forest----"

"You shall see him--you shall be restored to him," answered the
stranger.

"But will he receive me--will he not spurn me from him?" asked Agnes, in
a wildly impassioned--almost hysterical tone.

"The voice of pity cannot refuse to heave a sigh for thy fall," was the
response. "If thou wast guilty in abandoning one who loved thee so
tenderly, and whose earthly reliance was on thee, he, whom you did so
abandon, has not the less need to ask pardon of thee. For he speedily
forgot his darling Agnes--he traveled the world over, yet sought her
not--her image was, as it were, effaced from his memory. But when
accident----"

"Oh! signor, you are mistaken--you know not the old man whom I deserted,
and who was a shepherd on the verge of the Black Forest!" interrupted
Agnes, in a tone expressive of bitter disappointment, "for he, who loved
me so well, was old--very old, and could not possibly accomplish those
long wanderings of which you speak. Indeed, if he be still alive--but
that is scarcely possible----"

And she burst into tears.

"Agnes," cried the stranger, "the venerable shepherd of whom you speak
accomplished those wanderings in spite of the ninety winters which
marked his age. He is alive, too----"

"He is alive!" ejaculated the lady, with reviving hopes.

"He is alive--and at this moment in Florence!" was the emphatic answer.
"Did I not ere now tell thee as much in the church?"

"Yes--I remember--but my brain is confused!" murmured Agnes, pressing
her beautiful white hands upon her polished brow. "Oh, if he be indeed
alive--and so near me as you say--delay not in conducting me to him; for
he is now the only being on earth to whom I dare look for solace and
sympathy."

"You are even now beneath the roof of your grandfather's dwelling," said
the stranger, speaking slowly and anxiously watching the effect which
this announcement was calculated to produce upon her to whom he
addressed himself.

"Here!--this my grandsire's abode!" she exclaimed, clasping her hands
together, and glancing upward, as if to express her gratitude to Heaven
for this welcome intelligence. "But how can that old man, whom I left so
poor, have become the owner of this lordly palace? Speak, signor!--all
you have told me seems to involve some strange mystery," she added with
breathless rapidity. "Those wanderings of which you ere now
spoke--wanderings over the world, performed by a man bent down by age;
and then this noble dwelling--the appearances of wealth which present
themselves around--the splendor--the magnificence----"

"All--all are the old man's," answered the stranger, "and may some day
become thine!"

"Holy Virgin!" exclaimed Agnes, sinking upon the ottoman from which she
had ere now risen, "I thank thee that thou hast bestowed these blessings
on my relative in his old age. And yet," she added, again overwhelmed by
doubts, "it is scarcely possible--no, it is too romantic to be true!
Signor, thou art of a surety mistaken in him whom thou supposes to be my
grandsire?"

"Give me thine hand, Agnes--and I will convince thee," said the
stranger.

The young lady complied mechanically; and her unknown friend led her
toward the portrait of the old man of ninety.

Agnes recognized the countenance at a single glance, and would have
fallen upon the floor had not her companion supported her in his arms.

Tears again came to her relief; but hastily wiping them away, she
extended her arms passionately toward the portrait, exclaiming, "Oh! now
I comprehend you, signor! my grandsire lives in this dwelling
indeed--beneath this roof; but lives only in that picture! Alas! alas!
It was thus, no doubt, that the poor old man seemed when he was
abandoned by me--the lost, the guilty Agnes! It was thus that he sat in
his lonely dwelling--crushed and overwhelmed by the black ingratitude of
his granddaughter! Oh! that I had never seen this portrait--this
perpetuation of so much loneliness and so much grief! Ah! too faithful
delineation of that sad scene which was wrought by me--vainly penitent
that I am!"

And covering her face with her hands she threw herself on her knees
before the portrait, and gave way to all the bitterness and all the
wildness of her grief.

The stranger interrupted her not for some minutes: he allowed the flood
of that anguish to have its full vent: but when it was partially
subsiding he approached the kneeling penitent, raised her gently, and
said, "Despair not! your grandsire lives."

"He lives!" she repeated, her countenance once more expressing radiant
hope, as the sudden gleam of sunshine bursts forth amidst the last drops
of the April shower.

But, almost at the same instant that she uttered those words, her eyes
caught sight of the inscription at the foot of the picture; and,
bounding forward she read it aloud.

"Holy Virgin! I am deceived--basely, vilely deceived!" she continued,
all the violence of her grief, which had begun to ebb so rapidly, now
flowing back upon her soul; then turning abruptly round upon the
stranger, she said in a hoarse hollow tone: "Signor, wherefore thus
ungenerously trifle with my feelings--my best feelings? Who art thou?
what would'st thou with me? and wherefore is that portrait here?"

"Agnes--Agnes!" exclaimed her companion, "compose yourself, I implore
you! I do not trifle with you--I do not deceive you! Your grandsire,
Fernand Wagner, is alive--and in this house. You shall see him
presently; but in the meantime, listen to what I am about to say."

Agnes placed her finger impatiently upon the inscription at the bottom
of the portrait, and exclaimed in a wild, hysterical tone, "Canst thou
explain this, signor? 'January 7th, 1516,'--that was about a week after
I abandoned him; and, oh! well indeed might those words be added--'His
last day thus!'"

"You comprehend not the meaning of that inscription!" ejaculated the
stranger, in an imploring tone, as if to beseech her to have patience to
listen to him. "There is a dreadful mystery connected with Fernand
Wagner--connected with me--connected with these two portraits--connected
also with----"

He checked himself suddenly, and his whole form seemed convulsed with
horror as he glanced toward the black cloth covering the neighboring
frame.

"A mystery?" repeated Agnes. "Yes--all is mystery: and vague and
undefinable terrors oppress my soul!"

"Thou shalt soon--too soon--be enlightened!" said the stranger, in a
voice of profound melancholy; "at least, to a certain extent," he added,
murmuringly. "But contemplate that other portrait for a few
moments--that you may make yourself acquainted with the countenance of a
wretch who, in conferring a fearful boon upon your grandsire, has
plunged him into an abyss of unredeemable horror!"

Agnes cast her looks toward the portrait of the tall man with the
magnificent hair, the flashing blue eyes, the wildly expressive
countenance, and the symmetrical form bowed with affliction; and, having
surveyed it for some time with repugnance strongly mingled with an
invincible interest and curiosity, she suddenly pointed toward the
inscription.

"Yes, yes; there is another terrible memorial!" cried the stranger. "But
art thou now prepared to listen to a wondrous--an astonishing tale--such
a tale as even nurses would scarcely dare narrate to lull children----"

"I _am_ prepared," answered Agnes. "I perceive there is a dreadful
mystery connected with my grandsire--with you, also--and perhaps with
me;--and better learn at once the truth, than remain in this state of
intolerable suspense."

Her unknown friend conducted her back to the ottoman, whereon she placed
herself.

He took a seat by her side, and, after a few moments' profound
meditation, addressed her in the following manner.




CHAPTER VII.

REVELATIONS.


"You remember, Agnes, how happily the times passed when you were the
darling of the old man in his poor cottage. All the other members of his
once numerous family had been swept away by pestilence, malady,
accident, or violence; and you only were left to him. When the trees of
this great Black Forest were full of life and vegetable blood, in the
genial warmth of summer, you gathered flowers which you arranged
tastefully in the little hut; and those gifts of nature, so culled and
so dispensed by your hands, gave the dwelling a more cheerful air than
if it had been hung with tapestry richly fringed. Of an evening, with
the setting sun, glowing gold, you were wont to kneel by the side of
that old shepherd; and together ye chanted a hymn giving thanks for the
mercies of the day, and imploring the renewal of them for the morrow.
Then did the music of your sweet voice, as it flowed upon the old man's
ears in its melting, silvery tones, possess a charm for his senses which
taught him to rejoice and be grateful that, though the rest of his race
was swept away, thou, Agnes, was left!

"When the winter came, and the trees were stripped of their verdure, the
poor cottage had still its enjoyments; for though the cold was intense
without, yet there were warm hearts within; and the cheerful fire of an
evening, when the labors of the day were passed, seemed to make gay and
joyous companionship.

"But suddenly you disappeared; and the old man found himself deserted.
You left him, too, in the midst of winter--at a time when his age and
infirmities demanded additional attentions. For two or three days he
sped wearily about, seeking you everywhere in the neighboring district
of the Black Forest. His aching limbs were dragged up rude heights, that
he might plunge his glances down into the hollow chasms; but still not a
trace of Agnes! He roved along the precipices overlooking the rustling
streams, and searched--diligently searched the mazes of the dark wood;
but still not a trace of Agnes! At length the painful conviction broke
upon him that he was deserted--abandoned; and he would sooner have found
thee a mangled and disfigured corpse in the forest than have adopted
that belief. Nay--weep not now; it is all past; and if I recapitulate
these incidents, it is but to convince thee how wretched the old man
was, and how great is the extenuation for the course which he was so
soon persuaded to adopt."

"Then, who art thou that knowest all this?" exclaimed Agnes, casting
looks of alarm upon her companion.

"Thou shalt soon learn who I am," was the reply.

Agnes still gazed upon him in mingled terror and wonder; for his words
had gone to her heart, and she remembered how he had embraced her when
she first encountered him in the church. His manners, too, were so mild,
so kind, so paternal toward her; and yet he seemed but a few years older
than herself.

"You have gazed upon the portrait of the old man," he continued, "as he
appeared on that memorable evening which sealed his fate!"

Agnes started wildly.

"Yes, sealed his fate, but spared him his life!" said the unknown,
emphatically. "As he is represented in that picture, so was he sitting
mournfully over the sorry fire, for the morrow's renewal of which there
was no wood! At that hour a man appeared--appeared in the midst of the
dreadful storm which burst over the Black Forest. This man's countenance
is now known to thee; it is perpetuated in the other portrait to which I
directed thine attention."

"There is something of a wild and fearful interest in the aspect of that
man," said Agnes, casting a shuddering glance behind her, and trembling
lest the canvas had burst into life, and the countenance whose
lineaments were depicted thereon was peering over her shoulder.

"Yes, and there was much of wild and fearful interest in his history,"
was the reply; "but of that I cannot speak--no, I dare not. Suffice it
to say that he was a being possessed of superhuman powers, and that he
proffered his services to the wretched--the abandoned--the deserted
Wagner. He proposed to endow him with a new existence--to restore him to
youth and manly beauty--to make him rich--to embellish his mind with
wondrous attainments--to enable him to cast off the wrinkles of age----"

"Holy Virgin! now I comprehend it all!" shrieked Agnes, throwing herself
at the feet of her companion: "and you--_you_----"

"I am Fernand Wagner!" he exclaimed, folding her in his embrace.

"And can you pardon me, can you forgive my deep--deep ingratitude?"
cried Agnes.

"Let us forgive each other!" said Wagner. "You can now understand the
meaning of the inscription beneath my portrait. 'His last day thus'
signifies that it was the last day on which I wore that aged, decrepit,
and sinking form."

"But wherefore do you say, 'Let us forgive each other?'" demanded Agnes,
scarcely knowing whether to rejoice or weep at the marvelous
transformation of her grandsire.

"Did I not ere now inform thee that thou wast forgotten until accident
threw thee in my way to-night?" exclaimed Fernand. "I have wandered
about the earth and beheld all the scenes which are represented in those
pictures--ay, and many others equally remarkable. For eighteen months I
was the servant--and slave of him who conferred upon me this fatal
boon----"

"At what price, then, have you purchased it?" asked Agnes, with a cold
shudder.

"Seek not to learn my secret, girl!" cried Wagner, almost sternly; then,
in a milder tone, he added, "By all you deem holy and sacred, I conjure
you, Agnes, never again to question me on that head! I have told thee as
much as it is necessary for thee to know----"

"One word--only one word!" exclaimed Agnes in an imploring voice. "Hast
thou bartered thine immortal soul----"

"No--no!" responded Wagner, emphatically. "My fate is terrible
indeed--but I am not beyond the pale of salvation. See! Agnes--I kiss
the crucifix--the symbol of faith and hope!"

And, as he uttered these words, he pressed to his lips an ivory crucifix
of exquisite workmanship, which he took from the table.

"The Virgin be thanked that my fearful suspicion should prove
unfounded!" ejaculated Agnes.

"Yes--I am not altogether lost," answered Wagner. "But _he_--the unhappy
man who made me what I am---- And yet I dare not say more," he added,
suddenly checking himself. "For one year and a half did I follow him as
his servitor--profiting by his knowledge--gaining varied information
from his experience--passing with the rapidity of thought from clime to
clime--surveying scenes of ineffable bliss, and studying all the
varieties of misery that fall to the lot of human nature. When he--my
master--passed away----"

"On the 1st of August, 1517," observed Agnes, quoting from the
inscription beneath the portrait of the individual alluded to.

"Yes; when he passed away," continued Wagner, "I continued my wanderings
alone until the commencement of last year, when I settled myself in
Florence. The mansion to which I have brought you is mine. It is in a
somewhat secluded spot on the banks of the Arno, and is surrounded by
gardens. My household consists of but few retainers; and they are
elderly persons--docile and obedient. The moment that I entered this
abode, I set to work to paint those portraits to which I have directed
your attention--likewise these pictures," he added, glancing around,
"and in which I have represented scenes that my own eyes have witnessed.
Here, henceforth, Agnes, shalt thou dwell; and let the past be
forgotten. But there are three conditions which I must impose upon
thee."

"Name them," said Agnes; "I promise obedience beforehand."

"The first," returned Fernand, "is that you henceforth look upon me as
your brother, and call me such when we are alone together or in the
presence of strangers. The second is that you never seek to remove the
black cloth which covers yon place----"

Agnes glanced toward the object alluded to and shuddered--as if the veil
concealed some new mystery.

"And the third condition is that you revive not on any future occasion
the subject of our present conversation, nor even question me in respect
to those secrets which it may suit me to retain within my own breast."

Agnes promised obedience, and, embracing Wagner, said, "Heaven has been
merciful to me, in my present affliction, in that it has given me _a
brother_!"

"Thou speakest of thine afflictions, Agnes!" exclaimed Wagner; "this is
the night of revelations and mutual confidences--and this night once
passed, we will never again allude to the present topics, unless events
should render their revival necessary. It now remains for thee to
narrate to me all that has befallen thee since the winter of 1516."

Agnes hastened to comply with Fernand's request, and commenced her
history in the following manner:




CHAPTER VIII.

THE HISTORY OF AGNES.


"When you, dear brother--for so I shall henceforth call you--commenced
your strange and wondrous revelations ere now, you painted in vivid
colors the happiness which dwelt in our poor cottage on the borders of
the Black Forest. You saw how deeply your words affected me--I could not
restrain my tears. Let me not, however, dwell upon this subject; but
rather hasten to explain those powerful causes which induced me to quit
that happy home.

"It was about six weeks before my flight that I went into the forest to
gather wood. I was in the midst of my occupation, gayly thrilling a
native song, when the sound of a horse's feet upon the hard soil of the
beaten path suddenly interrupted me. I turned around, seeing a cavalier
of strikingly handsome countenance--though somewhat stern withal, and of
noble mien. He was in reality forty-four years of age--as I afterward
learnt; but he seemed scarcely forty, so light did time sit upon his
brow. His dress was elegant, though of some strange fashion; for it was
Italian costume that he wore. The moment he was close to the spot where
I stood he considered me for a short while, till I felt my cheeks
glowing beneath his ardent gaze. I cast down my eyes; and the next
instant he had leapt from his horse and was by my side. He addressed me
in gentle terms; and when again I looked at him his countenance no more
seemed stern. It appeared that he was staying with the Baron von
Nauemberg, with whom he had been out hunting in the Black Forest, and
from whom and his suite he was separated in the ardor of the chase.
Being a total stranger in those parts, he had lost his way. I
immediately described to him the proper path for him to pursue; and he
offered me gold as a recompense. I declined the guerdon; and he
questioned me concerning my family and my position. I told him that I
lived hard-by, with an only relative--a grandsire, to whom I was
devotedly attached. He lingered long in conversation with me; and his
manner was so kind, so condescending, and so respectful, that I thought
not I was doing wrong to listen to him. At length he requested me to be
on the same spot at the same hour on the morrow; and he departed.

"I was struck by his appearance--dazzled by the brilliancy of his
discourse; for he spoke German fluently, although an Italian. He had
made a deep impression on my mind; and I felt a secret longing to meet
him again. Suddenly it occurred to me that I was acting with
impropriety, and that you would be angry with me. I therefore resolved
not to mention to you my accidental encounter with the handsome
cavalier; but I determined at the same time not to repair to the forest
next day. When the appointed hour drew near, my good genius deserted me;
and I went. He was there, and he seemed pleased at my punctuality. I
need not detail to you the nature of the discourse which he held toward
me. Suffice it to say, that he declared how much he had been struck with
my beauty, and how fondly he would love me; and he dazzled me still more
by revealing his haughty name; and I found that I was beloved by the
Count of Riverola.

"You can understand how a poor girl, who had hitherto dwelt in the
seclusion of a cottage on the border of a vast wood, and who seldom saw
any person of higher rank than herself, was likely to be dazzled by the
fine things which that great nobleman breathed in her ear.

"And I was dazzled--flattered--excited--bewildered. I consented to meet
him again: interview followed interview, until I no longer required any
persuasion to induce me to keep the appointments thus given. But there
were times when my conscience reproached me for conduct which I knew you
would blame; and yet I dared not unburden my soul to you!

"Six weeks thus passed away; I was still innocent--but madly in love
with the Count of Riverola. He was the subject of my thoughts by day--of
my dreams by night; and I felt that I could make any sacrifice to retain
his affection. That sacrifice was too soon demanded! At the expiration
of the six weeks he informed me that on the following day he must return
to Italy, whither important affairs called him sooner than he had
anticipated. He urged me to accompany him; I was bewildered--maddened by
the contemplation of my duty on the one hand, of my love on the other.
My guardian saint deserted me; I yielded to the persuasion of the
count--I became guilty--and there was now no alternative save to fly
with him!

"Oh! believe me when I declare that this decision cost me a dreadful
pang; but the count would not leave me time for reflection. He bore me
away on his fleet steed, and halted not until the tall towers of
Nauemberg Castle appeared in the distance. Then he stopped at a poor
peasant's cottage, where his gold insured me a welcome reception. Having
communicated the plan which he proposed to adopt respecting our journey
to Florence, he took an affectionate leave of me, with a promise to
return on the ensuing morning. The remainder of the day was passed
wretchedly enough by me; and I already began to repent of the step I had
taken. The peasants who occupied the cottage vainly endeavored to cheer
me; my heart was too full to admit of consolation. Night came at length,
and I retired to rest; but my dreams were of so unpleasant a nature--so
filled with frightful images--that never did I welcome the dawn with
more enthusiastic joy. Shortly after daybreak the count appeared at the
cottage, attended by one of his numerous suite--a faithful attendant on
whom he could rely implicitly. They were mounted on good steeds; and
Antonio--such was the name of the servitor--led a third by the bridle.
This one the count had purchased at an adjacent hamlet, expressly for my
use. He had also procured a page's attire; for in such disguise was it
agreed that I should accompany the count to Italy.

"I should observe that the nobleman, in order to screen our _amour_ as
much as possible, had set out from Nauemberg Castle, attended by Antonio
alone, alleging as an excuse that certain affairs compelled him to
travel homeward with as much celerity as possible. The remainder of his
suit were therefore ordered to follow at their leisure.

"Oh! with what agonizing emotion did my heart beat, as, in a private
chamber of the cottage, I laid aside my peasant's garb and donned the
doublet, hose, cap and cloak of a youthful page. I thought of you--of
your helplessness--your age,--and also of my native land, which I was
about to quit--perhaps forever! Still I had gone too far to retreat, and
regrets were useless. I must also confess that when I returned to the
room where the count was waiting for me, and heard the flattering
compliments which he paid me on my appearance in that disguise, I
smiled--yes, I smiled, and much of my remorse vanished!

"We set out upon our journey toward the Alps; and the count exerted all
his powers of conversation to chase away from my mind any regrets or
repinings that might linger there. Though cold and stern--forbidding and
reserved--haughty and austere in his bearing toward others, to me he was
affectionate and tender. To be brief, yet with sorrow must I confess it,
at the expiration of a few days I could bear to think, without weeping,
of the fond relative whom I had left behind in the cottage of the Black
Forest!

"We crossed the Alps in safety, but not without experiencing much peril;
and in a short time glorious Italy spread itself out at our feet. The
conversation of the count had already prepared me to admire----"

At this moment, Agnes' narrative was interrupted by a piercing shriek
which burst from her lips; and extending her arms toward the window of
the apartment, she screamed hysterically, "Again that countenance!" and
fell back on the ottoman.




CHAPTER IX.

CONCLUSION OF THE HISTORY OF AGNES.


In order that the reader may understand how Agnes could perceive any
object outside the window, in the intense darkness of that tempestuous
night--or rather morning, for it was now past one o'clock--we must
observe that not only was the apartment in which Wagner and herself were
seated brilliantly lighted by the silver lamps, but that, according to
Florentine custom, there were also lamps suspended outside to the
veranda, or large balcony belonging to the casements of the room above.

Agnes and Wagner were, moreover, placed near the window which looked
into a large garden attached to the mansion; and thus it was easy for
the lady, whose eyes happened to be fixed upon the casement in the
earnest interest with which she was relating her narrative, to perceive
the human countenance that appeared at one of the panes.

The moment her history was interrupted by the ejaculation of alarm that
broke from her lips, Wagner started up and hastened to the window; but
he could see nothing save the waving evergreens in his garden, and the
light of a mansion which stood at a distance of about two hundred yards
from his own abode.

He was about to open the casement and step into the garden, when Agnes
caught him by the arm, exclaiming wildly, "Leave me not--I could not--I
could not bear to remain alone!"

"No, I will not quit you, Agnes," replied Wagner, conducting her back to
the sofa and resuming his seat by her side. "But wherefore that
ejaculation of alarm? Whose countenance did you behold? Speak, dearest
Agnes!"

"I will hasten to explain the cause of my terror," retorted Agnes,
becoming more composed. "Ere now I was about to detail the particulars
of my journey to Florence, in company with the Count of Riverola, and
attended by Antonio; but as those particulars are of no material
interest, I will at once pass on to the period when we arrived in this
city."

"But the countenance at the window?" said Wagner, somewhat impatiently.

"Listen--and you will soon know all," replied Agnes. "It was in the
evening when I entered Florence for the first time. Antonio had
proceeded in advance to inform his mother--a widow who resided in a
decent house, but in an obscure street near the cathedral--that she was
speedily to receive a young lady as a guest. This young lady was myself;
and accordingly, when the count assisted me to alight from my horse at
the gate of Dame Margaretha's abode, the good widow had everything in
readiness for my reception. The count conversed with her apart for a few
minutes; and I observed that he also placed a heavy purse in her
hand--doubtless to insure her secrecy relative to the _amour_, with the
existence of which he was of course compelled to acquaint her. Having
seen me comfortably installed in Dame Margaretha's best apartment, he
quitted me, with a promise to return on the morrow."

Agnes paused for a few moments, sighed, and continued her narrative in
the following manner:

"Fortunately for me, Dame Margaretha was a German woman, who had married
an Italian, otherwise my condition would have been wretched in the
extreme. She treated me with great kindness, mingled with respect; for
though but a poor peasant girl, I was beloved and protected by one of
the most powerful nobles of Florence. I retired early to rest:--sleep
did not, however, immediately visit my eyes! Oh! no--I was in Florence,
but my thoughts were far away in my native Germany, and on the borders
of the Black Forest. At length I fell into an uneasy slumber, and when I
awoke the sun was shining through the lattice. I arose and dressed
myself, and to my ineffable delight found that I was no longer to wear
the garb of a page. That disguise had been removed while I slept, and in
its place were costly vestments, which I donned with a pleasure that
triumphed over the gloom of my soul. In the course of the morning rich
furniture was brought to the house, and in a few hours the apartments
allotted to me were converted, in my estimation, into a little paradise.
The count arrived soon afterward, and I now--pardon me the neglect and
ingratitude which my words confess--I now felt very happy. The noble
Andrea enjoined me to go abroad but seldom, and never without being
accompanied by Dame Margaretha; he also besought me not to appear to
recognize him should I chance to meet him in public at any time, nor to
form acquaintances; in a word, to live retired and secluded as possible,
alike for his sake and my own. I promised compliance with all he
suggested, and he declared in return that he would never cease to love
me."

"Dwell not upon details, Agnes," said Wagner; "for, although I am deeply
interested in your narrative, my curiosity is strangely excited to learn
the meaning of that terror which overcame you ere now."

"I will confine myself to material facts as much as possible," returned
Agnes. "Time glided rapidly away;--months flew by, and with sorrow and
shame must I confess that the memories of the past, the memories of the
bright, happy days of my innocence intruded but little on the life which
I led. For, though he was so much older than I, yet I loved the Count of
Riverola devotedly. Oh! Heaven knows how devotedly! His conversation
delighted, fascinated me; and he seemed to experience a pleasure in
imparting to me the extensive knowledge which he had acquired. To me he
unbent as, doubtless, to human being he never unbent before; in my
presence his sternness, his somber moods, his gloomy thoughts vanished.
It was evident that he had much preying upon his mind; and perhaps he
loved me thus fondly because--by some unaccountable whim or caprice, or
strange influence--he found solace in my society. The presents which he
heaped upon me, but which have been nearly all snatched from me, were of
immense value; and when I remonstrated with him on account of a
liberality so useless to one whom he allowed to want for nothing, he
would reply, 'But remember, Agnes, when I shall be no more, riches will
constitute your best friend, your safest protection; for such is the
order of things in this world.' He generally spent two hours with me
every day, and frequently visited me again in the evening. Thus did time
pass; and at length I come to that incident which will explain the
terror I ere now experienced."

Agnes cast a hasty glance toward the window, as if to assure herself
that the object of her fears was no longer there; and, satisfied on this
head, she proceeded in the following manner:

"It was about six months ago that I repaired as usual on the Sabbath
morning to mass, accompanied by Dame Margaretha, when I found myself the
object of some attention on the part of a lady, who was kneeling at a
short distance from the place which I occupied in the church. The lady
was enveloped in a dark, thick veil, the ample folds of which concealed
her countenance, and meandered over her whole body's splendidly
symmetrical length of limb in such a manner as to aid her rich attire in
shaping, rather than hiding, the contours of that matchless form. I was
struck by her fine proportions, which gave her, even in her kneeling
attitude, a queen-like and majestic air; and I longed to obtain a
glimpse of her countenance--the more so as I could perceive by her
manner and the position of her head that from beneath her dark veil her
eyes were intently fixed upon myself. At length the scrutiny to which I
was thus subjected began to grow so irksome--nay, even alarming, that I
hurriedly drew down my own veil, which I had raised through respect for
the sacred altar whereat I was kneeling. Still I knew that the stranger
lady was gazing on me; I _felt_ that she was. A certain uneasy
sensation--amounting almost to a superstitious awe--convinced me that I
was the object of her undivided attention. Suddenly the priests, in
procession, came down from the altar; and as they passed us, I
instinctively raised my veil again, through motives of deferential
respect. At the same instant I glanced toward the stranger lady; she
also drew back the dark covering from her face. Oh! what a countenance
was then revealed to me--a countenance of such sovereign beauty that,
though of the same sex, I was struck with admiration; but, in the next
moment, a thrill of terror shot through my heart--for the fascination of
the basilisk could scarcely paralyze its victim with more appalling
effect than did the eyes of that lady. It might be conscience qualms,
excited by some unknown influence--it might even have been imagination;
but it nevertheless appeared as if those large, black, burning orbs shot
forth lightnings which seared and scorched my very soul! For that
splendid countenance, of almost unearthly beauty, was suddenly marked by
an expression of such vindictive rage, such ineffable hatred, such
ferocious menace, that I should have screamed had I not been as it were
stunned--stupefied!

"The procession of priests swept past. I averted my head from the
stranger lady. In a few moments I again glanced hurriedly at the place
which she had occupied--but she was gone. Then I felt relieved! On
quitting the church, I frankly narrated to old Margaretha these
particulars as I have now unfolded them to you; and methought that she
was for a moment troubled as I spoke! But if she were, she speedily
recovered her composure--endeavored to soothe me by attributing it all
to my imagination, and earnestly advised me not to cause any uneasiness
to the count by mentioning the subject to him. I readily promised
compliance with this injunction; and in the course of a few days ceased
to think upon the incident which has made so strange but evanescent an
impression on my mind."

"Doubtless Dame Margaretha was right in her conjecture," said Wagner;
"and your imagination----"

"Oh, no--no! It was not fancy!" interrupted Agnes, hastily. "But listen,
and then judge for yourself. I informed you ere now that it was about
six months ago when the event which I have just related took place. At
that period, also, my noble lover--the ever-to be lamented Andrea--first
experienced the symptoms of that internal disease which has, alas!
carried him to the tomb."

Agnes paused, wiped away her tears, and continued thus:

"His visits to me consequently became less frequent;--I was more
alone--for Margaretha was not always a companion who could solace me for
the absence of one so dearly loved as my Andrea; and repeated fits of
deep despondency seized upon my soul. At those times I felt as if some
evil--vague and undefinable, but still terrible--were impending over me.
Was it my lord's approaching death of which I had a presentiment? I know
not! Weeks passed away; the count's visits occurred at intervals growing
longer and longer--but his affection toward me had not abated. No: a
malady that preyed upon his vitals retained him much at home;--and at
last, about two months ago, I received through Antonio the afflicting
intelligence that he was confined to his bed. My anguish now knew no
bounds. I would fly to him--oh! I would fly to him:--who was more worthy
to watch by his couch than I, who so dearly loved him! Dame Margaretha
represented to me how painful it would be to his lordship were our
_amour_ to transpire through any rash proceeding on my part--the more
so, as I knew that he had a daughter and a son! I accordingly restrained
my impetuous longing to hasten to his bedside:--I could not so easily
subdue my grief!

"One night I sat up late in my lonely chamber--pondering on the
melancholy position in which I was placed,--loving so tenderly, yet not
daring to fly to him whom I loved,--and giving way to all the mournful
ideas which presented themselves to my imagination. At length my mind
grew bewildered by those sad reflections; vague terrors gathered around
me--multiplying in number and augmenting in intensity,--until at length
the very figures on the tapestry with which the room was hung appeared
animated with power to scare and affright me. The wind moaned ominously
without, and raised strange echoes within; oppressive feelings crowded
on my soul. At length the gale swelled to a hurricane--a whirlwind,
seldom experienced in this delicious clime. Howlings in a thousand tones
appeared to flit through the air; and piercing lamentations seemed to
sound down the black clouds that rolled their mighty volumes together,
veiling the moon and stars in thickest gloom. Overcome with terror, I
retired to rest--and I slept. But troubled dreams haunted me throughout
the night, and I awoke at an early hour in the morning. But--holy angels
protect me!--what did I behold? Bending over me, as I lay, was that same
countenance which I had seen four months before in the church,--and now,
as it was _then_, darting upon me lightning from large black eyes that
seemed to send shafts of flame and fire to the inmost recesses of my
soul! Yet--distorted as it was with demoniac rage--that face was still
endowed with the queen-like beauty--the majesty of loveliness, which had
before struck me, and which even lent force to those looks of dreadful
menace that were fixed upon me. There were the high forehead--the proud
lip, curled in scorn,--the brilliant teeth, glistening between the
quivering vermilion,--and the swan-like arching of the dazzling neck;
there also was the dark glory of the luxuriant hair!

"For a few moments I was spell-bound--motionless--speechless. Clothed
with terror and sublimity, yet in all the flush of the most perfect
beauty, a strange--mysterious being stood over me: and I knew not
whether she were a denizen of this world, or a spirit risen from
another. Perhaps the transcendent loveliness of that countenance was but
a mask and the wondrous symmetry of that form but a disguise, beneath
which all the passions of hell were raging in the brain and in the heart
of a fiend. Such were the ideas that flashed through my imagination; and
I involuntarily closed my eyes, as if this action could avert the
malignity that appeared to menace me. But dreadful thoughts still
pursued me--enveloping me, as it were, in an oppressive mist wherein
appalling though dimly seen images and forms were agitating; and I again
opened my eyes. The lady--if an earthly being she really were--was gone.
I rose from my couch and glanced nervously around--expecting almost to
behold an apparition come forth from behind the tapestry, or the folds
of the curtains. But my attention was suddenly arrested by a fact more
germane to worldly occurrences. The casket wherein I kept the rich
presents made to me at different times by my Andrea had been forced open
and the most valuable portion of its contents were gone. On a closer
investigation I observed that the articles which were left were those
that were purchased new; whereas the jewels that had been abstracted
were old ones, which, as the count had informed me, had belonged to his
deceased wife.

"On discovering this robbery, I began to suspect that my mysterious
visitress, who had caused me so much alarm, was the thief of my
property; and I immediately summoned old Margaretha. She was of course
astounded at the occurrence which I related; and, after some reflection,
she suddenly remembered that she had forgotten to fasten the house-door
ere she retired to rest on the preceding evening. I chided her for a
neglect which had enabled some evil-disposed woman to penetrate into my
chamber, and not only terrify but also plunder me. She implored my
forgiveness, and besought me not to mention the incident to the count
when next we met. Alas! my noble Andrea and I never met again.

"I was sorely perplexed by the event which I have just related. If the
mysterious visitress were a common thief, why did she leave any of the
jewels in the casket? and wherefore had she on two occasions
contemplated me with looks of such dark rage and infernal menace? A
thought struck me. Could the count's daughter have discovered our
_amour_? and was it she who had come to gain possession of jewels
belonging to the family? I hinted my suspicions to Margaretha; but she
speedily convinced me that they were unfounded.

"'The Lady Nisida is deaf and dumb,' she said, 'and cannot possibly
exercise such faculties of observation, nor adopt such means of
obtaining information as would make her acquainted with all that has
occurred between her father and yourself. Besides--she is constantly in
attendance on her sire, who is very, very ill.

"I now perceived the improbability of a deaf and dumb female discovering
an _amour_ so carefully concealed; but to assure myself more fully on
that head, I desired Margaretha to describe the Lady Nisida. This she
readily did, and I learnt from her that the count's daughter was of a
beauty quite different from the lady whom I had seen in the church and
in my own chamber. In a word, it appears that Nisida has light hair,
blue eyes and a delicate form: whereas, the object of my interest,
curiosity, and fear, is a woman of dark Italian loveliness.

"I have little more now to say. The loss of the jewels and the
recollection of the mysterious lady were soon absorbed in the
distressing thoughts which the serious illness of the count forced upon
my mind. Weeks passed away, and he came not; but he sent repeated
messages by Antonio, imploring me to console myself, as he should soon
recover, and urging me not to take any step that might betray the
existence of our _amour_. Need I say how religiously I obeyed him in the
latter respect? Day after day did I hope to see him again, for I knew
not that he was dying: and I used to dress myself in my gayest
attire--even as now I am appareled--to welcome his expected visit. Alas!
he never came; and his death was concealed from me, doubtless that the
sad event might not be communicated until after the funeral, lest in the
first frenzy of anguish I should rush to the Riverola palace to imprint
a last kiss upon the cheek of the corpse. But a few hours ago, I learned
the whole truth from two female friends of Dame Margaretha who called to
visit her, and whom I had hastened to inform that she was temporarily
absent. My noble Andrea was dead, and at that very moment his funeral
obsequies were being celebrated in the neighboring church--the very
church in which I had first beheld the mysterious lady! Frantic with
grief--unmindful of the exposure that would ensue--reckless of the
consequences, I left the house--I hastened to the church--I intruded my
presence amidst the mourners. You know the rest, Fernand. It only
remains for me to say that the countenance which I beheld ere now at the
window--strongly delineated and darkly conspicuous amidst the blaze of
light outside the casement--was that of the lady whom I have thus seen
for the third time! But, tell me, Fernand, how could a stranger thus
obtain admission to the gardens of your mansion?"

"You see yon lights, Agnes!" said Wagner, pointing toward the mansion
which, as we stated at the commencement of that chapter, was situated at
a distance of about two hundred yards from Fernand's dwelling, the backs
of the two houses thus looking toward each other. "Those lights," he
continued, "are shining in a mansion the gardens of which are separated
from my own by a simple hedge of evergreens, that would not bar even the
passage of a child. Should any inmate of that mansion possess curiosity
sufficient to induce him or her to cross the boundary, traverse my
gardens, and approach the casements of my residence, that curiosity may
be easily gratified."

"And to whom does yon mansion belong?" asked Agnes.

"To Dr. Duras, an eminent physician," was the reply.

"Dr. Duras, the physician who attended my noble Andrea in his illness!"
exclaimed Agnes. "Then the mysterious lady of whom I have spoken so
much, and whose countenance ere now appeared at the casement, must be an
inmate of the house of Dr. Duras; or at all events, a visitor there! Ah!
surely there is some connection between that lady and the family at
Riverola?"

"Time will solve the mystery, dearest sister, for so I am henceforth to
call you," said Fernand. "But beneath this roof, no harm can menace you.
And now let me summon good Dame Paula, my housekeeper, to conduct you to
the apartments which have been prepared for your reception. The morning
is far advanced, and we both stand in need of rest."

Dame Paula, an elderly, good-tempered, kind-hearted matron, shortly made
her appearance; and to her charge did Wagner consign his newly-found
relative, whom he now represented to be his sister.

But as Agnes accompanied the worthy woman from the apartment, she
shuddered involuntarily as she passed the frame which was covered with
the black cloth, and which seemed ominous amidst the blaze of light that
filled the room.




CHAPTER X.

FRANCISCO, WAGNER AND NISIDA.


On the ensuing evening, Francisco, Count of Riverola, was seated in one
of the splendid saloons of his palace, pondering upon the strange
injunction which he had received from his deceased father, relative to
the mysterious closet, when Wagner was announced.

Francisco rose to receive him, saying in a cordial though melancholy
tone, "Signor, I expected you."

"And let me hasten to express the regret which I experienced at having
addressed your lordship coldly and haughtily last night," exclaimed
Wagner. "But, at the moment, I only beheld in you the son of him who had
dishonored a being very dear to my heart."

"I can well understand your feelings on that occasion, signor," replied
Francisco. "Alas! the sins of the fathers are too often visited upon the
children in this world. But, in whatever direction our present
conversation may turn, I implore you to spare as much as possible the
memory of my sire."

"Think not, my lord," said Wagner, "that I should be so ungenerous as to
reproach you for a deed in which you had no concern, and over which you
exercised no control. Nor should I inflict so deep an injury upon you,
as to speak in disrespectful terms of him who was the author of your
being, but who is now no more."

"Your kind language has already made me your friend," exclaimed
Francisco. "And now point out to me in what manner I can in any way
repair--or mitigate--the wrong done to that fair creature in whom you
express yourself interested."

"That young lady is my sister," said Wagner, emphatically.

"Your sister, signor! And yet, meseems, she recognized you not----"

"Long years have passed since we saw each other," interrupted Fernand;
"for we were separated in our childhood."

"And did you not both speak of some relative--an old man who once dwelt
on the confines of the Black Forest of Germany, but who is now in
Florence?" asked Francisco.

"Alas! that old man is no more," returned Wagner. "I did but use his
name to induce Agnes to place confidence in me, and allow me to withdraw
her from a scene which her wild grief so unpleasantly interrupted; for I
thought that were I then and there to announce myself as her brother,
she might not believe me--she might suspect some treachery or snare in a
city so notoriously profligate as Florence. But the subsequent
explanations which took place between us cleared up all doubts on that
subject."

"I am well pleased to hear that the poor girl has found so near a
relative and so dear a friend, signor," said Francisco. "And now
acquaint me, I pray thee, with the means whereby I may, to some extent,
repair the injury your sister has sustained at the hands of him whose
memory I implore you to spare!"

"Wealth I possess in abundance--oh! far greater abundance than is
necessary to satisfy all my wants!" exclaimed Wagner, with something of
bitterness and regret in his tone; "but, even were I poor, gold would
not restore my sister's honor. No--let that subject, however, pass. I
would only ask you, count, whether there be any scion of your
family--any lady connected with you--who answers this description?"

And Wagner proceeded to delineate, in minute terms, the portraiture of
the mysterious lady who had inspired Agnes on three occasions with so
much terror, and whom Agnes herself had depicted in such glowing
language.

"Signor! you are describing the Lady Nisida, my sister!" exclaimed
Francisco, struck with astonishment at the fidelity of the portrait thus
verbally drawn.

"Your sister, my lord!" cried Wagner. "Then has Dame Margaretha deceived
Agnes in representing the Lady Nisida to be rather a beauty of the cold
north than of the sunny south."

"Dame Margaretha!" said Francisco; "do you allude, signor, to the mother
of my late father's confidential dependent, Antonio?"

"The same," was the answer. "It was at Dame Margaretha's house that your
father placed my sister Agnes, who has resided there nearly four years."

"But wherefore have you made those inquiries relative to the Lady
Nisida?" inquired Francisco.

"I will explain the motive with frankness," responded Wagner.

He then related to the young count all those particulars relative to the
mysterious lady and Agnes, with which the reader is already acquainted.

"There must be some extraordinary mistake--some strange error, signor,
in all this," observed Francisco. "My poor sister is, as you seem to be
aware, so deeply afflicted that she possesses not faculties calculated
to make her aware of that _amour_ which even I, who possess those
faculties in which she is deficient, never suspected, and concerning
which no hint ever reached me, until the whole truth burst suddenly upon
me last night at the funeral of my sire. Moreover, had accident revealed
to Nisida the existence of the connection between my father and your
sister, signor, she would have imparted the discovery to me, such is the
confidence and so great is the love that exists between us. For habit
has rendered us so skillful and quick in conversing with the language of
the deaf and dumb, that no impediment ever exists to the free
interchange of our thoughts."

"And yet, if the Lady Nisida _had_ made such a discovery, her hatred of
Agnes may be well understood," said Wagner; "for her ladyship must
naturally look upon my sister as the partner of her father's
weakness--the dishonored slave of his passions."

"Nisida has no secret from me," observed the young count, firmly.

"But wherefore did Dame Margaretha deceive my sister in respect to the
personal appearance of the Lady Nisida?" inquired Wagner.

"I know not. At the same time----"

The door opened, and Nisida entered the apartment.

She was attired in deep black; her luxuriant raven hair, no longer
depending in shining curls, was gathered up in massy bands at the sides,
and a knot behind, whence hung a rich veil that meandered over her
body's splendidly symmetrical length of limb in such a manner as to aid
her attire in shaping rather than hiding the contours of that matchless
form. The voluptuous development of her bust was shrouded, not
concealed, by the stomacher of black velvet which she wore, and which
set off in strong relief the dazzling whiteness of her neck.

The moment her lustrous dark eyes fell upon Fernand Wagner, she started
slightly; but this movement was imperceptible alike to him whose
presence caused it, and to her brother.

Francisco conveyed to her, by the rapid language of the fingers, the
name of their visitor, and at the same time intimated to her that he was
the brother of Agnes, the young and lovely female whose strange
appearance at the funeral, and avowed connection with the late noble,
had not been concealed from the haughty lady.

Nisida's eyes seemed to gleam with pleasure when she understood in what
degree of relationship Wagner stood toward Agnes; and she bowed to him
with a degree of courtesy seldom displayed by her to strangers.

Francisco then conveyed to her in the language of the dumb, all those
details already related in respect to the "mysterious lady" who had so
haunted the unfortunate Agnes.

A glow of indignation mounted to the cheeks of Nisida; and more than
usually rapid was the reply she made through the medium of the alphabet
of the fingers.

"My sister desires me to express to you, signor," said Francisco,
turning toward Wagner, "that she is not the person whom the Lady Agnes
has to complain against. My sister," he continued, "has never to her
knowledge seen the Lady Agnes; much less has she ever penetrated into
her chamber; and indignantly does she repel the accusation relative to
the abstraction of the jewels. She also desires me to inform you that
last night after reading of our father's last testament, she retired to
her chamber, which she did not quit until this morning at the usual
hour; and that therefore it was not her countenance which the Lady Agnes
beheld at the casement of your saloon."

"I pray you, my lord, to let the subject drop now, and forever!" said
Wagner, who was struck with profound admiration--almost amounting to
love--for the Lady Nisida: "there is some strange mystery in all this,
which time alone can clear up. Will your lordship express to your sister
how grieved I am that any suspicion should have originated against her
in respect to Agnes?"

Francisco signaled these remarks to Nisida; and the latter, rising from
her seat, advanced toward Wagner, and presented him her hand in token of
her readiness to forget the injurious imputations thrown out against
her.

Fernand raised that fair hand to his lips, and respectfully kissed it;
but the hand seemed to burn as he held it, and when he raised his eyes
toward the lady's countenance, she darted on him a look so ardent and
impassioned that it penetrated into his very soul.

That rapid interchange of glances seemed immediately to establish a kind
of understanding--a species of intimacy between those extraordinary
beings; for on the one side, Nisida read in the fine eyes of the
handsome Fernand all the admiration expressed there, and he, on his
part, instinctively understood that he was far from disagreeable to the
proud sister of the young Count of Riverola. While he was ready to fall
at her feet and do homage to her beauty, she experienced the kindling of
all the fierce fires of sensuality in her breast.

But the unsophisticated and innocent-minded Francisco observed not the
expression of these emotions on either side, for their manifestation
occupied not a moment. The interchange of such feelings is ever too
vivid and electric to attract the notice of the unsuspecting observer.

When Wagner was about to retire, Nisida made the following signal to her
brother:--"Express to the signor that he will ever be a welcome guest at
the palace of Riverola; for we owe kindness and friendship to the
brother of her whom our father dishonored."

But, to the astonishment of both the count and the Lady Nisida, Wagner
raised his hands, and displayed as perfect a knowledge of the language
of the dumb as they themselves possessed.

"I thank your ladyship for this unexpected condescension," he signaled
by the rapid play of his fingers; "and I shall not forget to avail
myself of this most courteous invitation."

It were impossible to describe the sudden glow of pleasure and delight
which animated Nisida's splendid countenance, when she thus discovered
that Wagner was able to hold converse with her, and she hastened to
reply thus: "We shall expect you to revisit us soon."

Wagner bowed low and took his departure, his mind full of the beautiful
Nisida.




CHAPTER XI.

NISIDA AND WAGNER--FRANCISCO AND FLORA--THE APPROACH OF SUNSET.


Upward of two months had passed away since the occurrences related in
the preceding chapter, and it was now the 31st of January, 1521.

The sun was verging toward the western hemisphere, but the rapid flight
of the hours was unnoticed by Nisida and Fernand Wagner, as they were
seated together in one of the splendid saloons of the Riverola mansion.

Their looks were fixed on each other's countenance; the eyes of Fernand
expressing tenderness and admiration, those of Nisida beaming with all
the passions of her ardent and sensual soul.

Suddenly the lady raised her hands, and by the rapid play of the
fingers, asked, "Fernand, do you indeed love me as much as you would
have me believe I am beloved?"

"Never in this world was woman so loved as you," he replied, by the aid
of the same language.

"And yet I am an unfortunate being--deprived of those qualities which
give the greatest charm to the companionship of those who love."

"But you are eminently beautiful, my Nisida; and I can fancy how sweet,
how rich-toned would be your voice, could your lips frame the words, '_I
love thee!_'"

A profound sigh agitated the breast of the lady; and at the same time
her lips quivered strangely, as if she were essaying to speak.

Wagner caught her to his breast; and she wept long and plenteously.
Those tears relieved her; and she returned his warm, impassioned kisses
with an ardor that convinced him how dear he had become to that
afflicted, but transcendently beautiful being. On her side, the blood in
her veins appeared to circulate like molten lead; and her face, her
neck, her bosom were suffused with burning blushes.

At length, raising her head, she conveyed this wish to her companion:
"Thou hast given me an idea which may render me ridiculous in your
estimation; but it is a whim, a fancy, a caprice, engendered only by the
profound affection I entertain for thee. I would that thou shouldst say,
in thy softest, tenderest tones, the words '_I love thee!_' and, by the
wreathing of thy lips, I shall see enough to enable my imagination to
persuade itself that those words have really fallen upon my ears."

Fernand smiled assent; and, while Nisida's eyes were fixed upon him with
the most enthusiastic interest, he said, "I love thee!"

The sovereign beauty of her countenance was suddenly lighted up with an
expression of ineffable joy, of indescribable delight; and, signaling
the assurance, "I love thee, dearest, dearest Fernand!" she threw
herself into his arms.

But almost at the same moment voices were heard in the adjacent room:
and Wagner, gently disengaging himself from Nisida's embrace, hastily
conveyed to her an intimation of the vicinity of others.

The lady gave him to understand by a glance that she comprehended him;
and they remained motionless, fondly gazing upon each other.

"I know not how it has occurred, Flora," said the voice of Francisco,
speaking in a tender tone, in the adjoining room--"I know not how it has
occurred that I should have addressed you in this manner--so soon, too,
after the death of my lamented father, and while these mourning garments
yet denote the loss which myself and sister have sustained----"

"Oh! my lord, suffer me to retire," exclaimed Flora Francatelli, in a
tone of beseeching earnestness; "I should not have listened to your
lordship so long in the gallery of pictures, much less have accompanied
your lordship hither."

"I requested thee to come with me to this apartment, Flora, that I might
declare, without fear of our interview being interrupted, how dear, how
very dear, thou art to me, and how honorable is the passion with which
thou hast inspired me. Oh, Flora," exclaimed the young count, "I could
no longer conceal my love for thee! My heart was bursting to reveal its
secret; and when I discovered thee alone, ere now, in the gallery of
pictures, I could not resist the favorable opportunity accident seemed
to have afforded for this avowal."

"Alas! my lord," murmured Flora, "I know not whether to rejoice or be
sorrowful at the revelation which has this day met my ears."

"And yet you said ere now that you could love me, that you did love me
in return," ejaculated Francisco.

"I spoke truly, my lord," answered the bashful maiden; "but, alas! how
can the humble, obscure, portionless Flora become the wife of the rich,
powerful and honored Count of Riverola? There is an inseparable gulf
fixed between us, my lord."

"Am I not my own master? Can I not consult my own happiness in that most
solemn and serious of the world's duties--marriage?" cried Francisco,
with all the generous ardor of youth and his own noble disposition.

"Your lordship is free and independent in point of fact," said Flora, in
a low, tender and yet impressive tone; "but your lordship has
relations--friends."

"My relations will not thwart the wishes of him whom they love,"
answered Francisco; "and those who place obstacles in the way of my
felicity cannot be denominated my friends."

"Oh! my lord--could I yield myself up to the hopes which your language
inspires!" cried Flora.

"You can--you may, dearest girl!" exclaimed the young count. "And now I
know that you love me! But many months must elapse ere I can call thee
mine; and, indeed, a remorse smites my heart that I have dared to think
of my own happiness, so soon after a mournful ceremony has consigned a
parent to the tomb. Heaven knows that I do not the less deplore his
loss--but wherefore art thou so pale, so trembling, Flora?"

"Meseems that a superstitious awe of evil omens has seized upon my
soul," returned the maiden, in a tremulous tone. "Let us retire, my
lord; the Lady Nisida may require my services elsewhere."

"Nisida!" repeated Francisco, as if the mention of his sister's name had
suddenly awakened new ideas in his mind.

"Ah! my lord," said Flora, sorrowfully, "you now perceive that there is
at least one who may not learn with satisfaction the alliance which your
lordship would form with the poor and humble dependent."

"Nay, by my patron saint, thou hast misunderstood me!" exclaimed the
young count warmly. "Nisida will not oppose her brother's happiness; and
her strong mind will know how to despise those conventional usages which
require that high birth should mate with high birth, and wealth ally
itself to wealth. Yes; Nisida will consult my felicity alone; and when I
ere now repeated her name as it fell from your lips, it was in a manner
reproachful to myself, because I have retained my love for thee a secret
from her. A secret from Nisida! Oh! I have been cruel, unjust, not to
have confided in my sister long ago! And yet," he added more slowly,
"she might reproach me for my selfishness in bestowing a thought on
marriage soon, so very soon, after a funeral! Flora, dearest maiden,
circumstances demand that the avowal which accident and opportunity have
led me this day to make, should exist as a secret, known only unto
yourself and me. But, in a few months I will explain all to my sister,
and she will greet thee as her brother's chosen bride. Are thou content,
Flora, that our mutual love should remain thus concealed until the
proper time shall come for its revelation?"

"Yes, my lord, and for many reasons," was the answer.

"For many reasons, Flora!" exclaimed the young count.

"At least for more than one," rejoined the maiden. "In the first
instance, it is expedient your lordship should have due leisure to
reflect upon the important step which you propose to take--a step
conferring so much honor on myself, but which may not insure your
happiness."

"If this be a specimen of thy reasons, dear maiden," exclaimed
Francisco, laughing, "I need hear no more. Be well assured," he added
seriously, "that time will not impair the love I experience for you."

Flora murmured a reply which did not reach Wagner, and immediately
afterward the sound of her light steps was heard retreating from the
adjacent room. A profound silence of a few minutes occurred; and then
Francisco also withdrew.

Wagner had been an unwilling listener to the preceding conversation; but
while it was in progress, he from time to time threw looks of love and
tenderness on his beautiful companion, who returned them with
impassioned ardor.

Whether it were that her irritable temper was impatient of the restraint
imposed upon herself and her lover by the vicinity of others, or whether
she was annoyed at the fact of her brother and Flora being so long
together (for Wagner had intimated to her who their neighbors were, the
moment he had recognized their voices), we cannot say; but Nisida showed
an occasional uneasiness of manner, which she, however, studied to
subdue as much as possible, during the scene that took place in the
adjoining apartment.

Fernand did not offer to convey to her any idea of the nature of the
conversation which occupied her brother and Flora Francatelli; neither
did she manifest the least curiosity to be enlightened on that head.

The moment the young lovers had quitted the next room Wagner intimated
the fact to Nisida; but at the same instant, just as he was about to
bestow upon her a tender caress, a dreadful, an appalling reminiscence
burst upon him with such overwhelming force that he fell back stupefied
on the sofa.

Nisida's countenance assumed an expression of the deepest solicitude,
and her eloquent, sparkling eyes, implored him to intimate to her what
ailed him.

But, starting wildly from his seat, and casting on her a look of such
bitter, bitter anguish, that the appalling emotions thus expressed
struck terror to her soul--Fernand rushed from the room.

Nisida sprung to the window; and, though the obscurity of the evening
now announced the last flickerings of the setting sunbeams in the west,
she could perceive her lover dashing furiously on through the spacious
gardens that surrounded the Riverola Palace.

On--on he went toward the River Arno; and in a few minutes was out of
sight.

Alas! intoxicated with love, and giving himself up to the one delightful
idea--that he was with the beauteous Nisida--then, absorbed in the
interest of the conversation which he had overheard between Francisco
and Flora--Wagner had forgotten until it was nearly too late, _that the
sun was about to set on the last day of the month_.




CHAPTER XII.

THE WEHR-WOLF.


'Twas the hour of sunset.

The eastern horizon, with its gloomy and somber twilight, offered a
strange contrast to the glorious glowing hues of vermilion, and purple,
and gold, that blended in long streaks athwart the western sky.

For even the winter sunset of Italy is accompanied with resplendent
tints--as if an emperor, decked with a refulgent diadem, were repairing
to his imperial couch.

The declining rays of the orb of light bathed in molten gold the
pinnacles, steeples, and lofty palaces of proud Florence, and toyed with
the limpid waves of the Arno, on whose banks innumerable villas and
casinos already sent forth delicious strains of music, broken only by
the mirth of joyous revelers.

And by degrees as the sun went down, the palaces of the superb city
began to shed light from their lattices, set in rich sculptured masonry;
and here and there, where festivity prevailed, grand illuminations
sprung up with magical quickness, the reflection from each separate
galaxy rendering it bright as day far, far around.

Vocal and instrumental melody floated through the still air; and the
perfume of exotics, decorating the halls of the Florentine nobles,
poured from the widely-opened portals, and rendered the air delicious.

For Florence was gay that evening--the last day of each month being the
one which the wealthy lords and high-born ladies set apart for the
reception of their friends.

The sun sank behind the western hills; and even the hothouse flowers
closed up their buds--as if they were eyelids weighed down by slumber,
and not to wake until the morning should arouse them again to welcome
the return of their lover--that glorious sun!

Darkness seemed to dilate upon the sky like an image in the midst of a
mirage, expanding into superhuman dimensions--then rapidly losing its
shapeliness, and covering the vault above densely and confusedly.

But, by degrees, countless stars began to stud the colorless canopy of
heaven, like gems of orient splendor; for the last--last flickering ray
of the twilight in the west had expired in the increasing obscurity.

But, hark! what is that wild and fearful cry?

In the midst of a wood of evergreens on the banks of the Arno, a
man--young, handsome, and splendidly attired--has thrown himself upon
the ground, where he writhes like a stricken serpent, in horrible
convulsions.

He is the prey of a demoniac excitement: an appalling consternation is
on him--madness is in his brain--his mind is on fire.

Lightnings appear to gleam from his eyes, as if his soul were dismayed,
and withering within his breast.

"Oh! no--no!" he cries with a piercing shriek, as if wrestling madly,
furiously, but vainly against some unseen fiend that holds him in his
grasp.

And the wood echoes to that terrible wail; and the startled bird flies
fluttering from its bough.

But, lo! what awful change is taking place in the form of that doomed
being? His handsome countenance elongates into one of savage and
brute-like shape; the rich garments which he wears become a rough,
shaggy, and wiry skin; his body loses its human contours, his arms and
limbs take another form; and, with a frantic howl of misery, to which
the woods give horribly faithful reverberations, and, with a rush like a
hurling wind, the wretch starts wildly away, no longer a man, but a
monstrous wolf!

On, on he goes: the wood is cleared--the open country is gained. Tree,
hedge, and isolated cottage appear but dim points in the landscape--a
moment seen, the next left behind; the very hills appear to leap after
each other.

A cemetery stands in the monster's way, but he turns not aside--through
the sacred inclosure--on, on he goes. There are situated many tombs,
stretching up the slope of a gentle acclivity, from the dark soil of
which the white monuments stand forth with white and ghastly gleaming,
and on the summit of the hill is the church of St. Benedict the Blessed.

From the summit of the ivy-grown tower the very rooks, in the midst of
their cawing, are scared away by the furious rush and the wild howl with
which the Wehr-Wolf thunders over the hallowed ground.

At the same instant a train of monks appear round the angle of the
church--for there is a funeral at that hour; and their torches flaring
with the breeze that is now springing up, cast an awful and almost
magical light on the dark gray walls of the edifice, the strange effect
being enhanced by the prismatic reflection of the lurid blaze from the
stained glass of the oriel window.

The solemn spectacle seemed to madden the Wehr-Wolf. His speed
increased--he dashed through the funeral train--appalling cries of
terror and alarm burst from the lips of the holy fathers--and the solemn
procession was thrown into confusion. The coffin-bearers dropped their
burden, and the corpse rolled out upon the ground, its decomposing
countenance seeming horrible by the glare of the torch-light.

The monk who walked nearest the head of the coffin was thrown down by
the violence with which the ferocious monster cleared its passage; and
the venerable father--on whose brow sat the snow of eighty winters--fell
with his head against a monument, and his brains were dashed out.

On, on fled the Wehr-Wolf, over mead and hill, through valley and dale.
The very wind seemed to make way: he clove the air--he appeared to skim
the ground--to fly.

Through the romantic glades and rural scenes of Etruria the monster
sped--sounds, resembling shrieking howls, bursting ever and anon from
his foaming mouth--his red eyes glaring in the dusk of the evening like
ominous meteors--and his whole aspect so full of appalling ferocity,
that never was seen so monstrous, so terrific a spectacle!

A village is gained; he turns not aside, but dashes madly through the
little street formed by the huts and cottages of the Tuscan
vine-dressers.

A little child is in his path--a sweet, blooming, ruddy, noble boy; with
violet-colored eyes and flaxen hair--disporting merrily at a short
distance from his parents, who are seated at the threshold of their
dwelling.

Suddenly a strange and ominous rush--an unknown trampling of rapid feet
falls upon their ears; then, with a savage cry, a monster sweeps past.

"My child! my child!" screams the affrighted mother; and simultaneously
the shrill cry of an infant in the sudden agony of death carries
desolation to the ear!

'Tis done--'twas but the work of a moment; the wolf has swept by, the
quick rustling of his feet is no longer heard in the village. But those
sounds are succeeded by awful wails and heart-rending lamentations: for
the child--the blooming, violet-eyed, flaxen-haired boy--the darling of
his poor but tender parents, is weltering in his blood!

On, on speeds the destroyer, urged by an infernal influence which
maddens the more intensely because its victim strives vainly to struggle
against it: on, on, over the beaten road--over the fallow field--over
the cottager's garden--over the grounds of the rich one's rural villa.

And now, to add to the horrors of the scene, a pack of dogs have started
in pursuit of the wolf--dashing--hurrying--pushing--pressing upon one
another in all the anxious ardor of the chase.

The silence and shade of the open country, in the mild starlight, seem
eloquently to proclaim the peace and happiness of a rural life; but now
that silence is broken by the mingled howling of the wolf, and the deep
baying of the hounds--and this shade is crossed and darkened by the
forms of the animals as they scour so fleetly--oh! with such whirlwind
speed along.

But that Wehr-Wolf bears a charmed life; for though the hounds overtake
him--fall upon him--and attack him with all the courage of their nature,
yet does he hurl them from him, toss them aside, spurn them away, and at
length free himself from their pursuit altogether!

And now the moon rises with unclouded splendor, like a maiden looking
from her lattice screened with purple curtains; and still the monster
hurries madly on with unrelaxing speed.

For hours has he pursued his way thus madly; and, on a sudden, as he
passes the outskirts of a sleeping town, the church-bell is struck by
the watcher's hand to proclaim midnight.

Over the town, over the neighboring fields--through the far-off forest,
clanged that iron tongue: and the Wehr-Wolf sped all the faster, as if
he were running a race with that Time whose voice had just spoken.

On, on went the Wehr-Wolf; but now his course began to deviate from the
right line which he had hitherto pursued, and to assume a curved
direction.

From a field a poor man was turning an ox into the main road, that he
might drive the animal to his master's residence by daylight; the wolf
swept by, and snapped furiously at the ox as he passed: and the beast,
affrighted by the sudden appearance, gushing sound, and abrupt though
evanescent attack of the infuriate monster, turned on the herdsman and
gored him to death.

On went the terrific wolf, with wilder and more frequent howlings, which
were answered in a thousand tones from the rocks and caverns overlooking
the valley through whose bosom he was now careering with whirlwind speed
along.

It was now two o'clock in the morning, and he had already described an
immense circuit from the point where he had begun to deviate from a
direct course.

At a turning of the road, as he emerged from the valley, the monster
encountered a party of village girls repairing with the produce of their
dairies, and of their poultry-yards, to some still far distant town,
which they had hoped to reach shortly after daybreak.

Fair, gay, and smiling was the foremost maiden, as the bright moon and
the silver starlight shone upon her countenance; but that sweet face,
clad in the richest hues of health, was suddenly convulsed with horror,
as the terrible Wehr-Wolf thundered by with appalling howls.

For a few moments the foremost village maiden stood rooted to the spot
in speechless horror: then, uttering a wild cry, she fell backward,
rolled down a steep bank, and was ingulfed in the rapid stream that
chafed and fretted along the side of the path.

Her companions shrieked in agony of mind--the wail was echoed by a
despairing cry from the drowning girl--a cry that swept frantically over
the rippling waters; and, in another moment, she sank to rise no more!

The breeze had by this time increased to a sharp wind, icy and cold, as
it usually is, even in southern climes, when the dawn is approaching;
and the gale now whistled through the branches of the evergreen wood in
the neighborhood of Florence--that vicinity to which the Wehr-Wolf was
at length returning!

Still was his pace of arrow-like velocity--for some terrible power
appeared to urge him on; and though his limbs failed not, though he
staggered not in his lightning speed, yet did the foam at his mouth, the
thick flakes of perspiration on his body, and the steam that enveloped
him as in a dense vapor, denote how distressed the unhappy being in
reality was.

At last--at last a faint tinge was visible above the eastern horizon;
gradually the light increased and put to flight the stars.

But now the Oriental sky was to some extent obscured with clouds; and
the Wehr-Wolf gnashed his teeth with rage, and uttered a savage howl, as
if impatient of the delay of dawn.

His speed began to relax; the infernal influence which had governed him
for so many hours already grew less stern, less powerful, and as the
twilight shone forth more plainly in proportion did the Wehr-Wolf's
velocity diminish.

Suddenly a piercing chill darted through his frame, and he fell in
strong convulsions upon the ground, in the midst of the same wood where
his transformation had taken place on the preceding evening.

The sun rose angrily, imparting a lurid, reddened hue to the dark clouds
that hung upon the Oriental heaven, as if the mantling curtains of a
night's pavilion strove to repel the wooing kisses of the morn; and the
cold chill breeze made the branches swing to and fro with ominous
flapping, like the wings of the fabulous Simoorg.

But in the midst of the appalling spasmodic convulsions, with direful
writhings on the soil, and with cries of bitter anguish, the Wehr-Wolf
gradually threw off his monster-shape; and at the very moment when the
first sunbeam penetrated the wood and glinted on his face he rose a
handsome, young, and perfect man once more!




CHAPTER XIII.

NISIDA'S EMOTIONS--THE DISGUISE--THE PLOT.


We must now return to Nisida, whom we left gazing from the window of the
Riverola mansion, at the moment when Wagner rushed away from the
vicinity of his lady-love on the approach of sunset.

The singularity of his conduct--the look of ineffable horror and anguish
which he cast upon her, ere he parted from her presence--and the
abruptness of his departure, filled her mind with the most torturing
misgivings, and with a thousand wild fears.

Had his senses suddenly left him? was he the prey to fits of mental
aberration which would produce so extraordinary an effect upon him? had
he taken a sudden loathing and disgust to herself? or had he
_discovered_ anything in respect to her which had converted his love
into hatred?

She knew not--and conjecture was vain! To a woman of her excitable
temperament, the occurrence was particularly painful. She had never
known the passion of love until she had seen Wagner; and the moment she
did see him, she loved him. The sentiment on her part originated
altogether in the natural sensuality of her disposition; there was
nothing pure--nothing holy--nothing refined in her affection for him; it
was his wonderful personal beauty that had made so immediate and
profound an impression upon her heart.

There was consequently something furious and raging in that passion
which she experienced for Fernand Wagner--a passion capable of every
extreme--the largest sacrifices, or infuriate jealousies--the most
implicit confidence, or the maddest suspicion! It was a passion which
would induce her to ascend the scaffold to save him; or to plunge the
vengeful dagger into his heart did she fancy that he deceived her!

To one, then, whose soul was animated by such a love, the conduct of
Fernand was well adapted to wear even an exaggerated appearance of
singularity; and as each different conjecture swept through her
imagination, her emotions were excited to an extent which caused her
countenance to vary its expressions a hundred times in a minute.

The fury of the desolating torrent, the rage of the terrific volcano,
the sky cradled in the blackest clouds, the ocean heaving tempestuously
in its mighty bed, the chafing of a tremendous flood against an
embankment which seems ready every moment to give way, and allow the
collected waters to burst forth upon the broad plains and into the
peaceful valleys--all these occurrences in the physical world were
imagined by the emotions that now agitated within the breast of the
Italian lady.

Her mind was like the sea put in motion by the wind; and her eyes
flashed fire, her lips quivered, her bosom heaved convulsively, her neck
arched proudly, as if she were struggling against ideas that forced
themselves upon her and painfully wounded her boundless patrician pride.

For the thought that rose uppermost amidst all the conjectures which
rushed to her imagination, was that Fernand had conceived an invincible
dislike toward her.

Wherefore did he fly thus--as if eager to place the greatest possible
distance between herself and him?

Then did she recall to mind every interchange of thought that had passed
between them through the language of the fingers; and she could fix upon
nothing which, emanating from herself, had given him offense.

Had he then really lost his senses?

Madly did he seem to be rushing toward the Arno, on whose dark tide the
departing rays of the setting sun glinted with oscillating and dying
power.

She still continued to gaze from the window long after he had
disappeared; obscurity was gathering rapidly around; but, even had it
been noonday, she would have seen nothing. Her ideas grew bewildered:
mortification, grief, anger, suspicion, burning desire, all mingled
together and at length produced a species of stunning effect upon her,
so that the past appeared to be a dream, and the future was wrapt in the
darkest gloom and uncertainty.

This strange condition of her mind did not, however, last long; the
natural energy of her character speedily asserted its empire over the
intellectual lethargy which had seized upon her, and, awakening from her
stupor, she resolved to waste not another instant in useless conjecture
as to the cause of her lover's conduct.

Hastening to her own apartments, she dismissed Flora Francatelli, whom
she found there, with an abruptness of gesture and a frowning expression
of countenance amounting to an act of cruelty toward that resigned and
charming girl; so that as the latter hastened from the room, tears
started from her eyes, and she murmured to herself, "Can it be possible
that Donna Nisida suspects the attachment her brother has formed toward
me? Oh! if she do, the star of an evil destiny seems already to rule my
horoscope!"

Scarcely had Flora disappeared in this sorrowing manner, when Nisida
secured the outer door of her own suit of apartments, and hurried to her
bed-chamber. There she threw aside the garb belonging to her sex, and
assumed that of a cavalier, which she took from a press opening with a
secret spring. Then, having arranged her hair beneath a velvet tocque
shaded with waving black plumes, in such a manner that the disguise was
as complete as she could render it, she girt on a long rapier of finest
Milan steel, and throwing the short cloak edged with costly fur,
gracefully over her left shoulder, she quitted her chamber by a private
door opening behind the folds of the bed curtains.

A narrow and dark staircase admitted her into the gardens of the
Riverola mansion. These she crossed with a step so light and free, that
had it been possible to observe her in the darkness of the evening, she
would have been taken for the most elegant and charming cavalier that
ever honored the Florentine Republic with his presence.

In about a quarter of an hour she reached the abode of Dr. Duras; but
instead of entering it, she passed round one of its angles, and opening
a wicket by means of a key which she had about her, gained access to the
gardens in the rear of the mansion.

She traversed these grounds with hasty steps, passing the boundary which
separated them from the gardens of Wagner's dwelling, and then relaxing
her pace, advanced with more caution to the windows of this very
apartment where Agnes had been so alarmed two months previously, by
observing the countenance at the casement.

But all was now dark within. Wagner was not in his favorite room--for
Nisida _knew_ that this was her lover's favorite apartment.

Perhaps he had not yet returned?

Thus thought the lady; and she walked slowly round the spacious
dwelling, which, like the generality of the patrician mansions of
Florence in those times--as indeed is now the case to a considerable
extent--stood in the midst of extensive gardens.

There were lights in the servants' offices; but every other room seemed
dark. No; one window in the front, on the ground-floor, shone with the
luster of a lamp.

Nisida approached it, and beheld Agnes reclining in a pensive manner on
a sofa in a small but elegantly-furnished apartment. Her countenance was
immediately overclouded; and for an instant she lingered to gaze upon
the sylph-like form that was stretched upon that ottoman. Then she
hastily pursued her way; and, having perfected the round of the
building, once more reached the windows of her lover's favorite room.

Convinced that he had not returned, and fearful of being observed by any
of the domestics who might happen to pass through the gardens, Nisida
retraced her way toward the dwelling of Dr. Duras. But her heart was now
heavy, for she knew not how to act.

Her original object was to obtain an interview with Wagner that very
night, and learn, if possible, the reason of his extraordinary conduct
toward her: for the idea of remaining in suspense for many long, long
hours, was painful in the extreme to a woman of her excitable nature.

She was, however, compelled to resign herself to this alternative; and,
having let herself through the wicket belonging to the physician's
gardens, she directed her steps homeward.

On her way she passed by the gate of the Convent of Carmelite Nuns--one
of the wealthiest, most strictly disciplined, and celebrated monastic
establishments in the Florentine Republic.

It appeared that a sudden thought here struck her; for ascending to the
steep leading to the gate, she paused beneath the lamp of the deep
Gothic portico, took out her tablets, and hastily wrote the following
words:

"Donna Nisida of Riverola requests an interview with the Lady Abbess
Maria to-morrow at midday, on a matter seriously regarding the spiritual
welfare of a young female who has shown great and signal disregard for
the rites and ordinances of the most Holy Catholic Church: and in
respect to whom the most severe measures must be adopted. Donna Nisida
will visit the holy mother to-morrow at midday."

Having written these words, Nisida tore off the leaf and thrust it
through a small square grating set in the massive door of the convent.
Then ringing the bell to call attention to the gate, she hastily pursued
her way homeward.

She had gained the gardens of the Riverola mansion, and was advancing
toward the door of the private staircase leading to her chamber, when
she suddenly perceived two dark figures standing within a few yards of
her. Fearful that they might be domestics belonging to the household,
she hastily and noiselessly retreated within the deep shade of the wall
of the mansion, and there she remained motionless.

We must now detail the conversation which passed between the two
individuals whose presence in the garden had thus alarmed the Lady
Nisida.

"But are you sure of what you say, Antonio?" demanded one of the men.

"By Saint Jacopo! I cannot be mistaken," was the reply. "The closet has
been locked up for years and years, and the old count always used to
keep the keys in an iron chest, which was also carefully locked and
chained round. What can the place possibly contain but a treasure?"

"After all it is only conjecture on your part; and that being the case,
it is not worth while to risk one's life----"

"You are a coward, Stephano!" exclaimed Antonio, angrily. "The closet
has got a heavy, massive door, and a prodigiously strong lock; and if
these precautions were not adopted to protect a hoard of wealth, why
were they taken at all, let me ask you?"

"There is something in what you say," replied Stephano; "but you do
wrong to call me a coward. If it were not that we were cousins, and
linked by a bond of long maintained friendship, I would send my rapier
through your doublet in a twinkling."

"Nay; I do not mean to anger thee, Stephano," cried the valet. "But let
us speak lower: chafe not, I pray thee!"

"Well--well!" said the other, gloomily; "go on, in the name of your
patron saint! Only keep a guard upon your tongue, for it wags somewhat
too freely; and remember that a man who has been for fifteen years the
captain of as gallant a band as ever levied contributions on the lieges
of the republic, is not to have '_coward_' thrown in his teeth."

"Let it pass, good Stephano!" urged the valet. "I tell thee that a
closet whereof I have spoken, can contain naught save a
treasure--perhaps in gold--perhaps in massive plate."

"We can dispose of either to our advantage," observed the bandit, with a
coarse chuckle.

"Will you undertake the business?" demanded Antonio.

"I will," was the resolute answer; "and as much to convince you that
Stephano is not a coward, as for any other reason. But when is it to be
done? and why did you make an appointment to meet me here, of all places
in Florence?"

"It can be done when you choose," replied Antonio; "and as for the other
questions, I desired you to meet me here, because I knew that you would
not refuse a fine chance; and, suspecting this much it was necessary to
show you the geography of the place."

"Good!" observed the robber-chief. "To-morrow night I have a little
affair in hand for a reverend and holy father, who is sure to be chosen
superior of his order if his rival in the candidature be removed; and in
four-and-twenty hours the said rival must be food for the fishes of the
Arno."

"Then the night after that?" suggested Antonio.

"Pre-engaged again," returned the bandit-captain coolly. "A wealthy
countess has been compelled to pledge her diamonds to a Jew; on Sunday
next she must appear with her husband at the palace of the Medici; and
on Saturday night, therefore, the diamonds must be recovered from the
Jew."

"Then the husband knows not that they are so pledged?" said Antonio.

"Scarcely," answered the brigand. "They were deposited with the Jew for
a loan which the countess raised to accommodate her lover. Now do you
understand?"

"Perfectly. What say you to next Monday night?"

"I am at your service," responded Stephano. "Monday will suit me
admirably, and midnight shall be the hour. And now instruct me in the
nature of the locality."

"Come with me, and I will show you by which way you and your comrades
must effect an entry," said Antonio.

The valet and the robber-chief now moved away from the spot where they
had stood to hold the above conversation; and the moment they had turned
the adjacent angle of the mansion, Nisida hastened to regain her
apartment by the private staircase--resolving, however, to see Wagner as
early as possible in the morning.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE LAST MEETING OF AGNES AND THE STRANGER LADY.


While all nature was wrapped in the listening stillness of admiration at
the rising sun, Fernand Wagner dragged himself painfully toward his
home.

His garments were besmeared with mud and dirt; they were torn, too, in
many places; and here and there were stains of blood, still wet, upon
them.

In fact, had he been dragged by a wild horse through a thicket of
brambles, he could scarcely have appeared in a more wretched plight.

His countenance was ghastly pale; terror still flashed from his eyes,
and despair sat on his lofty brow.

Stealing through the most concealed part of his garden, he was
approaching his own mansion with the air of a man who returns home in
the morning after having perpetrated some dreadful deed of turpitude
under cover of the night.

But the watchful eyes of a woman have marked his coming from the lattice
of her window; and in a few minutes Agnes, light as a fawn, came
bounding toward him, exclaiming, "Oh! what a night of uneasiness have I
passed, Fernand! But at length thou art restored to me--thou whom I have
ever loved so fondly; although," she added, mournfully, "I abandoned
thee for so long a time!"

And she embraced him tenderly.

"Agnes!" cried Fernand, repulsing her with an impatience which she had
never experienced at his hands before: "wherefore thus act the spy upon
me? Believe me, that although we pass ourselves off as brother and
sister, yet I do not renounce that authority which the real nature of
those ties that bind us together----"

"Fernand! Fernand! this to me!" exclaimed Agnes, bursting into tears.
"Oh! how have I deserved such reproaches?"

"My dearest girl, pardon me, forgive me!" cried Wagner, in a tone of
bitter anguish. "My God! I ought not to upbraid thee for that
watchfulness during my absence, and that joy at my return, which prove
that you love me! Again I say, pardon me, dearest Agnes."

"You need not ask me, Fernand," was the reply. "Only speak kindly to
me----"

"I do, I will, Agnes," interrupted Wagner. "But leave me now! Let me
regain my own chamber alone; I have reasons, urgent reasons for so
doing; and this afternoon, Agnes, I shall be composed--collected again.
Do you proceed by that path; I will take this."

And, hastily pressing her hand, Wagner broke abruptly away.

For a few moments Agnes stood looking after him in vacant astonishment
at his extraordinary manner, and also at his alarming appearance, but
concerning which latter she had not dared to question him.

When he had entered the mansion by a private door, Agnes turned and
pursued her way along a circuitous path shaded on each side by dark
evergreens, and which was the one he had directed her to take so as to
regain the front gate of the dwelling.

But scarcely had she advanced a dozen paces, when a sudden rustling
among the trees alarmed her; and in an instant a female form--tall,
majestic, and with a dark veil thrown over her head, stood before her.

Agnes uttered a faint shriek: for, although the lady's countenance was
concealed by the veil, she had no difficulty in recognizing the stranger
who had already terrified her on three previous occasions, and who
seemed to haunt her.

And, as if to dispel all doubt as to the identity, the majestic lady
suddenly tore aside her veil, and disclosed to the trembling, shrinking
Agnes, features already too well known.

But, if the lightning of those brilliant, burning, black eyes had seemed
terrible on former occasions, they were now absolutely blasting, and
Agnes fell upon her knees, exclaiming, "Mercy! mercy! how have I
offended you?"

For a few moments those basilisk-eyes darted forth shafts of fire and
flame, and the red lips quivered violently, and the haughty brow
contracted menacingly, and Agnes was stupefied, stunned, fascinated,
terribly fascinated by that tremendous rage, the vengeance of which
seemed ready to explode against her.

But only a few moments lasted that dreadful scene; for the lady, whose
entire appearance was that of an avenging fiend in the guise of a
beauteous woman, suddenly drew a sharp poniard from its sheath in her
bodice, and plunged it into the bosom of the hapless Agnes.

The victim fell back; but not a shriek--not a sound escaped her lips.
The blow was well aimed, the poniard was sharp and went deep, and death
followed instantaneously.

For nearly a minute did the murderess stand gazing on the corpse--the
corpse of one erst so beautiful; and her countenance, gradually relaxing
from its stern, implacable expression, assumed an air of deep
remorse--of bitter, bitter compunction.

But probably yielding to the sudden thought that she must provide for
her own safety, the murderess drew forth the dagger from the white bosom
in which it was buried: hastily wiped it upon a leaf; returned it to the
sheath; and, replacing the veil over her countenance, hurried rapidly
away from the scene of her fearful crime.




CHAPTER XV.

THE SBIRRI--THE ARREST.


Scarcely ten minutes had elapsed since the unfortunate Agnes was thus
suddenly cut off in the bloom of youth and beauty, when a lieutenant of
police, with his guard of sbirri, passed along the road skirting
Wagner's garden.

They were evidently in search of some malefactor, for, stopping in their
course, they began to deliberate on the business which they had in hand.

"Which way could he possibly have gone?" cried one, striking the
butt-end of his pike heavily upon the ground.

"How could we possibly have missed him?" exclaimed another.

"Stephano is not so easily caught, my men," observed the lieutenant. "He
is the most astute and cunning of the band of which he is the captain.
And yet, I wish we had pounced upon him, since we were so nicely upon
his track."

"And a thousand ducats offered by the state for his capture," suggested
one of the sbirri.

"Yes; 'tis annoying!" ejaculated the lieutenant, "but I could have sworn
he passed this way."

"And I could bear the same evidence, signor," observed the first
speaker. "Maybe he has taken refuge in those bushes."

"Not unlikely. We are fools to grant him a moment's vantage ground. Over
the fence, my men, and beat amongst these gardens."

Thus speaking, the lieutenant set the example, by leaping the railing,
and entering the grounds belonging to Wagner's abode.

The sbirri, who were six in number, including their officer, divided
themselves into two parties, and proceeded to search the gardens.

Suddenly a loud cry of horror burst from one of the sections; and when
the other hastened to the spot, the sbirri composing it found their
comrades in the act of raising the corpse of Agnes.

"She is quite dead," said the lieutenant, placing his hand upon her
heart. "And yet the crime cannot have been committed many minutes, as
the corpse is scarcely cold, and the blood still oozes forth."

"What a lovely creature she must have been," exclaimed one of the
sbirri.

"Cease your profane remarks, my man," cried the lieutenant. "This must
be examined into directly. Does any one know who dwells in that
mansion?"

"Signor Wagner, a wealthy German," was the reply given by a sbirro.

"Then come with me, my man," said the lieutenant; "and let us lose no
time in searching his house. One of you must remain by the corpse--and
the rest may continue the search after the bandit, Stephano."

Having issued these orders, the lieutenant, followed by the sbirro whom
he had chosen to accompany him, hastened to the mansion.

The gate was opened by an old porter, who stared in astonishment when he
beheld the functionaries of justice visiting that peaceful dwelling. But
the lieutenant ordered him to close and lock the gate; and having
secured the key, the officer said, "We must search this house; a crime
has been committed close at hand."

"A crime!" ejaculated the porter; "then the culprit is not here--for
there is not a soul beneath this roof who would perpetrate a misdeed."

"Cease your prating, old man," said the lieutenant, sternly. "We have a
duty to perform--see that we be not molested in executing it."

"But what is the crime, signor, of which----"

"Nay--that you shall know anon," interrupted the lieutenant. "In the
name of his serene highness, the duke, I command you in the first place
to lead me and my followers to the presence of your master."

The old man hastened to obey this mandate, and he conducted the sbirri
into the chamber where Wagner, having thrown off his garments, was
partaking of that rest which he so much needed.

At the sound of heavy feet and the clanking of martial weapons, Fernand
started from the slumber into which he had fallen only a few minutes
previously.

"What means this insolent intrusion?" he exclaimed, his cheeks flushing
with anger at the presence of the police.

"Pardon us, signor," said the lieutenant, in a respectful tone: "but a
dreadful crime has been committed close by--indeed within the inclosure
of your own grounds----"

"A dreadful crime!" ejaculated Wagner.

"Yes, signor; a crime----"

The officer was interrupted by an ejaculation of surprise which burst
from the lips of his attendant sbirro; and, turning hastily round, he
beheld his follower intently scrutinizing the attire which Fernand had
ere now thrown off.

"Ah! blood-stains!" cried the lieutenant, whose attention was directed
toward those marks by the finger of his man. "Then is the guilty one
speedily discovered! Signor!" he added, turning once more toward Wagner,
"are those your garments?"

An expression of indescribable horror convulsed the countenance of
Fernand; for the question of the officer naturally reminded him of his
dreadful fate--the fate of a Wehr-Wolf--although, we should observe, he
never remembered, when restored to the form of a man, what he might have
done during the long hours that he wore the shape of a ferocious
monster.

Still, as he knew that his garments had been soiled, torn and
blood-stained in the course of the preceding night, it was no wonder
that he shuddered and became convulsed with mental agony when his
terrible doom was so forcibly called to his mind.

His emotions were naturally considered to be corroborative evidence of
guilt: and the lieutenant laying his hand upon Wagner's shoulder, said
in a stern, solemn manner, "In the name of his highness our prince, I
arrest you for the crime of murder!"

"Murder!" repeated Fernand, dashing away the officer's arm; "you dare
not accuse me of such a deed!"

"I accuse you of murder, signor," exclaimed the lieutenant. "Within a
hundred paces of your dwelling a young lady----"

"A young lady!" cried Wagner, thinking of Agnes, whom he had left in the
garden.

"Yes, signor, a young lady has been most barbarously murdered!" added
the officer in an impressive tone.

"Agnes! Agnes!" almost screamed the unhappy man, as this dreadful
announcement fell upon his ears. "Oh! is it possible that thou art no
more, my poor Agnes!"

He covered his face with his hands and wept bitterly.

The lieutenant made a sign to his follower, who instantly quitted the
room.

"There must be some mistake in this, signor," said the old porter,
approaching the lieutenant and speaking in a voice tremulous with
emotion. "The master whom I serve, and whom you accuse, is incapable of
the deed imputed to him."

"Yes. God knows how truly you speak!" ejaculated Wagner, raising his
head. "That girl--oh! sooner than have harmed one single hair of her
head---- But how know you that it is Agnes who is murdered?" he cried
abruptly, turning toward the lieutenant.

"It was you who said it, signor," calmly replied the officer, as he
fixed his dark eyes keenly upon Fernand.

"Oh! it was a surmise--a conjecture--because I parted with Agnes a short
time ago in the garden," exclaimed Wagner, speaking in hurried and
broken sentences.

"Behold the victim!" said the lieutenant, who had approached the window,
from which he was looking.

Wagner sprung from his couch, and glanced forth into the garden beneath.

The sbirri were advancing along the gravel pathway, bearing amongst them
the corpse of Agnes upon whose pallid countenance the morning sunbeams
were dancing, as if in mockery even at death.

"Holy Virgin! it is indeed Agnes!" cried Wagner, in a tone of the most
profound heart-rending anguish, and he fell back senseless in the arms
of the lieutenant.

An hour afterward, Fernand Wagner was the inmate of a dungeon beneath
the palace inhabited by the Duke of Florence.




CHAPTER XVI.

NISIDA AND THE CARMELITE ABBESS.


Punctually at midday, the Lady Nisida of Riverola proceeded, alone and
unattended, to the Convent of Carmelite Nuns, where she was immediately
admitted into the presence of the abbess.

The superior of this monastic establishment, was a tall, thin,
stern-looking woman, with a sallow complexion, an imperious compression
of the lips, and small, grey eyes, that seemed to flicker with malignity
rather than to beam with the pure light of Christian love.

She was noted for the austerity of her manners, the rigid discipline
which she maintained in the convent, and the inexorable disposition
which she showed toward those who, having committed a fault, came within
her jurisdiction.

Rumor was often busy with the affairs of the Carmelite Convent; and the
grandams and gossips of Florence would huddle together around their
domestic hearths, on the cold winter's evenings, and venture mysterious
hints and whispers of strange deeds committed within the walls of that
sacred institution; how from time to time some young and beautiful nun
had suddenly disappeared, to the surprise and alarm of her companions;
how piercing shrieks had been heard to issue from the interior of the
building, by those who passed near it at night,--and how the inmates
themselves were often aroused from their slumbers by strange noises
resembling the rattling of chains, the working of ponderous machinery,
and the revolution of huge wheels.

Such food for scandal as those mysterious whispers supplied, was not
likely to pass without exaggeration; and that love of the marvelous
which inspired the aforesaid gossips, led to the embellishment of the
rumors just glanced at--so that one declared with a solemn shake of the
head, how spirits were seen to glide around the convent walls at
night--and another averred that a nun, with whom she was acquainted, had
assured her that strange and unearthly forms were often encountered by
those inmates of the establishment who were hardy enough to venture into
the chapel, or to traverse the long corridors or gloomy cloisters after
dusk.

These vague and uncertain reports did not, however, prevent some of the
wealthiest families in Florence from placing their daughters in the
Carmelite Convent. A nobleman or opulent citizen who had several
daughters, would consider it a duty to devote one of them to the service
of the church; and the votive girl was most probably compelled to
perform her novitiate and take the veil in this renowned establishment.
It was essentially the convent patronized by the aristocracy; and no
female would be received within its walls save on the payment of a
considerable sum of money.

There was another circumstance which added to the celebrity and
augmented the wealth of the Carmelite Convent. Did a young unmarried
lady deviate from the path of virtue, or did a husband detect the
infidelity of his wife, the culprit was forthwith consigned to the care
of the abbess, and forced to take up her abode in that monastic
institution. Or, again--did some female openly neglect her religious
duties, or imprudently express an opinion antagonistic to the Roman
Catholic Church, the family to which she belonged would remove her to
the spiritual care of the abbess.

The convent was therefore considered to be an institution recognized by
the state as a means of punishing immorality, upholding the Catholic
religion, persuading the skeptical,--confirming the wavering, and
exercising a salutary terror over the ladies of the upper class, at that
period renowned for their dissolute morals. The aristocracy of Florence
patronized and protected the institution--because its existence afforded
a ready means to get rid of a dishonored daughter, or an unfaithful
wife; and it was even said that the abbess was invested with
extraordinary powers by the rescript of the duke himself, powers which
warranted her interference with the liberty of young females who were
denounced to her by their parents, guardians, or others who might have a
semblance of a right to control or coerce them.

Luther had already begun to make a noise in Germany; and the thunders of
his eloquence had reverberated across the Alps to the Italian states.
The priesthood was alarmed; and the conduct of the reformer was an
excuse for rendering the discipline of the monastic institutions more
rigid than ever. Nor was the Abbess Maria a woman who hesitated to avail
herself of this fact as an apology for strengthening her despotism and
widening the circle of her influence.

The reader has now heard enough to make him fully aware that the Carmelite
Convent was an establishment enjoying influence, exercising an authority,
and wielding a power, which--if these were misdirected--constituted an
enormous abuse in the midst of states bearing the name of a republic.
But the career of the Medici was then hastening toward a close; and in
proportion as the authority of the duke became more circumscribed, the
encroachments of the ecclesiastical orders grew more extensive.

The Abbess Maria, who was far advanced in years, but was endowed with
one of those vigorous intellects against which Time vainly directs his
influence, received the Lady Nisida in a little parlor plainly
furnished. The praying desk was of the most humble description; and
above it rose a cross of wood so worm-eaten and decayed that it seemed
as if the grasp of a strong hand would crush it into dust. But this
emblem of the creed had been preserved in the Carmelite Convent since
the period of the Second Crusade, and was reported to consist of a piece
of the actual cross on which the Saviour suffered in Palestine.

Against the wall hung a scourge, with five knotted thongs, whereon the
blood-stains denoted the severity of that penance which the abbess
frequently inflicted upon herself. On a table stood a small loaf of
coarse bread and a pitcher of water; for although a sumptuous banquet
was every day served up in the refectory, the abbess was never known to
partake of the delicious viands nor to place her lips in contact with
wine.

When Nisida entered the presence of the abbess, she sank on her knees,
and folded her arms meekly across her bosom. The holy mother gave her a
blessing, and made a motion for her to rise. Nisida obeyed, and took a
seat near the abbess at the table.

She then drew forth her tablets, and wrote a few lines, which the
superior read with deep attention.

Nisida placed a heavy purse of gold upon the table, and the abbess
nodded an assent to the request contained in the lines inscribed on the
tablet.

The interview was about to terminate, when the door suddenly opened, and
an elderly nun entered the room.

"Ursula," said the lady abbess, in a cold but reproachful tone, "didst
thou not know that I was engaged? What means this abrupt intrusion?"

"Pardon me, holy mother!" exclaimed the nun: "but the rumor of such a
frightful murder has just reached us----"

"A murder!" ejaculated the abbess. "Oh! unhappy Florence, when wilt thou
say farewell to crimes which render thy name detestable among Italian
states?"

"This indeed, too, holy mother, is one of inordinate blackness,"
continued Sister Ursula. "A young and beautiful lady----"

"We know not personal beauty within these walls, daughter," interrupted
the abbess, sternly.

"True, holy mother! and yet I did but repeat the tale as the porteress
ere now related it to me. However," resumed Ursula, "it appears that a
young female, whom the worldly-minded outside these sacred walls
denominate beautiful, was barbarously murdered this morning--shortly
after the hour of sunrise----"

"Within the precincts of Florence?" inquired the abbess.

"Within a short distance of the convent, holy mother," answered the nun.
"The dreadful deed was accomplished in the garden attached to the
mansion of a certain Signor Wagner, whom the worldly-minded style a
young man wondrously handsome."

"A fair exterior often conceals a dark heart, daughter," said the
abbess. "But who was the hapless victim?"

"Rumor declares, holy mother----"

The nun checked herself abruptly, and glanced at Nisida, who, during the
above conversation, had approached the windows which commanded a view of
the convent garden, and whose back was therefore turned toward the
abbess and Ursula.

"You may speak fearlessly, daughter," said the abbess; "that unfortunate
lady hears you not--for she is both deaf and dumb."

"Holy Virgin succor her," exclaimed Ursula, crossing herself. "I was
about to inform your ladyship," she continued, "that rumor represents
the murdered woman to have been the sister of this Signor Wagner of whom
I spoke; but it is more than probable that there was no tie of
relationship between them--and that----"

"I understand you, daughter," interrupted the abbess. "Alas! how much
wickedness is engendered in this world by the sensual, fleshly passion
which mortals denominate love! But is the murderer detected?"

"The murderer was arrested immediately after the perpetration of the
crime," responded Ursula; "and at this moment he is a prisoner in the
dungeon of the palace."

"Who is the lost man that has perpetrated such a dreadful crime?"
demanded the abbess, again crossing herself.

"Signor Wagner himself, holy mother," was the reply.

"The pious Duke Cosmo bequeathed gold to this institution," said the
abbess, "that masses might be offered up for the souls of those who fall
beneath the weapon of the assassin. See that the lamented prince's
instructions be not neglected in this instance, Ursula."

"It was to remind your ladyship of this duty that I ventured to break
upon your privacy," returned the nun, who then withdrew.

The abbess approached Nisida, and touched her upon the shoulder to
intimate to her that they were again alone together.

She had drawn down her veil, and was leaning her forehead against one of
the iron bars which protected the window--apparently in a mood of deep
thought.

When the abbess touched her, she started abruptly round--then, pressing
the superior's hand with convulsive violence, hurried from the room.

The old porteress presented the alms-box as she opened the gate of the
convent; but Nisida pushed it rudely aside, and hurried down the steps
as if she were escaping from a lazar-house, rather than issuing from a
monastic institution.




CHAPTER XVII.

WAGNER IN PRISON--A VISITOR.


It was evening; and Wagner paced his narrow dungeon with agitated steps.

Far beneath the level of the ground, and under the ducal palace, was
that gloomy prison, having no window, save a grating in the massive door
to admit the air.

A lamp burned dimly upon the table, whereon stood also the coarse prison
fare provided for the captive, but which was untouched.

The clanking of the weapons of the sentinels, who kept guard in the
passage from which the various dungeons opened, fell mournfully upon
Fernand's ears, and every moment reminded him of the apparent
impossibility to escape--even if such an idea possessed him.

The lamp had burned throughout the day in his dungeon; for the light of
heaven could not penetrate that horrible subterranean cell--and it was
only by the payment of gold that he had induced the jailer to permit him
the indulgence of the artificial substitute for the rays of the glorious
sun.

"Oh! wretched being that I am!" he thought within himself, as he paced
the stone floor of his prison-house; "the destiny of the accursed is
mine! Ah! fool--dotard that I was to exchange the honors of old age for
the vicissitudes of a renewed existence! Had nature taken her course, I
should probably now be sleeping in a quiet grave--and my soul might be
in the regions of the blessed. But the tempter came, and dazzled me with
prospects of endless happiness--and I succumbed! Oh! Faust! would that
thou hadst never crossed the threshold of my humble cottage in the Black
Forest! How much sorrow--how much misery should I have been spared!
Better--better to have remained in poverty--solitude--helplessness--worn
down by the weight of years--and crushed by the sense of utter
loneliness--oh! better to have endured all this, than to have taken on
myself a new tenure of that existence which is so marked with misery and
woe!"

He threw himself upon a seat, and endeavored to reflect on his position
with calmness; but he could not!

Starting up, he again paced the dungeon in an agitated manner.

"Holy God!" he exclaimed aloud, "how much wretchedness has fallen upon
me in a single day! Agnes murdered--Nisida perhaps forever estranged
from me--myself accused of a dreadful crime, whereof I am innocent--and
circumstances all combining so wonderfully against me! But who could
have perpetrated the appalling deed? Can that mysterious lady, whom
Agnes spoke of so frequently, and who, by her description, so closely
resembled my much-loved Nisida--can she----"

At that moment the bolts were suddenly drawn back from the door of the
dungeon--the clanking chains fell heavily on the stone pavement
outside--and the jailer appeared, holding a lamp in his hand.

"Your brother, signor, is come to visit you," said the turnkey. "But
pray let the interview be a brief one--for it is as much as my situation
and my own liberty are worth to have admitted him without an order from
the chief judge."

"With these words the jailer made way for a cavalier to enter the
dungeon;" and as he closed the door, he said, "I shall return shortly to
let your brother out again."

Surprise had hitherto placed a seal upon Wagner's lips; but even before
the visitor had entered the cell, a faint suspicion--a wild hope had
flashed to his mind that Nisida had not forgotten him, that she would
not abandon him.

But this hope was destroyed almost as soon as formed, by the sudden
recollection of her affliction;--for how could a deaf and dumb woman
succeed in bribing and deceiving one so cautious and wary as the jailer
of a criminal prison?

Nevertheless the moment the visitor had entered the cell--and in spite
of the deep disguise which she wore, the eyes of the lover failed not to
recognize the object of his adoration in that elegant cavalier who now
stood before him.

Scarcely had the jailer closed and bolted the massive door again, when
Fernand rushed forward to clasp Nisida in his arms;--but, imperiously
waving her hand, she motioned him to stand back.

Then, with the language of the fingers, she rapidly demanded--"Will you
swear upon the cross that the young female who has been murdered, was
not your mistress?"

"I swear," answered Fernand in the same symbolic manner; and, as the
light of the lamp played on his handsome countenance, his features
assumed so decided an expression of truth, frankness, and sincerity,
that Nisida was already more than half convinced of the injustice of her
suspicions.

But still she was determined to be completely satisfied; and, drawing
forth a small but exquisitely sculptured crucifix from her doublet, she
presented it to her lover.

He sank upon one knee, received it respectfully, and kissed it without
hesitation.

Nisida then threw herself into his arms, and embraced him with a
fondness as warm, as wild, as impassioned as her suspicions had ere now
been vehement and fearfully resentful.

Her presence caused Fernand to forget his sorrow--to forget that he was
in a dungeon--to forget, also, the tremendous charge that hung over his
head. For never had his Nisida appeared to him so marvelously beautiful
as he now beheld her, disguised in the graceful garb of a cavalier of
that age. Though tall, majestic, and of rich proportions for a woman,
yet in the attire of the opposite sex she seemed slight, short, and
eminently graceful. The velvet cloak sat so jauntily on her sloping
shoulder;--the doublet became her symmetry so well;--and the rich lace
collar was so arranged as to disguise the prominence of the chest--that
voluptuous fullness which could not be compressed.

At length a sudden thought struck Fernand, and he inquired, in the usual
manner, how Nisida had gained access to him?

"A faithful friend contrived the interview for me," she replied, with
her wonted rapidity of play upon the fingers. "He led the jailer to
believe that I was a German, and totally unacquainted with the Italian
tongue. Thus not a word was addressed to me; and gold has opened the
door which separated me from you. The same means shall secure your
escape."

"Dearest Nisida," signaled Wagner, "I would not escape were the door of
my dungeon left open and the sentinels removed. I am innocent--and that
innocence must be proved!"

The lady exhibited extraordinary impatience at this reply.

"You do not believe me guilty?" asked Wagner.

She shook her head in a determined manner, to show how profound was her
conviction of his innocence.

"Then do not urge me, beloved one, to escape and be dishonored forever,"
was the urgent prayer he conveyed to her.

"The evidence against you will be overwhelming," she gave him to
understand: then with an air of the most heart appealing supplication,
she added, "Escape, dearest Fernand, for my sake!"

"But I should be compelled to fly from Florence--and wouldst thou
accompany me?"

She shook her head mournfully.

"Then I will remain here--in this dungeon! If my innocence be proved, I
may yet hope to call the sister of the Count of Riverola my wife: if I
be condemned----"

He paused:--for he knew that, even if he were sentenced to death, he
could not die,--that some power, of which, however, he had only a vague
notion, would rescue him,--that the compact, which gave him renewed
youth and a long life on the fatal condition of his periodical
transformation into a horrid monster, must be fulfilled; and, though he
saw not--understood not how all this was to be, still he knew that it
_would_ happen if he should really be condemned!

Nisida was not aware of the motive which had checked her lover as he was
conveying to her his sense of the dread alternatives before him; and she
hastened to intimate to him the following thought:--

"You would say that if you be condemned, you will know how to meet death
as becomes a brave man. But think of _me_--of Nisida, who loves you!"

"Would you continue to love a man branded as a murderer?"

"I should only think of you as my own dear Fernand!"

He shook his head--as much as to say, "It cannot be!"--and then once
more embraced her fondly--for he beheld, in her anxiety for his escape,
only a proof of her ardent affection.

At this moment the jailer returned: and while he was unbolting the door,
Nisida made one last, imploring appeal to her lover to give his assent
to escape, if the arrangements were made for that purpose.

But he conveyed to her his resolute determination to meet the charge,
with the hope of proving his innocence: and for a few moments Nisida
seemed convulsed with the most intense anguish of soul.

The jailer made his appearance; and Wagner, to maintain the deceit which
Nisida informed him to have been practiced on the man, said a few words
aloud in German--as if he was really taking leave of a brother.

Nisida embraced him tenderly; and covering her countenance, as much as
possible, with her slouched hat, the waving plumes of which she made to
fall over her face, this extraordinary being issued from the cell.




CHAPTER XVIII.

FLORA FRANCATELLI--THE THREE NUNS--THE CHAIR.


Nisida regained her apartment, by the private staircase, without any
molestation. Having laid aside her male attire, she assumed a loose
wrapper, and then, throwing herself into an armchair, gave way to her
reflections.

These were apparently of no pleasurable nature; for they were frequently
interrupted by convulsive starts and rapid glancings around the room--as
if she were fearful lest some terrible specter were present to scare
her.

Once or twice her eyes lingered on her mother's portrait; and then
profound sighs escaped her bosom.

Presently the beautiful Flora Francatelli entered the apartment; but
Nisida made her a sign of dismissal.

The maiden withdrew; and we must now follow her to her own chamber.

On reaching her bedroom, Flora did not immediately retire to rest. She
felt that she should not sleep, even were she to seek her pillow: for
she had much--very much to ponder upon!

There was a marked, undisguised reserve about her mistress which
materially affected her. Although she could not control her affections,
yet she felt as if she were acting with duplicity toward the Lady Nisida
in having listened to the love-tale of Francisco, and, retaining that
revelation of his affection a secret in her own breast.

Yet--had he not implored, had he not enjoined her to keep that avowal to
herself? Yes, and when she looked at the matter, as it were, face to
face, she could not justly reproach herself:--nevertheless, that secret
love weighed upon her conscience like a crime!

She could not understand wherefore Nisida's manner had changed toward
her. Francisco had assuredly made no communication to his sister; and
nothing had transpired to excite a suspicion of the real truth in her
mind. Still there _was_ a coolness on the part of that lady:--or might
it not be that Flora's imagination deceived her?

There was another, and even a more serious cause of grief weighing upon
her mind. Dispatches had been received from the nobleman in whose suit
her brother Alessandro had repaired to Constantinople; and the secretary
of the council of Florence had intimated to Signora Francatelli (Flora's
aunt) that Alessandro had abjured the faith of his forefathers and had
embraced the Mussulman creed. It was also stated that the young man had
entered the service of grand vizier; but whether he had become a
renegade through love for some Turkish maiden, or with the hope of
ameliorating his condition in a worldly point of view, whether, indeed,
self-interest or a conscientious belief in the superiority of the Moslem
doctrines over those of Christianity, had swayed Alessandro, no one
could say.

His aunt was almost heart-broken at the news. Father Marco, through
whose influence he had obtained the post of secretary to the Florentine
Envoy, was shocked and grieved; and Flora was not the less afflicted at
an event which, as she had been taught to believe, must inevitably place
her much-loved brother beyond the hope of spiritual salvation.

Amidst the gloomy reflections excited by the Lady Nisida's coolness, and
the disagreeable tidings which had been received concerning her brother,
there was nevertheless one gleam of consolation for Flora Francatelli.

This was the love which Francisco entertained for her, and which she so
tenderly, so sincerely reciprocated.

Yes, a maiden's first love is ever a source of solace amidst the gloom
of affliction; because it is so intimately intertwined with hope! For
the soul of the innocent, artless girl who fondly loves, soars aloft in
a heaven of her own creation, dove-like on the wings of faith!

It was already late when Flora began to unbraid and set at liberty her
dark brown tresses, preparatory to retiring to rest, when a low knock at
the chamber-door startled her in the midst of her occupation.

Thinking it might be the Lady Nisida who required her attendance she
hastened to open the door; and immediately three women, dressed in
religious habits and having black veils thrown over their heads so as
completely to conceal their faces, entered the room.

Flora uttered a faint scream--for the sudden apparition of those
specter-like figures, at such a late hour of the night, was well
calculated to alarm even a person of maturer age and stronger mind than
Signora Francatelli.

"You must accompany us, young lady," said the foremost nun, advancing
toward her. "And beware how you create any disturbance--for it will
avail you nothing."

"Whither am I to be conducted?" asked Flora, trembling from head to
foot.

"That we cannot inform you," was the reply. "Neither must you know at
present; and therefore our first duty is to blindfold you."

"Pity me--have mercy upon me!" exclaimed Flora, throwing herself on her
knees before the nun who addressed her in so harsh, so stern a manner.
"I am a poor, unprotected girl: have mercy upon me!"

But the three nuns seized upon her; and while one held the palm of her
hand forcibly over her mouth so as to check her utterance, the others
hastily blindfolded her.

Flora was so overcome by this alarming proceeding, that she fainted.

When she came to her senses, she found herself lying on a hard and sorry
couch in a large apartment, almost entirely denuded of furniture and
lighted by a feebly-burning lamp suspended to the low ceiling.

For a moment she thought she was laboring under the influence of a
hideous dream; but, glancing around, she started with affright, and a
scream burst from her lips, when she beheld the three nuns standing by
the bed.

"Why have you brought me hither?" she demanded, springing from the
couch, and addressing the recluses with frantic wildness.

"To benefit you in a spiritual sense," replied the one who had before
acted as spokeswoman: "to purge your mind of those mundane vanities
which have seized upon it, and to render you worthy of salvation. Pray,
sisters--pray for this at present benighted creature!"

Then, to the surprise of the young maiden, the three nuns all fell upon
their knees around her, and began to chant a solemn hymn in most
lugubrious notes.

They had thrown aside their veils, and the flickering light of the dim
lamp gave a ghastly and unearthly appearance to their pale and severe
countenances. They were all three elderly persons: and their aspect was
of that cold, forbidding nature, which precludes hope on the part of any
one who might have to implore mercy.

The young maiden was astounded--stupefied--she knew not what to
conjecture. Where was she? who were those nuns that had treated her so
harshly? why was she brought to that cold, cheerless apartment? what
meant the hymn that seemed chanted expressly on her account?

She could not bear up against the bewilderment and alarm produced by
these questions which she asked herself, and none of which she could
solve. An oppressive sensation came over her; and she was about to sink
back upon the couch from which she had risen, when the hymn suddenly
ceased--the nuns rose from their suppliant posture--and the foremost,
addressing the poor girl in a reproachful tone, exclaimed, "Oh!
wicked--worldly-minded creature, repent--repent--repent!"

There was something so awful--so appalling--in this strange conduct on
the part of the nuns, that Flora began to doubt whether she were not
laboring under some terrible delusion. She feared lest her senses were
leaving her: and, covering her face with her hands, so as to close her
eyes against external objects, she endeavored to look inward, as it
were, and scrutinize her own soul.

But she was not allowed time to reflect; for the three nuns seized upon
her, the foremost saying, "You must come with us!"

"Mercy! mercy!" screamed the wretched girl, vainly struggling in the
powerful grasp of the recluses.

Her long hair, which she had unbraided before she was carried off from
the Riverola mansion, floated over her shoulders, and enhanced the
expression of ineffable despair which her pallid countenance now wore.

Wildly she glanced around, as she was being hurried from the room; and
frantic screams escaped her lips. But there was no one nigh to
succor--no one to melt at the outbursts of her anguish!

The three nuns dragged, rather than conducted her to an adjacent
apartment, which was lighted by a lamp of astonishing brilliancy, and
hung in a skylight raised above the roof.

On the floor, immediately beneath this lamp, stood an armchair of
wicker-work; and from this chair two stout cords ascended to the
ceiling, through which they passed by means of two holes perforated for
the purpose.

When Flora was dragged by the nuns to the immediate vicinity of the
chair, which her excited imagination instantly converted into an engine
of torture, that part of the floor on which the chair stood seemed to
tremble and oscillate beneath her feet, as if it were a trap-door.

The most dreadful sensations now came over her: she felt as if her brain
was reeling--as if she must go mad.

A fearful scream burst from her lips, and she struggled with the energy
of desperation, as the nuns endeavored to thrust her into the chair.

"No--no!" she exclaimed, frantically; "you shall not torture me--you
dare not murder me! What have I done to merit this treatment! Mercy!
mercy!"

But her cries and her struggles were alike useless; for she was now
firmly bound to the chair, into which the nuns had forced her to seat
herself.

Then commenced the maddening scene which will be found in the ensuing
chapter.




CHAPTER XIX.

THE DESCENT--THE CHAMBER OF PENITENCE.


Having bound Flora Francatelli to the chair in the manner just
described, the three nuns fell back a few paces, and the wretched girl
felt the floor giving way under her.

A dreadful scream burst from her lips, as slowly--slowly the chair sank
down, while the working of hidden machinery in the roof, and the steady,
monotonous revolution of wheels, sounded with ominous din upon her ears.

An icy stream appeared to pour over her soul; wildly she cast around her
eyes, and then more piercing became her shrieks, as she found herself
gradually descending into what seemed to be a pit or well--only that it
was square instead of round.

The ropes creaked--the machinery continued its regular movement, and the
lamp fixed in the skylight overhead became less and less brilliant.

And bending over the mouth of this pit into which she was descending
were the three nuns--standing motionless and silent like hideous
specters, on the brink of the aperture left by the square platform or
trap, whereon the chair was fixed.

"Mercy! Mercy!" exclaimed Flora, in a voice expressive of the most acute
anguish.

And stretching forth her snowy arms (for it was round the waist and by
the feet that she was fastened to the chair), she convulsively placed
her open palms against the wooden walls of the pit, as if she could by
that spasmodic movement arrest the descent of the terrible apparatus
that was bearing her down into that hideous, unknown gulf! But the walls
were smooth and even, and presented nothing whereon she could fix her
grasp.

Her brain reeled, and for a few minutes she sat motionless, in dumb,
inert despair.

Then again, in obedience to some mechanical impulse, she glanced upward;
the light of the lamp was now dimly seen, like the sun through a dense
mist--but the dark figures were still bending over the brink of the
abyss, thirty yards above.

The descent was still progressing and the noise of the machinery still
reached her ears, with buzzing, humming, monotonous indistinctness.

She shrieked not now--she screamed not any more; but it was not
resignation that sealed her lips;--it was despair!

Suddenly she became aware of the gradual disappearance of the three
nuns; as she descended, the wall seemed to rise slowly upward and cover
them from her view.

Then, for an instant there was a slight shock given to the platform
whereon the chair was placed--as if it rested on something beneath.

But no;--the fearful descent still went on--for, when she again
stretched forth her hand to touch the walls, they appeared to be slowly
rising--rising!

She was now involved in almost total darkness; but far--far overhead the
dim luster of the lamp was seen; and the four walls of the gulf now
appeared to touch the ceiling of the room above, and to inclose that
faint but still distinct orb within the narrow space thus shut in.

The noise of the machinery also reached her still--but merely with a
humming sound that was only just audible.

For an instant she doubted whether she was still descending; but, alas!
when her arms were a third time convulsively stretched forth, her fair
hands felt the walls slipping away from her touch--gliding upward, as it
were, with steady emotion.

Then she knew that the descent had not ceased.

But whither was she going? to what awful depth was she progressing?

Already she conjectured, was she at least sixty yards beneath that dim
yellow orb which every instant appeared to shine as through a deeper,
deepening mist.

For what fate was she reserved? and where was she?

Suddenly it struck her that she was an inmate of the Carmelite Convent;
for the rumors alluded to in a preceding chapter had often met her ears;
and her imagination naturally associated them with the occurrences of
that dreadful night.

The piercing shrieks--the noise of machinery--the disappearance from
time to time of some member of that monastic institution, all the
incidents, in fine, to which those rumors had ever pointed, now seemed
to apply to her own case.

These reflections flashed, with lightning rapidity, through her brain,
and paralyzed her with horror.

Then she lost all further power of thought; and though not absolutely
fainting, she was stunned and stupefied with the tremendous weight of
overwhelming despair.

How long she remained in this condition she knew not; but she was
suddenly aroused by the opening of a low door in the wall in front of
her.

Starting as from a dreadful dream, she stretched forth her arms, and
became aware that the descent had stopped; and at the same moment she
beheld a nun, bearing a lamp, standing on the threshold of the door
which had just opened.

"Sister, welcome to the chamber of penitence!" said the recluse,
approaching the terrified Flora.

Then, placing the lamp in a niche near the door, the nun proceeded to
remove the cords which fastened the young maiden to the chair.

Flora rose, but fell back again on the seat--for her limbs were stiff in
consequence of the length of time they had been retained in one
position. The nun disappeared by the little door for a few minutes; and,
on her return, presented the wretched girl a cup of cold water. Flora
swallowed the icy beverage, and felt refreshed.

Then, by the light of the lamp in the niche, she hastily examined the
countenance of the nun; but its expression was cold--repulsive--stern:
and Flora knew that it was useless to seek to make a friend of her.

A frightful sense of loneliness, as it were, struck her like an
ice-shaft penetrating to her very soul; and clasping her hands together,
she exclaimed: "Holy Virgin! protect me!"

"No harm will befall you, daughter," said the nun, "if you manifest
contrition for past errors and a resolution to devote your future years
to the service of Heaven."

"My past errors!" repeated Flora, with mingled indignation and
astonishment. "I am not aware that I ever injured a living soul by a
word or deed--nor entertained a thought for which I need to blush!
Neither have I neglected those duties which manifest the gratitude of
mortals for the bounties bestowed upon them by Providence."

"Ah! daughter," exclaimed the nun, "you interpret not your own heart
rightly. Have you never abandoned yourself to those carnal
notions--those hopes--those fears--those dreams of happiness--which
constitute the passion which the world calls love?"

Flora started, and a blush mantled on her cheeks, before so pale!

"You see that I have touched a chord which vibrates to your heart's
core, daughter," continued the nun, on whom that sudden evidence of
emotion was not lost. "You have suffered yourself to be deluded by the
whisperings of that feeling whose tendency was to wean your soul from
Heaven."

"And is it possible that a pure and virtuous love can be construed into
a crime?" demanded the young maiden, her indignation overpowering her
fears.

"A love that is founded on, and fostered by ambition is a sin," replied
the nun. "Marriage is doubtless an institution ordained by Heaven; but
it becomes a curse, and is repulsive to all pious feelings, when it
unites those whose passion is made up of sensuality and selfishness."

"You dare not impute such base considerations to me!" exclaimed Flora,
her cheeks again flushing, but with the glow of conscious innocence
shamefully outraged by the most injurious suspicions.

"Nay, daughter," continued the nun, unmoved by the manner of the young
maiden; "you are unable to judge rightly of your own heart. You possess
a confidence in integrity of purpose, which is but a mental blindness on
your part."

"Of what am I accused? and wherefore am I brought hither?" asked Flora,
beginning to feel bewildered by the sophistry that characterized the
nun's discourse.

"Those who are interested in your welfare," replied the nun evasively,
"have consigned you to the care of persons devoted to the service of
Heaven, that your eyes may be opened to the vanity of the path which you
have been pursuing, but from which you are so happily rescued."

"And where am I? is this the Convent of the Carmelites? why was I
subjected to all the alarms--all the mental tortures through which I
have just passed?" demanded the young maiden, wildly and rapidly.

"Think not that we have acted toward you in a spirit of persecution,"
said the nun. "The mysteries which have alarmed you will be explained at
a future period, when your soul is prepared by penance,
self-mortification, and prayer to receive the necessary revelation. In
the meantime, ask no questions, forget the world, and resolve to embrace
a life devoted to the service of Heaven."

"To embrace a conventual existence!" almost shrieked the wretched girl.
"Oh! no, never!"

"Not many days will elapse ere your mind will undergo a salutary
change," said the nun, composedly. "But if you will follow me--as you
appear to be somewhat recovered--I will conduct you to your cell
adjoining the Chamber of Penitence."

Flora, perceiving that any further attempt to reason with the recluse
would be fruitlessly made, rose and followed her into a narrow, dark
passage, at the end of which was a door standing half open.

The nun extinguished her lamp, and led the way into a large apartment
hung with black. At the further end there was an altar, surmounted by a
crucifix of ebony, and lighted up with four wax candles, which only
served to render the gloom of the entire scene more apparent.

At the foot of the altar knelt five women, half naked, and holding
scourges in their hands.

"These are the penitents," whispered the nun to Flora. "Pause for a
moment and contemplate them."

A minute elapsed, during which the five penitents remained motionless as
statues, with their heads bowed upon their bosoms, and their hands
hanging down by their sides, as if those limbs were lifeless--save in
respect to the hands that held the scourges. But, suddenly, one of
them--a young and beautiful woman--exclaimed, in a tone of piercing
anguish, "It is my fault! it is my fault! it is my fault!"--and the
others took up the wail in voices equally characteristic of heartfelt
woe.

Then they lacerated their shoulders with the hard leathern thongs of
their scourges; and a faintness came over Flora Francatelli when she
observed the blood appear on the back of the young and beautiful
penitent who had given the signal for this self-mortification.

The nun, perceiving the effect thus produced upon the maiden, touched
her upon the shoulder as a signal to follow whither she was about to
lead; and, opening one of the several doors communicating with the
Chamber of Penitence, she said in a low whisper--"This is your cell. May
the Virgin bless you!"

Flora entered the little room allotted to her, and the nun retired,
simply closing, but not bolting the door behind her.

A taper burnt before a crucifix suspended to the wall; and near it hung
a scourge, from which last mentioned object Flora averted her eyes with
horror.

A bed, a simple toilet-table, a praying-desk, and a single chair,
completed the furniture of the cell, which was of very narrow
dimensions.

Seating herself on the bed, Flora burst into an agony of tears.

What would her aunt think when she received the news of her
disappearance? for she could not suppose that any friendly feeling on
the part of her persecutors would induce them to adopt a course which
might relieve that much-loved relative's mind concerning her. What would
Francisco conjecture? Oh! these thoughts were maddening!

Anxious to escape from them, if possible, the almost heartbroken girl
proceeded to lay aside her garments and retire to rest.

Physical and mental exhaustion cast her into a deep sleep; but the
horrors of her condition pursued her even in her dreams; so that when
she awoke she was not startled to find herself in that gloomy cell.

Casting her eyes around, she observed two circumstances which showed her
that some one had visited her room during the hours she slept; for a new
taper was burning before the crucifix, and her own garments had been
removed,--the coarse garb of a penitent now occupying their place on the
chair.

"Oh! is it possible that I am doomed to bid farewell to the world
forever?" exclaimed Flora, in a voice of despair, as she clasped her
hands convulsively together.




CHAPTER XX.

FRANCISCO AND NISIDA--DR. DURAS AND THE LETTER.


The greatest confusion prevailed in the Riverola Palace, when, in the
morning, the disappearance of Flora Francatelli was discovered.

Nisida hastened, at an early hour, to her brother's apartment, and
intimated to him the fact that she was nowhere to be found.

Francisco, who was already dressed, was overwhelmed with grief at this
announcement, and, in the first excess of excitement, conveyed to her
his intention of seeking the young maiden throughout the city.

He was hastening to quit the room, when Nisida held him back, and
intimated to him that his anxiety in this respect would create
suspicions injurious alike to his reputation and that of Flora
Francatelli--the more so, as she was but a menial in the household.

Francisco paused and reflected for a few moments; then, having tenderly
embraced his sister, he hastily addressed her by the symbolic language
in which they were accustomed to converse:

"Pardon me, beloved Nisida, for having kept a secret from thee--the only
one that my heart has ever so selfishly cherished."

Nisida appeared to be profoundly astonished at this communication, and
made an impatient sign for him to proceed.

"You will not be surprised at my anxiety to seek after the missing
girl," he continued, "when I intimate to you that I love her--and that,
next to yourself, she is dearer to me than I can express."

"Your passion can scarcely be an honorable one, Francisco," was the
reproach conveyed by Nisida, while her countenance wore a corresponding
expression.

"I would sooner die than harbor an injurious thought in respect to that
virtuous and beautiful creature!" responded the young count, his face
flushed with the glow of generous emotions. "My happiness is intimately
connected with this attachment, Nisida, and I feel convinced that you
would rather forward my views than oppose them."

"Yes, dear brother," was the reply which she conveyed to him: "your
happiness is my only consideration."

But, as she gave this assurance, an ill-subdued sigh escaped her breast,
and she compressed her lips tightly to crush the emotions that were
agitating her. A cloud evanescently appeared on the broad and marble
forehead; the penciled brows contracted, and the eyes flashed
brightly--oh! far more brightly than glanced the ray of the morning sun
through the windows, upon the glossy surface of her luxuriant hair. A
momentary spasm seemed to convulse the full and rounded form; and the
small, elegantly shaped foot which peered from beneath her flowing robe,
tapped the floor twice with involuntary movement.

Mistress as she usually was of even her most intense feelings, and
wonderfully habituated by circumstances to exercise the most complete
command over her emotions, she was now for an instant vanquished by the
gush of painful sentiments which crowded on her soul.

Francisco did not, however, observe that transitory evidence of acute
feeling on the part of his sister--a feeling which seemed to partake of
the nature of remorse, as if she were conscience-stricken!

For she loved her brother deeply--tenderly, but after the fashion of her
own wild and wonderful disposition--a love that was not calculated
always to prove friendly to his interests.

Francisco paced the room in an agitated manner.

At length he stopped near where his sister was standing, and intimated
to her that Flora might perhaps have repaired to the residence of her
aunt.

Nisida conveyed to him this answer: "The moment that I missed Flora ere
now, I dispatched a domestic to her aunt's cottage; but she has not been
there since Sunday last."

"Some treachery is at work here, Nisida," was the young count's
response. "Flora has not willingly absented herself."

At this moment Francisco's page entered the apartment to announce that
Dr. Duras was in the reception-room.

The young count made a sign to his sister to accompany him; and they
proceeded to the elegant saloon where the physician was waiting.

Having saluted the count and Nisida with his usual urbanity, Dr. Duras
addressed himself to the former, saying, "I have just learnt from your
lordship's page that the favorite attendant on your sister has most
unaccountably disappeared."

"And both Nisida and myself are at a loss what to conjecture, or how to
act," replied Francisco.

"Florence is at this moment the scene of dreadful crimes," observed the
physician. "Yesterday morning a young female was murdered by a near
neighbor of mine----"

"I was astounded when I heard of the arrest of Signor Wagner on such a
charge," interrupted the count. "He was latterly a frequent guest at
this house: although, I believe, you never happened to meet him here?"

"No," answered the physician; "but I saw him at the funeral of your
lamented father, and once or twice since in the garden attached to his
mansion; and I certainly could not have supposed, from his appearance,
that he was a man capable of so black a crime. I was, however, about to
observe that Florence is at this moment infested by a class of villains
who hesitate at no deed of turpitude. This Signor Wagner is a foreigner,
possessed of immense wealth, the sources of which are totally unknown;
and, moreover, it is declared that the sbirri, yesterday morning,
actually traced the robber-captain Stephano to the vicinity of his
mansion. All this looks black enough, and it is more than probable that
Wagner was in league with the redoubtable Stephano and his banditti.
Then the mysterious disappearance of Flora is, to say the least,
alarming, for I believe she was a well conducted, virtuous, estimable
young woman."

"She was--she was indeed!" exclaimed Francisco. "At least," he added,
perceiving that the physician was somewhat astonished at the enthusiasm
with which he spoke--"at least, such is my firm impression; such, too,
is the opinion of my sister."

"The motive which brought me hither this morning," said Dr. Duras, "was
to offer you a little friendly advice, which my long acquaintance with
your family, my dear count, will prevent you from taking amiss."

"Speak, doctor--speak your thoughts!" cried Francisco, pressing the
physician's hand gratefully.

"I would recommend you to be more cautious how you form an intimacy with
strangers," continued Dr. Duras. "Rumor has a thousand tongues--and it
is already reported in Florence that the alleged murderer was on
familiar terms with the noble Count of Riverola and Lady Nisida."

"The duke himself is liable to be deceived in respect to the real
character of an individual," said Francisco proudly.

"But his highness would not form hasty acquaintances," replied the
physician. "After all, it is with the best possible feeling that I offer
you my counsel--knowing your generous heart, and also how frequently
generosity is imposed upon."

"Pardon the impatience with which I answered you, my dear friend,"
exclaimed the young count.

"No pardon is necessary," said the physician; "because you did not
offend me. One word more and I must take my leave. Crimes are
multiplying thickly in Florence, and Stephano's band becomes each day
more and more daring; so that it is unsafe to walk alone in the city
after dusk. Beware how you stir unattended, my dear Francisco, at
unseasonable hours."

"My habits are not of that nature," replied the count. "I, however,
thank you cordially for your well-meant advice. But you appear to
connect the disappearance of Flora Francatelli," he added, very
seriously, "with the dreadful deed supposed to be committed by Signor
Wagner!"

"I merely conjecture that this Wagner is associated with that lawless
horde who have become the terror of the republic," answered the
physician; "and it is natural to suppose that these wretches are guilty
of all the enormous crimes which have lately struck the city with
alarm."

Francisco turned aside to conceal the emotions which these remarks
excited within him; for he began to apprehend that she whom he loved so
fondly had met with foul play at the hands of the bravoes and banditti
whom Stephano was known to command.

Dr. Duras seized that opportunity to approach Nisida, who was standing
at the window; and as he thrust into her hand a note, which was
immediately concealed in her dress, he was struck with surprise and
grief at the acute anguish that was depicted on her countenance.

Large tears stood on her long, dark lashes, and her face was ashy pale.

The physician made a sign of anxious inquiry; but Nisida, subduing her
emotions with an almost superhuman effort, pressed his hand violently
and hurried from the room.

Dr. Duras shook his head mournfully, but also in a manner which showed
that he was at a loss to comprehend that painful manifestation of
feeling on the part of one whom he well knew to be endowed with almost
miraculous powers of self-control.

His meditations were interrupted by Francisco, who, addressing him
abruptly, said, "In respect to the missing young lady, whose absence
will be so acutely felt by my sister, the only course which I can at
present pursue, is to communicate her mysterious disappearance to the
captain of police."

"No time should be lost in adopting that step," responded the doctor. "I
am about to visit a sick nobleman in the neighborhood of the captain's
office: we will proceed so far in each other's company."

The young count summoned his page to attend upon him, and then quitted
the mansion in company with the physician.

In the meantime Nisida had retired to her own apartment, where she threw
herself into a seat, and gave vent to the dreadful emotions which had
for the last hour been agitating within her bosom.

She wept--oh! she wept long and bitterly: it was terrible and strange to
think how that woman of iron mind now yielded to the outpourings of her
anguish.

Some time elapsed ere she even attempted to control her feelings; and
then her struggle to subdue them was as sudden and energetic as her
grief had a moment previously been violent and apparently inconsolable.

Then she recollected the note which Dr. Duras had slipped into her hand,
and which she had concealed in her bosom; and she hastened to peruse it.
The contents ran as follows:

    "In accordance with your request, my noble-hearted and
    much-enduring friend, I have consulted eminent lawyers in
    respect to the will of the late Count of Riverola. The substance
    of their opinion is unanimously this: The estates are
    inalienably settled on yourself, should you recover the
    faculties of hearing and speaking at any time previous to your
    brother's attainment of the age of thirty; and should you enter
    into possession of the estates, and allow your brother to enjoy
    the whole or greater part of the revenues, in direct
    contradiction to the spirit of your father's will, the estates
    would become liable to confiscation by his highness the duke. In
    this case your brother and yourself would alike be ruined.

    "Now, the advice that these lawyers give is this: A memorial
    should be addressed to his highness, exhibiting that you refuse
    to undergo any surgical treatment or operation for the
    restoration of the faculties of hearing and speech, inasmuch as
    you would not wish to deprive your brother of the enjoyment of
    the estates nor of the title conferred by their possession: that
    you therefore solicit a decree, confirming his title of
    nobility, and dispensing with the prerogative of confiscation on
    the part of the prince, should you recover the faculties of
    hearing and speech, and act in opposition to the will of your
    late father in respect to the power of alienating the estates
    from your own possession.

    "Such, my generous-minded friend, is the counsel offered by
    eminent advocates; and, by the memory of your sainted mother, if
    not for the sake of your own happiness, I implore you to act in
    accordance with these suggestions. You will remember that this
    advice pretty accurately corresponds with that which I gave you,
    when, late on the night that the will was read, you quitted your
    sleepless couch and came to my dwelling to consult me on a point
    so intimately connected with your felicity in this world.

                    "Your sincerely devoted friend,
                                               "JERONYMO DURAS."

While Nisida was occupied in the perusal of the first paragraph of this
letter, dark clouds lowered upon her brow; but as she read the second
paragraph, wherein the salutary advice of the lawyers was conveyed to
her, those clouds rapidly dispersed, and her splendid countenance became
lighted up with joyous, burning, intoxicating hope!

It was evident that she had already made up her mind to adopt the
counsel proffered her by the eminent advocates whom the friendly
physician had consulted on her behalf.




CHAPTER XXI.

THE SUBURB OF ALLA CROCE--THE JEW--THE ROBBER CHIEF'S LOVE.


It was past the hour of ten on Saturday night, when a tall, powerfully
built man emerged from what might be termed the fashionable portion of
the city of Florence, and struck into the straggling suburb of Alla
Croce.

This quarter of the town was of marvelously bad reputation, being
infested by persons of the worst description, who, by herding, as it
were, together in one particular district, had converted the entire
suburb into a sort of sanctuary where crime might take refuge, and into
which the sbirri, or police-officers, scarcely dared to penetrate.

The population of Alla Croce was not, however, entirely composed of
individuals who were at variance with the law, for poverty as well as
crime sought an asylum in that assemblage of forbidding-looking
dwellings, which formed so remarkable a contrast with the marble
palaces, noble public buildings, and handsome streets of the city of
Florence itself.

And not only did the denizens of penury and crushing toil, the artisans,
the vine-dressers, the gardeners, the water-carriers, and the porters of
Florence occupy lodgings in the suburb of Alla Croce, but even wealthy
persons--yes, men whose treasures were vast enough to pay the ransom of
princes--buried themselves and their hoards in this horrible
neighborhood.

We allude to that most undeservedly-persecuted race, the Jews--a race
endowed with many virtues and generous qualities, but whose characters
have been blackened by a host of writers whose narrow minds and
illiberal prejudices have induced them to preserve all the exaggerations
and misrepresentations which tradition hands down in the Christian world
relative to the cruelly-treated Israelite.

The enlightened commercial policy of those merchant princes, the Medici,
had, during the primal glories of their administrative sway in the
Florentine Republic, relaxed the severity of the laws against the Jews,
and recognizing in the persecuted Israelites those grand trading and
financial qualities which have ever associated the idea of wealth with
their name, permitted them to follow unmolested their specific pursuits.

But at the time of which we are writing--the year 1521--the prince who
had the reins of the Florentine Government, had yielded to the
representations of a bigoted and intolerant clergy, and the Jews had
once more become the subjects of persecution. The dissipated nobles
extorted from them by menace those loans which would not have been
granted on the security proffered; and the wealthy members of the
"scattered race" actually began to discover that they could repose
greater confidence in the refuse of the Florentine population than in
the brilliant aristocracy, or even in the famous sbirri themselves. Thus
had many rich Jews established themselves in the quarter of Alla Croce;
and by paying a certain sum to the syndic, or magistrate of this
suburb--a functionary elected by the inhabitants themselves, and in
virtue of a law of their own enactment--the persecuted Israelites
enjoyed comparative security and peace.

We now return to the man we left plunging into the suburbs of which we
have afforded a short and necessary account.

This individual was dressed in simple attire, but composed of excellent
materials. His vest was of dark velvet, slashed, but not embroidered;
and on his breast he wore a jazeran, or mailed cuirass, which was not
only lighter than a steel corselet, but was equally proof against
poniard or pike. In his broad leather belt were stuck two pairs of
pistols, and a long dagger; a heavy broadsword also hung by his side.
His black boots came up nearly to the knee--in contravention of the
prevailing fashion of that age, when these articles of dress seldom
reached above the swell of the leg. A large slouched hat, without
plumage or any ornament, was drawn down as much as possible over his
features; and the broad _mantello_, or cloak, was gathered round the
body in such a manner that it covered all the left side and the weapons
fastened in the belt, but left the sword arm free for use in any sudden
emergency.

Behind the wayfarer stretched the magnificent city of Florence,
spreading over the deep vale, on both sides of the Arno, and, as usual,
brilliant with light, like a world of stars shining in mimic rivalry of
those that studded the purple vault above.

Before him were the mazes of the Alla Croce, the darkness of which
suburb was only interrupted by a few straggling and feeble lights
gleaming from houses of entertainment, or from huts whose poverty
required not the protection of shutters to the casements.

And now, as one of those faint lights suddenly fell upon the wayfarer's
countenance, as he passed the abode in which it shone--let us avail
ourselves of the opportunity afforded by that glimpse, to state that
this man's features were handsome, but coarse, bearing the traces of a
dissolute life. His age was apparently forty; it might even have been a
few years more matured--but his coal-black hair, mustachio, and bushy
whiskers, unstreaked by silver, showed that time sat lightly on his
head, in spite of the evident intimacy with the wine-cup above alluded
to.

Having threaded the greater portion of the suburb, which was almost
knee-deep in mud--for it had been raining nearly all day, and had only
cleared up after sunset--the individual whom we have been describing
stopped at the corner of a street, and gave a shrill whistle.

The signal was immediately answered in a similar fashion, and in a few
minutes a man emerged from the darkness of a by-street. He also was
well-armed, but much more plainly dressed than the other; and his
countenance was such as would not have proved a very friendly witness in
his favor in a court of justice.

"Lomellino?" said the first individual whom we have described in this
chapter.

"Captain Stephano!" responded the other.

"All right, my fine lad," returned the bandit-captain. "Follow me."

The two robbers then proceeded in silence until they reached a house
larger and stronger in appearance than any other in the same street. The
shutters which protected the casements were massive and strengthened
with iron bars and huge nails, somewhat after the fashion of church
doors.

The walls were of solid gray stones, whereas those of the adjacent huts
were of mud or wood. In a word, this dwelling seemed a little fortress
in the midst of an exposed and unprotected town.

Before this house the robbers stopped.

"Do you remain on the other side of the street, Lomellino," said the
bandit-chief; "and if need be, you will answer to my accustomed signal."

"Good, captain," was the reply; and Lomellino crossed over the way to
the deep shade of the houses on that side.

Stephano then gave a low knock at the door of the well-defended dwelling
above described.

Several minutes elapsed; and no sounds were heard within.

"The old usurer is at home, I know," muttered Stephano to himself; for
the moment he had knocked a gleam of light, peeping through a crevice in
an upper casement, had suddenly disappeared. He now rapped more loudly
at the door with the handle of his heavy broadsword.

"Ah! he comes!" muttered the bandit-chief, after another long pause.

"Who knocks so late?" demanded a weak and tremulous voice from within.

"I--Stephano Verrina!" cried the brigand pompously: "open--and fear
not."

The bolts were drawn back--a chain fell heavily on the stone floor
inside--and the door opened, revealing the form of an old and
venerable-looking man, with a long white beard. He held a lamp in his
hand: and, by its fitful glare, his countenance, of the Jewish cast,
manifested an expression denoting the terror which he vainly endeavored
to conceal.

"Enter. Signor Stephano," said the old man. "But wherefore here so
late?"

"Late, do ye call it. Signor Isaachar?" ejaculated the bandit, crossing
the threshold. "Meseems there is yet time to do a world of business this
night, for those who have the opportunity and the inclination."

"Ah! but you and yours turn night into day," replied the Jew, with a
chuckle intended to be of a conciliatory nature: "or rather you perform
your avocations at a time when others sleep."

"Every one to his calling, friend Isaachar," said the brigand chief.
"Come! have you not made that door fast enough yet? you will have to
open it soon again--for my visit will be none of the longest."

The Jew having replaced the chains and fastened the huge bolts which
protected the house-door, took up the lamp and led the way to a small
and meanly-furnished room at the back of his dwelling.

"What business may have brought you hither to-night, good Captain
Verrina?" he inquired in a tone of ill-subdued apprehension.

"Not to frighten thee out of thy wits, good Isaachar," responded
Stephano, laughing.

"Ah! ha!" exclaimed the Jew, partially reassured: "perhaps you have come
to repay me the few crowns I had the honor to lend you--without
security, and without interest----"

"By my patron saint! thou wast never more mistaken in thy life, friend
Isaachar!" interrupted the robber chief. "The few crowns you speak of,
were neither more nor less than a tribute paid on consideration that my
men should leave unscathed the dwelling of worthy Isaachar ben Solomon:
in other words, that thy treasures should be safe at least from them."

"Well--well! be it so!" cried the Jew. "Heaven knows I do not grudge the
amount in question--although," he added slowly, "I am compelled to pay
almost an equal sum to the syndic."

"The syndic of Alla Croce and the captain of the banditti are two very
different persons," returned Stephano. "The magistrate protects you from
those over whom he has control: and I, on my side, guaranty you against
the predatory visits of those over whom I exercise command. But let us
to business."

"Ay--to business!" echoed the Jew, anxious to be relieved from the state
of suspense into which this visit had thrown him.

"You are acquainted with the young, beautiful, and wealthy Countess of
Arestino, Isaachar?" said the bandit.

The Jew stared at him in increased alarm, now mingled with amazement.

"But, in spite of all her wealth," continued Stephano, "she was
compelled to pledge her diamonds to thee, to raise the money wherewith
to discharge a gambling debt contracted by her lover, the high-born,
handsome, but ruined Marquis of Orsini."

"How knowest thou all this?" inquired the Jew.

"From her ladyship's own lips," responded Stephano. "At least she told
me she had raised the sum to accommodate a very particular friend. Now,
as the transaction is unknown to her husband, and as I am well assured
that the Marquis of Orsini is really on most excellent terms with her
ladyship--moreover, as this same marquis did pay a certain heavy
gambling debt within an hour after the diamonds were pledged to you--it
requires but little ingenuity to put all these circumstances together,
to arrive at the result which I have mentioned. Is it not so, Isaachar?"

"I know not the motive for which the money was raised," answered the
Jew, wondering what was coming next.

"Oh! then the money was raised with you," cried Stephano, "and
consequently you hold the diamonds."

"I did not say so--I----"

"A truce to this fencing with my words!" ejaculated the bandit,
impatiently. "I have an unconquerable desire to behold these
diamonds----"

"You, good captain!" murmured Isaachar, trembling from head to foot.

"Yes, I! And wherefore not? Is there anything so marvelous in a man of
my refined tastes and exquisite notions taking a fancy to inspect the
jewels of one of the proudest beauties of gay Florence? By my patron
saint! you should thank me that I come in so polite a manner to request
a favor, the granting of which I could so easily compel without all this
tedious circumlocution."

"The diamonds!" muttered the Jew, doubtless troubled at the idea of
surrendering the security which he held for a very considerable loan.

"Perdition seize the man!" thundered Stephano, now waxing angry. "Yes,
the diamonds, I say; and fortunate will it be for you if they are
produced without further parley."

Thus speaking the bandit suffered his cloak to fall from over his belt,
and the Jew's quick eye recoiled from the sight of those menacing
weapons, with which his visitor was armed, as it were, to the teeth.

Then without further remonstrance, but with many profound sighs,
Isaachar proceeded to fetch a small iron box from another room; and in a
few moments the diamond case, made of sandal wood inlaid with
mother-of-pearl, was in the bandit captain's hands.

"Let me convince myself that it is all right!" exclaimed Stephano,
examining the lid of the case. "Yes, there are the arms of Arestino,
with the ciphers of the Countess, G. A.--Giulia Arestino--a very pretty
name, by my troth! Ah, how the stones sparkle!" he cried, as he opened
the case. "And the inventory is complete, just as it was described to me
by her ladyship. You are a worthy man, Isaachar, a good man; you will
have restored tranquillity to the mind of the beautiful countess,"
continued Stephano, in a bantering tone: "and she will be enabled to
appear at court to-morrow, with her husband. Good-night, Isaachar; my
brave men shall receive orders to the effect that the first who dares to
molest you may reckon upon swinging to the highest tree that I can find
for his accommodation."

"You violate your compact, Signor Verrina!" exclaimed the Jew, his rage
now mastering his fears. "Wherefore should I pay you tribute to protect
me, when you enter my house and rob me thus vilely?"

"In this case a lady is concerned, good Isaachar," responded the bandit,
calmly; "and you know that with all true cavaliers the ladies are
pre-eminent. Once more, a fair night's repose, my much respected
friend."

Thus saying, Stephano Verrina rose from the seat on which he had been
lounging; and the Jew, knowing that altercation and remonstrance were
equally useless, hastened to afford the means of egress to so unwelcome
a visitor.

Stephano lingered a moment opposite the house until he heard the door
bolted and chained behind him; then crossing the street, he rejoined his
follower, Lomellino.

"All right, captain?" said the latter, inquiringly.

"All right!" answered Stephano. "Poor Isaachar is inconsolable, no
doubt; but the countess will be consoled at his expense. Thus it is with
the world, Lomellino; what is one person's misery is another's
happiness."

"Dost grow sentimental, good captain?" exclaimed the man, whose ears
were entirely unaccustomed to such language on the part of his chief.

"Lomellino, my friend," answered Verrina, "when a man is smitten in a
certain organ, commonly called the heart, he is apt to give utterance to
that absurdity which the world denominates sentiment. Such is my case."

"You are, then, in love, captain?" said Lomellino, as they retraced
their way through the suburb of Alla Croce.

"Just so," replied the bandit chief. "I will tell you how it happened.
Yesterday morning, when those impertinent sbirri gave me a harder run
than I have ever yet experienced, I was fain to take refuge in the
garden of that very same Signor Wagner----"

"Who was yesterday arrested for murder?" interrupted Lomellino.

"The identical one," returned Stephano. "I concealed myself so well that
I knew I might bid defiance to those bungling sbirri--although their
scent was sharpened by the hope of the reward set on my head by the
prince. While I thus lay hidden, I beheld a scene that would have done
good to the heart of even such a callous fellow as yourself--I mean
callous to female qualifications. In a word, I saw one woman stab
another as effectually as----"

"But it was Wagner who killed the woman!" ejaculated Lomellino.

"No such thing," said Stephano quietly. "The murderess is of the gentle
sex--though she can scarcely be gentle in disposition. And such a
splendid creature, Lomellino! I beheld her countenance for a few
minutes, as she drew aside her veil that her eyes might glare upon her
victim; and I whispered to myself, 'That woman must be mine; she is
worthy of me!' Then the blow descended--her victim lay motionless at her
feet--and I never took my eyes off the countenance of the murderess.
'She is an incarnate fiend,' I thought, 'and admirably fitted to mate
with the bandit captain.' Such was my reflection then; and the lapse of
a few hours has only served to strengthen the impression. You may now
judge whether I have formed an unworthy attachment!"

"She _is_ worthy of you, captain!" exclaimed Lomellino. "Know you who
she is?"

"Not a whit," replied Stephano Verrina. "I should have followed her when
she left the garden, and complimented her on her proficiency in handling
a poniard, but I was not so foolhardy as to stand the chance of meeting
the sbirri. Moreover, I shall speedily adopt measures to discover who
and what she is; and when I present myself to her, and we compare
qualifications, I do not think there can arise any obstacle to our
happiness--as lovers are accustomed to say."

"Then it was _she_ who murdered the Lady Agnes?" said Lomellino.

"Have I not told you so? Signor Wagner is as innocent of that deed as
the babe unborn; but it is not for me to step forward in his behalf, and
thereby criminate a lady on whom I have set my affections."

"That were hardly to be expected captain," returned Lomellino.

"And all that I have now told thee thou wilt keep to thyself," added
Stephano; "for to none else of the band do I speak so freely as to
thee."

"Because no one is so devoted to his captain as I," rejoined Lomellino.
"And now that we are about to separate," added the man, as they reached
the verge of the suburb, which was then divided by a wide, open space
from the city itself, and might even be termed a detached village--"now
that we are about to separate, captain, allow me to ask whether the
affair of Monday night still holds good?"

"The little business at the Riverola Palace, you mean?" said Stephano.
"Most assuredly! You and Piero will accompany me. There is little danger
to be apprehended; and Antonio has given me the necessary information.
Count Francisco sleeps at a great distance from the point where we must
enter; and as for his sister--she is as deaf as if she had her ears
sealed up."

"But what about the pages, the lackeys----"

"Antonio will give them all a sleeping draught. Everything," added the
robber-chief, "is settled as cleverly as can be."

"Antonio is your cousin, if I err not?" said Lomellino.

"Something of the kind," replied Stephano; "but what is better and more
binding--we are friends. And yet, strange to say, I never was within the
precincts of the Riverola mansion until the night before last, and--more
singular still--I have never, to my knowledge, seen any members of the
family in whose service Antonio has been so long."

"Why, Florence is not much honored with your presence during the
day-time," observed Lomellino; "and at night the great lords and
high-born ladies who happen to be abroad, are so muffled up--the former
in their cloaks, the latter in their veils----"

"True--true; I understand all you would say, Lomellino," interrupted the
captain; "but you know how to be rather tedious at times. Here we
separate, I repair to the Arestino Palace, and you----"

"To the cavern," replied Lomellino: "where I hope to sleep better than I
did last night," he added.

"What! a renewal of those infernal shriekings and screamings, that seem
to come from the bowels of the earth?" exclaimed the captain.

"Worse than ever," answered Lomellino. "If they continue much longer, I
must abandon my office of treasure-keeper, which compels me to sleep in
the innermost room----"

"That cannot be allowed, my worthy friend," interrupted the captain;
"for I should not know whom to appoint in your place. If it were not
that we should not betray our own stronghold," continued Stephano,
emphatically, "we would force our way into the nest of our noisy
neighbors, and levy such a tribute upon them as would put them on their
good behavior for the future."

"The scheme is really worth consideration," remarked Lomellino.

"We will talk more of it another time," said the captain. "Good-night,
Lomellino. I shall not return to the cavern until very late."

The two banditti then separated--Lomellino striking off to the right,
and Stephano Verrina pursuing his way toward the most aristocratic
quarter of Florence.

Upon entering the sphere of marble palaces, brilliantly lighted villas,
and gay mansions, the robber chief covered his face with a black mask--a
mode of disguise so common at that period, not only amongst ladies, but
also with cavaliers and nobles, that it was not considered at all
suspicious, save as a proof of amatory intrigue, with which the sbirri
had no right of interference.




CHAPTER XXII.

THE COUNTESS OF ARESTINO.


We must now introduce our readers to a splendid apartment in the
Arestino Palace.

This room was tastefully decorated and elegantly furnished. The tapestry
was of pale blue; and the ottomans, ranged round the walls in Oriental
style, were of rich crimson satin embroidered with gold. In the middle
stood a table covered with ornaments and rich trinkets lately arrived
from Paris--for France already began to exercise the influence of its
superior civilization and refinement over the south of Europe.

The ceiling of that room was a master-piece of the united arts of
sculpture and painting. First, the hand of the sculptor had carved it
into numerous medallions, on which the pencil of the painter had then
delineated the most remarkable scenes in early Florentine history. Round
the sides, or cornices, were beautifully sculptured in marble the heads
of the principal ancestors of the Count of Arestino.

It was within half an hour of midnight, and the beautiful Giulia
Arestino was sitting restlessly upon an ottoman, now holding her breath
to listen if a step were approaching the private door behind the
tapestry--then glancing anxiously toward a clepsydra on the mantel.

"What can detain him thus? will he deceive me?" she murmured to herself.
"Oh! how foolish--worse than foolish--mad--to confide in the promise of
a professed bandit! The jewels are worth a thousand times the reward I
have pledged myself to give him! wretched being that I am!"

And with her fair hand she drew back the dark masses of her hair that
had fallen too much over her polished brow: and on this polished brow
she pressed that fair hand, for her head ached with the intensity of
mingled suspense and alarm.

Her position was indeed a dangerous one as the reader is already aware.
In the infatuation of her strong, unconquerable, but not less guilty
love for the handsome spendthrift Orsini, she had pledged her diamonds
to Isaachar ben Solomon for an enormous sum of money, every ducat of
which had passed without an hour's delay into the possession of the
young marquis.

Those diamonds were the bridal gift of her fond and attached, but, alas!
deceived husband, who, being many years older than herself, studied
constantly how to afford pleasure to the wife of whom he was so proud.
He was himself an extraordinary judge of the nature, purity and value of
precious stones; and, being immensely rich, he had collected a perfect
museum of curiosities in that particular department. In fact, it was his
amateur study, or, as we should say in these times, his peculiar hobby;
and hence the impossibility of imposing on him by the substitution of a
hired or a false set of diamonds for those which he had presented to his
wife.

It was, therefore, absolutely necessary to get these diamonds back from
Isaachar, by fair means or foul. The fair means were to redeem them by
the payment of the loan advanced upon them; but the sum was so large
that the countess dared not make such a demand upon her husband's purse,
because the extravagances of her lover had lately compelled her to apply
so very, very frequently to the count for a replenishment of her funds.
The foul means were therefore resorted to--an old woman, who had been
the nurse of the countess in her infancy, and to whom in her distress
she applied for advice, having procured for the patrician lady the
services of Stephano Verrina, the bandit-captain.

It is not to be wondered at, then, if the Countess of Arestino were a
prey to the most poignant anxiety, as each successive quarter of an hour
passed without bringing either Stephano or any tidings from him. Even if
she feigned illness, so as to escape the ceremony of the following day,
relief would only be temporary, for the moment she should recover, or
affect to recover, her husband would again require her to accompany him
to the receptions of the prince.

Giulia's anguish had risen to that point at which such feelings become
intolerable, and suggest the most desperate remedies--suicide,--when a
low knock behind the pale-blue arras suddenly imparted hope to her soul.

Hastily raising the tapestry on that side whence the sound had emanated,
she drew back the bolt of a little door communicating with a private
staircase (usually found in all Italian mansions at that period), and
the robber chief entered the room.

"Have you succeeded?" was Giulia's rapid question.

"Your ladyship's commission has been executed," replied Stephano, who,
we should observe, had laid aside his black mask ere he appeared in the
presence of the countess.

"Ah! now I seem to live--breathe again!" cried Giulia, a tremendous
weight suddenly removed from her mind.

Stephano produced the jewel-case from beneath his cloak; and as the
countess hastily took it--nay, almost snatched it from him, he
endeavored to imprint a kiss upon her fair hand.

Deep was the crimson glow which suffused her countenance--her neck--even
all that was revealed of her bosom, as she drew haughtily back, and with
a sublime patrician air of offended pride.

"I thank you--thank you from the bottom of my soul, Signor Verrina," she
said in another moment; for she felt how completely circumstances had
placed her in the power of the bandit-chief, and how useless it was to
offend him. "Here is your reward," and she presented him a heavy purse
of gold.

"Nay, keep the jingling metal, lady," said Stephano; "I stand in no need
of it--at least for the present. The reward I crave is of a different
nature, and will even cost you less than you proffer me."

"What other recompense can I give you?" demanded Giulia, painfully
alarmed.

"A few lines written by thy fair hand to my dictation," answered
Stephano.

Giulia cast upon him a look of profound surprise.

"Here, lady, take my tablets, for I see that your own are not at hand,"
cried the chief. "Delay not--it grows late, and we may be interrupted."

"We may indeed," murmured Giulia, darting a rapid look at the
water-clock. "It is within a few minutes of midnight."

She might have added--"And at midnight I expect a brief visit from
Manuel d'Orsini, ere the return of my husband from a banquet at a
friend's villa." But of course this was her secret; and anxious to rid
herself of the company of Stephano, she took the tablets with trembling
hands and prepared to write.

"I, Giulia, Countess of Arestino," began the brigand, dictating to her,
"confess myself to owe Stephano Verrina a deep debt of gratitude for his
kindness in recovering my diamonds from the possession of the Jew
Isaachar, to whom they were pledged for a sum which I could not pay."

"But wherefore this document?" exclaimed the countess, looking up in a
searching manner at the robber-chief; for she had seated herself at the
table to write, and he was leaning over the back of her chair.

"'Tis my way at times," he answered, carelessly, "when I perform some
service for a noble lord or a great lady, to solicit an acknowledgment
of this kind in preference to gold." Then, sinking his voice to a low
whisper, he added with an air of deep meaning, "Who knows but that this
document may some day save my head?"

Giulia uttered a faint shriek, for she comprehended in a moment how
cruelly she might sooner or later be compromised through that document,
and how entirely she was placing herself in the bandit's power.

But Stephano's hand clutched the tablets whereon the countess had,
almost mechanically, written to his subtle dictation; and he said,
coolly: "Fear not, lady--I must be reduced to a desperate strait indeed
when my safety shall depend on the use I can make of this fair
handwriting."

Giulia felt partially relieved by this assurance: and it was with
ill-concealed delight that she acknowledged the ceremonial bow with
which the bandit-chief intimated his readiness to depart.

But at that moment three low and distinct knocks were heard at the
little door behind the arras.

Giulia's countenance became suffused with blushes: then, instantly
recovering her presence of mind, she said in a rapid, earnest tone, "He
who is coming knows nothing concerning the jewels, and will be surprised
to find a stranger with me. Perhaps he may even recognize you--perhaps
he knows you by sight----"

"What would you have me do, lady?" demanded Stephano. "Speak, and I obey
you."

"Conceal yourself--here--and I will soon release you."

She raised the tapestry on the side opposite to that by which Stephano
had entered the room; and the robber-chief hid himself in the wide
interval between the hangings in the wall.

All this had scarcely occupied a minute; and Giulia now hastened to open
the private door, which instantly gave admittance to the young,
handsome, and dissipated Marquis of Orsini.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE LOVE OF WOMAN--GIULIA AND HER LOVER.


Silence, and calmness, and moonlight were without the walls of the
Arestino villa; for the goddess of night shone sweetly but coldly on the
city of Florence, and asserted her empire even over the clouds that ere
now had seemed laden with storm. Nor beamed she there alone--that fair
Diana; for a countless host of handmaidens--the silver-faced stars--had
spread themselves over the deep purple sky; and there--there--they all
shone in subdued and modest glory--those myriads of beacons floating on
the eternal waves of that far-off and silent sea!

Shine on, sweet regent of the night--and ye, too, silver-faced stars,
whose countenances are reflected and multiplied endlessly, as they are
rocked to and fro, on the deep blue bosom of the Arno; while on the
banks of that widely-famed stream, Nature herself, as if wearied of her
toils, appears to be sleeping.

Would that the soul of man could thus lie down in its night of sorrow or
of racking passion, on the margin of the waters of hope, confident that
the slumber of contentment and peace will seal his eyelids, heavy with
long vigils in a world where conflicting interests need constant
watching, and that the stillness of the unfathomable depths of those
waters will impart its influence unto him!

For, oh! if calmness, silence, and moonlight prevail without the walls
of the Arestino villa, yet within there be hearts agitated by passions
and emotions, from which the gentle genius of slumber shrinks back
aghast.

In the brilliantly lighted apartment, to which we have already
introduced our readers, the Countess Giulia receives her lover, the
dissipated but handsome Marquis of Orsini; the bandit-captain is
concealed behind the richly-worked tapestry; and at the door--not the
little private one--of that room, an old man is listening; an old man
whose ashy pale countenance, clinched hands, quivering white lips, and
wildly rolling eyes indicate how terrible are the feelings which agitate
within his breast.

This old man was the Count of Arestino, one of the mightiest nobles of
the republic. Naturally his heart was good, and his disposition kind and
generous--but, then, he was an Italian--and he was jealous! Need we say
more to account for the change which had now taken place in his usually
calm, tranquil, yet dignified, demeanor? Or shall we inform our readers
that at the banquet to which he had been invited at a friend's villa
that evening, he had overheard two young nobles, in a conversation which
the generous wine they had been too freely imbibing rendered
indiscreetly loud, couple the names of Giulia Arestino, his own
much-loved wife, and Manuel d'Orsini, in a manner which suddenly excited
a fearful, a blasting suspicion in his mind? Stealing away unperceived
from the scene of revelry, the count had returned unattended to the
immediate vicinity of his mansion; and from the shade of a detached
building he had observed the Marquis of Orsini traverse the gardens and
enter a portico leading to the private staircase communicating with that
wing of the palace which contained the suit of apartments occupied by
Giulia.

This was enough to strengthen the suspicion already excited in the old
nobleman's mind; but not quite sufficient to confirm it. The countess
had several beautiful girls attached to her person; and the marquis
might have stooped to an intrigue with one of them. The Lord of Arestino
was therefore resolved to act with the caution of a prudent man: but he
was also prepared to avenge, in case of the worst, with the spirit of an
Italian.

He hurried round to the principal entrance of his palace, and gave some
brief but energetic instructions to a faithful valet, who instantly
departed to execute them. The count then ascended the marble staircase,
traversed the corridors leading toward his lady's apartments, and placed
himself against the door of that one wherein Giulia had already received
her lover.

Thus, while silence, and calmness, and moonlight reign without--yet
within the walls of the Arestino mansion a storm has gathered, to
explode fearfully. And all through the unlawful, but not less ardent,
love of Giulia for the spendthrift Marquis of Orsini!

Sober-minded men, philosophic reasoners, persons of business-habits,
stern moralists--all these may ridicule the poet or the novelist who
makes Love his everlasting theme; they may hug themselves, in the apathy
of their own cold hearts, with the belief that all the attributes of the
passion have been immensely exaggerated; but they are in error, deeply,
profoundly, indisputably in error. For Love, in its various phases,
among which are Jealousy, Suspicion, Infidelity, Rivalry, and Revenge,
has agitated the world from time immemorial--has overthrown empires, has
engendered exterminating wars, and has extended its despotic sway alike
over the gorgeous city of a consummate civilization, and the miserable
wigwam of a heathen barbarism! Who, then, can wonder--if the theme of
Love be universal--that it should have evoked the rude and iron
eloquence of the Scandinavian Scald as well as the soft and witching
poesy of the bards of more genial climes, or that its praises or its
sorrows should be sung on the banks of the Arno, the Seine, or the
Thames, as well as amidst the pathless forests of America, or the
burning sands of Africa, or in the far-off islands of the Southern Seas.

But, alas! it is thou, O woman! who art called on to make the most cruel
sacrifices at the altar of this imperious deity--love! If thou lovest
honorably, 'tis well; but if thou lovest unlawfully how wretched is thy
fate! The lover, for whose sake thou hast forgotten thy duties as a
wife, has sacrificed nothing to thee, whilst thou hast sacrificed
everything to him. Let the _amour_ be discovered, and who suffers? Thou!
He loses not caste, station, name, nor honor;--thou art suddenly robbed
of all these! The gilded saloons of fashion throw open their doors to
the seducer; but bars of adamant defend that entrance against the
seduced. For his sake thou risketh contumely, shame, reviling, scorn,
and the lingering death of a breaking heart,--for _thee_ he would not
risk one millionth part of all that! Shouldst thou be starving, say to
him, "Go forth and steal to give me bread; dare the dishonor of the
deed, and make the sacrifice of thy good name for me. Or go and forge,
or swindle, or lie foully, so that thou bringest me bread; for have I
not dared dishonor, made the sacrifice of my good name, and done as
much, ay, far more than all that, for thee?"

Shouldst thou, poor, seduced, weak one, address thy seducer thus, he
will look upon thee as a fiend-like tempter--he will rush from thy
sight--he will never see thee more; his love will be suddenly converted
into hatred! Yes, man demands that woman should dishonor herself for
_his_ sake; but he will not allow a speck to appear upon what he calls
_his_ good name--no, not to save that poor, confiding, lost creature
from the lowest depths and dregs of penury into which her frailty may
have plunged her!

Such is the selfishness of man! Where is his chivalry?

But let us return to the Arestino Palace.

The moment Manuel d'Orsini entered the apartment by means of the private
door, he embraced Giulia with a fondness which was more than half
affected--at least on that occasion--and she herself returned the kiss
less warmly than usual--but this was because she was constrained and
embarrassed by the presence of the bandit-captain, who was concealed
behind the tapestry.

"You appear cool--distant, Giulia," said Manuel, casting upon her an
inquiring glance.

"And you either love me less, or you have something on your mind,"
returned the countess, in a low tone.

"In the first instance you are wrong--in the second you are right, my
well-beloved," answered the marquis. "But tell me----"

"Speak lower, Manuel--we may be overheard. Some of my dependents are in
the adjacent room, and----"

"And you wish me to depart as soon as possible, no doubt?" said the
marquis, impatiently.

"Oh! Manuel--how can you reproach me thus?" asked Giulia, in a voice
scarcely above a whisper; for that woman who dared be unfaithful to her
husband revolted from the thought that a coarse-minded bandit should be
in a position to overhear her conversation with her lover:--"how can you
reproach me thus, Manuel?" she repeated;--"have I not given thee all the
proofs of tenderest love which woman can bestow? Have I not risked
everything for thee?"

"I do not reproach you, Giulia," he replied, pressing his hand to his
brow, "but I am unhappy--miserable!"

And he flung himself upon the nearest ottoman.

"Oh! what has occurred to distract thee thus?" exclaimed the countess,
forgetting the presence of Stephano Verrina in the all-absorbing
interest of her lover's evident grief.

"Am I ever to find thee oppressed with care--thee, who art so young--and
so gloriously handsome?" she added, her voice suddenly sinking to a
whisper.

Manuel gazed for a few moments, without speaking, on the countenance of
his mistress as she leant over him: then, in a deep, hollow tone--a tone
the despair of which was too real and natural to be in the slightest
degree affected, he said, "Giulia, I am a wretch,--unworthy of all this
sweet love of thine!--I have broken the solemn vow which I pledged
thee--I have violated my oath----"

"Oh, Manuel!" ejaculated the countess, still forgetting the presence of
the bandit: "thou hast----"

"Gambled once more--and lost!" cried the marquis wildly. "And the sum
that I am bound in honor to pay on Monday--by noon, is nearly equal in
amount to that which thy generosity lent me the other day."

"Holy Virgin aid you, my unhappy Manuel!" said Giulia.

"For thou canst not?" exclaimed the young noble, with a profound sigh.
"Oh! I am well aware that I have no claim upon thee----"

"Ah! wherefore that reproach?--for a reproach it is!" interrupted the
countess. "No claim on me! Hast thou not my heart? and in giving thee
that, Manuel, I laid at thy feet a poor offering, which, though so poor,
yet absorbs all others of which I may dispose! Do not reproach me,
Manuel--for I would lay down my life to save thy soul from pain, or thy
name from dishonor!"

"Now art thou my own Giulia!" cried the marquis, pressing her hand to
his lips. "An accursed fatality seems to hang over me! This habit of
gaming entraps me as the wine cup fascinates the bibber who would fain
avoid it, but cannot. Listen to me for one moment, Giulia. In the public
casino--which, as thou well knowest, is a place of resort where fortunes
are lost and won in an hour--ay, sometimes in a minute--I have met a man
whose attire is good, and whose purse is well filled, but whose
countenance I like as little as I should that of the captain of the
sbirri, or his lieutenant, if I had committed a crime. This individual
of whom I speak--for I know not his name--was the favored votary of Dame
Fortune who won of me that sum which thy kindness, Giulia, alone enabled
me to pay but a few days past. And now am I a second time this man's
debtor. An hour ago he entered the casino; he stayed but for ten
minutes--and in that time----"

"Oh! Manuel, is not this conduct of thine something bordering on
madness?" interrupted the countess. "And if thou art thus wedded to that
fatal habit, how canst thou find room in thy heart for a single gleam of
affection for me?"

"Now dost thou reproach me in thy turn, Giulia!" exclaimed the young
marquis. "But believe me, my angel," he continued, exerting all his
powers to bend her to his purpose,--"believe me when I declare--oh! most
solemnly declare, by all that I put faith in, and by all I hope for
hereafter--that could I be relieved from this embarrassment--extricated
from this difficulty----"

"Heavens! how can it be done?" interrupted the countess, casting her
eyes wildly round; for the time was passing--she suddenly remembered
that the bandit was still concealed in the room--and then, her husband
might return earlier than was expected.

"Oh! if you despair of the means, Giulia," said the marquis, "I must fly
from Florence--I must exile myself forever from the city of my birth,
and which is still more endeared to me because," he added, sinking his
voice to a tender tone,--"because, my well-beloved, it contains thee!"

"No, Manuel--you must not quit Florence and leave a dishonored name
behind thee!" exclaimed this lovely woman, who was thus sublimely
careful of the reputation of him for whom she had so long compromised
her own. "What can be done? would that I had the means to raise this
sum----"

"It is with shame that I suggest----" said Manuel.

"What? Speak--speak! The means?"

"Thy jewels, dearest--thy diamonds----"

"Merciful heavens! if you did but know all!" cried Giulia, almost
frantically. "These diamonds were pledged to the Jew Isaachar ben
Solomon, to raise the sum with which thy last debt was paid, Manuel;
and--but forgive me if I did not tell thee all this before--not half an
hour has elapsed since----"

She stopped short; for she knew that the bandit overheard every syllable
she uttered.

Nor had she time, even if she possessed the power, to continue her most
painful explanation; for scarcely had she thus paused abruptly, when the
door burst open, and the Count of Arestino stood in the presence of the
guilty pair.




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE INJURED HUSBAND--THE GUILTY WIFE--AND THE INSOLENT LOVER.


In fury of heart and agony of mind, rushed the old lord into that
apartment. Oh! how had he even been able to restrain himself so long,
while listening at the door? It was that the conversation between his
wife and the marquis had, as the reader is aware, been carried on in so
low a tone--especially on the side of the countess, that he had not been
able to gather sufficient to place beyond all doubt the guilt of that
fair creature; and even in the midst of his Italian ire, he had clung to
the hope that she might have been imprudent--but not culpable, as yet!

Oh! in this case, how gladly would that old lord have forgiven the past,
on condition of complete reformation for the future! He would have
removed his young wife afar from the scene of temptation--to a distant
estate which he possessed; and there by gentle remonstrances and
redoubled attention, he would have sought to bind her to him by the
links of gratitude and respect, if not by those of love.

But this dream--so honorable to that old man's heart--was not to be
realized; for scarcely was it conceived, when the discourse of the
youthful pair turned upon the diamonds--those diamonds which he had
given her on the bridal day!

Giulia spoke clearly and plainly enough _then_--in spite of the presence
of the bandit in that chamber; for she was about to explain to her lover
how willingly she would comply with his suggestion to raise upon the
jewels the sum he again required--a readiness on her part which might be
corroborated by the fact that she had already once had recourse to this
expedient, and for _him_--but she dared not adopt the same course again,
as her husband might detect the absence of the valuables ere she could
obtain funds to redeem them.

When she acknowledged to her lover that "these diamonds were pledged to
the Jew Isaachar ben Solomon, to raise the sum with which his last debt
was paid," it flashed to the old nobleman's mind that his wife had
exhibited some little confusion when he had spoken to her a day or two
previously concerning her jewels: and now it was clear that they had
been used as the means to supply the extravagances of an unprincipled
spendthrift. How could he any longer cling to the hope that Giulia was
imprudent only, and not guilty? Must she not be guilty, to have made so
large a sacrifice and run so great a risk for the sake of the Marquis of
Orsini?

It was under the influence of these excited feelings that the Count of
Arestino burst into the room.

Fortunately--so far as outward appearance went--there was nothing more
to confirm the old nobleman's suspicions; the youthful pair were not
locked in each other's arms; their hands were not even joined. Manuel
was seated on the sofa, and Giulia was standing at a short distance from
him.

But conscious guilt elicited a faint scream from her lips; and the
boiling blood, after rushing to her countenance, seemed to ebb away as
rapidly again--leaving her beauteous face as pale as marble; while she
clung to the mantel-piece for support.

"I am glad that your lordship is returned," said the marquis, rising
from his seat and advancing toward the count in a manner so insolently
cool and apparently self-possessed, that Giulia was not only astonished
but felt her courage suddenly revive: "I was determined--however
uncourteous the intrusion and unseemly the hour--to await your
lordship's coming; and as her ladyship assured me that you would not
tarry late----"

"My lord marquis," interrupted the old nobleman, who was himself so
taken by surprise at this unembarrassed mode of address, that he began
to fancy his ears must have deceived him and his suspicions beguiled
him; "on what business could you possibly have needed my services at
this late hour?"

"I will explain myself," returned Orsini, who was a perfect adept in the
art of dissimulation, and who, never losing his presence of mind,
embraced at a glance the whole danger of Giulia's position and his own,
and the probability that their conversation might have been overheard;
"I was explaining to her ladyship the temporary embarrassment under
which I lay, and from which I hoped that your friendship might probably
release me----"

"And her ladyship spoke of her diamonds--did she not?" demanded the
count, addressing himself to the marquis, but fixing a keen and
penetrating glance on Giulia.

"Her ladyship was remonstrating with me on my extravagancies," hastily
replied the marquis, "and was repeating to me--I must say in a manner
too impressive to be agreeable--the words which my own sister had used
to me a few days ago, when explaining, as her motive for refusing me the
succor which I needed, that she actually had been compelled to pledge
her diamonds----"

"Ah! they were your sister's diamonds that were pledged to Isaachar the
Jew?" said the count, half ironically and half in doubt; for he was
fairly bewildered by the matchless impudence of the young marquis.

"Yes, my lord--my dear sister, who, alas! is ruining herself to supply
me with the means of maintaining my rank. And as my sister and her
ladyship, the countess, are on the most friendly terms, as you are well
aware, it is not surprising if she should have communicated the secret
of the diamonds to her ladyship, and also beg her ladyship to
remonstrate with me----"

"Well, my lord," interrupted the count impatiently, "your own private
affairs have no particular interest for me--at this moment; and as for
any business on which you may wish to speak to me, I shall be pleased if
you postpone it till to-morrow."

"Your lordship's wishes are commands with me," said Manuel, with a
polite salutation. And having made a low bow to Giulia, he quitted the
room--not by the private door, be it well understood, but by that which
had ere now admitted the Count of Arestino.

The moment the door had closed behind the Marquis of Orsini, the count
approached his wife, and said in a cold, severe manner: "Your ladyship
receives visitors at a late hour."

He glanced as he spoke toward the dial of the clepsydra, and Giulia
followed his look in the same direction; it was half an hour after
midnight.

"The marquis explained to your lordship, or partially so, the motive of
his importunate visit," said Giulia, endeavoring to appear calm and
collected.

"The marquis is an unworthy--reckless--unprincipled young man,"
exclaimed the count, fixing a stern, searching gaze upon Giulia's
countenance, as if with the iron of his words he would probe the depths
of her soul. "He is a confirmed gamester--overwhelmed with debts--and
has tarnished, by his profligacy, the proud name that he bears. Even the
friendship which existed for many, many years between his deceased
father and myself, shall no longer induce me to receive at this house a
young man whose reputation is all but tainted, even in a city of
dissipation and debauchery, such as, alas! the once glorious Florence
has become! For his immorality is not confined to gaming and wanton
extravagance," continued the count, his glance becoming more keen, as
his words fell like drops of molten lead upon the heart of Giulia; "but
his numerous intrigues amongst women--his perfidy to those confiding and
deceived fair ones----"

"Surely, my lord," said the countess, vainly endeavoring to subdue the
writhings of torture which this language excited,--"surely the Marquis
d'Orsini is wronged by the breath of scandal?"

"No, Giulia, he is an unprincipled spendthrift," returned the count, who
never once took his eyes off his wife's countenance while he was
speaking:--"an unprincipled spendthrift," he added emphatically,--"a man
lost to all sense of honor--a ruined gamester--a heartless seducer--a
shame, a blot, a stigma upon the aristocracy of Florence;--and now that
you are acquainted with his real character, you will recognize the
prudence of the step which I shall take to-morrow--that is, to inform
him that henceforth the Count and Countess of Arestino must decline to
receive him again at their villa. What think you, Giulia?"

"Your lordship is the master to command, and it is my duty to obey,"
answered the countess; but her voice was hoarse and thick, the acutest
anguish was rending her soul, and its intensity almost choked her
utterance.

"She is guilty!" thought the count within himself; and to subdue an
abrupt explosion of his rage, until he had put the last and most certain
test to his lady's faith, he walked twice up and down the room; then,
feeling that he had recovered his powers of self-control, he said,
"To-morrow, Giulia, is the reception day of his highness the duke, and I
hope thou hast made suitable preparations to accompany me in the manner
becoming the wife of the Count of Arestino."

"Can your lordship suppose for an instant that I should appear in the
ducal presence otherwise than is meet and fitting for her who has the
honor to bear your name?" said Giulia, partially recovering her presence
of mind, as the conversation appeared to have taken a turn no longer
painful to her feelings--for, oh! cannot the reader conceive the
anguish, the mortal anguish, she had ere now endured when her husband
was heaping ashes on the reputation of her lover!

"I do not suppose that your ladyship will neglect the preparations due
to your rank and to that name which you esteem it an honor to bear, and
which no living being should _dishonor_ with impunity!"

Giulia quailed--writhed beneath the searching glance which now literally
glared upon her.

"Nevertheless," continued the count, "I was fearful you might have
forgotten that to-morrow is the reception day. And while I think of it,
permit me to examine your diamonds for a few minutes--to convince myself
that the settings are in good order, as you know," he added, with a
strange, unearthly kind of laugh, "that I am skilled in the jewelers'
craft."

The old man paused; but he thought within himself, "Now what subterfuge
can she invent if my suspicions be really true, and if my ears did not
ere now deceive me?"

How profound then was his astonishment, when Giulia, with the calm and
tranquil demeanor which innocence usually wears, but with the least,
least curl of the upper lip, as if in haughty triumph, leisurely and
deliberately drew the jewel-case from beneath the cushion of the ottoman
whereon she was seated, and, handing it to him, said, "Your lordship
perceives that I had not forgotten the reception which his highness
holds to-morrow, since I ere now brought my diamonds hither to select
those which it is my intention to wear."

The count could have pressed her hand as he took the case in his own--he
could have fallen at her feet and demanded pardon for the suspicions
which he had entertained, for it now seemed certain beyond all
possibility of doubt, that the explanation volunteered by the marquis
was a true one--yes, he could have humbled himself in her presence--but
his Italian pride intervened, and he proceeded to examine the diamonds
with no other view than to gain time to reflect how he should account
for the abrupt manner in which he had entered the room ere now, and for
the chilling behavior he had maintained toward his wife.

On her side Giulia, relieved of a fearful weight of apprehension, was
only anxious for this scene to have a speedy termination, that she might
release the robber-captain from his imprisonment behind the tapestry.

Three or four minutes of profound silence now ensued.

But suddenly the count started, and uttered an ejaculation of mingled
rage and surprise.

Giulia's blood ran cold to her very heart's core, she scarcely knew why.

The suspense was not, however, long--though most painful; for, dashing
the jewel-case with its contents upon the table, the old nobleman
approached her with quivering lips and a countenance ghastly white,
exclaiming, "Vile woman! thinkest thou to impose upon me thus? The
diamonds I gave thee are gone--the stones set in their place are
counterfeit!"

Giulia gazed up toward her husband's countenance for a few moments in a
manner expressive of blank despair; then falling on her knees before
him, clasping her hands together, she screamed frantically, "Pardon!
pardon!"

"Ah! then it is all indeed too true!" murmured the unhappy nobleman,
staggering as if with a blow: but, recovering his balance, he stamped
his foot resolutely upon the floor, and drawing himself up to his full
height, while he half averted his eyes from his kneeling wife, he
exclaimed: "Lost--guilty--abandoned woman, how canst thou implore pardon
at my hands? For pardon is mercy, and what mercy hast thou shown to me?
Giulia, I am descended from an old and mighty race, and tradition
affords no room to believe that any one who has borne the name of
Arestino has dishonored it--until now! Oh! fool--dotard--idiot that I
was to think that a young girl could love an aged man like me! For old
age is a weed, which, when twined round the plant of love, becomes like
the deadly nightshade, and robs the rose-bush of its health! Alas! alas!
I thought that in my declining years, I should have one to cheer me, one
who might respect me, if she could not love me--one who would manifest
some gratitude for the proud position I have given her--and the
boundless wealth that it would have been my joy to leave her. And now
that hope is gone--withered--crushed--blighted, woman, by thy perfidy!
Oh! wherefore did you accompany the old man to the altar, if only to
deceive him? Wherefore did you consent to become his bride, if but to
plunge him into the depth of misery? You weep! Ah! weep on; and all
those tears, be they even so scalding as to make seams on that too fair
face, cannot wipe away the stain which is now affixed to the haughty
name of Arestino! Weep on, Giulia; but thy tears cannot move me now!"

And the old lord's tone changed suddenly from the deep, touching pathos
of tremulousness to a stern, fixed, cold severity, which stifled the
germs of hope that had taken birth in the heart of his guilty wife.

"Mercy! mercy!" she shrieked, endeavoring to grasp his hand.

"No!" thundered the Count of Arestino; and he rang violently a silver
bell which stood upon the table.

"Holy Virgin, what will become of me? For what fate am I destined?"
implored Giulia, frantically.

The old nobleman approached her, gazed on her sternly for nearly a
minute, then bending down said, in a hollow, sepulchral tone:

"Thou art doomed to eternal seclusion in the convent of the Carmelites!"

He then turned hastily round and advanced to the door, to which steps
were already distinctly heard drawing near in the corridor.

For an instant Giulia seemed paralyzed by the dreadful announcement that
had been made to her; but suddenly a ray of hope flashed on her mind,
and darting toward that part of the tapestry behind which the robber was
concealed, she said, in a low and rapid tone:

"Thou hast heard the fate that awaits me. I charge thee to seek Manuel
d'Orsini, and let him know all."

"Fear not, lady; you shall be saved!" answered Stephano, in a scarcely
audible but yet profoundly emphatic whisper.

She had only just time to turn away when the count's faithful valet,
accompanied by three nuns, wearing their black veils over their faces,
entered the room.

Half an hour afterward the Carmelite Convent received another inmate.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE MARQUIS OF ORSINI.


Upon quitting the Arestino palace, the Marquis of Orsini suddenly lost
that bold, insolent, self-sufficient air with which he had endeavored to
deceive the venerable count, whose wife he had dishonored.

For dishonor now menaced _him_!

Where could he raise the sum necessary to liquidate the debt which he
had contracted with the stranger at the Casino, or gaming-house? And as
the person to whom he found himself thus indebted _was_ a stranger--a
total stranger to him, he had no apology to offer for a delay in the
payment of the money due.

"Perdition!" he exclaimed aloud, as he issued rapidly from the grounds
attached to the Arestino mansion; "is there no alternative save flight?
Giulia cannot assist me--her jewels are gone, they are pledged to the
Jew Isaachar--she was telling me so when the count broke in upon us.
What course can I adopt? what plan pursue? Shall the name of Orsini be
dishonored--that proud name which for three centuries has been
maintained spotless? No, no--this must not be!"

And in a state of most painful excitement--so painful, indeed, that it
amounted almost to a physical agony--the marquis hastened rapidly
through the mazes of the sleeping city, reckless whither he was going,
but experiencing no inclination to repair to his own abode.

The fact of the diamonds of his mistress having been pledged to Isaachar
ben Solomon was uppermost in his mind: for the reader must remember that
he was unaware of the circumstance of their restoration to Giulia--as it
was at the moment when she was about to give him this explanation that
the old Lord of Arestino had interrupted their discourse.

The diamonds, then, constituted the pivot on which his thoughts now
revolved. They seemed to shine like stars amidst the deep haze which
hung upon his mind. Could he not possess himself of them? The name of
Orsini would be dishonored if the gambling debt were not paid; and one
bold--one desperate step might supply him with the means to save himself
from the impending ruin--the imminent disgrace.

But as the thoughts encouraged by those simple words--"the
diamonds"--assumed a more palpable shape in his imagination, he shrank
back dismayed from the deed which they suggested: for gamester,
debauchee, spendthrift as he was, he had never yet perpetrated an act
that could be termed a crime. The seduction of the Countess of Arestino
was not a crime in his estimation--oh! no, because man may seduce, and
yet may not be dishonored in the eyes of the world. It is his victim, or
the partner of his guilty pleasure, only, who is dishonored. Such is the
law written in society's conventional code. Vile, detestable, unjust
law!

To weigh and balance the reasons for or against the perpetration of a
crime, to pause only for an instant to reflect whether the deed shall or
shall not be done--this is to yield at once to the temptation. The
desperate man who hovers hesitatingly between right and wrong,
invariably adopts the latter course.

And Manuel of Orsini was not an exception to the general rule.

Silence, and calmness, and moonlight were still spread over the City of
Flowers, while the marquis pursued the path leading to the suburb of
Alla Droce. And the silver-faced stars shone on--shone on, brightly and
sweetly, as the young nobleman knocked at the well-protected door of
Isaachar ben Solomon.

For a long time his summons remained unanswered; and he repeated it
several times ere it received the slightest attention.

At last a casement was opened slowly on the upper story; and the Jew
demanded who sought admittance at that hour.

"'Tis I, the Marquis of Orsini!" exclaimed the nobleman.

"A thousand pardons, my lord; I come directly," answered the Jew, not
daring to offend a scion of the omnipotent aristocracy of Florence, yet
filled with some misgivings, the more painful because they were so vague
and undefined.

In a few moments Manuel was admitted into the abode of Isaachar ben
Solomon, who carefully barred and bolted the door again, ere he even
thought of alleviating his acute suspense by inquiring the nobleman's
business.

"Deign to enter this humble apartment, my lord," said the Jew, at
length, as he conducted the marquis into the same room where he had a
few hours previously received the bandit-captain.

"Isaachar," exclaimed Manuel, flinging himself upon a seat, "you behold
a desperate man before you!"

"Alas! my lord, what can a poor, aged, and obscure individual like
myself do to assist so great and powerful a noble as your lordship?"
said the Jew in a trembling tone.

"What can you do?" repeated the marquis: "much--everything, old man! But
listen patiently, for a few moments only. A noble lady's fame, honor,
reputation are at stake; and I am the guilty, unhappy cause of the
danger that threatens her. To minister to my necessities she has pledged
her jewels----"

"Yes, yes, my lord--I understand," said Isaachar, trembling from head to
foot, "'tis a plan by no means unusual nowadays in Florence."

"Her husband suspects the fact, and has commanded her to produce her
diamonds to-morrow----"

"Her diamonds!" articulated the Jew in a stifling tone.

"Yes, _her diamonds_," exclaimed Manuel emphatically; "and they are in
your possession. Now do you understand me?"

"I--I--my lord----"

"Let us not waste time in idle words, Isaachar," cried the marquis.
"Will you permit this scandal to be discovered, and involve the Countess
of Arestino--myself--ay, and _yourself_, old man, in danger, and perhaps
ruin? Perhaps, did I say? Nay, that ruin is certain to fall upon
_her_--certain also to overwhelm _you_--for the Count of Arestino is a
councilor of state, and," added Manuel, with slow, measured emphasis,
"_the dungeons of the inquisition open at his commands_ to receive the
heretic or the Jew!"

Isaachar ben Solomon vainly endeavored to reply; fear choked his
utterance; and he sank trembling and faint upon a low ottoman, where he
sat, the picture of dumb despair.

"Ruin, then, awaits the countess, ruin, and the inquisition yawn to
ingulf you; and dishonor in having involved that noble lady in such a
labyrinth of perils attends upon me," continued Orsini, perceiving that
his dark threats had produced the effect which he desired.

"My lord--my lord," gasped the unfortunate Israelite, who could not
close his eyes against the truth, the terrible truth of the prospect
submitted to his contemplation.

"It is for you to decide against the ruin of one, two, three persons,
yourself being he who will, if possible, suffer most," resumed the
marquis, impressively--"it is, I say, for you to decide between exposure
and the inquisition on one hand, and the surrender of those paltry
diamonds on the other!"

"The diamonds, the diamonds, they are gone!" exclaimed the Jew, his
voice becoming almost frantic with the wild hope that suddenly struck
him of being able to shift the danger from his own head to that of
another. "The captain of banditti, Stephano Verrina, was here a few
hours ago, here, in this very room, and he sat where your lordship now
sits!"

"Well, well?" cried the marquis, impatiently; for his heart began to
grow sick with the fear of disappointment in respect to his plan of
obtaining the diamonds of his mistress.

"And Stephano Verrina took them from me--basely, vilely, wrenched them
as it were from my grasp!" continued the Jew.

"'Tis false! a miserable subterfuge on your part!" ejaculated the
marquis, starting from his seat and striding in a menacing manner toward
Isaachar ben Solomon.

"'Tis true!--I will give your lordship the proof!" cried the Jew: and
Manuel fell back a few paces. "Stephano came and told me all. He said
that the countess had pledged her jewels for the sake of her lover--of
you, my lord--you, the Marquis of Orsini. 'Twas to pay a gambling debt
which your lordship had contracted; and that debt was paid within an
hour or two from the moment when the sum was advanced on the diamonds.
Moreover," continued Isaachar, still speaking in a rapid, excited
tone--"moreover, Stephano was hired by the countess to regain them from
me!"

"Liar!" thundered the marquis, again rushing toward the defenseless old
man.

"Patience, my lord--patience for an instant--and you will see that I am
no utterer of base falsehoods. The robber-captain examined the diamonds
carefully--yes, most carefully--and, while occupied in the scrutiny, he
let drop expressions which convinced me that he was hired by the
countess. 'The inventory is complete,' he said, 'just as it was
described to me by her ladyship. You are a worthy man, Isaachar,' he
added; 'you will have restored tranquillity to the mind of this
beautiful countess; and she will be enabled to appear at court to-morrow
with her husband.' Now does your lordship believe me?"

The marquis was staggered; for several minutes he made no answer. Was it
possible that the Countess of Arestino could have employed the dreaded
chieftain of the Florentine banditti to wrest her diamonds from the
possession of Isaachar? or had the Jew invented the tale for an obvious
purpose? The latter alternative scarcely seemed feasible. How could
Isaachar have learned that the sum raised was for the payment of a
gambling debt? Giulia would not have told him so. Again, how had he
learned that this debt had been paid within an hour or two after the
money was procured? and how had he ascertained that the countess had
actually required her diamonds to accompany her husband the count?

"Perdition!" ejaculated Orsini, bewildered by conflicting ideas,
suspicions, and alarms: and he paced the room with agitated steps.

Nearly a quarter of a hour elapsed--the silence being occasionally
broken by some question which the marquis put to the Jew, and to which
the latter had his reply ready. And each question thus put, and every
answer thus given, only served to corroborate Isaachar's tale, and
banish hope still further from the breast of the ruined nobleman.

At length the latter stopped short--hesitated for a few moments, as if
wrestling with some idea or scheme that had taken possession of his
mind;--then turning abruptly toward the Jew, he said in a deep, hollow
tone--"Isaachar, I need gold!"

"Gold--gold, my lord!" ejaculated the Jew, all his fears returning;
"surely--surely, my lord, her ladyship will supply you with----"

"Fool--dolt!" cried the marquis, terribly excited; "do you not see that
she herself is menaced with ruin--that the villain Stephano must have
kept the diamonds for himself? that is, granting your tale to be
true----"

At this moment there was an authoritative knock at the house-door.

"This is Stephano Verrina himself!" exclaimed the Jew. "I know his
manner of knocking with the rude handle of his sword. What can he want?
What will become of me?"

"Stephano Verrina, say you?" cried the marquis, hastily. "Then admit him
by all means; and the possession of the diamonds of the countess shall
be disputed between him and me at the sword's point."

Manuel d'Orsini was naturally brave, and the desperate position in which
he was placed, rendered his tone and bearing so resolute--so determined,
that Isaachar feared lest blood should be shed in his dwelling.

"My lord--my lord," he said in an imploring tone, "depart, or conceal
yourself----"

"Silence, signor!" ejaculated the marquis; "and hasten to admit the
captain of banditti. I have heard much of Stephano Verrina, and would
fain behold this formidable chieftain."

The Jew proceeded, with trembling limbs and ghastly countenance, to obey
the orders of the marquis; and in a few moments he returned to the room,
accompanied by Stephano Verrina.




CHAPTER XXVI.

A COMBAT--THE DESPISED AND PERSECUTED ISRAELITE.


Isaachar had taken away the lamp with him to give admission to the
bandit, and the marquis had remained for a few instants in the dark.

When the Jew reappeared, bearing the light, Orsini's first and natural
impulse was to cast a rapid, searching glance at the brigand captain. At
the same moment this individual burst into a loud, coarse, joyous laugh;
and the marquis, to his profound surprise, recognized in Stephano
Verrina the person with whom he had twice played so unsuccessfully at
the gambling house.

"Good, my lord!" exclaimed Verrina, flinging himself upon the ottoman
which the Jew had ere now occupied; "there is not in all Florence a man
whom I would rather have encountered than yourself."

"You are somewhat pressing for the trifle--the miserable trifle in which
I am indebted to you, signor," said the marquis haughtily; "seeing that
scarce two hours have elapsed since I lost the amount at the casino."

"Pshaw! who alluded to the affair, save yourself?" cried Stephano. "It
was for another motive----"

"Yes; and I also wished to see Signor Stephano Verrina for another
motive," exclaimed Manuel emphatically.

"Ah! then you know me, my lord?" said the bandit. "And yet methought I
was a stranger to you, although you were none to me at the casino."

"You were a stranger until now," continued Orsini; "but Isaachar knew by
the knock which you dealt so lustily on his door, who was his visitor."

"And your lordship was desirous to see me?"

"Very much so. I believe you expressed a similar wish?"

"Precisely, my lord," returned Stephano. "But as you hold the higher
rank in the world, precedence in the way of explanation belongs to your
lordship."

"It is rather an explanation which I seek, than one which I have to
give," rejoined Manuel, in a cold but resolute manner. "In a word, my
business with thee is touching the diamonds of the Duchess of Arestino."

"And my business with your lordship is touching the countess herself,"
observed Verrina, also in a cool and deliberate manner.

"Ah!" cried the marquis, with a sudden start.

"Yes, my lord. But this is no place for explanations on that head,"
added Stephano, glancing toward the Jew.

"I understand you, signor; we must confer alone," said the marquis. "We
will go out together presently; but in the meantime, one word concerning
the diamonds which the Countess of Arestino----"

"Employed me to procure for her," exclaimed Stephano, finishing the
nobleman's sentence for him. "I presume that old Isaachar here has
informed you of the particulars of my previous visit to him this
night--or rather last night, for it is now the Sabbath morning."

"I am well informed of those particulars, Sir Captain," returned Manuel;
"but I would fain know what has become of the jewels which you obtained
from Isaachar."

"I might with reason question your lordship's right to catechise me----"

"Ah! villain--would you dare?" exclaimed the marquis, his countenance
becoming flushed with rage: for he imagined that the robber chief was
trifling with him. "Far as you are beneath me--wide as is the gulf that
separates the Marquis of Orsini from the proscribed bravo--yet will I
condescend to wreak upon thee, base-born as thou art, that vengeance
which the law has not yet been able to inflict."

And Manuel unsheathed his weapon with such rapidity that the polished
blade of Milan steel flashed like lightning in the glare of the lamp.

"Since this is your object, I will bear with your humor," muttered
Stephano, starting from his seat and drawing his heavy sword.

"My lord--good Signor Verrina--in mercy--not here--I implore----"
ejaculated the Jew, speaking in a piteous tone, and wringing his hands
in alarm at this hostile demonstration.

"Stand back!" thundered the bandit chief; and the Jew retreated to the
most remote corner of the room, where he fell upon his knees and began
to offer up prayers that no blood would be spilt--for he was a humane
and kind-hearted man.

The marquis and the captain of banditti crossed their weapons; and the
combat began. The former was lighter, younger, and therefore, more
active than his opponent; but the latter was far more experienced in the
use of his sword; and, moreover, the space was too narrow to enable the
marquis to gain any advantage from his superior agility. The fight
lasted about ten minutes, when the bandit parried a desperate thrust
that was made at him by his opponent, and at the next moment wounded the
marquis in the sword arm. The weapon fell from Manuel's hand, and he
stood at the mercy of his conqueror.

"You are wounded, my lord--and the blood is flowing!" cried Stephano.
"Hasten, friend Isaachar--and fetch water, bandages----"

"It is nothing--a mere scratch," exclaimed the marquis, tearing away
with his left hand the right sleeve of his doublet, and displaying a
tolerably severe gash, which ran down the forearm lengthwise, and from
which the blood trickled on the floor. "Be kind enough to bind it with
my scarf, Signor Verrina, and let us continue in a more peaceful manner
the discourse which has been somewhat rudely interrupted."

Isaachar, however, supplied water in an ewer, and linen bandages; and
the old man, forgetting the object of Manuel's predatory visit to his
abode, hastened himself to wash and bind up the wounded arm.

"Thou art a good Jew--and hast something of the feeling of the Christian
in thee," said the marquis, when the operation was completed.

"Didst thou ever suppose that different creeds made different hearts, my
lord?" asked the old man, in a half melancholy, half reproachful tone.

"Isaachar, I shall not forget this kindness on your part," said the
marquis, blushing with shame at himself, when he reflected on the
purpose for which he had sought the Jew's dwelling. "Heaven knows it is
not in my power to reward you with gold; but whenever I may henceforth
hear your race traduced, reckon upon me as its champion."

The old man cast a look of gratitude upon the marquis; and, after some
little hesitation, he said in a tremulous tone, "Your lordship hinted
ere now--at least methought I understood as much--that you required
gold. I take Father Abraham above to witness that I am not so rich as ye
Christians deem me to be; but--since your lordship can say a kind word
of the Jew--I--I will lend you such sum as you may need--without
interest--without bond----"

Orsini, in whose breast all generous feeling had not been entirely
crushed by the vices which had proved his ruin, extended his left
hand--for his right now hung in a sling--to the kind-hearted Jew,
exclaiming, "There is the signor to whom I am indebted, worthy Isaachar;
it is for him to say whether he will press me immediately for the sum
that I have fairly lost to him with the dice."

"Not I!" ejaculated Stephano, in his blunt, coarse manner. "And
therefore your lordship need not lay yourself under any obligation to
the Jew, who, after all, is a worthy signor in his way."

"Yes," exclaimed the marquis, "I shall ever lie under an obligation to
him; nor shall I be ashamed to proclaim the fact in the presence of all
Florence."

"And now, my lord," resumed Stephano, "I will give you that explanation
relative to the diamonds which you might have had without bloodshed; but
patience and aristocracy are as much at variance as a thief and the
headsman. Read this paper, my lord; it is not the worst testimonial
which I could produce in proof of good character."

And he handed to the marquis the document which he had compelled the
Countess of Arestino to sign.

Manuel read it with astonishment.

"Then she _has_ the diamonds in her possession!" he exclaimed; "and you
must have seen her since I was there!"

"My lord," replied Stephano, as he received back the paper, "I was at
the Arestino Palace ere now, at the same time, and in the same room, as
yourself. But this is a mystery I will explain presently. As for the
diamonds--Isaachar here can tell your lordship what he has done with the
_real_ stones, for those that I received from him which I handed to her
ladyship were _false_."

Orsini glanced toward the Jew, who was now pale and trembling.

"It was to make inquiries on this point," continued Stephano, "that I
came here on the present occasion. And to speak truly, it was also with
the intention of making the old Israelite disgorge his plunder."

"Plunder!" repeated the Jew, in a tone almost of indignation, in spite
of the terror with which the bandit-captain inspired him. "Did I not
lend my good golden ducats upon those diamonds? and must I be blamed, if
knowing--ah! knowing too well, the base artifices of which many of even
the best-born Florentine nobles and great ladies are capable, must I be
blamed, I say, if aware of all this, I adopted a device which the
wickedness of others, and not our own, has rendered common amongst those
of our race who traffic in loans upon jewels and precious stones."

"Isaachar speaks naught save the pure truth," remarked Orsini, blushing
at the justice which dictated these reproaches against the aristocracy
whereof he was a member. "Signor Verrina," he continued, "you are a
brave man--and I believe you to be a generous one. Confirm this opinion
on my part, by refraining from further molestation toward the Jew, and
thou wilt doubly render me thy debtor."

"Be that as you will, my lord," grumbled the bandit-chief. "And now let
us depart--for I have much to communicate to your lordship."

"I am ready to accompany you," returned the marquis, putting on his
plumed hat, and settling his cloak with his left hand.

"One word, my lord," said Isaachar, in his habitual nervous and
trembling tone. "Should the Countess of Arestino _really_ need her
diamonds--_really_ need them, my lord--I--should not--object--that is,
my lord," he added in a firmer voice, as if ashamed at the hesitation
with which he was expressing his readiness to do a good action, "I will
at once give them up to her, trusting to her ladyship's honor to pay me
my moneys at her most befitting convenience."

"Her ladyship does not require them now!" exclaimed the bandit-chief,
emphatically.

The marquis looked at Stephano inquiringly, for there was something
ominously mysterious in his words; but the brigand stalked in a dogged
manner toward the door, as if anxious to hurry the departure so long
protracted, and Manuel, having renewed the expressions of his gratitude
toward Isaachar ben Solomon, hastily followed Verrina from the house.




CHAPTER XXVII.

STEPHANO AND THE MARQUIS--THE STRONGHOLD OF THE BANDITTI.


The moment Stephano and the marquis were alone together in the open
street the former related all the incidents which had occurred at the
Arestino Palace after the departure of Manuel himself; and the young
nobleman now learned, with feelings of remorse and sorrow, that the
unfortunate countess had been hurried away to the convent of the
Carmelites--that species of inquisition the gates of which so seldom
opened more than once for each new female victim.

"But you promised to save her, signor!" he exclaimed, with enthusiastic
warmth.

"I gave this pledge in the manner described to your lordship," returned
Verrina, "and I shall not swerve from it."

"Think you that her liberation can be effected?" demanded Manuel.
"Remember that the convent is protected by the highest personages in the
state--that violence never will succeed in accomplishing the object--for
should an armed man dare to pass that sacred threshold, every sbirro in
Florence would fly to the spot----"

"It is, then, your lordship who is afraid of attempting the rescue of
the countess!" interrupted Stephano, in a contemptuous tone.

"That observation is hardly fair, Signor Verrina," said the young
nobleman; "considering that my right arm is disabled, and that the wound
was received in combat with yourself."

"I crave your lordship's pardon," exclaimed the bandit-captain. "My
remark was most uncourteous--particularly to one who has ere now given
no equivocal proof of his valor. But I pretend not to courtly manners;
and such as I am you will find me faithfully devoted to your service and
that of the Lady Giulia. The attempt to rescue her will be somewhat
hazardous; it is, however, tolerably sure of success. But it can only be
undertaken on certain conditions; and these regard your lordship's self.
Indeed, had I not so opportunely met you at the Jew's house, I should
have sent one of my fellows to you to-morrow."

"In what way do the conditions that you speak of, regard myself?"
inquired the marquis.

"To this extent," returned the robber-chief; "that you accompany me to
my stronghold, wherever it may be; that you join us in any project or
plan that may be undertaken with a view to liberate the Countess of
Arestino; and that you remain with us until such project or plan be
attempted; then, whether it succeed or fail, you shall be at liberty to
take your departure."

"Agreed!" exclaimed Manuel; "and now permit me to ask you one
question:--On what ground do you manifest this interest in behalf of the
countess and myself? You are well aware that from me you have little to
hope in the shape of reward; and that the countess will be in no better
condition than myself to recompense you, even if you succeed in
effecting her rescue."

"I am well aware of this, my lord," answered Stephano; "and I will give
you an explanation of my motives as frankly as you solicit it. In the
first place it suits my projects to make friends as much as possible
with nobles and great ladies; as no one can say how or when such
interest may be available to me or to those connected with me. Secondly,
I am not sorry to have an excuse for paying a visit to the Carmelite
Convent; and in case of failure, it will be as well to have a Florentine
noble amongst us. Because the statutes of our glorious Republic are
somewhat unequal in their application; thus, for instance, if a plebeian
commit sacrilege, he is punished with death; but a patrician is merely
reprimanded by the judge and mulcted in a sum which is devoted to
religious purposes. In this latter case, too, the companions of the
patrician are punished only as he himself is. Now, therefore, your
lordship's presence amongst us will be a guarantee for our safety.
Lastly, for I have another and less selfish motive, I admire the spirit
with which your lordship spends money, drinks a flagon of good wine, and
loses your thousands at dice; for saving your lordship's presence, there
is much in all those facts which finds sympathy with my own
inclinations. Thus, everything considered, Stephano Verrina and fifty as
gallant fellows as ever bore the name of banditti, are completely at
your lordship's service, and that of the dear lady who has the good
taste to prefer a dashing roistering blade like yourself, to a gentleman
no doubt very worthy of esteem, but certainly old enough to be her
father."

The marquis made no reply to this tirade; but he reflected profoundly
upon all that the robber-chieftain said as they walked leisurely along
through the suburb of Alla Croce, and toward the city.

He reflected because he now saw all the dangers that were associated
with the step he was taking, the chance of being arrested with the whole
band of lawless freebooters, and the dishonor that would attach itself
to his name, were such an event to occur. But on the other hand, Giulia
was immured in consequence of her love for him; and his naturally
chivalrous disposition triumphed over selfish considerations. Could her
liberation be effected, he would fly with her into another state; and
the revenues arising from her own little patrimony which had been
settled on herself at her marriage would enable them to live
comfortably, if not affluently. And who could tell but that her husband
might die intestate? and then all his wealth would become hers by law.

Thus did he reason with himself.

"Well, my lord--you do not reply?" exclaimed the robber-captain,
impatient of the long silence which had followed his explanations. "Are
you content to abide by the conditions I ere now proposed?"

"Perfectly content," answered the marquis.

He knew that it was useless to reason with the brigand against the
spoliation of the convent, which he had more than hinted at; for it was
not likely that the robbers would incur so great a risk as that involved
in the sacrilegious invasion of the sacred establishment, unless it were
with the hope of reaping an adequate reward.

The bandit-chief and the young nobleman had now reached the boundary of
the city; but instead of entering the streets, they turned abruptly to
the right, Stephano acting as guide, and plunged into a thick grove of
evergreens.

"Here, my lord," said Stephano, stopping short, "you must consent to be
blindfolded."

"And wherefore?" demanded Manuel, indignantly. "Think you that I shall
betray the secrets of your dwelling, wherever and whatever it may be?"

"I entertain no such base suspicion," returned Verrina. "But we banditti
are governed by a code of laws which none of us--not even I, the
chief--dare violate. To the observance of this code we are bound by an
oath of so deadly--so dreadful a nature, that bold and reckless as we
are, we could not forget _that_. And I should alike break our laws and
depart from my oath, were I to conduct an uninitiated stranger to our
stronghold otherwise than blindfolded."

"I offer no further opposition, Signor Verrina," said the marquis. "Fix
on the bandage."

Stephano tied his scarf over the nobleman's eyes, and then conducted him
slowly through the mazes of the grove.

In this manner they proceeded for nearly a quarter of an hour, when they
stopped, and Stephano, quitting Manuel's hand, said in a low tone,
"Stand still just where you are for a moment, while I give the signal,
and do not move a single step--for it is a dangerous neighborhood."

About half a minute elapsed, during which it struck Manuel that he heard
a bell ring far--far under ground. The sound was very faint: but still
he felt convinced that he did hear it, and that it appeared to come from
the bowels of the earth.

But he had not much time for reflection; for Stephano once more took his
hand, saying, "You are now about to descend a flight of steps."

They proceeded downward together for some distance, when the steps
ceased, and they pursued their way on a flat surface of pavement; but
the echoes of their footsteps convinced the marquis that he was treading
a subterranean cavern or passage.

Presently a huge door, sounding as if it were made of iron, was closed
behind them, and Stephano exchanged a few words in a whisper with some
one who spoke to him at that point. Then they descended a few more
steps, and at the bottom another door was banged heavily, when they had
passed its threshold,--the echoes resounding like pistol-shots
throughout the place.

For a few minutes more did they proceed on another level-paved floor:
and then the gurgling rush of a rapid stream met the ears of the
marquis.

"Be careful in following me," said Stephano; "for you are about to cross
a narrow bridge, my lord--and one false step is destruction."

Slowly they passed over the bridge, which seemed to be a single plank of
about thirty feet in length and excessively narrow, he had no doubt,
both from the caution which he had received and the elasticity of that
dangerous pathway.

On the opposite side, the level-paved surface was continued; and at the
expiration of another minute, heavy folding-doors closed behind them.

"Take off the bandage, my lord," said Stephano, as he untied the knot
which fastened the scarf at the back of the young nobleman's head.

The Marquis of Orsini gladly availed himself of this permission; and
when the bandage fell from his eyes, he found himself in a spacious
cavern, paved with marble, hung with rich tapestry, and lighted by four
chandeliers of massive silver.

Six pillars of crystal supported the roof, and rendered the luster of
the chandeliers almost insupportably brilliant by means of reflection.

In the midst of this subterranean apartment stood a large table, covered
with flagons, empty wine flasks, and drinking-cups; but the revelers had
retired to rest--and the marquis and Stephano were alone in that
banqueting-hall.

"Follow me, my lord," said the bandit-captain; "and I will conduct you
to a place where you will find as dainty a couch as even a nobleman so
accustomed to luxury as your lordship need not despise."

Thus speaking Stephano opened an iron door at the end of the hall, and
led the way along a narrow and low corridor, lighted by lamps placed in
niches at short intervals. At the end of this corridor he knocked at
another door, which was opened in a few moments by a man who had
evidently been aroused from his slumber.

"I bring a guest, Lomellino," said Verrina. "See that his lordship be
well cared for."

Stephano then retraced his way along the corridor, and Lomellino closed
and bolted the iron door.

But no pen can describe the astonishment of the marquis when he found
himself in a spacious room, heaped all around with immense riches.
Massive plate, splendid chandeliers, gorgeous suits of armor and martial
weapons incrusted with gold or set with precious stones, chalices and
dishes of silver, bags of money piled in heaps, an immense quantity of
jewelry spread upon shelves, and an infinite assortment of the richest
wearing apparel--all these, suddenly bursting upon the young nobleman's
view by the light of a lamp suspended to the roof, produced an effect at
once brilliant and astounding.

When Lomellino addressed him with a request to follow whither he should
lead, it seemed as if some rude voice were suddenly awaking him from a
delicious dream--save that the cause of his pleasure and wonder was
still present. Then, ashamed at having allowed himself to be so
attracted by the spectacle of boundless wealth around him, he followed
Lomellino to an alcove at the further end of the caverned room, and the
entrance of which was covered by a purple velvet curtain, richly fringed
with gold.

Within were two beds, having a screen between them. These couches were
of the most comfortable description, and such as in those times were not
usually seen elsewhere than in the dwellings of the wealthy. Near each
bed stood a toilet-table and wash-stand, with ewers of massive silver
and towels of fine linen; and to the walls hung two large
mirrors--articles of exclusive luxury at that period. The floor was
richly carpeted, and a perfumed lamp burned in front of the dial of a
water-clock.

Lomellino respectfully informed the marquis that one division of the
alcove was at his service; and Manuel was too much wearied by the
adventures of the evening not to avail himself of the information.

The brigand seeing that he was wounded, but without asking any questions
as to the cause, proffered his aid to divest the marquis of his upper
clothing; and at length the young nobleman was comfortably stretched in
one of the voluptuous beds.

Sleep had just closed his eyelids, and he had even already entered upon
a vision of fairy enchantment,--doubtless conjured up to his imagination
by the gorgeous spectacle of the treasure-room,--when he was startled by
screams which appeared to issue from the very wall of the alcove, at the
head of his bed.

He listened--and those screams became more and more piercing in their
nature, although their tone was subdued, as if by the existence of a
thick intervening partition.

"Holy Virgin! what sounds are those?" he exclaimed, more in pity than in
fear--for they were unmistakably female shrieks which he heard.

"Perdition seize on those Carmelite nuns!" cried Lomellino; "they seem
to have got another victim!"

"_Another victim!_" murmured the marquis falling back in his bed, a prey
to the most torturing feelings; and then his lips framed the sweet and
tender name of "GIULIA!"




CHAPTER XXVIII.

A FEARFUL ACCUSATION.


Fair and beauteous art thou, O City of Flowers! with thy domes and
spires, and turrets overlooking the Arno's silver stream, and crowding
together in that river's classic pale; surrounded, too, by oak-covered
hills, and cypress groves, and gardens of olives and evergreens, and
presenting to the view of the spectator who stands on the lofty summit
of Monte Senario, so vast an assemblage of palaces as to justify the
saying of Ariosto, that it seemed as if the very soil produced them!

Or seen from the olive-crowned hill of Fesole, consecrated by the genius
of Milton, how glorious is thy rich combination of beauty, thou Athens
of Etruria!

The sun dawned upon the eventful night, the incidents of which have
occupied so many chapters. The golden flood poured upon the Florentine
scene, so fair even in winter, bathing in yellow luster the mighty dome
of the cathedral of St. Mary, the ducal palace on its left, and the
cupola of the Medicean chapel on its right, and bringing out into strong
relief against the deep foliage of the evergreens the marble fronts of
palaces, villas, and convents, seated amidst the hills, or scattered
through the vale--the whole affording a rich and varied view, as if
eternal summer reigned in that delightful region and beneath the purple
canopy of that warm Italian sky!

Alas! that the selfish interests, dark passions, conflicting feeling,
clashing aims, and black, black crimes of men should mar the serenity
and peace which ought to maintain an existence congenial to this scene!

Scarcely had the orient beams penetrated through the barred casements of
the Jew Isaachar's house in the suburb of Alla Croce, when the old man
was awakened from a repose to which he had only been able to withdraw a
couple of hours previously, by a loud and impatient knocking at his
gate.

Starting from his couch, he glanced from the window, and, to his dismay,
beheld the lieutenant of police, accompanied by half a dozen of his
terrible sbirri, and by an individual in the plain, sober garb of a
citizen.

A cold tremor came over the unhappy Israelite, for he knew that this
official visit could bode him no good: and the dread of having
encountered the resentment of the Count of Arestino, immediately
conjured up appalling scenes of dungeons, chains, judgment-halls and
tortures, to his affrighted imagination.

The dark hints which Manuel d'Orsini had dropped relative to the
possibility of the count's discovering the affair of the diamonds, and
the certain vengeance that would ensue, flashed to the mind of Isaachar
ben Solomon; and he stood, as it were, paralyzed at the window, gazing
with the vacancy of despair upon the armed men, on whose steel morions
and pikes the morning sunbeams now fell in radiant glory.

The knocking was repeated more loudly and with greater impatience than
before; and Isaachar, suddenly restored to himself, and remembering that
it was dangerous as well as useless to delay the admittance of those who
would not hesitate to force a speedy entry, huddled on his garments, and
descended to the door.

The moment it was opened, the sbirri and the citizen entered; and the
lieutenant, turning shortly round upon the Jew, said, "His Excellency
the Count of Arestino demands, through my agency, the restoration of
certain diamonds which his lordship has good reason to believe are in
your possession. But think not that his lordship is desirous of
plundering you of these jewels which you hold as security for certain
moneys advanced, for here is the gold to repay thee."

Thus speaking, the lieutenant produced from beneath his cloak a heavy
bag of gold; and Isaachar, now considerably relieved of his
apprehensions, led the way into the apartment where he had received the
Marquis of Orsini and Stephano de Verrina during the past night.

"Hast thou heard my message, Israelite?" demanded the lieutenant.

"Yes, yes; and his lordship is a worthy man--an estimable man. No
oppressor of the poor defenseless Jew is he! Would that Florence
abounded in such nobles as the Count of Arestino!"

"Cease thy prating, Jew, and let us dispatch this business," cried the
officer. "You see," he added, glancing toward his men, "that with these
at my disposal, the ransacking of your dwelling would be a light and
easy matter."

"I will not render it necessary," returned the Jew. "Tarry ye here a few
moments and the diamonds shall be delivered up."

Isaachar proceeded into another apartment, the lieutenant following him
as far as the passage to see that he did not escape. When the old man
returned, he had a small rosewood case in his hand: and from this box he
produced the stones which had been extracted from the settings the very
day the jewels were first mortgaged to him.

"Now, signor," said the lieutenant, turning to the citizen in the plain
sober garb, "as you are the diamond merchant of whom his lordship the
count originally purchased the precious stones which have been traced to
the possession of Isaachar, it is for you to declare whether those be
the true diamonds or not."

The citizen examined the stones, and having pronounced them to be the
genuine ones, took his departure, his services being no longer required.

The lieutenant secured the rosewood case with its valuable contents
about his person, and then proceeded to settle with interest the amount
claimed by the Jew, as the sum which he had advanced on the jewels.

While this transaction was in progress, the notice of one of the sbirri
was attracted by the marks of blood which appeared on the floor, and
which, as the reader will recollect, had been caused by the wound that
the Marquis of Orsini had received from the robber Stephano.

"It is decidedly blood," whispered the sbirro to one of his companions.

"Not a doubt of it," observed another. "We must mention it to the
lieutenant when he has done counting out that gold."

"Do you know what I have heard about the Jews?" asked the first speaker,
drawing his comrades still further aside.

"What?" was the general question.

"That they kill Christian children to mix the blood in the dough with
which they make the bread used at their religious ceremonies," answered
the sbirro.

"Depend upon it. Isaachar has murdered a Christian child for that
purpose!" said one of his companions.

This atrocious idea gained immediate belief among the ignorant sbirri;
and as the Jew now quitted the room for a few moments to secure the gold
which he had just received, in his coffer in the adjacent apartment, the
police officers had leisure to point out to their superior the traces of
blood which they had noticed, and the suspicion which these marks had
engendered.

The lieutenant was not further removed beyond the influence of popular
prejudice and ridiculous superstition than even his men: and though by
no means of a cruel disposition, yet he thought it no sin nor injustice
to persecute the Hebrew race, even when innocent and unoffending. But,
now that suspicion, or what he chose to consider suspicion, pointed at
Isaachar ben Solomon as a dreadful criminal, the lieutenant did not
hesitate many moments how to act.

Thus, when the Jew returned to the room with the fond hope of seeing his
visitors take their speedy departure, he was met by the terrible words,
uttered by the officer of the sbirri. "In the name of the most high
inquisition, Isaachar, do I make you my prisoner!"

The unhappy Jew fell upon his knees, stunned, terrified by the appalling
announcement; and although he assumed this attitude of supplication, he
had not the power to utter a syllable of intercession or of prayer.
Horror had for the moment stricken him dumb: and a thousand images of
terror, conjured up by the fearful words, "the inquisition," suddenly
sprung up to scare, bewilder and overwhelm him.

"Bind him, gag him!" ejaculated the lieutenant: and this order was
immediately obeyed: for whenever a prisoner was about to be conveyed to
the dungeons of the inquisition, he was invariably gagged, in order that
no questions on his part might evoke answers at all calculated to afford
him a clew to the cause of his arrest.

This precaution was originally adopted in reference to those only who
were ignorant of the charges laid against them: but it had subsequently
become common in all cases of arrest effected in the name or on the part
of the holy brotherhood.

The Palazzo del Podesta, or ducal palace, was one of the most celebrated
edifices in Florence. In strong contrast with the various beautiful
specimens of composite Tuscan, combined with a well-assimilated portion
of the Grecian character, which abounded in Florence, the ducal palace
was remarkable for the stern and gloomy character of its architecture.
Its massive and heavy tower, crowned with embattled and overhanging
parapets, seemed to frown in sullen and haughty defiance at the lapse of
Time. The first range of windows were twelve feet from the ground, and
were grated with enormous bars of iron, producing a somber and ominous
effect. Within were the apartments of the duke's numerous dependents;
and the lower portion of the palace had been rendered thus strong to
enable the edifice to withstand a siege in those troublous times, when
the contentions of the Guelphs and Ghibelines desolated Florence. On the
second floor there was in front a plain and simple architrave, and on
that story the windows were high and arched; for those casements
belonged to the ducal apartments. The upper stories were in the same
style; but the general aspect was stern and mournful to a degree.

The palace was built, as indeed nearly all the Florentine mansions then
were, and still are, in the form of a square; and around this court,
which was of an antique and gloomy cast, were numerous monumental
stones, whereon were inscribed the names of the nobles and citizens who
had held high offices in the state previous to the establishment of the
sway of the Medici.

It was beneath the Palazzo del Podesta that the dungeons of the criminal
prison and also those of the inquisition were situated.

In a cell belonging to the former department, Fernand Wagner was already
a captive; and Isaachar ben Solomon now became the inmate of a narrow,
cold, and damp stone chamber, in that division of the subterrane which
was within the jurisdiction of the holy office.




CHAPTER XXIX.

THE VISIT OF THE BANDITTI TO THE RIVEROLA PALACE.


It was Monday night, and within an hour of the time appointed by
Stephano for the meditated invasion of the Riverola Palace.

Francisco had already retired to rest, for he was wearied with vain and
ineffectual wandering about the city and its environs in search of some
trace that might lead him to discover his lost Flora.

Indeed, the few days which had now elapsed since her mysterious
disappearance had been passed by the young count in making every
possible inquiry and adopting every means which imagination could
suggest to obtain a clew to her fate. But all in vain. And never for a
moment did he suspect that she might be an inmate of the Carmelite
Convent, for, although he was aware of the terrible power wielded by
that institution, yet feeling convinced that Flora herself was incapable
of any indiscretion, it never struck him that the wicked machinations of
another might place her in the custody of the dreaded Carmelite abbess.

We said that Francisco had retired to rest somewhat early on the
above-mentioned night, and the domestics, yielding to the influence of a
soporific which Antonio, the faithless valet, had infused into the wine
which it was his province to deal out to them under the superintendence
of the head butler, had also withdrawn to their respective chambers.

Nisida had dismissed her maids shortly before eleven, but she did not
seek her couch. There was an expression of wild determination, of firm
resolve, in her dark black eyes and her compressed lips which denoted
the courage of her dauntless but impetuous mind. For of that mind the
large piercing eyes seemed an exact transcript.

Terrible was she in the decision of her masculine--oh! even more than
masculine--character, for beneath that glorious beauty with which she
was arrayed beat a heart that scarcely knew compunction, or that, at all
events, would hesitate at nothing calculated to advance her interests or
her projects.

Though devoured with ardent passions, and of a temperament naturally
voluptuous and sensual even to an extreme, she had hitherto remained
chaste, as much for want of opportunity to assuage the cravings of her
mad desires, as through a sentiment of pride--but since she had loved
Wagner--the first and only man whom she had ever loved--her warm
imagination had excited those desires to such a degree, that she felt
capable of making any sacrifice, save one--to secure him to herself.

And that one sacrifice which she could not make was not her honor: no,
of that she now thought but little in the whirlwind of her impetuous,
ardent, heated imagination. But, madly as she loved Fernand Wagner--that
is, loved him after the fashion of her own strange and sensual
heart--she loved her brother still more; and this attachment was at
least a pure, a holy sentiment, and a gloriously redeeming trait in the
character of this wondrous woman, of a mind so darkly terrible.

And for her brother's sake it was that there was one sacrifice--a
sacrifice of a tremendous, but painfully persevered-in project--which
she would not make even to her love for Fernand Wagner! No, rather would
she renounce him forever--rather would she perish, consumed by the
raging fires of her own ungratified passions, than sacrifice one tittle
of what she deemed to be her brother's welfare to any selfish feeling of
her own!

Wherefore do we dwell on this subject now?

Because such was the resolution which Nisida vowed within her own heart,
as she stood alone in her chamber, and fixed her eyes upon a document,
bearing the ducal seal that lay upon the table.

That document contained the decision of his highness in respect to the
memorial which she had privately forwarded to him in accordance with the
advice given her a few days previously by Dr. Duras. The duke lost no
time in vouchsafing a reply; and this reply was unfavorable to the hopes
of Nisida. His highness refused to interfere with the provisions of the
late count's will; and this decision was represented to be final.

Therefore it was that Nisida solemnly vowed within herself to persevere
in a course so long ago adopted, and ever faithfully, steadily, sternly
adhered to since the day of its commencement; and, as if to confirm
herself in the strength of this resolution, she turned her eyes with
adoring, worshiping look toward the portrait of her maternal parent,
those eloquent, speaking orbs seeming almost to proclaim the words which
her lips could not utter, "Yes, mother--sainted mother! thou shalt be
obeyed!"

Then she hastily secured the ducal missive in an iron box where she was
in the habit of keeping her own private papers, and which opened with a
secret spring.

But did she, then, mean to renounce her love for Wagner? Did she
contemplate the terrible alternative of abandoning him in his
misfortune, in his dungeon?

No--far from that! She would save him if she could; she would secure him
to herself, if such were possible; but she would not sacrifice to these
objects the one grand scheme of her life, that scheme which had formed
her character as we now find it, and which made her stand alone, as it
were, among the millions of her own sex!

And it was to put into execution the plan which she had devised to
effect Wagner's freedom, that she was now arming herself with all the
resolution, all the magnanimity, all the firmness with which her
masculine soul was capable.

The dial on the mantel in the chamber marked the hour of eleven; and
Nisida commenced her preparations.

Having divested herself of her upper garment, she put on a thin, but
strong, and admirably formed corselet, made so as to fit the precise
contour of her ample bust, and completely to cover her bosom. Then she
assumed a black velvet robe, which reached up to her throat, and
entirely concealed the armor beneath. Her long flexible dagger was next
thrust carefully into a sheath formed by the wide border of her
stomacher; and her preparations for defense in case of peril were
completed.

She now took from a cupboard six small bags, which were nevertheless
heavy, for they were filled with gold; and these she placed on a table.
Then seating herself at that table, she wrote a few lines on several
slips of paper, and these she thrust into her bosom.

Having accomplished her arrangements thus far, the Lady Nisida took a
lamp in her hand, and quitted her apartments.

Ascending a staircase leading to the upper story, she paused at one of
several doors in a long corridor, and slowly and noiselessly drew the
bolt, by which that door might be fastened outside.

This was Antonio's room; and thus, by Nisida's precaution, was he made a
prisoner.

She then retraced her way to the floor below, and proceeded to the
apartment in which her father breathed his last, and where the
mysterious closet was situated.

No one until now had entered that room since the day of the late count's
funeral; and its appearance was gloomy and mournful in the extreme; not
only on account of the dark, heavy hangings of the bed, and the drawn
curtains of the windows, but also from the effect of the ideas
associated with that chamber.

And as Nisida glanced toward the closet-door, even she trembled, and her
countenance became ashy pale; for not only did she shudder at the
thought of the horrors which that closet contained, but through her
brain also flashed the dreadful history revealed to her by the
manuscript--of which, however, only a few lines have as yet been
communicated to the reader. But she knew all--she had read the whole;
and well--oh! well might she shudder and turn pale.

For terrible indeed must have been the revelations of a manuscript
whereof the few lines above alluded to gave promise of such appalling
interest,--those lines which ran thus: "Merciless scalpel hacked and
hewed away at the still almost palpitating flesh of the murdered man, in
whose breast the dagger remained deeply buried,--a ferocious joy--a
savage, hyena-like triumph now----"

But we are to some extent digressing from the thread of our narrative.

Nisida placed the lamp in the chimney, in such a way that its light was
concealed so as to leave all the immediate vicinity of the door in a
state of complete darkness; and she seated herself in a chair close by,
to await the expected events of midnight.

Slowly, slowly passed the intervening twenty minutes; and the lady had
ample leisure to reflect upon all the incidents of her life--ay, and to
shudder too at one which had dyed her hand with blood--the blood of
Agnes!

Yet, though she shuddered thus, she did not look upon it with that
unbounded, tremendous horror that would be experienced by a lady
similarly placed in these times; for jealousy was a feeling that, by the
tacit convention of a vitiated society, was an excuse for even murder;
and, moreover, she possessed the true Italian heart, which deemed the
death of a rival in love a justifiable act of vengeance.

But she felt some compunction, because she had learnt, when it was too
late, that Agnes was not the mistress of Fernand Wagner; and she was
convinced that in affirming this much he had uttered the strictest
truth.

Thus was she rather grieved at the fatal mistake than appalled by the
deed itself; and she shuddered because she knew that her fearful
impetuosity of disposition had led to the unnecessary deed which had
entailed so dark a suspicion and so much peril upon her lover.

She was in the midst of these and other reflections connected with the
various salient features of her life, when the door of the room was
slowly and cautiously opened, and a man entered, bearing a lantern in
his hand.

Two others followed close behind him.

"Shut the door, Lomellino," said the foremost.

"But are you sure that this is the room?" asked the man thus addressed.

"Certain," was the reply. "Antonio described its situation so
clearly----"

"Then why did he not join us?"

"How do I know? But that need not prevent us----"

Nisida at this moment raised the lamp from the fire-place, and the light
flashing at that end of the room, produced a sudden start and
ejaculation on the part of the banditti.

"Perdition!" cried Stephano, "what can this mean?"

Nisida advanced toward the robbers in a manner so calm, so dignified, so
imperious, and so totally undaunted by their presence, that they were
for a moment paralyzed and rooted to the spot as if they were confronted
by a specter.

But at the next instant Stephano uttered an exclamation of mingled
surprise and joy, adding, "By my patron saint! Lomellino, this is the
very lady of whom I spoke to you the other evening!"

"What, the one who did the business so well in----"

"Yes, yes," cried Stephano hastily; "you know what I mean--in Wagner's
garden! But----"

Nisida had in the meantime drawn from her bosom one of the slips of
paper before alluded to; and, handing it to the bandit-chief, she made a
hasty and imperious motion for him to read it.

He obeyed her with the mechanical submission produced by astonishment
and curiosity, mingled with admiration for that bold and daring woman,
whom he already loved and resolved to win: but his surprise was
increased a hundred-fold, when he perused these lines:--"I am the Lady
Nisida of Riverola. Your design is known to me; it matters not how.
Rumor has doubtless told you that I am deaf and dumb; hence this mode of
communicating with you. You have been deluded by an idle knave--for
there is no treasure in the closet yonder. Even if there had been, I
should have removed it the moment your intended predatory visit was made
known to me. But you can serve me; and I will reward you well for your
present disappointment."

"What does the paper say?" demanded Lomellino and Piero, the captain's
two companions, almost in the same breath.

"It says just this much," returned Stephano--and he read the writing
aloud.

"The Lady Nisida!" ejaculated Lomellino. "Then it is she who used her
dagger so well in Wagner's garden."

"Peace, silly fool!" cried Stephano. "You have now let out the secret to
Piero. True, 'tis no matter, as he is as stanch to me as you are; and
therefore he may as well know that this lady here was the murderess of
the young female in Wagner's garden: for I saw her do the deed when I
was concealed among the evergreens there. She is as much in our power as
we are in hers, and we will let her know it if she means any treachery."

"But how could she have discovered that we meant to come here to-night,
and what our object was?" asked Piero.

"Antonio must have peached, that's clear!" returned Stephano; "and
therefore he did not join us, as agreed, in the hall down-stairs. But no
matter. It seems there's gold to be earned in this lady's service: and
even if there wasn't I have such an affection for her I would cut the
throat of the duke or the cardinal archbishop himself merely to give her
pleasure."

Then turning toward Nisida, whose courage seemed partially to have
abandoned her, for her countenance was ghastly pale, and her hand
trembled so that it could scarcely hold the lamp, Stephano made a low
bow, as much as to imply that he was entirely at her service.

Nisida made a powerful effort to subdue the emotions that were agitating
her: and, advancing toward the door, she made a sign for the banditti to
follow her.

She led them to her own suit of apartments, and to the innermost
room--her own bed-chamber--having carefully secured the several doors
through which they passed.

The banditti stood round the table, their eyes wandering from the six
tempting-looking money-bags to the countenance of Nisida, and then back
to the little sacks; but Stephano studied more the countenance than the
other objects of attraction; for Nisida's face once more expressed firm
resolution and her haughty, imperious, determined aspect, combined with
her extraordinary beauty, fired the robber-chieftain's heart.

Taking from her bosom another slip of paper, she passed it to Stephano,
who read its contents aloud for the benefit of his companions--"The
trial of Fernand Wagner will take place this day week. If he be
acquitted, your services will not be required. If he be condemned, are
ye valiant and daring enough (sufficiently numerous ye are, being upward
of fifty in all) to rescue him on his way back from the judgment-hall to
the prison of the ducal palace? The six bags of gold now upon the table
are yours, as an earnest of reward, if ye assent. Double that amount
shall be yours if ye succeed."

"It is a generous proposition," observed Lomellino.

"But a dangerous one," said Piero.

"Nevertheless, it shall be accepted, if only for her fair self's sake,"
exclaimed Stephano, completely dazzled by Nisida's surpassing majesty of
loveliness; then, with a low bow, he intimated his readiness to
undertake the enterprise.

Nisida handed him a third paper, on which the following lines were
written:--"Take the gold with you, as a proof of the confidence I place
in you. See that you deceive me not; for I have the power to avenge as
well as to reward. On Sunday evening next let one of you meet me, at ten
o'clock, near the principal entrance of the Cathedral of St. Mary, and I
will deliver the written instructions of the mode of proceeding which
circumstances may render necessary."

"I shall keep the appointment myself," said Stephano to his companions;
and another obsequious but somewhat coarse bow denoted full compliance
with all that Nisida had required through the medium of the slips of
paper.

She made a sign for the banditti to take the bags of gold from the
table, an intimation which Piero and Lomellino did not hesitate to obey.

The private staircase leading into the garden then afforded them the
means of an unobserved departure; and Nisida felt rejoiced at the
success of her midnight interview with the chiefs of the Florentine
banditti.




CHAPTER XXX.

FLORA'S CAPTIVITY--A COMPANION--THE LIVING TOMB.


Six days had now elapsed since Flora Francatelli became an inmate of the
Carmelite Convent.

During this period she was frequently visited in her cell by Sister
Alba, the nun who had received her at the bottom of the pit or well into
which she descended by means of the chair; and that recluse gradually
prepared her to fix her mind upon the necessity of embracing a
conventual life.

It was not, however, without feelings of the most intense--the most
acute--the most bitter anguish, that the unhappy maiden received the
announcement that she was to pass the remainder of her existence in that
monastic institution.

All the eloquence--all the sophistry--all the persuasion of Sister Alba,
who presided over the department of the penitents, failed to make her
believe that such a step was necessary for her eternal salvation.

"No," exclaimed Flora, "the good God has not formed this earth so fair
that mortals should close their eyes upon its beauties. The flowers, the
green trees, the smiling pastures, the cypress groves were not intended
to be gazed upon from the barred windows of a prison-house."

Then the nun would reason with her on the necessity of self-denial and
self-mortification; and Flora would listen attentively; but if she gave
no reply, it was not because she was convinced.

When she was alone in her cell she sat upon her humble pallet, pondering
upon her mournful condition, and sometimes giving way to all the anguish
of her heart, or else remaining silent and still in the immovability of
dumb despair.

Her suspicions often fell upon the Lady Nisida as the cause of her
terrible immurement in that living tomb--especially when she remembered
the coldness with which her mistress had treated her a day or two
previous to her forced abduction from the Riverola Palace. Those
suspicions seemed confirmed, too, by the nature of the discourse which
Sister Alba had first addressed to her, when she upbraided her with
having given way to "those carnal notions--those hopes--those
fears--those dreams of happiness, which constitute the passion that the
world calls love."

The reader will remember that Flora had suspected the coolness of Nisida
to have risen from a knowledge of Francisco's love for the young maiden;
and every word which Sister Alba had uttered in allusion to the passion
of love seemed to point to that same fact.

Thus was Flora convinced that it was this unfortunate attachment, in
which for a moment she had felt herself so supremely blest, that was the
source of her misfortunes. But then, how had Nisida discovered the
secret? This was an enigma defying conjecture; for Francisco was too
honorable to reveal his love to his sister, after having so earnestly
enjoined Flora herself not to betray that secret.

At times a gleam of hope would dawn in upon her soul, even through the
massive walls of that living tomb to which she appeared to have been
consigned. Would Francisco forget her? Oh! no, she felt certain that he
would leave no measure untried to discover her fate, no means unessayed
to effect her deliverance.

But, alas! then would come the maddening thought that he might be
deceived with regard to her real position; that the same enemy or
enemies who had persecuted her might invent some specious tale to
account for her absence, and deter him from persevering in his inquiries
concerning her.

Thus was the unhappy maiden a prey to a thousand conflicting sentiments;
unable to settle her mind upon any conviction save the appalling one
which made her feel the stern truth of her captivity.

Oh! to be condemned so young to perpetual prisonage, was indeed hard,
too hard--enough to make reason totter on its throne and paralyze the
powers of even the strongest intellect.

Sister Alba had sketched out to her the course of existence on which she
must prepare to enter. Ten days of prayer and sorry food in her own cell
were first enjoined as a preliminary, to be followed by admission into
the number of penitents who lacerated their naked forms with scourges at
the foot of the altar. Then the period of her penitence in this manner
would be determined by the manifestations of contrition which she might
evince, and which would be proved by the frequency of her
self-flagellations, the severity with which the scourge was applied, and
the anxiety which she might express to become a member of the holy
sisterhood. When the term of penitence should arrive, the maiden would
be removed to the department of the convent inhabited by the professed
nuns; and then her flowing hair would be cut short, and she would enter
on her novitiate previously to taking the veil, that last, last step in
the conventual regime, which would forever raise up an insuperable
barrier between herself and the great, the beautiful, the glorious world
without!

Such was the picture spread for the contemplation of this charming, but
hapless maiden.

Need we wonder if her glances recoiled from her prospects, as if from
some loathsome specter, or from a hideous serpent preparing to dart from
its coils and twine its slimy folds around her?

Nor was the place in which she was a prisoner calculated to dissipate
her gloomy reflections.

It seemed a vast cavern hollowed out of the bowels of the earth,
rendered solid by masonry and divided into various compartments. No
windows were there to admit the pure light of day; an artificial luster,
provided by lamps and tapers, prevailed eternally in that earthly
purgatory.

Sometimes the stillness of death, the solemn silence of the tomb reigned
throughout that place: then the awful tranquillity would be suddenly
broken by the dreadful shrieks, the prayers, the lamentations, and the
scourges of the penitents.

The spectacle of these unfortunate creatures, with their naked forms
writhing and bleeding beneath the self-inflicted stripes, which they
doubtless rendered as severe as possible in order to escape the sooner
from that terrible preparation for their novitiate--this spectacle, we
say, was so appalling to the contemplation of Flora, that she seldom
quitted her own cell to set foot in the chamber of penitence. But there
were times when her thoughts became so torturing, and the solitude of
her stone chamber so terrible, that she was compelled to open the door
and escape from those painful ideas and that hideous loneliness, even
though the scene merely shifted to a reality from which her gentle
spirit recoiled in horror and dismay.

But circumstances soon gave her a companion in her cell. For, on the
second night of her abode in that place, the noise of the well-known
machinery was heard; the revolution of wheels and the play of the
dreadful mechanism raised ominous echoes throughout the subterrane.
Another victim came: all the cells were tenanted: and the new-comer was
therefore lodged with Flora, whose own grief was partially forgotten, or
at all events mitigated, in the truly Christian task of consoling a
fellow-sufferer.

Thus it was that the Countess of Arestino and Flora Francatelli became
companions in the Carmelite convent.

At first the wretched Giulia gave way to her despair, and refused all
comfort. But so gentle, so willing, so softly fascinating were the ways
of the beautiful Flora, and so much sincerity did the charming girl
manifest in her attempts to revive that frail but drooping flower which
had been thrown as it were at her feet; at the feet of her, a pure
though also drooping rosebud of innocence and beauty: so earnest did the
maiden seem in her disinterested attentions, that Giulia yielded to the
benign influence, and became comparatively composed.

But mutual confidence, that outpouring of the soul's heavy secrets,
which so much alleviates the distress of the female mind, did not spring
up between the countess and Flora; because the former shrank from
revealing the narrative of her frailty, and the latter chose not to
impart her love for the young Count of Riverola. Nevertheless, the
countess gave her companion to understand that she had friends without,
who were acquainted with the fact of her removal to the Carmelite
convent, and on whose fidelity as well as a resolute valor she could
reckon; for the promise made to her by the robber-captain, and the idea
that the Marquis of Orsini would not leave her to the dreadful fate of
eternal seclusion in that place, flashed to her mind when the first
access of despair had passed.

Flora was delighted to hear that such a hope animated the Countess of
Arestino: and throwing herself at her feet, she said, "Oh! lady,
should'st thou have the power to save me----"

"Thinkest thou that I would leave thee here, in this horrible dungeon?"
interrupted the countess, raising Flora from her suppliant position on
the cold pavement of the cell, and embracing her. "No, if those on whom
I rely fulfill the hope that we have entertained we shall go forth
together. And, oh!" added the countess, "were all Florence to rise up
against this accursed institution, pillage it, and sack it, and raze it
to the ground, so that not one stone shall remain upon another, heaven
could not frown upon the deed! For surely demons in mortal shape must
have invented that terrible engine by means of which I was consigned to
this subterrane!"

The recollection of the anguish she had suffered during the descent, a
mental agony that Flora herself could fully appreciate, she having
passed through the same infernal ordeal, produced a cold shudder which
oscillated throughout Giulia's entire form.

But we shall not dwell upon this portion of our tale; for the reader is
about to pass to scenes of so thrilling a nature, that all he has yet
read in the preceding chapters are as nothing to the events which will
occupy those that are to follow.

We said then, at the opening of this chapter, that six days had elapsed
since Flora became an inmate of the convent, and four since
circumstances had given her a companion in the person of Giulia of
Arestino.

It was on the sixth night, and the two inmates of the gloomy cell were
preparing to retire to their humble pallet, after offering their prayers
to the Virgin, for adversity had already taught the countess to pray,
and to pray devoutly, too, when they were startled and alarmed by the
sudden clang of a large bell fixed in some part of the subterrane.

The echoes which it raised, and the monotonous vibration of the air
which it produced, struck terror to their souls.

A minute elapsed, and again the bell struck.

Flora and the countess exchanged glances of terror and mysterious doubt,
so ominous was that sound.

Again a minute passed, and a third time clanged that heavy iron tongue.

Then commenced a funeral hymn, chanted by several female voices, and
emanating as yet from a distance, sounding, too, as if the mournful
melody was made within the very bowels of the earth.

But by degrees the strain became louder, as those who sang approached
nearer; and in a short time the sound of many light steps on the stone
pavement of the chamber of penitence were heard by Giulia and her
companion in their cell.

Again did they exchange terrified glances, as if demanding of each other
what this strange interruption of night's silence could mean. But at
that instant the hymn ceased--and again the loud bell clanged, as if in
some far-off gallery hollowed out of the earth.

Oh! in that convent where all was mysterious, and where a terrific
despotism obeyed the dictates of its own wild will, such sounds as that
funeral chant, and that deafening bell, were but too fairly calculated
to inspire the souls of the innocent Flora and the guilty Giulia with
the wildest apprehension!

Suddenly the door opened, and Sister Alba, who presided over the chamber
of penitence, appeared on the threshold.

"Come forth, daughters!" she exclaimed; "and behold the punishment due
to female frailty."

The Countess of Arestino and Flora Francatelli mechanically obeyed this
command; and a strange--a heart-rending sight met their eyes.

The chamber of penitence was filled with nuns in their convent-garbs;
and the penitents in a state of semi-nudity. On one side of the
apartment, a huge door with massive bolts and chains stood open,
allowing a glimpse, by the glare of the lamps, tapers, and torches, of
the interior of a small cell that looked like a sepulcher. Near the
entrance to that tomb, for such, indeed, it was--stood the lady abbess:
and on the pavement near her knelt a young and beautiful girl, with
hands clasped and countenance raised in an agony of soul which no human
pen can describe. The garments of this hapless being had been torn away
from her neck and shoulders, doubtless by the force used to drag her
thither: and her suppliant attitude, the despair that was depicted by
her appearance, her extreme loveliness, and the wild glaring of her deep
blue eyes, gave her the appearance of something unearthly in the glare
of that vacillating light.

"No, daughter," said the abbess, in a cold, stern voice; "there is no
mercy for you on earth."

Then echoed through the chamber of penitence a scream, a shriek so wild,
so long, so full of agony, that it penetrated to the hearts of Flora,
the countess, and some of the penitents, although the abbess and her
nuns seemed unmoved by that appalling evidence of female anguish. At the
same instant the bell struck again; and the funeral hymn was recommenced
by the junior recluses.

Sister Alba now approached Flora and the countess, and said in a low
whisper, "The vengeance of the conventual discipline is terrible on
those who sin! That miserable girl completed her novitiate five months
ago; and the night before she was to take the veil she escaped. This
awful crime she committed for the sake of some man she had known ere she
first entered the convent, and for whom she thus endangered her immortal
soul. But her justly incensed relations yesterday discovered her
retreat; and she was restored to this house of penitence and peace.
Alas! the effects of her frailty were but too apparent; and that
benighted girl would become a mother--_had she long enough to live_!"

These last words were uttered with terrible significancy; and the nun
turned aside, leaving Flora and the countess each a prey to the most
unspeakable horror.

In the meantime the helpless victim of ecclesiastical vengeance--the
poor erring creature, who had dared and sacrificed everything for the
love of her seducer--had risen from her suppliant posture, and flown
wildly--madly round to the elder nuns in succession, imploring mercy,
and rending the very roof of the subterrane with piercing screams. But
those to whom she appealed turned a deaf ear; for a convent is a tomb in
which all human sympathies are immured--a vortex wherein all the best
feelings that concrete in the mortal heart are cruelly engulfed!

And while this wretched girl--for she was scarcely yet a woman, although
were life spared her, on the way to maternity--was thus fruitlessly
imploring the mercy of hearts that were stern and remorseless, the hymn
continued, and the bell tolled at short intervals.

Suddenly at a particular verse in the funeral chant, the three nuns who
usually did the bidding of the lady abbess, glided noiselessly--but
surely, like black serpents--toward the victim--seized her in their
powerful grasp--and bore her to the cell in which she was to be immured.

The choir of nuns raised their voices, and the bell now clanged quickly
with its almost deafening note--and those human and metallic sounds
combined to deaden the screams that burst from the miserable girl, on
whom the huge door at length closed with fearful din.

The massive bolts were drawn--the key turned harshly in the lock and
still the shrieks came from within the sepulcher where a human being was
_entombed alive_!

So sickening a sensation came over Flora and the countess, when the last
act of the awful tragedy was thus concluded, that they reeled back to
their cell with brains so confused, and such horrible visions floating
before their eyes, that their very senses appeared to be abandoning
them.

When they were enabled to collect their scattered ideas, and the
incidents of the last half-hour assumed a definite shape in their
memories, the sound of hymn and bell had ceased--the chamber of
penitence was deserted--the silence of death reigned throughout the
subterrane--nor did even the faintest shriek or scream emanate from the
cell in which the victim was entombed.




CHAPTER XXXI.

THE BANDITTI.


The night of which we are speaking was destined to be one pregnant with
alarms for the Countess of Arestino and Signora Francatelli.

Scarcely had they recovered from the effects of the appalling tragedy
which had just been enacted, when their attention was drawn to a strange
noise on one side of the cell.

They listened, and the noise continued--resembling an attempt to remove
the massive masonry at that part of the stone chamber.

"Merciful heavens!" said Flora, in a subdued whisper; "what new terror
can now be in store for us!"

But scarcely were these words uttered, when a considerable portion of
the masonry fell in with a loud crash; and had not the countess and
Flora already withdrawn to the vicinity of the door, when the mysterious
sound first began, they would either have been killed or seriously hurt
by the falling of the huge stones.

A faint scream burst from Flora's lips, and she would have rushed from
the cell, had not an ejaculation of joy escaped the countess.

For at the aperture formed by the falling in of the masonry, and by the
glare of the light that shone on the other side, as well as by the dim
taper that burnt before the crucifix in the cell, Giulia had in an
instant recognized the countenance of the Marquis of Orsini.

"Manuel!--dearest Manuel!" she exclaimed, rushing toward the aperture:
"art thou come to save me?"

"Yes, Giulia," replied the marquis. "But by what good fortune art thou
the very first whom it is my destiny to encounter? and who is thy
companion?"

"A good--a generous-hearted girl, whom you must save also from this
dreadful place," answered the countess. "And as for this accidental, but
most fortunate encounter, I can tell you no more than that this is our
cell. It is rather for me to ask----"

"We have no time to waste in idle talk, my lord," said Stephano, who now
appeared at the aperture. "Pardon my roughness, noble lady--but every
moment is precious. Is there any danger of an alarm being given?"

"None that I am aware of," returned the countess. "The place where we
now are must be a hundred yards below the surface of the earth----"

"No, my lady--that is impossible," interrupted Stephano; "a hundred feet
at the most--and even that is above the mark. But stand back, my lady,
while we remove some more of this solid masonry."

Giulia obeyed the robber-chief, and turned to embrace Flora with the
liveliest manifestations of joy, which the young maiden sincerely
shared--for escape now appeared to be at hand.

The aperture was rapidly enlarged by those who worked on the other side,
and in a few minutes it was spacious enough to admit the passage of a
human form. Then Giulia and Flora quitted their dismal cell, and entered
the innermost chamber of the robbers' hold, but from which the treasures
described in a previous chapter had all been removed away.

Giulia embraced the marquis with grateful affection; but Stephano
exclaimed, "Come, my lord! Remember your oath, and join us in this
expedition to the end!"

At that moment the awful tragedy of the night flashed back to Flora's
memory, from which nothing could have dispelled it even for an instant,
save the thrilling excitement attendant on the escape from the convent;
and in a few hurried words, she told the dreadful tale.

But what was the astonishment of all present, when Piero, one of the
banditti, exclaimed in a tone of mingled rage and grief, "'Tis Carlotta!
the victim can be none other--the dates you have mentioned, signora,
convince me! Yes--five months ago she fled from that accursed
convent--and yesterday she disappeared. Ah! my poor Carlotta!"

And the rude but handsome brigand wept.

Flora, forgetting the danger of re-entering the walls of the terrible
institution, exclaimed, "Follow me--it may not be too late--I will show
you the cell----"

And she once more passed through the aperture, closely followed by
Stephano, Piero, Lomellino, and a dozen other banditti. The Marquis of
Orsini stayed behind a few moments, to breathe a reassuring word to
Giulia, whom he left in the treasure chamber (as that apartment of the
robbers' hold was called), and then hastened after those who had
penetrated into the subterrane of the convent.

The party entered the chamber of penitence, where the long wax candles
were still burning before the altar; and Flora having hastily given
Stephano as much information as she could relative to the geography of
the place, that chieftain placed sentinels around. Flora had already
pointed out the door of the dungeon to which Carlotta had been
consigned; and Piero hastened to call upon his mistress to answer him.

It was a touching spectacle to behold that lawless and bold, bad man
melting into tenderness beneath the influence of love!

But no reply came from within that dungeon; and though the bolts were
easily drawn back, yet the lock was strong, and the key was not there!

By this time the penitents, who slept in the various cells adjoining the
chamber, had become alarmed by the heavy tread and the voices of men,
and had opened their doors. But they were desired to keep back by the
sentinels, whom Stephano had posted around to maintain order and prevent
a premature alarm, but who, nevertheless, gave assurances of speedy
escape to those who might choose to profit by the opportunity.

Suddenly a door, which Flora had never noticed before in the chamber of
penitence, opened, and two recluses appeared on the threshold.

"The abbess!" ejaculated Flora, yielding to a sudden impulse of alarm.

But almost at the same instant Stephano sprung forward, caught the
abbess by the arm, and dragged her into the chamber; then rushing up a
flight of narrow stone steps, with which that door communicated, and
which the other recluse had already turned to ascend, he brought her
forcibly back also. This latter nun was Sister Alba, the presiding
authority of the chamber of penitence.

Her astonishment, as well as that of the lady abbess, at the spectacle
of a number of armed men in the most private part of the entire
establishment, may well be conceived; nor was this disagreeable surprise
unmixed with intense alarm. But they had little time for reflection.

"The key of that door!" cried Stephano in a fierce and menacing tone, as
he pointed toward Carlotta's dungeon.

The abbess mechanically drew forth the key from beneath her
convent-habit, and Piero, rushing forward, clutched it eagerly. In a few
moments it turned in the lock--the next moment the door stood open.

But what a spectacle met the view of Piero, Flora, and those who were
near enough to glance within! Stretched upon the stone floor of the
narrow cell lay the victim--motionless and still! Drops of gore hung to
her lips; in the agony of her grief she had burst a blood-vessel--and
death must have been almost instantaneous.

Flora staggered back--sick at the dreadful sight; and she would have
fallen to the ground had not the Marquis of Orsini suddenly sprung
forward to sustain her.

"This is no place for you, young lady," he said. "Permit me to conduct
you back to the companionship of the Countess of Arestino."

Flora leant upon his arm, and he half carried, rather than led her away
from the chamber of penitence into the robbers' hold. But as they passed
through the aperture formed by the removal of the masonry, a terrible
menace met their ears.

"Vengeance!" cried Piero, furiously; "vengeance on the murderess of
Carlotta!"

"Yes--vengeance shalt thou have, comrade," returned the deep, sonorous
voice of Stephano.

But scarcely were those words uttered, when the loud clanging of the
bell struck up; and the abbess exclaimed joyfully, "We are saved! we are
saved!"




CHAPTER XXXII.

THE MYSTERY OF THE CHAIR--THE CATASTROPHE.


The reader will recollect that when Flora Francatelli was released from
the chair at the bottom of the pit or well, Sister Alba had led her
along a narrow, dark passage communicating with the chamber of
penitence.

In a small dome-like cavity, hollowed out of the roof of this passage,
hung a large bell; and in a cell opening from the side of the passage
immediately beneath the dome, dwelt an old nun, who, for some dreadful
misdeed committed in her youth, had voluntarily consigned herself to the
convent of the Carmelites, and, having passed through the ordeal of the
chamber of penitence, had accepted the office of sextoness in that
department of the establishment.

It was her duty to keep the chamber of penitence clean, maintain tapers
constantly burning before the altar, supply also the cells of the
penitents themselves with lights, and toll the bell whenever occasion
required. She it was who had visited Flora's cell the first night of her
arrival at the convent, to renew the taper that burnt before her
crucifix, and to exchange the maiden's attire for the conventual garb.

This old nun it was, then, who suddenly tolled the bell, at the moment
when Piero and Stephano were menacing the abbess and Sister Alba with
their vengeance, and when the Marquis of Orsini was bearing away Flora
to the robbers' hold, that she might have the companionship of Giulia.

The way in which the old nun rang the bell was such that the inmates of
the convent would perceive it to be an alarm; and moreover, so sudden
was its startling clang, that Stephano and Piero abandoned their hold
upon the abbess and Sister Alba, and retreated a few paces, uncertain
how to act; hence the exclamation of the superior of the convent, "We
are saved! we are saved!"

But little did that stern, imperious woman know of the desperate
characters of those with whom she had now to deal. Ashamed of their
momentary hesitation, Stephano and Piero rushed on the abbess and Sister
Alba, and dragged them, in spite of their deafening screams, into that
fatal cell, where they threw them headlong over the lifeless corpse of
their victim.

Scarcely, however, had they closed the door on the wretched woman, when
the Marquis of Orsini returned; and, too well divining what had passed,
he exclaimed, "In the name of Heaven, captain!--by all that is holy,
Piero! I implore you not to consummate this dreadful crime!"

"My lord," said Stephano, "ere we entered on this expedition to-night,
you bound yourself by an oath to obey me as the leader. I command you
then not to interfere with our proceedings; but, on the contrary, go and
ascertain whence comes the clanging of that infernal bell."

The marquis turned aside, sick at heart at the deed of vengeance which
was in progress, but unable to remonstrate further, in consequence of
the oath which he had taken. It was, however, a relief for him to move
away from the vicinity of the living tomb, whence emanated the shrieks
of the abbess and the nun; and guided by the sound of the bell, he
rushed, with whirling brain and desperate resolution, into the passage
leading from the chamber of penitence.

In a few moments the clanging of the bell ceased, for the marquis had
discovered the old sextoness in her cell, and compelled her to desist.

All the events yet recorded in the preceding and the present chapter had
occurred with a rapidity which the reader can scarcely comprehend,
because their complicated nature and variety have forced us to enter
into minute details requiring a considerable time to peruse. Those
events which we are now about to describe also succeeded each other with
marvelous speed, and occupied an incredibly short space of time,
although our narrative must necessarily appear prolix in comparison.

Extraordinary was the excitement that now prevailed in all the
subterranean department of the convent. The victims of a stern but just
vengeance were sending forth appalling screams from the fatal dungeon;
and some of the penitents in their cells, which were still guarded by
the sentinels, were also giving vent to their affright by means of
piercing shrieks, though others remained tranquil in hope of the
promised release.

Stephano had entirely recovered his presence of mind, and now issued his
orders with wondrous rapidity.

Pointing to the door by which the abbess and Sister Alba had entered the
chamber of penitence, he said, "Lomellino, that is the way to the upper
part of the convent--there can be no doubt of it! Take Piero and half a
dozen of the men, and hasten up that staircase. Secure the front gate of
the building, and possess yourself of the plate and treasure. But no
violence, remember--no violence to the nuns."

Lomellino, Piero, and six of the banditti hastened to obey these
commands, while Stephano remained below to act as circumstances might
require. He went the round of the five cells belonging to the penitents,
and enjoined those who were yielding to their terrors to hold their
peace, as they had nothing to fear, but much to gain--at least, he
observed, if they valued their freedom; and to those who were tranquil
he repeated the assurances of speedy liberation already given by his
men.

For thirty years the old woman had not seen a being of the male sex; and
she was terrified by the appearance of an armed man in that place which
she had so long deemed sacred against the possibility of such an
intrusion.

"Fear nothing," said the marquis, "no one will harm you. But what will
be the effect of that alarm which you have rung?"

"Merely to warn those above that something unusual is taking place
below," answered the old woman.

"And by what means can access be obtained to this subterrane?" demanded
the marquis.

"There is a staircase leading from the chamber of penitence up into the
hall of the convent----"

"Of the existence of that staircase I am aware," interrupted the
marquis, who had seen the abbess and Sister Alba enter the chamber of
penitence a few minutes previously, as stated in the preceding chapter;
"but are there no means of ingress or egress?"

"Yes; follow me," said the sextoness.

Taking up a lamp from the table in her cell, she led the way to the
further end of the passage, threw open a door, and thrusting forth the
light beyond the opening, exclaimed in a tone denoting a reminiscence
the bitterness of which long years had scarcely mitigated--"That is the
road whereby I came hither; and many, many others have traveled the same
downward path!"

The marquis seized the lamp, and beheld, a few paces from from him, a
wicker chair, to which two ropes, hanging perpendicularly down, were
fastened. He raised his eyes, following the direction of the ropes, but
as there was now no other light in the pit than the feeble, flickering
one shed by the lamp which he held, his glances could not penetrate the
dense obscurity that prevailed above.

"What means this chair, with its two ropes? and for what purpose is this
narrow, square compartment, the mouth of which is shrouded in darkness?"
inquired Manuel.

"This is the method of descent to this region, for all those who come to
this convent either as willing penitents, or who are sent hither against
their inclination," returned the sextoness. "And though I came a willing
penitent, yet never, never while the breath shall animate this poor,
weak form, and reason shall remain, can I forget the mental agony, the
intense anguish, of that fearful descent. Ah! it is a cruel engine of
torture, although it tears not the flesh, nor racks the limbs, nor
dislocates the joints. And even though thirty long years have passed
since I made that dread journey," she continued, glancing
upwards--"thirty years since I last saw the light of day--and though I
have since learned and seen how much of the horror of that descent is
produced by the delusion of mechanical ingenuity--yet still I shudder,
and my blood runs cold within me."

"To me, old woman," said the marquis, "your words are an enigma. But you
have excited my curiosity: speak quickly, and explain yourself, for I
may not linger here."

"Behold this basket," returned the nun, without further preface--"these
ropes connect it with complicated machinery in some chamber adjoining
the well itself. In that basket those who are doomed to pass the ordeal
of penitence are lowered from an apartment above. This apartment is
really but a short distance overhead: but the art of the mechanist has
so contrived the four wooden walls of the well, that when the descent of
the basket ceases, those walls rise slowly upward, and thus descent
appears to be continued. Then, when the affrighted female stretches
forth her hands wildly, she encounters the ascending walls, and she
believes that she is still going down--down--down! Oh! signor, it is
most horrible, but a fitting prelude to the terrors of that place!"

And she pointed back toward the chamber of penitence. The marquis was
about to make some observation in reply to the strange disclosures of
the old sextoness, when suddenly the din of a tumult, occurring, as it
seemed, in that department of the convent far overhead, reached his
ears, commencing with the rushing of many feet--the ejaculations of
hostile bands--and then continuing with the clash of arms, and the
shrieks of affrighted women--until, in a few moments, those ominous
sounds were broken in upon and dominated by the wild, terrific cry of
"Fire! fire!"

"Oh! wherefore have I tarried here so long?" exclaimed the marquis; and
he was about to return to the chamber of penitence, when a sudden blaze
of light appeared at the mouth of the pit, thirty yards above. Looking
hastily up, he beheld the flames rolling over the entrance of that well
at the bottom of which he stood; and, in another minute, the forked fire
burst from the sides, forcing for itself a way through the wooden walls;
and the old dry timber and planks yielded to the devouring element as if
they had been steeped in oil.

But while the marquis was still standing at the bottom looking up the
pit, the clash of weapons, the tread of many steps, and the
vociferations of combatants appeared to grow nearer; then in another
moment he became aware that the hostile sounds came down the well, and
proceeded from the room far above, where the fire as well as the war was
raging.

Manuel had again turned around to hurry back to the chamber of
penitence, when a loud cry of despair came vibrating down, and in
another instant the heavy form of a man was precipitated into the well.
The wicker chair fortunately broke his fall, and he rose with a dreadful
imprecation.

"Piero!" cried the marquis.

"Ah! my lord, is it you?" said the bandit faintly, as he staggered back
and fell heavily on the floor. "This is a bad business--the sbirri were
alarmed, and broke in--Lomellino has got away, but the rest who were
with me are slain----"

"And you are wounded, Piero," ejaculated the marquis, rushing forward to
assist the bandit, from whose breast he now perceived the blood to be
flowing.

"Never mind me, my lord!" said Piero faintly. "Haste and tell Verrina
that--our men fought well--it was not their fault--nor mine--the nuns
must have given--the--alarm----"

His voice had grown fainter as he spoke: and, while the marquis was
endeavoring to raise him, he fell back again, and expired with the name
of Carlotta upon his tongue.

The combat had ceased above, but the flames had increased in the well to
such an extent that the marquis was compelled to beat a rapid retreat
toward the chamber of penitence, whither the old sextoness had already
fled. At the entrance of that apartment he met Stephano, who, alarmed by
the clashing of arms and the cries of "fire" that had reached his ears,
and which seemed to come from the direction of the passage, was hurrying
thither to learn the cause. In a few words the marquis informed him of
all that had occurred.

"Back to the cavern, my friends!" cried Stephano, in a loud tone. "If
the sbirri discover us there, we will resist them to the death."

And followed by the marquis and two or three of his men, the captain
passed through the aperture made from the cell recently occupied by
Flora and the countess, into the treasure-chamber.

But scarcely had those few individuals effected their retreat in this
manner, when a tremendous crash was heard, cries and shrieks of horror
and dismay burst from those who had not as yet passed through the
opening, and then the roof of the chamber of penitence and all the
adjacent cells gave way with a din as of a thousand cannon, burying
beneath their weight the sextoness, the five penitents, the inmates of
Carlotta's cell, and seven of the banditti.

Those who were in the treasure-chamber felt the ground shake beneath
their feet; the sides--although hollowed from the solid rock--appeared
to vibrate and groan, and the aperture leading into the subterrane of
the convent was closed up by the massive masonry that had fallen in.

Flora and Giulia threw themselves into each other's arms, weeping
bitterly; for they saw how dearly their freedom had been purchased, and
they trembled for the result.

But the Marquis of Orsini, although greatly shocked at the terrible
sacrifice of human life which had occurred, exerted himself to console
and reassure the two terrified ladies.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

LOMELLINO'S ESCAPE--STEPHANO'S INTENTIONS.


Stephano Verrina was not the man to allow his energies to be paralyzed
by the reverse he had just sustained. He immediately commanded a general
muster of his men to be held in the banqueting-hall, that he might
accurately ascertain the loss his corps had sustained.

Giulia and Flora were left in the treasure-chamber to snatch a few
hours' repose, if they could, as it was now past two o'clock in the
morning, and the marquis accompanied Stephano to the banqueting-hall.
Scarcely were the men mustered, when the usual signals announcing the
approach of a member of the band were heard, and in a few moments
Lomellino appeared amongst the troop.

All crowded round him to hear the account which he had to give of his
expedition and its failure.

His tale was soon told. It seemed that on reaching what might be
properly termed the main building of the convent, he found the greatest
alarm and confusion prevailing amongst the nuns, the shrieks of the
abbess, Sister Alba, and the penitents, and the alarm of the bell,
having reached the ears of the recluses. Their consternation was
increased almost to madness when they suddenly perceived several armed
men emerging from the private staircase leading to the subterranean
department, and Lomellino found it impossible to tranquilize them either
by threats or fair speaking. A guard of sbirri must have been passing at
the time, for loud knocks resounded at the gate, which the old portress
immediately opened before Lomellino or any of his men could interfere to
prevent her. A number of police officers rushed in, and then commenced a
terrific combat between the banditti and the sbirri, the former of whom
were forced into an apartment, the door of which was originally locked,
but was burst open in the deadly struggle. There the strife was
continued, when suddenly the cry of "Fire" arose, and the flames, which
had caught a bed in the apartment, spread rapidly to the cumbrous and
time-worn woodwork that supported the ceiling. How the fire originated,
Lomellino knew not, but as some of the nuns carried lamps in their
hands, and rushed wildly about in all directions in their terror, it was
not very difficult to hazard a conjecture as to the cause of the
conflagration. From that apartment, where the fire began, the flames
drove the combatants into an inner room, and there Lomellino saw his
comrade Piero hurled down some steep place, he himself being too sorely
pressed by his assailants to be able to repair to his assistance.

At length, seeing that all his companions were slain, Lomellino had
fought his way desperately through the police-officers, and had
succeeded in escaping from the convent, though closely pursued by three
of the sbirri. They were rapidly gaining upon him, when an awful crash
suddenly met their ears, as they were hurrying along the street leading
to the wood; and, looking back, Lomellino beheld a tremendous pillar of
flame shoot up from the place where the convent had stood, to the very
sky, rendering for the space of a minute everything as light as day
around. The building had fallen in, and Heaven only knows how many of
the nuns and sbirri had escaped, or how many had perished beneath the
ruins! Those officers who were in pursuit of Lomellino were so astounded
by the sudden din and the column of flame, that they remained rooted to
the spot where they had turned to gaze on the evidence of the
catastrophe: and Lomellino had succeeded in effecting a safe and
unobserved return to the stronghold.

This account was particularly welcome to the robbers, inasmuch as it
convinced them that the sbirri had no clew to the secret entrance of
their stronghold, and that none of their band had been captured in the
conflict: for they would rather hear of the death of their comrades than
that they had been taken prisoners; because, were the latter the case,
the tortures of the rack or the exhortations of the priest might elicit
confessions hostile to the interests of the corps.

Stephano Verrina now proceeded to count his men, who had mustered fifty
strong previously to the expedition of that fatal night, which, it was
ascertained, had reduced the number to thirty-six--seven, including
Piero, having been slain by the sbirri, and as many having perished by
the falling in of the chamber of penitence.

The captain then addressed the troop in the following manner:

"Worthy comrades,--our number is sadly reduced; but regrets will not
bring back those gallant fellows who are gone. It, therefore, behooves
us to attend to our own interests; and, for that purpose, I demand your
attention for a few minutes. In pursuance of the resolution to which we
came the night before last at the general council that was held, the
treasures and possessions amassed during many years of adventure and
peril have been fairly divided, and each man's portion has been settled
by lot. The fourteen shares that revert to us by the death of our
comrades shall be equally subdivided to-morrow; and the superintendence
of that duty, my friends, will be the last act in my chieftainship. Yes,
brave comrades,--I shall then leave you, in accordance with the
announcement I made the night before last. It will grieve me to part
with you; but you will choose another captain----"

"Lomellino! Lomellino!" exclaimed the banditti with one accord; "he
shall succeed our gallant Verrina!"

"And you could not make a better choice," continued Stephano.
"Lomellino----"

"Pardon me, captain," interrupted the individual thus alluded to: "but
is not that little expedition to take place on Monday, in case the lady
requires it? We have received her gold as an earnest----"

"And double that amount was promised if the affair should turn out
successful," added Stephano. "But I have reasons of my own, which you
may perhaps understand, Lomellino, for desiring that all idea of that
business should be abandoned. And in order that the band may not be
losers by this change of intentions, I will give you from my own share
of our long accumulated treasures----"

"No! no!" cried the banditti, enthusiastically; "we will not receive our
gallant Stephano's gold! Let him act according to his own wishes!"

"I thank you, my friends, for this generosity on your part," said
Stephano.

Their meeting then broke up; and the robbers sat down to the banqueting
table, to luxuriate in the rich wines with which the stronghold was well
stored.

The Marquis of Orsini was compelled, through fear of giving offense, to
share in the festival.

"This resolution to abandon the command of your gallant band is somewhat
sudden, meseems, Signor Stephano," he said: for not having been present
at the council held two nights previously, he was unaware of the
captain's intention until it was alluded to in that individual's speech
on the present occasion.

"Yes, my lord," was the reply; "the resolution _is_ sudden, But," he
added, sinking his voice to a whisper, "a certain little blind god is at
the bottom of it."

"Ah! signor, you are in love!" said the marquis, laughing.

"And therefore, I mean to turn honest man," observed Verrina, also
laughing. "In truth, I am not sorry to have found a good excuse to quit
a mode of life which the headsman yearns to cut short. Not that I reck
for peril; but, methinks, twenty years of danger and adventure ought to
be succeeded by a season of tranquillity."

"Love has a marvelous influence over you, Signor Verrina," said the
marquis; "for love alone could have inspired such sentiments in _your_
breast."

"I am fain to confess that your lordship is not far wrong," returned the
bandit. "I have discovered a woman who is worthy of me--although she may
not consider me to be altogether deserving of her. But of that no
matter; for I am not accustomed to consult the inclinations of others,
when mine own are concerned. And now a word in respect to yourself, my
lord. When do you propose to quit this place? for according to my
promise, you are now the master of your own actions."

"The mysterious assault made upon the convent--the destruction of the
entire establishment--and the lives that have been lost, will doubtless
create a terrible sensation in Florence," replied the nobleman; "and
should it transpire that I was in any way implicated----"

"That is impossible, my lord," interrupted Stephano. "These men whom you
behold around you could alone betray that secret; and you must have seen
enough of them----"

"To know that they are stanch and true," added the marquis. "Yes, on
reflection, I perceive that I have nothing to fear; and therefore, with
your leave, the countess, her young companion, and myself will take our
departure to-morrow."

"In the evening, when it is dusk," said Stephano. "But your lordship
will not remain in Florence?"

"The news which you brought me, a few days ago, of the arrest of that
poor Israelite on a ridiculous but most monstrous charge, has affected
me strangely," observed Manuel; "and as it is in my power to explain
away that charge, I must tarry in Florence the necessary time to
accomplish this object. The Count of Arestino will imagine that his wife
has perished in the ruins of the convent; and hence her temporary
concealment in the city will be easily effected."

"Well, my lord," said Stephano, "it is not for me to dictate nor to
advise. But as I always entertain an esteem for a man with whom I have
measured weapons--and as I have somehow formed a liking for your
lordship--pardon my boldness--I should recommend you not to remain in
Florence on account of the Jew. The Lady Giulia might be discovered by
her husband, and you would lose her again. To tell your lordship the
truth," he added, in a low and confidential tone, "a friend of mine, who
commands a trading vessel, sails in a few days from Leghorn for the
Levant; and I intend to be a passenger on board, in company with the
sweet lady whom I have honored with my affections. What says your
lordship? will it suit you to embark in that vessel?"

"A thousand thanks, Signor Verrina," replied the marquis; "but I must
remain at Florence to prove the innocence of that poor, persecuted Jew."

Stephano offered no further remonstrance; and the conversation which
ensued possessed not the least interest for our readers.

On the following evening the Marquis, Giulia, and Flora quitted the
robbers' stronghold--all three were carefully blindfolded, and safely
conducted amidst the dangers of the egress by Stephano, Lomellino, and
another bandit. When in the grove with which the entrance of the
stronghold communicated, the bandages were removed from their eyes, and
the two ladies, as well as the marquis, were once more enabled to
rejoice in their freedom.

According to a previous arrangement between them, and in consequence of
the intention of the marquis to remain a few days in Florence, Giulia
accompanied Flora to the dwelling of the young maiden's aunt, who was
rejoiced to behold the reappearance of her niece, and who willingly
afforded an asylum to the countess.

The marquis, having conducted the two ladies to the hospitable cottage
of this good woman, returned to his own dwelling, his protracted absence
from which had caused serious apprehensions amongst the few domestics
whom his means permitted him to maintain. Ere we conclude this chapter,
we shall observe in a few words that the greatest excitement prevailed
in Florence relative to the attack on the convent and its destruction.
Many of the nuns had escaped from the building at the commencement of
the fire; and these took up their abode in another institution of the
same order. But the thrilling events which occurred in the chamber of
penitence did not transpire; nor was it ascertained who were the
sacrilegious invaders of the establishment, nor by what means they had
obtained an entry.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE ABDUCTION.


It was originally Stephano Verrina's intention to observe good faith
with Nisida in respect to the service on which she had intimated her
desire to employ him and his band. But so dazzled was he by her almost
supernatural majesty of beauty on that night when he and his companions
encountered her in the Riverola palace, that he would have promised, or
indeed undertaken, anything calculated to please or benefit her.

When, however, he came to reflect calmly upon the service in which
Nisida had enlisted him, he began to suspect that some motive more
powerful than the mere desire to effect the liberation of an innocent
man influenced that lady. Had she not put to death a beautiful creature
who had resided in the same dwelling with Fernand Wagner? and did not
that deed bear upon its aspect the stamp of an Italian woman's
vengeance? Thus thought Stephano, and he soon arrived at the very
natural conclusion that Nisida loved Fernand Wagner. Wagner was
therefore his rival; and Verrina did not consider it at all in
accordance with his own particular views in respect to Nisida, to aid in
effecting that rival's liberation, should he be condemned by the
tribunal.

Again Stephano reflected that as Wagner's acquittal was within the range
of probability, it would be expedient to possess himself of Nisida
_before_ the trial took place;--and what opportunity could be more
favorable than the one which that lady herself afforded by the
appointment she had given him for the Sunday evening at the gate of
Saint Mary's Cathedral?

All these considerations had determined the bandit to adopt speedy and
strenuous measures to possess himself of Nisida, of whom he was so madly
enamored that the hope of gratifying his passion predominated even over
the pride and delight he had hitherto experienced in commanding the
Florentine robbers.

The appointed evening came; and Stephano, disguised in his black mask,
repaired a few minutes before ten to the immediate vicinity of the old
cathedral. At the corner of an adjacent street, two men, mounted on
powerful horses, and holding a third steed by the bridle, were in
readiness; and, crouched in the black darkness formed by the shade of a
huge buttress of the cathedral, two members of the troop which Lomellino
now commanded lay concealed--for the new captain of banditti had lent
some of his stanchest followers to further the designs of the
ex-chieftain.

A heavy rain had fallen in the early part of the day; but it ceased ere
the sun went down; and the stars shone forth like beauty's eyes when the
tears of grief have been wiped away by the lips of the lover.

Stephano paced the arena in front of the sacred edifice; and at length a
gentle tread and a rustling of velvet met his ears. Then, in a few
moments, as if emerging from the darkness, the majestic form of Nisida
appeared; and when Stephano approached her, she drew aside her veil for
an instant--only for a single instant, that he might convince himself of
her identity with the lady for whom he was waiting.

But as the light of the silver stars beamed for a moment on the
countenance of Nisida, that mild and placid luster was out-vied by the
dazzling brilliancy of her large black eyes: and mental excitement had
imparted a rich carnation hue to her cheek, rendering her so
surpassingly beautiful that Stephano could almost have fallen on his
knees to worship and adore her. But, oh! what lovely skins do some
snakes wear!--and into what charming shapes does satan often get!

Nisida had replaced her veil while yet Verrina's eyes were fixed on her
bewitching countenance; then, placing her finger lightly upon his
arm--oh! how that gentle touch thrilled through him!--she made a sign
for him to follow her toward a niche in the deep gateway of the
cathedral: for in that niche was an image of the Madonna, and before it
burnt a lamp night and day. To gain that spot it was necessary to pass
the buttress in whose shade the two banditti lay concealed.

Stephano trembled as he followed that lady whom he knew to be as
intrepid, bold, and desperate as she was beautiful:--he trembled,
perhaps for the first time in his life, because never until now had he
felt himself overawed by the majesty of loveliness and the resolute mind
of a woman. But he had gone too far to retreat--even if that temporary
and almost unaccountable timidity had prompted him to abandon his
present design;--yes, he had gone too far--for at that moment when
Nisida was passing the huge buttress, the two brigands sprung forth: and
though her hand instantly grasped her dagger, yet so suddenly and
effectually was she overpowered that she had not even time to draw it
from its sheath.

Fortunately for the scheme of Stephano, the great square in front of the
cathedral was at that moment completely deserted by the usual evening
loungers; and thus did he and his companions experience not the
slightest interruption as they bore Nisida firmly and rapidly along to
the corner of the street where the horses were in attendance.

The lady's hands were already bound, and her dagger had been taken from
her; and thus the resistance she was enabled to make was very slight,
when Stephano, having sprung upon one of the horses, received the
charming burden from the banditti, and embraced that fine voluptuous
form in his powerful arms.

The two men who had waited with Stephano's horse were already mounted on
their own, as before stated, and the little party was now in readiness
to start.

"No further commands, signor?" said one of the banditti who had first
seized upon Nisida.

"None, my brave fellow. Tell Lomellino that I sent him my best wishes
for his prosperity. And now for a rapid journey to Leghorn!"

"Good-night, signor."

"Good-night. Farewell--farewell, my friends!" cried Verrina; and
clapping spurs to his steed, he struck into a quick gallop, his two
mounted companions keeping pace with him, and riding one on either side,
so as to prevent any possibility of escape on the part of Donna Nisida
of Riverola.

In a few minutes the little party gained the bank of the Arno, along
which they pursued their rapid way, lighted by the lovely moon, which
now broke forth from the purple sky, and seemed, with its chaste beams
playing on the surface of the water, to put a soul into the very river
as it ran!




CHAPTER XXXV.

WAGNER AND THE TEMPTER--PHANTASMAGORIA.


While Stephano was bearing away the Lady Nisida in the manner described
in the preceding chapter, Fernand Wagner was pacing his solitary cell,
conjecturing what would be the result of the morrow's trial.

Nisida had visited him a second time on the preceding
evening--disguised, as on the former occasion, in male attire; and she
had implored him, in the language of the deaf and dumb, but far more
eloquently with her speaking eyes and the expression of her beauteous
countenance, to allow measures to be that night adopted to effect his
immediate escape. But he had resolutely persisted in his original
determination to undergo his trial: for by pursuing this course, he
stood the chance of an acquittal; and he knew on the other hand that if
he were sentenced to die, the decree of the human tribunal could not be
carried into execution. How his escape from that fate (should death be
indeed ordained) was beyond his power of comprehension; but that he
possessed a superhuman protector he knew full well.

Without revealing to Nisida his motives for meeting the criminal judges,
he refused to yield to her silently but eloquently pleaded prayer that
he would escape should gold induce the jailers to throw open the door of
his cell: but he conveyed to her the assurance that the deep interest
she manifested in his behalf only bound him the more sincerely and
devotedly to her.

During eight or nine days of his imprisonment, he had reflected deeply
upon the murder of Agnes. He naturally associated that black deed with
the mystery of the strange lady who had so alarmed Agnes on several
occasions; and he had of course been struck by the likeness of his much
loved Nisida to her whom his dead granddaughter had so minutely
described to him. But, if ever suspicion pointed toward Nisida as the
murderess of Agnes, he closed his eyes upon the bare idea--he hurled it
from him; and he rather fell back upon the unsatisfactory belief that
the entire case was wrapped in a profound mystery than entertain a
thought so injurious to her whom he loved so tenderly.

We said that Nisida had visited him on Saturday night. She had
determined to essay her powers of mute persuasion once more ere she
finally arranged with the bandit for his rescue. But that arrangement
was not to take place; for on the Sabbath evening she was carried away,
in the manner already described. And it was now, also, on that Sabbath
evening that Wagner was pacing his dungeon--pondering on the probable
result of his trial, and yet never ceasing to think of Nisida. His
memory re-traveled all the windings, and wanderings, and ways which his
feet had trodden during a long, long life, and paused to dwell upon that
far back hour when he loved the maiden who became the wife of his first
period of youth--for he was now in a second period of youth; and he felt
that he did not love her so devotedly--so tenderly--so passionately as
he loved Nisida now. Suddenly, as he paced his dungeon and pondered on
the past as well as on the present, the lamp flickered; and, before he
could replenish it with oil, the wick died in its socket. He had the
means of procuring another light; but he cared not to avail himself
thereof, and he was about to lay aside his vesture, preparatory to
seeking his humble pallet, when he was struck by the appearance of a dim
and misty luster which seemed to emanate from the wall facing the door.
He was not alarmed; he had seen and passed through too much in this
world to be readily terrified:--but he stood gazing, with intense
curiosity and profound astonishment, upon that phenomenon for which his
imagination suggested no natural cause.

Gradually the luster became more powerful; but in the midst of it there
appeared a dark cloud, which by degrees assumed the appearance of a
human form; and in a few minutes Wagner beheld a tall, strange-looking
figure standing before him.

But assuredly that was no mortal being; for, apart from the mysterious
mode in which he had introduced himself into the dungeon, there was on
his countenance so withering--bitter--scornful--sardonic a smile, that
never did human face wear so sinister an expression. And yet this being
wore a human shape, and was attired in the habiliments of that age;--the
long doublet, the tight hose, the trunk breeches, the short cloak, and
the laced collar: but his slouched hat, instead of having a large and
gracefully waving plume, was decorated with but a single feather.

Fernand stood with fascinated gaze fixed upon the being whose eyes
seemed to glare with subdued lightnings, like those of the basilisk.
There was something awful in that form--something wildly and menacingly
sinister in the sardonic smile that curled his lips as if with ineffable
contempt, and with the consciousness of his own power!

"Wagner!" he said, at length breaking silence, and speaking in a deep
sonorous voice, which reverberated even in that narrow dungeon like the
solemn tone of the organ echoing amidst cloistral roofs: "Wagner,
knowest thou who the being is that now addresseth thee?"

"I can conjecture," answered Fernand, boldly. "Thou art the Power of
Darkness."

"So men call me," returned the demon, with a scornful laugh, "Yes--I am
he whose delight it is to spread desolation over a fertile and beautiful
earth--he, whose eternal enmity against man is the fruitful source of so
much evil! But of all the disciples who have ever yet aided me in my
hostile designs on the human race, none was so serviceable as
Faust--that Count of Aurana, whose portrait thou hast so well
delineated, and which now graces the wall of thy late dwelling."

"Would that I had never known him!" ejaculated Wagner fervently.

"On the contrary," resumed the demon; "thou should'st be thankful that
in the wild wanderings of his latter years he stopped at thy humble
cottage in the Black Forest of Germany. Important to thee were the
results of that visit--and still more important may they become!"

"Explain thyself, fiend!" said Wagner, nothing dismayed.

"Thou wast tottering with age--hovering on the brink of the
tomb--suspended to a thread which the finger of a child might have
snapped," continued the demon; "and in one short hour thou wast restored
to youth, vigor, and beauty."

"And by how dreadful a penalty was that renovated existence purchased!"
exclaimed Wagner.

"Hast thou not been taught by experience that no human happiness can be
complete?--that worldly felicity must ever contain within itself some
element of misery and distress?" demanded the fiend. "Reflect--and be
just! Thou art once more young--and thy tenure of life will last until
that age at which thou would'st have perished, had no superhuman power
intervened to grant thee a new lease of existence! Nor is a long life
the only boon conferred upon thee hitherto. Boundless wealth is ever at
thy command; the floor of this dungeon would be strewed with gold, and
jewels, and precious stones, at thy bidding--as thou well knowest!
Moreover, thou wast ignorant--illiterate--uninformed: now all the
sources of knowledge--all the springs of learning--all the fountains of
science and art, are at thy disposal, and with whose waters thou canst
slake the thirst of thine intellect. Endowed with a youthfulness and a
vigor of form that will yield not to the weight of years--that will defy
the pressure of time--and that no malady can impair,--possessed of
wealth having no limit,--and enriched with a mind so stored with
knowledge that the greatest sage is as a child in comparison with
thee,--how darest thou complain or repent of the compact which has given
to thee all these, though associated with the destiny of a Wehr-Wolf?"

"It is of this fatal--this terrible destiny that I complain and that I
repent," answered Wagner. "Still do I admit that the advantages which I
have obtained by embracing that destiny are great."

"And may be far greater!" added the demon, impressively. "Handsome,
intelligent, and rich--all that thou dost require is power!"

"Yes," exclaimed Wagner, eagerly--and now manifesting, for the first
time since the appearance of the fiend in his cell, any particular
emotion: "I have need of _power!_--power to avert those evils into which
my sad destiny may plunge me,--power to dominate instead of being
subject to the opinions of mankind,--power to prove my complete
innocence of the dreadful crime now imputed to me,--power to maintain an
untarnished reputation, to which I cling most lovingly,--power, too," he
added in a slower and also a more subdued tone--"power to restore the
lost faculties of hearing and speech to her whom I love."

Strange was the smile that curled the demon's lips as Wagner breathed
these last words.

"You require power--power almost without limit," said the fiend, after a
few moments' pause; "and that aim is within thy reach. Handsome,
intelligent, and rich," he continued, dwelling on each word with marked
emphasis, "how happy may'st thou be when possessed of the power to
render available, in all their glorious extent, the gifts--the qualities
wherewith thou art already endowed! When in the service of Faust--during
those eighteen months which expired at the hour of sunset on the
thirtieth of July, 1517----"

"Alas!" cried Wagner, his countenance expressing emotions of
indescribable horror; "remind me not of that man's fate! Oh!
never--never can I forget the mental agony--the profound and soul-felt
anguish which he experienced, and which he strove not to conceal, when
at the gate of Vienna on that evening he bade me farewell--forever."

"But thou wast happy--supremely happy in his service," said the demon;
"and thou didst enjoy a fair opportunity of appreciating the value of
the power which he possessed. By his superhuman aid wast thou
transported from clime to clime--as rapidly as thought is transfused by
the interchange of lovers' glances; and in that varied, bustling, busied
life wast thou supremely happy. The people of Europe spoke of that
western world, the discovery of which recently rewarded the daring
venture of great navigators; and you were desirous to behold that new
continent. Your master repeated the wish; and by my invisible agency, ye
stood in a few moments in the presence of the red men of North America.
Again--you accompanied your master to the eternal ice of the northern
pole, and from the doorway of the Esquimaux hut he beheld the wondrous
play of the boreal lights. On a third occasion, and in obedience to your
wish, you stood with your master in the Island of Ceylon, where the
first scene that presented itself to your view was an occurrence which,
though terrible, is not uncommon in that reptile-infested clime.
Afterward, my power--although its active agency was but partially known
to you--transported you and the count your master--_now my victim_--to
the fantastic and interesting scenes of China--then to the court of the
wife-slaying tyrant of England, and subsequently to the most sacred
privacy of the imperial palace at Constantinople. How varied have been
thy travels!--how rapid thy movements. And that the scenes which thine
eyes did thus contemplate made a profound impression upon thy mind is
proved by the pictures now hanging to the walls of thy late dwelling."

"But wherefore this recapitulation of everything I know so well
already?" asked Wagner.

"To remind thee of the advantages of that power which Faust, thy master,
possessed, and which ceased to be available to thee when the term of his
compact with myself arrived. Yes," continued the demon emphatically,
"the powers which he possessed may be possessed by thee--and thou
may'st, with a single word, at once and forever shake off the trammels
of thy present doom--the doom of a Wehr-Wolf!"

"Oh! to shake off those trammels, were indeed a boon to be desired!"
exclaimed Wagner.

"And to possess the power to gratify thy slightest whim," resumed the
demon, "to possess the power to transport thyself at will to any clime,
however distant--to be able to defy the machinations of men and the
combination of adverse circumstances, such as have plunged thee into
this dungeon--to be able, likewise, to say to thy beloved Nisida,
'Receive back the faculties which thou hast lost----'"

And again was the smile sinister and strange that played upon the lips
of the demon. But Wagner noticed it not. His imagination was excited by
the subtle discourse to which he had lent so ready an ear.

"And hast _thou_ the power," he cried impatiently, "to render me thus
powerful?"

"I have," answered the demon.

"But the terms--the conditions--the compact!" exclaimed Wagner, in
feverish haste, though with foreboding apprehension.

"THINE IMMORTAL SOUL!" responded the fiend, in a low but sonorous and
horrifying whisper.

"No--no!" shrieked Wagner, covering his face with his hands. "Avaunt,
Satan, I defy thee! Ten thousand, thousand times preferable is the doom
of the Wehr-Wolf, appalling even though that be!" With folded arms and
scornful countenance, did the demon stand gazing upon Wagner, by the
light of the supernatural luster which filled the cell.

"Dost thou doubt my power?" he demanded, in a slow and imperious tone.
"If so, put it to the test, unbelieving mortal that thou art! But
remember--should'st thou require evidence of that power which I propose
to make available to thee, it must not be to give thee liberty, nor
aught that may enhance thy interest."

"And any other evidence thou wilt give me?" asked Wagner, a sudden idea
striking him.

"Yes," answered the demon, who doubtless divined his thoughts, for again
did a scornful smile play upon his lips. "I will convince thee, by any
manifestation thou may'st demand, subject to the condition ere now
named, I will convince thee that I am he whose power was placed at the
disposal of thy late master, Faust, and by means of which thou wast
transported, along with him, to every climate on the earth."

"I will name my wish," said Wagner.

"Speak!" cried the fiend.

"Show me the Lady Nisida as she now is," exclaimed Fernand, his heart
beating with the hope of beholding her whom he loved so devotedly; for,
with all the jealousy of a lover, was he anxious to convince himself
that she was thinking of him.

"Ah! 'tis the same as with Faust and his Theresa," murmured the demon to
himself; then aloud he said, "Rather ask me to show you the Lady Nisida
as she will appear four days hence."

"Be it so!" cried Wagner, moved by the mysterious warning those words
appeared to convey.

The demon extended his arm, and chanted in deep, sonorous tones, the
following incantation:

    "Ye powers of darkness who obey
    Eternally my potent sway,
    List to thy sovereign master's call!
    Transparent make this dungeon wall;
    And now annihilated be
    The space 'twixt Florence and the sea!
    Let the bright luster of the morn
    In golden glory steep Leghorn;
    Show where the dancing wavelets sport
    Round the gay vessels in the port,
    Those ships whose gilded lanterns gleam
    In the warm sun's refulgent beam;
    And whose broad pennants kiss the gale,
    Woo'd also by the spreading sail!--
    Now let this mortal's vision mark
    Amidst that scene the corsair's bark,
    Clearing the port with swan-like pride;
    Transparent make the black hull's side,
    And show the curtain'd cabin, where
    Of earth's fair daughters the most fair--
    Sits like an image of despair,
      Mortal, behold! thy Nisida is there!"

The strange phantasmagorian spectacle rapidly developed itself in
obedience to the commands of the demon.

First, it appeared to Wagner that the supernatural luster which pervaded
the dungeon, gathered like a curtain on one side and occupied the place
of the wall. This wondrous light became transparent, like a thin golden
mist; and then the distant city of Leghorn appeared--producing an effect
similar to that of the dissolving views now familiar to every one. The
morning sun shone brightly on the fair scene; and a forest of masts
stood out in bold relief against the western sky. The gilded lanterns on
the poops of the vessels--the flags and streamers of various hues--the
white sails of those ships that were preparing for sea--and the richly
painted pinnaces that were shooting along in the channel between the
larger craft rendered the scene surpassingly gay and beautiful.

But amidst the shipping, Wagner's eyes were suddenly attracted by a
large galley, with three masts--looking most rakish with its snow-white
sail, its tapering spars, its large red streamer, and its low, long, and
gracefully sweeping hull, which was painted jet black. On its deck were
six pieces of brass ordnance; and stands of fire-arms were ranged round
the lower parts of the masts.

Altogether, the appearance of that vessel was as suspicious and menacing
as it was gallant and graceful; and from the incantation of the demon,
Wagner gleaned its real nature.

And now--as that corsair-ship moved slowly out of the port of
Leghorn--its black side suddenly seemed to open, or at least to become
transparent; and the interior of a handsomely fitted up cabin was
revealed.

Fernand's heart had already sunk within him through foreboding
apprehension; but now an ejaculation of mingled rage and grief burst
from his lips, when, on a sofa in that cabin, he beheld his loved--his
dearly loved Nisida, seated "like an image of despair," motionless and
still, as if all the energies of her haughty soul, all the powers of her
strong mind had been suddenly paralyzed by the weight of misfortune!

Wagner stood gazing--unable to utter another word beyond that one
ejaculation of mingled rage and grief--gazing--gazing, himself a kindred
image of despair, upon this mysterious and unaccountable scene.

But gradually the interior of the cabin grew more and more indistinct,
until it was again completely shut in by the black side of the
harbor--her dark hull disappearing by degrees, and melting away in the
distance. Wagner dashed his open palm against his forehead, exclaiming,
"Oh! Nisida--Nisida! who hath torn thee from me!"

And he threw himself upon a seat, where he remained absorbed in a
painful reverie, with his face buried in his hands--totally unmindful of
the presence of the demon.

Two or three minutes passed--during which Fernand was deliberating
within himself whether he were the sport of a wild and fanciful vision,
or whether he had actually received a warning of the fate which hung
over Nisida.

"Art thou satisfied with the proof of my power?" demanded a deep voice,
sounding ominously upon his ear.

He raised his hand with a spasmodic start; before him stood the demon
with folded arms and scornful expression of countenance--and though the
phantasmagorian scene had disappeared, the supernatural luster still
pervaded the dungeon.

"Fiend!" cried Wagner, impatiently; "thou hast mocked--thou hast
deceived me!"

"Thus do mortals ever speak, even when I give them a glimpse of their
own eventual fate, through the medium of painful dreams and hideous
nightmares," said the demon, sternly.

"But who has dared--or rather, who _will_ dare--for that vision is a
prospective warning of a deed to happen four days hence--who, then, I
ask, will dare to carry off the Lady Nisida--my own loved and loving
Nisida?" demanded Wagner, with increased impatience.

"Stephano Verrina, the formidable captain of the Florentine banditti,
has this night carried away thy lady-love, Wagner," replied the demon.
"Thou hast yet time to save her; though the steed that bears her to
Leghorn be fleet and strong, I can provide thee with a fleeter and a
stronger. Nay, more--become mine, consent to serve me as Faust served
me, and within an hour, within a minute if thou wilt, Nisida shall be
restored to thee, she shall be released from the hands of her captors,
thou shalt be free, and thy head shall be pillowed on her bosom, in
whatever part of the earth it may suit thee thus to be united to her.
Reflect, Wagner--I offer thee a great boon--nay, many great boons: the
annihilation of those trammels which bind thee to the destiny of a
wehr-wolf, power unlimited for the rest of thy days, and the immediate
possession of that Nisida whom thou lovest so fondly, and who is so
beautiful, so exceedingly beautiful."

Desperate was the struggle that took place in the breast of Wagner. On
one side was all he coveted on earth; on the other was the loss of the
immortal soul. Here the possession of Nisida--there her forced abduction
by a brigand; here his earthly happiness might be secured at the expense
of his eternal welfare--there his eternal welfare must be renounced if
he decided in favor of his earthly happiness. What was he to do? Nisida
was weighing in the balance against his immortal soul: to have Nisida he
must renounce his God!

Oh! it was maddening--maddening, this bewilderment!

"An hour--an hour to reflect!" he cried, almost frantically.

"Not a quarter of an hour," returned the demon, "Nisida will be lost to
you--haste--decide!"

"Leave me--leave me for five minutes only!"

"No--no, not for a minute. Decide--decide!"

Wagner threw up his arms in the writhings of his ineffable anguish:--his
right hand came in contact with a crucifix that hung against the wall;
and he mechanically clutched it--not with any motive prepense--but
wildly, unwittingly.

Terrific was the expression of rage which suddenly distorted the
countenance of the demon: the lightnings of ineffable fury seemed to
flash from his eyes and play upon his contracting brow;--and yet a
strong spasmodic shuddering at the same time convulsed his awful form;
for as Wagner clung to the crucifix to prevent himself from falling at
the feet of the malignant fiend, the symbol of Christianity was dragged
by his weight from the wall--and, as Wagner reeled sideways, the cross
which he retained with instinctive tenacity in his grasp, waved across
the demon's face.

Then, with a terrific howl of mingled rage and fear, the fiend fell back
and disappeared through the earth--as if a second time hurled down in
headlong flight before the thunderbolts of heaven. Wagner fell upon his
knees and prayed fervently.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

THE TRIAL OF FERNAND WAGNER.


On the ensuing morning Wagner stood before the judge of the Criminal
Tribunal of the Republic.

The judgment hall was a large and lofty room in the Palazzo del Podesta,
or ducal palace. The judges sat in antique and richly carved chairs,
placed on a platform, beneath a canopy of purple velvet fringed with
gold.

On the left, at a handsome desk covered with papers, was seated the
procurator fiscal or attorney-general of the republic, distinguished in
attire from the judges only by the fact of the ermine upon his scarlet
robe being narrower than theirs. Opposite to this functionary was a
bench whereon the witnesses were placed. The prisoner stood between two
sbirri in a small pew, in the center of the court. Defendants in civil
cases were alone permitted in that age and country to retain counsel in
their behalf; persons accused of crimes were debarred this privilege.
Wagner was therefore undefended.

The proceedings of the tribunal were usually conducted privately; but
about a dozen gentlemen and twice as many ladies had obtained orders of
admission on this occasion, the case having produced considerable
sensation in Florence, on account of the reputed wealth of the accused.
Perhaps, also, the rumor that he was a young man endowed with
extraordinary personal attractions, had exercised its influence upon the
susceptible hearts of the Florentine ladies. Certain it is, that when he
was conducted into the judgment hall, his strikingly handsome
exterior--his air of modest confidence--his graceful gait, and his
youthful appearance, so far threw into the back-ground the crime imputed
to him, that the ladies present felt their sympathies deeply enlisted in
his behalf.

The usher of the tribunal having commanded silence in a loud voice, the
chief judge began the usual interrogatory of the prisoner.

To the questions addressed to him, the accused replied that his name was
Fernand Wagner; that he was a native of Germany; that he had no
profession, avocation nor calling; that he was possessed of a large
fortune; and that having traveled over many parts of the world, he
settled in Florence, where he had hoped to enjoy a tranquil and peaceful
existence.

"The murdered female was reputed to be your sister," said the chief
judge. "Was such the fact?"

"She was a near relative," answered Wagner.

"But was she your sister?" demanded the procurator fiscal.

"She was not."

"Then in what degree of relationship did she stand toward you?" asked
the chief judge.

"I must decline to reply to that question."

"The tribunal infers, therefore, that the murdered female was not
related to you at all," observed the judge. "Was she not your mistress?"

"No, my lord!" cried Wagner, emphatically. "As truly as Heaven now hears
my assertion, it was not so!"

"Was she your wife?" demanded the chief judge.

A negative answer was given.

The chief judge and the procurator fiscal then by turns questioned and
cross-questioned the prisoner in the most subtle manner, to induce him
state the degree of relationship subsisting between himself and Agnes;
but he either refused to respond to their queries, or else answered
direct ones by means of a positive denial.

The lieutenant of the sbirri was at length called upon to give an
account of the discovery of the dead body and the suspicious
circumstances which had led to the arrest of Wagner. Two of these
circumstances appeared to be very strong against him. The first was the
soiled and blood-stained appearance of the garments which were found in
his chamber; the other was the exclamation--"But how know you that it is
Agnes who is murdered?"--uttered before any one had informed who had
been murdered.

Wagner was called upon for an explanation. He stated that he had been
out the whole night; that the blood upon his garments had flowed from
his own body, which had been scratched and torn in the mazes of the
woods; that on his return home he met Agnes in the garden; that he had
left her there; and that he was told a young lady had been assassinated
in the vicinity of his dwelling, he immediately conceived that the
victim must be Agnes.

When questioned concerning the motives of his absence from home during
the entire night he maintained a profound silence; but he was evidently
much agitated and excited by the queries thus put to him. He said
nothing about the stranger-lady who had so frequently terrified Agnes;
because, in relating the proceedings of that mysterious female in
respect to his deceased grand-daughter--especially the incident of the
abstraction of the antique jewels which the late Count of Riverola had
given to her--he would have been compelled to enter into details
concerning the _amour_ between those who were no more. And this subject
he was solicitous to avoid, not only through respect for the memory of
the murdered Agnes, but also to spare the feelings of Count Francisco
and Donna Nisida.

The judges and the procurator fiscal, finding that they could elicit
nothing from Wagner relative to the cause of his absence from home
during the night preceding the murder, passed on to another subject.

"In an apartment belonging to your residence," said the chief judge,
"there are several pictures and portraits."

Wagner turned pale and trembled. The judge made a signal to an officer
of the court, and that functionary quitted the judgment hall. In a few
minutes he returned, followed by three subordinates bearing the two
portraits mentioned in the sixth chapter of this tale, and also the
frame covered over with the large piece of black cloth. On perceiving
this last object, Wagner became paler still, and trembled violently.

"There are six other pictures in the room whence these have been taken,"
said the judge; "but these six are not of a character to interest the
tribunal. We however require explanations concerning the two portraits
and the frame with the black cloth cover now before us."

The greatest excitement at present prevailed amongst the audience.

"On one of the portraits," continued the chief judge, "there is an
inscription to this effect,--_F., Count of A., terminated his career on
the 1st. of August, 1517._--What does this inscription mean?"

"It means that Faust, Count of Aurana, was a nobleman with whom I
traveled during a period of eighteen months," replied Wagner; "and he
died on the day mentioned in that inscription."

"The world has heard strange reports relative to Faust," said the chief
judge, in a cold voice and with unchanged manner, although the mention
of that name had produced a thrill of horror on the part of his brother
judges and the audience. "Art thou aware that rumor ascribes to him a
compact with the Evil One?"

Wagner gazed around him in horrified amazement, for the incident of the
preceding night returned with such force to his mind that he could
scarcely subdue an agonizing ebullition of emotion.

The chief judge next recited the inscription on the other
portrait:--"_F. W. January 7th, 1516. His last day thus._" But Wagner
maintained a profound silence, and neither threats nor entreaties could
induce him to give the least explanation concerning that inscription.

"Let us then proceed to examine this frame with the black cloth cover,"
said the chief judge.

"My lord," whispered one of his brother judges, "in the name of the
Blessed Virgin! have naught more to do with this man. Let him go forth
to execution: he is a monster of atrocity, evidently a murderer,
doubtless leagued with the Evil One, as Faust, of whose acquaintance he
boasts, was before him----"

"For my part, I credit not such idle tales," interrupted the chief
judge, "and it is my determination to sift this matter to the very
foundation. I am rather inclined to believe that the prisoner is allied
with the banditti who infest the republic, than with any preterhuman
powers. His absence from home during the entire night, according to his
own admission, his immense wealth, without any ostensible resources, all
justify my suspicion. Let the case proceed," added the chief judge
aloud; for he had made the previous observations in a low tone. "Usher,
remove the black cloth from the picture!"

"No! no!" exclaimed Wagner, wildly: and he was about to rush from the
dock, but the sbirri held him back. The usher's hand was already on the
black cloth.

"I beseech your lordship to pause!" whispered the assistant judge who
had before spoken.

"Proceed!" exclaimed the presiding functionary in a loud authoritative
tone; for he was a bold and fearless man.

And scarcely were these word uttered, when the black cloth was stripped
from the frame; and the usher who had removed the covering recoiled with
a cry of horror, as his eyes obtained a glimpse of the picture which was
now revealed to view.

"What means this folly?" ejaculated the chief judge. "Bring the picture
hither."

The usher, awed by the manner of this great functionary, raised the
picture in such a way that the judges and the procurator fiscal might
obtain a full view of it.

"A Wehr-Wolf!" ejaculated the assistant judge, who had previously
remonstrated with his superior; and his countenance became pale as
death.

The dreadful words were echoed by other tongues in the court; and a
panic fear seized on all save the chief judge and Wagner himself. The
former smiled contemptuously, the latter had summoned all his courage to
aid him to pass through this terrible ordeal without confirming by his
conduct the dreadful suspicion which had been excited in respect to him.

For, oh! the subject of that picture was indeed awful to contemplate! It
had no inscription, but it represented, with the most painful and
horrifying fidelity, the writhings and agonizing throes of the human
being during the progress of transformation into the lupine monster. The
countenance of the unhappy man had already elongated into one of savage
and brute-like shape; and so admirably had art counterfeited nature,
that the rich garments seemed changed into a rough, shaggy, and wiry
skin! The effect produced by that picture was indeed of thrilling and
appalling interest!

"A Wehr-Wolf!" had exclaimed one of the assistant judges: and while the
voices of several of the male spectators in the body of the court echoed
the words mechanically, the ladies gave vent to screams, as they rushed
toward the doors of the tribunal. In a few moments that part of the
court was entirely cleared.

"Prisoner!" exclaimed the chief judge, "have you ought more to advance
in your defense, relative to the charge of murder?"

"My lord, I am innocent!" said Wagner, firmly but respectfully.

"The tribunal pronounces you guilty!" continued the chief judge: then,
with a scornful smile toward his assistants and the procurator
fiscal--who all three, as well as the sbirri and the officers of the
court were pale and trembling with vague fear--the presiding functionary
continued thus:--"The tribunal condemns you, Fernand Wagner, to death by
the hand of the common headsman; and it is now my duty to name the day
and fix the hour for your execution. Therefore I do ordain that the
sentence just pronounced be carried into effect precisely at the hour of
sunset on the last day of the present month!"

"My lord! my lord!" exclaimed the procurator fiscal; "the belief is that
on the last day of each month, and at the hour of sunset----"

"I am aware of the common superstition," interrupted the chief judge,
coldly and sternly; "and it is to convince the world of the folly of
putting faith in such legends that I have fixed that day and that hour
in the present instance. Away with the prisoner to his dungeon."

And the chief judge waved his hand imperiously, to check any further
attempts at remonstrance; but his assistant functionaries, the
procurator fiscal and the officers of the court, surveyed him with
mingled surprise and awe, uncertain whether they ought to applaud his
courage or tremble at his rashness. Wagner had maintained a calm and
dignified demeanor during the latter portion of the proceedings; and,
although the sbirri who had charge of him ventured not to lay a finger
upon him, he accompanied them back to the prison of the Palazzo del
Podesta.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

THE SHIPWRECK.


Ten days had elapsed since the incidents related in the preceding
chapter. The scene changes to an island in the Mediterranean Sea. There,
seated on the strand, with garments dripping wet, and with all the
silken richness of her raven hair floating wildly and disheveled over
her shoulders, the Lady Nisida gazed vacantly on the ocean, now tinged
with living gold by the morning sun. At a short distance, a portion of a
shipwrecked vessel lay upon the shore, and seemed to tell her tale. But
where were the desperate, daring crew who had manned the gallant bark?
where were those fearless freebooters who six days previously had sailed
from Leghorn on their piratical voyage? where were those who hoisted the
flag of peace and assumed the demeanor of honest trader when in port,
but who on the broad bosom of the ocean carried the terrors of their
black banner far and wide? where, too, was Stephano Verrina, who had so
boldly carried off the Lady Nisida?

The gallant bark had struck upon a shoal, during the tempest and the
obscurity of the night, and the pilot knew not where they were. His
reckoning was lost--his calculations had all been set at naught by the
confusion produced by the fearful storm which had assailed the ship and
driven her from her course. The moment the corsair galley struck, that
confusion increased to such an extent that the captain lost all control
over his men; the pilot's voice was unheeded likewise.

The crew got out the long-boat and leaped into it, forcing the captain
and the pilot to enter it with them. Stephano Verrina, who was on deck
when the vessel struck, rushed down into the cabin appropriated to
Nisida, and by signs endeavored to convey to her a sense of the danger
which menaced them. Conquering her ineffable aversion for the bandit,
Nisida followed him hastily to the deck. At the same instant that her
eyes plunged, as it were, into the dense obscurity which prevailed
around, the lightning streamed in long and vivid flashes over the
turbulent waters, and with the roar of the billows suddenly mingled
deafening shrieks and cries--shrieks and cries of wild despair, as the
long-boat, which had been pushed away from the corsair-bark, went down
at a little distance. And as the lightning played upon the raging sea,
Nisida and Verrina caught hurried but frightful glimpses of many human
faces, whereon was expressed the indescribable agony of the drowning.

"Perdition!" cried Verrina; "all are gone save Nisida and myself! And
shall we too perish ere she has become mine? shall death separate us ere
I have reveled in her charms? Fool that I was to delay my triumph
hitherto! Fool that I was to be overawed by her impetuous signs, or
melted by her silent though strong appeals!"

He paced the deck in an excited manner as he uttered these words aloud.

"No!" he exclaimed wildly, as the tempest seemed to increase, and the
ship was thrown further on shoal: "she shall not escape me thus, after
all I have done and dared in order to possess her! Our funeral may take
place to-night--but our bridal shall be first. Ha! ha!"--and he laughed
with a kind of despairing mockery, while the fragments of the vessel's
sails flapped against the spars with a din as if some mighty demon were
struggling with the blast. The sense of appalling danger seemed to
madden Stephano only because it threatened to separate him from Nisida;
and, fearfully excited, he rushed toward her, crying wildly, "You shall
be mine!"

But how terrible was the yell which burst from his lips, when by the
glare of a brilliant flash of lightning, he beheld Nisida cast herself
over the side of the vessel!

For a single instant he fell back appalled, horror-struck; but at the
next, he plunged with insensate fury after her. And the rage of the
storm redoubled.

When the misty shades of morning cleared away, and the storm had passed,
Nisida was seated alone upon the strand, having miraculously escaped
that eternal night of death which leads to no dawn. But where was
Stephano Verrina? She knew not; although she naturally conjectured, and
even hoped, that he was numbered with the dead.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

THE ISLAND IN THE MEDITERRANEAN SEA.


Fair and beauteous was the Mediterranean isle whereon the Lady Nisida
had been thrown.

When the morning mists had dispersed, and the sunbeams tinged the ridges
of the hills and the summits of the tallest trees, Nisida awoke as it
were from the profound lethargic reverie in which she had been plunged
for upward of an hour, since the moment when the billows had borne her
safely to the shore.

The temperature of that island was warm and genial, for there eternal
summer reigned, and thus, though her garments were still dripping wet,
Nisida experienced no cold. She rose from the bank of sand whereon she
had been seated, and cast anxious, rapid, and searching glances around
her. Not a human being met her eyes; but in the woods that stretched,
with emerald pride, almost down to the golden sands, the birds and
insects--nature's free commoners--sent forth the sounds of life and
welcomed the advent of the morn with that music of the groves.

The scenery which now presented itself to the contemplation of Nisida
was indescribably beautiful. Richly wooded hills rose towering above
each other with amphitheatrical effect; and behind the verdant panorama
were the blue outlines of pinnacles of naked rocks. But not a trace of
the presence of human beings was to be seen--not a hamlet, nor a
cottage, nor the slightest sign of agriculture! At a short distance lay
a portion of the wreck of the corsair-ship. The fury of the tempest of
the preceding night had thrown it so high upon the shoal whereon it had
struck, and the sea was now comparatively so calm, that Nisida was
enabled to approach close up to it. With little difficulty she succeeded
in reaching the deck,--that deck whose elastic surface lately vibrated
to the tread of many daring, desperate young men--but now desolate and
broken in many parts.

The cabin which had been allotted to her, or rather to which she had
been confined, was in the portion of the wreck that still remained; and
there she found a change of raiment, which Stephano had provided ere the
vessel left Leghorn. Carefully packing up these garments in as small and
portable a compass as possible, she fastened the burden upon her
shoulders by the means of a cord, and, quitting the vessel, conveyed it
safe and dry to the shore.

Then she returned again to the wreck in search of provisions,
considerable quantities of which she fortunately found to be uninjured
by the water; and these she was enabled to transport to the strand by
means of several journeys backward and forward between the shore and the
wreck. The occupation was not only necessary in order to provide the
wherewith to sustain life, but it also abstracted her thoughts from a
too painful contemplation of her position. It was long past the hour of
noon when she had completed her task; and the shore in the immediate
vicinity of the wreck was piled with a miscellaneous assortment of
objects--bags of provisions, weapons of defense, articles of the toilet,
clothing, pieces of canvas, cordage, and carpenter's tools. Then,
wearied with her arduous toils, she laid aside her dripping garments,
bathed her beauteous form in the sea, and attired herself in dry
apparel.

Having partaken of some refreshment, she armed herself with weapons of
defense, and quitting the shore, entered upon that vast amphitheater of
verdure to which we have already slightly alluded. The woods were thick
and tangled; but though, when seen from the shore, they appeared to form
one dense, uninterrupted forest, yet they in reality only dotted the
surface of the islands with numerous detached patches of grove and
copse; and in the intervals were verdant plains or delicious valleys,
exhibiting not the slightest sign of agriculture, but interspersed with
shrubs and trees laden with fruits rich and tempting.

Nature had indeed profusely showered her bounties over that charming
isle; for the trees glowed with their blushing or golden produce, as if
gems were the fruitage of every bough.

Through one of the delicious valleys which Nisida explored, a streamlet,
smooth as a looking-glass, wound its way. To its sunny bank did the lady
repair; and the pebbly bed of the river was seen as plainly through the
limpid waters as an eyeball through a tear.

Though alone was Nisida in that vale, and though many bitter
reflections, deep regrets, and vague apprehensions crowded upon her
soul; yet the liveliness of the scene appeared to diminish the
intenseness of the feelings of utter solitude, and its soft influence
partially lulled the waves of her emotions. For never had mortal eyes
beheld finer fruit upon the trees, nor lovelier flowers upon the soil;
all life was rejoicing, from the grasshopper at her feet to the
feathered songsters in the myrtle, citron, and olive groves; and the
swan glided past to the music of the stream. Above, the heavens were
more clear than her own Italian clime, more blue than any color that
tinges the flowers of the earth.

She roved along the smiling bank which fringed the stream until the
setting sun dyed with the richest purple the rocky pinnacles in the
distance, and made the streamlet glow like a golden flood. And
Nisida--alone, in the radiance and glory of her own charms--alone amidst
all the radiance and glory of the charms of nature--the beauteous Nisida
appeared to be the queen of that Mediterranean isle. But whether it were
really an island or a portion of the three continents which hem in that
tideless ocean, the lady as yet knew not.

Warned by the splendors of the setting sun to retrace her way, she
turned and sped back to the strand, where the stores she had saved from
the wreck were heaped up. When first she had set out upon her exploring
ramble, she had expected every moment to behold human forms--her
fellow-creatures--emerge from the woods; but the more she saw of that
charming spot whereon her destinies had thrown her, the fainter grew the
hope or the fear--we scarcely know which to term the expectation. For no
sign of the presence of man was there; Nature appeared to be the
undisputed empress of that land; and Nisida returned to the shore with
the conviction that she was the sole human inhabitant of this delicious
region.

And now, once more seated upon the strand, while the last beams of the
sun played upon the wide blue waters of the Mediterranean, Nisida
partook of her frugal repast, consisting of the bread supplied by the
wreck and a few fruits which she gathered in the valley. The effects of
the tempest had totally disappeared in respect to the sea, which now lay
stretched in glassy stillness. It seemed as if a holy calm, soft as an
infant's sleep, lay upon the bosom of the Mediterranean, now no longer
terrible with storm, but a mighty emblem of mild majesty and rest!

Nisida thought of the fury which had lately convulsed that sea, now so
placid, and sighed at the conviction which was forced upon her--that no
such calm was for the mortal breast when storms had once been there! For
she pondered on her native land, now, perhaps, far--oh! how far away;
and the images of those whom she loved appeared to rise before
her--Francisco in despair at his sister's unaccountable
disappearance--and Fernand perchance already doomed to die! And tears
flowed down her cheeks, and trickled upon her snowy bosom, gleaming like
dew amongst lilies. Of what avail was the energy of her character in
that land along whose coast stretched the impassable barrier of the sea?
Oh! it was enough to make even the haughty Nisida weep, and to produce a
terrible impression on a mind hitherto acting only in obedience to its
own indomitable will.

Though the sun had set some time, and no moon had yet appeared in the
purple sky, yet was it far from dark. An azure mantle of twilight seemed
to wrap the earth--the sea--the heavens; and so soft, so overpowering
was the influence of the scene and of the night, that slumber gradually
stole upon the lady's eyes. There now, upon the warm sand, slept Nisida;
and when the chaste advent of the moon bathed all in silver, as the sun
had for twelve hours steeped all in gold, the beams of the goddess of
the night played on her charming countenance without awakening her. The
raven masses of her hair lay upon her flushed cheeks like midnight on a
bed of roses, her long black lashes reposed on those cheeks, so
surpassingly lovely with their rich carnation hues. For she dreamt of
Fernand; and her vision was a happy one. Imagination played wild tricks
with the shipwrecked, lonely lady, as if to recompense her for the
waking realities of her sad position. She thought that she was reposing
in the delicious valley which she had explored in the afternoon--she
thought that Fernand was her companion--that she lay in his arms--that
his lips pressed hers--that she was all to him as he was all to her, and
that love's cup of enjoyment was full to the very brim.

But, oh! when she slowly awoke, and under the influence of the
delightful vision, raised her eyes in the dewy light of voluptuous
languor to the blue sky above her, the sunbeams that were heralding in
another day cruelly dispelled the enchanting illusions of a warm and
excited fancy, and Nisida found herself alone on the sea-shore of the
island.

Thus the glory of that sunrise had no charms for her; although never had
the orb of day come forth with greater pomp, nor to shine on a lovelier
scene. No words can convey an idea of the rapid development of every
feature in the landscape, the deeper and deepening tint of the glowing
sky, the roseate hue of the mountain-peaks as they stood out against the
cloudless orient, and the rich emerald shades of the woods sparkling
with fruit. The fragrant rose and the chaste lily, the blushing peony
and the gaudy tulip, and all the choicest flowers of that delicious
clime, expanded into renewed loveliness to greet the sun: and the citron
and the orange, the melon and the grape, the pomegranate and the date
drank in the yellow light to nourish their golden hues.

Nisida's eyes glanced rapidly over the vast expanse of waters, and swept
the horizon: but there was not a sail, nor even a cloud which
imagination might transform into the white wing of a distant ship. And
now upon the golden sand the lovely Nisida put off her garments one by
one: and set at liberty the dark masses of her shining hair, which
floated like an ample veil of raven blackness over the dazzling
whiteness of her skin. Imagination might have invested her forehead with
a halo, so magnificent was the lustrous effect of the sun upon the
silken glossiness of that luxuriant hair.

The Mediterranean was the lady's bath: and, in spite of the oppressive
nature of the waking thoughts which had succeeded her delicious dream,
in spite of that conviction of loneliness which lay like a weight of
lead upon her soul, she disported in the waters like a mermaid.

Now she plunged beneath the surface, which glowed in the sun like a vast
lake of quicksilver: now she stood in a shallow spot, where the water
rippled no higher than her middle, and combed out her dripping tresses;
then she waded further in, and seemed to rejoice in allowing the little
wavelets to kiss her snowy bosom. No fear had she, indeed, no thought of
the monsters of the deep: could the fair surface of the shining water
conceal aught dangerous or aught terrible? Oh! yes, even as beneath that
snowy breast beat a heart stained with crime, often agitated by ardent
and impetuous passions, and devoured by raging desire.

For nearly an hour did Nisida disport in Nature's mighty bath until the
heat of the sun became so intense that she was compelled to return to
the shore and resume her apparel. Then she took some bread in her hand,
and hastened to the groves to pluck the cooling and delicious fruits
whereof there was so marvelous an abundance. She seated herself on a bed
of wild flowers on the shady side of a citron and orange grove,
surrounded by a perfumed air. Before her stretched the valley, like a
vast carpet of bright green velvet fantastically embroidered with
flowers of a thousand varied hues. And in the midst meandered the
crystal stream, with stately swans and an infinite number of other
aquatic birds floating on its bosom. And the birds of the groves, too,
how beautiful were they, and how joyous did they seem! What variegated
plumage did they display, as they flew past the Lady Nisida, unscared by
her presence! Some of them alighted from the overhanging boughs, and as
they descended swept her very hair with their wings; then, almost to
convince her that she was not an unwelcome intruder in that charming
land, they hopped round her, picking up the crumbs of bread which she
scattered about to attract them.

For the loneliness of her condition had already attuned the mind of this
strange being to a susceptibility of deriving amusement from incidents
which a short time previously she would have looked upon as the most
insane triflings;--thus was the weariness of her thoughts relieved by
disporting in the water, as we ere now saw her, or by contemplating the
playfulness of the birds. Presently she wandered into the vale, and
gathered a magnificent nosegay of flowers: then the whim struck her that
she would weave for herself a chaplet of roses; and as her work
progressed, she improved upon it, and fashioned a beauteous diadem of
flowers to protect her head from the scorching noonday sun.

But think not, O reader! that while thus diverting herself with
trivialities of which you would scarcely have deemed the
haughty--imperious--active disposition of Nisida of Riverola to be
capable--think not that her mind was altogether abstracted from
unpleasant thoughts. No--far, very far from that! She was merely
relieved from a portion of that weight which oppressed her; but her
entire burden could not be removed from her soul. There were moments
when her grief amounted almost to despair. Was she doomed to pass the
remainder of her existence in that land? was it really an island and
unknown to navigators? She feared so: for did it join a continent, its
loveliness and fruitfulness would not have permitted it to remain long
unoccupied by those who must of necessity discover it.

And oh! what would her brother think of her absence? what would Fernand
conjecture? And what perils might not at that moment envelop her lover,
while she was not near to succor him by means of her artifice, her
machinations, or her gold. Ten thousand-thousand maledictions upon
Stephano, who was the cause of all her present misery! Ten
thousand-thousand maledictions on her own folly for not having exerted
all her energies and all her faculties to escape from his power, ere she
was conveyed on board the corsair ship, and it was too late!

But useless now were regrets and repinings; for the past could not be
recalled, and the future might have much happiness in store for Nisida.
For oh! sweetest comes the hope which is lured back because its presence
is indispensable; and, oppressed as Nisida was with the weight of her
misfortunes, her soul was too energetic, too sanguine, too impetuous to
yield to despair.

Day after day passed, and still not a ship appeared. Nisida did not
penetrate much further into the island than the valley which we have
described, and whither she was accustomed to repair to gather the
flowers that she wove into diadems. She lingered for the most part near
the shore on which she had been thrown, fearing lest, if away, a ship
might pass in her absence.

Each day she bathed her beauteous form in the Mediterranean; each day
she devoted some little time to the adornment of her person with wreaths
of flowers. She wove crowns for her head--necklaces, bracelets, and
scarfs,--combining the flowers so as to form the most wild and fanciful
devices, and occasionally surveying herself in the natural mirror
afforded her by the limpid stream. Purposely wearing an apparel as
scanty as possible, on account of the oppressive heat which prevailed
during each day of twelve long hours, and which was not materially
moderated at night, she supplied to some extent the place of the
superfluous garments thus thrown aside, by means of tissues of cool,
refreshing, fragrant flowers.

Thus, by the time she had been ten or twelve days upon the island, her
appearance seemed most admirably to correspond with her new and lonely
mode of life, and the spot where her destinies had cast her. Habited in
a single linen garment, confined round the slender waist with a cestus
of flowers, and with light slippers upon her feet, but with a diadem of
roses on her head, and with wreaths round her bare arms, and her equally
bare ankles, she appeared to be the goddess of that island--the genius
of that charming clime of fruits, and verdure, and crystal streams, and
flowers. The majesty of her beauty was softened, and thus enhanced, by
the wonderful simplicity of her attire; the dazzling brilliancy of her
charms was subdued by the chaste, the innocent, the primitive aspect
with which those fantastically woven flowers invested her. Even the
extraordinary luster of her fine dark eyes was moderated by the gaudy
yet elegant assemblage of hues formed by those flowers which she wore.
Was it not strange that she whose soul we have hitherto seen bent on
deeds or schemes of stern and important nature--who never acted without
a motive, and whose mind was far too deeply occupied with worldly cares
and pursuits to bestow a thought on trifles--who, indeed, would have
despised herself had she wasted a moment in toying with a flower, or
watching the playful motions of a bird,--was it not strange that Nisida
should have become so changed as we now find her in that island of which
she was the queen?

Conceive that same Nisida who planned dark plots against Flora
Francatelli, now tripping along the banks of the sunlit stream, bedecked
with flowers and playing with the swans. Imagine that same being, who
dealt death to Agnes, now seated beneath the shade of myrtles and
embowering vines, distributing bread or pomegranate seeds to the birds
that hopped cheerfully around her. Picture to yourself that woman of
majestic beauty, whom you have seen clad in black velvet and wearing a
dark thick veil, now weaving for herself garments of flowers, and
wandering in the lightest possible attire by the seashore, or by the
rippling stream, or amidst the mazes of the fruit-laden groves.

And sometimes, as she sat upon the yellow sand, gazing on the wavelets
of the Mediterranean, that were racing one after another, like living
things from some far off region, to that lovely but lonely isle, it
would seem as if all the low and sweet voices of the sea--never loud and
sullen now, since the night of storm which cast her on that strand--were
heard by her, and made delicious music to her ears! In that island must
we leave her now for a short space,--leave her to her birds, her
flowers, and her mermaid-sports in the sea,--leave her also to her
intervals of dark and dismal thoughts, and to her long, but ineffectual
watchings for the appearance of a sail in the horizon.




CHAPTER XXXIX.

THE WEHR-WOLF.


It was the last day of the month; and the hour of sunset was fast
approaching. Great was the sensation that prevailed throughout the city
of Florence. Rumor had industriously spread, and with equal assiduity
exaggerated, the particulars of Fernand Wagner's trial, and the belief
that a man on whom the horrible destiny of a Wehr-Wolf had been
entailed, was about to suffer the extreme penalty of the law, was
generally prevalent.

The great square of the ducal palace, where the scaffold was erected, was
crowded with the Florentine populace; and the windows were literally alive
with human faces. Various were the emotions and feelings which influenced
that mass of spectators. The credulous and superstitious--forming more
than nine-tenths of the whole multitude--shook their heads, and
commented amongst themselves, in subdued whispers, on the profane
rashness of the chief judge, who dared to doubt the existence of such a
being as a Wehr-Wolf. The few who shared the skepticism of the judge
applauded that high functionary for his courage in venturing so bold a
stroke in order to destroy what he and they deemed an idle superstition.

But the great mass were dominated by a profound and indeed most painful
sensation of awe; curiosity induced them to remain, though their
misgivings prompted them to fly from the spot which had been fixed upon
for the execution. The flowers of Florentine loveliness--and never in
any age did the republic boast of so much female beauty--were present:
but bright eyes flashed forth uneasy glances, and snowy bosoms beat with
alarms, and fair hands trembled in the lover's pressure. In the midst of
the square was raised a high platform covered with black cloth, and
presenting an appearance so ominous and sinister that it was but little
calculated to revive the spirits of the timid. On this scaffold was a
huge block: and near the block stood the headsman, carelessly leaning on
his ax, the steel of which was polished and bright as silver. A few
minutes before the hour of sunset, the chief judge, the procurator
fiscal, the two assistant-judges, and the lieutenant of sbirri, attended
by a turnkey and several subordinate police officers, were repairing in
procession along the corridor leading to the doomed prisoner's cell.

The chief judge alone was dignified in manner; and he alone wore a
demeanor denoting resolution and at the same time self-possession. Those
who accompanied him were, without a single exception, a prey to the most
lively fear; and it was evident that had they dared to absent themselves
they would not have been present on this occasion. At length the door of
the prisoner's cell was reached; and there the procession paused.

"The moment is now at hand," said the chief judge, "when a monstrous and
ridiculous superstition, imported into our country from that cradle and
nurse of preposterous legends--Germany--shall be annihilated forever.
This knave who is about to suffer has doubtless propagated the report of
his lupine destiny, in order to inspire terror and thus prosecute his
career of crime and infamy with the greater security from chances of
molestation. For this end he painted the picture which appalled so many
of you in the judgment hall, but which, believe, my friends, he did not
always believe destined to retain its sable covering. Well did he know
that the curiosity of a servant or of a friend would obtain a peep
beneath the mystic veil; and he calculated that the terror with which he
sought to invest himself would be enhanced by the rumors and
representations spread by those who had thus penetrated into its feigned
secrets. But let us not waste that time which now verges toward a
crisis, whereby doubt shall be dispelled and a ridiculous superstition
destroyed forever."

At this moment a loud, a piercing, and an agonizing cry burst from the
interior of the cell.

"The knave has overheard me, and would fain strike terror to your
hearts!" exclaimed the chief judge; then in a still louder tone, he
commanded the turnkey to open the door of the dungeon. But when the man
approached, so strange, so awful, so appalling were the sounds which
came from the interior of the cell, that he threw down the key in dismay
and rushed from the dreadful vicinity.

"My lord, I implore you to pause!" said the procurator fiscal, trembling
from head to foot.

"Would you have me render myself ridiculous in the eyes of all
Florence?" demanded the chief judge sternly.

Yet, so strange were now the noises which came from the interior of the
dungeon--so piercing the cries of agony--so violent the rustling and
tossing on the stone floor, that for the first time this bold
functionary entertained a partial misgiving, as if he had indeed gone
too far. But to retreat was impossible; and, with desperate resolution,
the chief judge picked up the key and thrust it into the lock.

His assistants, the procurator fiscal, and the sbirri drew back with
instinctive horror, as the bolts groaned in the iron work which held
them; the chain fell with a clanking sound; and as the door was opened,
the horrible monster burst forth from the dungeon with a terrific howl.
Yells and cries of despair reverberated through the long corridor: and
those sounds were for an instant broken by that of the falling of a
heavy body.

'Twas the chief judge, hurled down and dashed violently against the
rough uneven masonry, by the mad careering of the Wehr-Wolf as the
monster burst from his cell. On, on he sped, with the velocity of
lightning, along the corridor, giving vent to howls of the most
horrifying description.

Fainting with terror, the assistant judges, the procurator fiscal, and
the sbirri were for a few moments so overcome by the appalling scene
they had just witnessed, that they thought not of raising the chief
judge, who lay motionless on the pavement. But at length some of the
police-officers so far recovered themselves as to be able to devote
attention to that high functionary--it was, however, too late--his skull
was fractured by the violence with which he had been dashed against the
rough wall, and his brains were scattered on the pavement. Those who now
bent over his disfigured corpse exchanged looks of unutterable horror.

In the meantime the Wehr-Wolf had cleared the corridor, rapid as an
arrow shot from the bow; he sprung, bounding up a flight of steep stone
stairs as if the elastic air bore him on, and rushing through an open
door, burst suddenly upon the crowd that was so anxiously waiting to
behold the procession issue thence.

Terrific was the yell that the multitude sent forth--a yell formed of a
thousand combining voices, so long, so loud, so wildly agonizing, that
never had the welkin rung with so appalling an ebullition of human
misery before! Madly rushed the wolf amidst the people, dashing them
aside, overturning them, hurling them down, bursting through the mass
too dense to clear a passage of its own accord, and making the scene of
horror more horrible still by mingling his hideous howlings with the
cries--the shrieks--the screams that escaped from a thousand tongues.

No pen can describe the awful scene of confusion and death which now
took place. Swayed by no panic fear, but influenced by terrors of
dreadful reality, the people exerted all their force to escape from that
spot; and thus the struggling, crushing, pushing, crowding, fighting,
and all the oscillations of a multitude set in motion by the direst
alarms, were succeeded by the most fatal results. Women were thrown down
and trampled to death, strong men were scarcely able to maintain their
footing, many females were literally suffocated in the pressure of the
crowd, and mothers with young children in their arms excited no
sympathy.

Never was the selfishness of human nature more strikingly displayed than
on this occasion: no one bestowed a thought upon his neighbor: the
chivalrous Florentine citizens dashed aside the weak and helpless female
who barred his way with as little remorse as if she were not a being of
flesh and blood; and even husbands forgot their wives, lovers abandoned
their mistresses, and parents waited not an instant to succor their
daughters.

Oh! it was a terrible thing to contemplate, that dense mass, oscillating
furiously like the waves of the sea, sending up to heaven such appalling
sounds of misery, rushing furiously toward the avenues of egress,
falling back baffled and crushed, in the struggle where only the very
strongest prevailed, laboring to escape from death, and fighting for
life, fluctuating and rushing, and wailing in maddening excitement like
a raging ocean. Oh! all this wrought a direful sublimity, with those
cries of agony and that riot of desperation. And all this while the wolf
pursued its furious career, amid the mortal violence of a people thrown
into horrible disorder, pursued its way with savage howls, glaring eyes,
and foaming mouth, the only living being there that was infuriate and
not alarmed, battling for escape, and yet unhurt.

As a whirlpool suddenly assails the gallant ship, makes her agitate and
rock fearfully for a few moments and then swallows her up altogether, so
was the scaffold in the midst of the square shaken to its very basis for
a little space, and then hurled down, disappearing altogether amidst the
living vortex.

In the balconies and at the windows overlooking the square, the awful
excitement spread like wild-fire, and a real panic prevailed among those
who were at least beyond the reach of danger. But horror paralyzed the
power of sober reflection, and the hideous spectacle of volumes of human
beings battling, and roaring, and rushing, and yelling in terrific
frenzy, produced a kindred effect, and spread the wild delirium among
the spectators at those balconies and those windows. At length, in the
square below, the crowds began to pour forth from the gates, for the
Wehr-Wolf had by this time cleared himself a passage and escaped from
the midst of that living ocean so fearfully agitated by the storms of
fear. But even when the means of egress were thus obtained, the most
frightful disorder prevailed, the people rolling in heaps upon heaps,
while infuriate and agile men ran on the tops of the compact masses, and
leapt in their delirium, as with barbarous intent.

On--on sped the Wehr-Wolf, dashing like a whirlwind through the streets
leading to the open country, the white flakes of foam flying from his
mouth like spray from the prow of a vessel, and every fiber of his frame
vibrating as if in agony. And oh! what dismay--what terror did that
monster spread in the thoroughfares through which he passed; how wildly,
how madly flew the men and women from his path; how piteously screamed
the children at the house-doors in the poor neighborhoods! But, as if
sated with the destruction already wrought in the great square of the
palace, the wolf dealt death no more in the precincts of the city; as if
lashed on by invisible demons, his aim, or his instinct, was to escape.

The streets are threaded, the suburbs of the city are passed, the open
country is gained; and now along the bank of the Arno rushes the
monster, by the margin of that pure stream to whose enchanting vale the
soft twilight lends a more delicious charm.

On the verge of a grove, with its full budding branches all impatient
for the spring, a lover and his mistress were murmuring fond language to
each other. In the soft twilight blushed the maiden, less in bashfulness
than in her own soul's emotion, her countenance displaying all the magic
beauty not only of feature but of feeling; and she raised her large blue
eyes in the dewy light of a sweet enthusiasm to the skies, as the
handsome youth by her side pressed her fair hand and said, "We must now
part until to-morrow, darling of my soul! How calmly has this day, with
all its life and brightness, passed away into the vast tomb of eternity.
It is gone without a single hour's unhappiness for us--gone without
leaving a regret on our minds--gone, too, without clouds in the heavens
or mists upon the earth, most beautiful even at the moment of its
parting! Tomorrow, beloved one, will unite us again in your parents'
cot, and renewed happiness----"

The youth stopped, and the maiden clung to him in speechless terror: for
an ominous sound, as of a rushing animal and then a terrific howl, burst
upon their ears! No time had they for flight, not a moment even to
collect their scattered thoughts. The infuriate wolf came bounding over
the greensward, the youth uttered a wild and fearful cry, a scream of
agony burst from the lips of the maiden as she was dashed from her
lover's arms, and in another moment the monster had swept by.

But what misery, what desolation had his passage wrought! Though unhurt
by his glistening fangs--though unwounded by his sharp claws, yet the
maiden--an instant before so enchanting in her beauty, so happy in her
love--lay stretched on the cold turf, the cords of life snapped suddenly
by that transition from perfect bliss to the most appalling terror!

And still the wolf rushed madly, wildly on.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was an hour past sunrise; and from a grove in the immediate
neighborhood of Leghorn a man came forth. His countenance, though
wondrously handsome, was deadly pale; traces of mental horror and
anguish remained on those classically chiseled features, and in those
fine eloquent eyes. His garments were soiled, blood-stained, and torn.

This man was Fernand Wagner. He entered the city of Leghorn, and
purchased a change of attire, for which he paid from a purse well filled
with gold. He then repaired to a hostel, or public tavern, where he
performed the duties of the toilet, and obtained the refreshment of
which he appeared to stand so much in need. By this time his countenance
was again composed; and the change which new attire and copious ablution
had made in his appearance, was so great that no one who had seen him
issue from the grove and beheld him now, could have believed in the
identity of the person. Quitting the hostel, he repaired to the port,
where he instituted inquiries relative to a particular vessel which he
described, and which had sailed from Leghorn upward of a fortnight
previously.

He soon obtained the information which he sought; and an old sailor, to
whom he had addressed himself, not only hinted that the vessel in
question was suspected, when in the harbor, to be of piratical
character, but also declared that he himself had seen a lady conveyed on
board during the night preceding the departure of the ship. Further
inquiries convinced Wagner that the lady spoken of had been carried by
force, and against her will, to the corsair vessel; and he was now
certain that the demon had not deceived him, and that he had indeed
obtained a trace of his lost Nisida!

His mind was immediately resolved how to act; and his measures were as
speedily taken.

Guided by the advice of the old sailor from whom he had gleaned the
information he sought, he was enabled to purchase a fine vessel and
equip her for sea within the space of a few days. He lavished his gold
with no niggard hand, and gold is a wondrous talisman to remove
obstacles and facilitate designs. In a word, on the sixth morning after
his arrival at Leghorn, Fernand Wagner embarked on board his ship, which
was manned with a gallant crew, and carried ten pieces of ordnance. A
favoring breeze prevailed at the time, and the gallant bark set sail for
the Levant.




CHAPTER XL.

WAGNER IN SEARCH OF NISIDA.


The reader may perhaps be surprised that Fernand Wagner should have been
venturous enough to trust himself to the possibilities of a protracted
voyage, since every month his form must undergo a frightful change--a
destiny which he naturally endeavored to shroud in the profoundest
secrecy.

But it must be recollected that the Mediterranean is dotted with
numerous islands; and he knew that, however changeable or adverse the
winds might be, it would always prove an easy matter to make such
arrangements as to enable him to gain some port a few days previously to
the close of the month. Moreover, so strong, so intense was his love for
Nisida, that, even without the prospect afforded by this calculation, he
would have dared all perils, incurred all risks, exposed himself to all
hostile chances, rather than have remained inactive while he believed
her to be in the power of a desperate, ruthless bandit. For, oh! ever
present to his mind was the image of the lost fair one; by day, when the
sun lighted up with smiles the dancing waves over which his vessel
bounded merrily, merrily; and by night, when the moon shone like a
silver lamp amidst the curtains of heaven's pavilion.

His was not the love which knows only passionate impulse: it was a
constant, unvarying tender sentiment--far, far more pure, and therefore
more permanent, than the ardent and burning love which Nisida felt for
him. His was not the love which possession would satiate and enjoyment
cool down: it was a feeling that had gained a soft yet irresistible
empire over his heart.

And that love of his was nurtured and sustained by the most generous
thoughts. He pictured to himself the happiness he should experience in
becoming the constant companion of one whose loss of hearing and of
speech cut her off as it were from that communion with the world which
is so grateful to her sex: he imagined to himself, with all the fond
idolatry of sincere affection, how melodiously soft, how tremulously
clear would be her voice, were it restored to her, and were it first
used to articulate the delicious language of love. And then he thought
how enchanting, how fascinating, how fraught with witching charms, would
be the conversation of a being endowed with so glorious an intellect,
were she able to enjoy the faculty of speech. Thus did her very
imperfections constitute a ravishing theme for his meditation; and the
more he indulged in dreams like these, the more resolute did he become
never to rest until he had discovered and rescued her.

Seven days had elapsed since the ship sailed from Leghorn; and Sicily
had already been passed by, when the heavens grew overclouded, and
everything portended a storm. The captain, whom Wagner had placed in
charge of his vessel, adopted all the precautions necessary to encounter
the approaching tempest; and soon after the sun went down on the seventh
night a hurricane suddenly swept the surface of the Mediterranean. The
ship bent to the fury of the gust--her very yards were deep in the
water. But when the rage of that dreadful squall subsided, the gallant
bark righted again, and bounded triumphantly over the foaming waves.

A night profoundly dark set in; but the white crests of the billows were
visible through that dense obscurity: while the tempest rapidly
increased in violence, and all the dread voices of the storm, the
thunder in the heavens, the roaring of the sea, and the gushing sounds
of the gale, proclaimed the fierceness of the elemental war. The wind
blew not with that steadiness which the skill of the sailor and the
capacity of the noble ship were competent to meet, but in long and
frequent gusts of intermittent fury. Now rose the gallant bark on the
waves, as if towering toward the starless sky, in the utter blackness of
which the masts were lost; then it sank down into the abyss, the foam of
the boiling billows glistening far above, on all sides, amidst the
obscurity. What strange and appalling noises are heard on board a ship
laboring in a storm--the cracking of timber, the creaking of elastic
planks, the rattling of the cordage, the flapping of fragments of sails,
the failing of spars, the rolling of casks got loose, and at times a
tremendous crash throughout the vessel, as if the whole framework were
giving way and the very sides collapsing!

And amidst those various noises and the dread sounds of the storm, the
voices of the sailors were heard--not in prayer nor subdued by
terror--but echoing the orders issued by the captain, who did not
despair of guiding--nay, fighting, as it were, the ship through the
tumultuous billows and against the terrific blast.

Again a tremendous hurricane swept over the deep: it passed, but not a
spar remained to the dismantled bark. The tapering masts, the long
graceful yards were gone, the cordage having snapped at every point
where its support was needed--snapped by the fury of the tempest, as if
wantonly cut by a sharp knife. The boats--the crew's last alternative of
hope--had likewise disappeared. The ship was now completely at the mercy
of the wild raging of the winds and the fury of the troubled waters; it
no longer obeyed its helm, and there were twenty men separated, all save
_one_, from death only by a few planks and a few nails! The sea now
broke so frequently over the vessel that the pumps could scarcely keep
her afloat; and at length, while it was yet dark, though verging toward
the dawn, the sailors abandoned their task of working at those pumps.
Vainly did the captain endeavor to exercise his authority--vainly did
Wagner hold out menaces and promises by turns; death seemed imminent,
and yet those men, who felt that they were hovering on the verge of
destruction, flew madly to the wine-stores.

Then commenced a scene of the wildest disorder amidst those desperate
men; and even the captain himself, perceiving that they could laugh, and
shout, and sing, in the delirium of intoxication, rushed from the side
of Wagner and joined the rest. It was dreadful to hear the obscene jest,
the ribald song, and the reckless execration, sent forth from the cabin,
as if in answer to the awful voices in which Nature was then speaking to
the world. But scarcely had a faint gleam appeared in the orient
sky--not quite a gleam, but a mitigation of the intenseness of the
night--when a tremendous wave--a colossus amongst giants--broke over the
ill-fated ship, while a terrible crash of timber was for a moment heard
in unison with the appalling din of the whelming billows. Wagner was the
only soul on deck at that instant: but the fury of the waters tore him
away from the bulwark to which he had been clinging, and he became
insensible.

When he awoke from the stupor into which he had been plunged, it was
still dusk, and the roar of the ocean sounded in his ears with deafening
din.

But he was on land, though where he knew not. Rising from the sand on
which he had been cast, he beheld the billows breaking on the shore at
the distance of only a few paces; and he retreated further from their
reach. Then he sat down, with his face toward the east, anxiously
awaiting the appearance of the morn that he might ascertain the nature
and the aspect of the land on which he had been cast. By degrees the
glimmering which had already subdued the blackness of night into the
less profound obscurity of duskiness, grew stronger; and a yellow
luster, as of a far-distant conflagration, seemed to struggle against a
thick fog. Then a faint roseate streak tinged the eastern horizon,
growing gradually deeper in hue, and spreading higher and wider--the
harbinger of sunrise; while, simultaneously, the features of the land on
which Wagner was thrown began to develop themselves like specters
stealing out of complete security; till at length the orient luster was
caught successively by a thousand lofty pinnacles of rock; and finally
the majestic orb itself appeared, lighting up a series of verdant
plains, delicious groves, glittering lakes, pellucid streams, as well as
the still turbulent ocean and the far-off mountains which had first
peeped from amidst the darkness.

Fair and delightful was the scene that thus developed itself to the eyes
of Wagner; but as his glance swept the country which rose
amphitheatrically from the shore not a vestige of the presence of man
could be beheld. No smoke curled from amidst the groves, no church spire
peeped from amongst the trees; nor had the wilderness of nature been
disturbed by artificial culture.

He turned toward the ocean; there was not a trace of his vessel to be
seen. But further along the sand lay a dark object, which he approached,
with a shudder, for he divined what it was.

Nor was he mistaken; it was the swollen and livid corpse of one of the
sailors of his lost ship.

Wagner's first impulse was to turn away in disgust, but a better feeling
almost immediately animated him: and, hastening to the nearest grove, he
broke off a large bough, with which he hollowed a grave in the sand. He
deposited the corpse in the hole, throwing back the sand which he had
displaced, and thus completed his Christian task.

During his visit to the grove, he had observed with delight that the
trees were laden with fruit; and he now returned thither to refresh
himself by means of the banquet thus bountifully supplied by nature.
Having terminated his repast, he walked further inland. The verdant
slope stretched up before him, variegated with flowers, and glittering
with morning dew. As he advanced, the development of all the features of
that land--lakes and woods; hills undulating like the sea in sunset,
after hours of tempest: rivulets and crystal streams, each with its own
peculiar murmurs, but all of melody; groves teeming with the most
luxurious fruit of the tropics, and valleys carpeted with the brightest
green, varied with nature's own embroidery of flowers--the development
of this scene was inexpressibly beautiful, far surpassing the finest
efforts of creative fancy.

Wagner seated himself on a sunny bank, and fell into a profound
meditation. At length, glancing rapidly around, he exclaimed aloud, as
if in continuation of the chain of thoughts which had already occupied
his mind, "Oh, if Nisida were here--here, in this delicious clime, to be
my companion! What happiness--what joy! Never should I regret the world
from which this isle--for an isle it must be--is separated! Never should
I long to return to that communion with men from which we should be cut
off! Here would the eyes of my Nisida cast forth rays of joy and
gladness upon everything around; here would the sweetest transitions of
sentiment and feeling take place! Nisida would be the island queen; she
should deck herself with these flowers, which her fair hands might weave
into wildly fantastic arabesques! Oh! all would be happiness--a
happiness so serene, that never would the love of mortals he more truly
blessed! But, alas!" he added, as a dreadful thought broke rudely upon
this delightful vision, "I should be compelled to reveal to her my
secret--the appalling secret of my destiny: that when the period for
transformation came round, she might place herself in safety----"

Wagner stopped abruptly, and rose hastily from his seat on the sunny
bank. The remembrance of this dreadful fate had spoiled one of the most
delicious waking dreams in which he had ever indulged; and, dashing his
hands against his forehead, he rushed wildly toward the chain of
mountains which intersected the island.

But suddenly he stopped short, for on the ground before him lay the
doublet of a man--a doublet of the fashion then prevalent in Italy. He
lifted it up, examined it, but found nothing in the pockets; then,
throwing it on the ground, he stood contemplating it for some minutes.

Could it be possible that he was in some part of Italy? that the ship
had been carried back to the European Continent during the tempest of
the night? No; it was impossible that so lovely a tract of land would
remain uninhabited, if known to men. The longer he reflected the more he
became convinced that he was on some island hitherto unknown to
navigators, and on which some other shipwrecked individual had probably
been cast. Why the doublet should have been discarded he could well
understand, as it was thick and heavy, and the heat of the sun was
already intense, although it was not yet near the meridian.

Raising his eyes from the doublet which had occasioned these
reflections, he happened to glance toward a knot of fruit trees at a
little distance; and his attention was drawn to a large bough which hung
down as if almost broken away from the main stem. He approached the
little grove; and several circumstances now confirmed his suspicion that
he was not the only tenant of the island at that moment. The bough had
been forcibly torn down, and very recently, too; several of the fruits
had been plucked off, the little sprigs to which they had originally
hung still remaining and bearing evidence to the fact. But if additional
proof were wanting of human presence there, it was afforded by the
half-eaten fruits that were strewed about.

Wagner now searched for the traces of footsteps; but such marks were not
likely to remain in the thick rich grass, which if trampled down, would
rise fresh and elastic again with the invigorating dew of a single
night. The grove, where Wagner observed the broken bough and the
scattered fruits, was further from the shore than the spot where he had
found the doublet; and he reasoned that the man, whoever he might be,
had thrown away his garment, when overpowered by the intensity of the
heat, and had then sought the shade and refreshment afforded by the
grove. He therefore concluded that he had gone inland, most probably
toward the mountains, whose rocky pinnacles, of every form, now shone
with every hue in the glorious sunlight.

Overjoyed at the idea of finding a human being in a spot which he had at
first deemed totally uninhabited, and filled with the hope that the
stranger might be able to give him some information relative to the
geographical position of the isle, and even perhaps aid him in forming a
raft by which they might together escape from the oasis of the
Mediterranean, Wagner proceeded toward the mountains. By degrees the
wondrous beauty of the scene became wilder, more imposing, but less
bewitching, and when he reached the acclivities of the hill, the groves
of fruits and copses of myrtles and citrons, of vines and almond shrubs,
were succeeded by woods of mighty trees.

Further on still the forests ceased and Fernand entered on a wild region
of almost universal desolation, yet forming one of the sublimest
spectacles that nature can afford. The sounds of torrents, as yet
concealed from his view, and resembling the murmur of ocean's waves,
inspired feelings of awe; and it was now for the first time since he
entered on the region of desolation, having left the clime of loveliness
nearly a mile behind, that his attention was drawn to the nature of the
soil, which was hard and bituminous in appearance.

The truth almost immediately struck him: there was a volcano amongst
those mountains up which he was ascending; and it was the lava which had
produced that desolation, and which, cold and hardened, formed the soil
whereon he walked. It was now past midday; and he seated himself once
more to repose his limbs, wearied with the fatigues of the ascent and
overcome by the heat that was there intolerable. At the distance of
about two hundred yards on his right was a solitary tree, standing like
a sign to mark the tomb of nature's vegetation. Upon this tree his eyes
were fixed listlessly, and he was marveling within himself how that
single scion of the forest could have been spared, when the burning
lava, whenever the eruption might have taken place, had hurled down and
reduced to cinders its verdant brethren.

Suddenly his attention was more earnestly riveted upon the dense and
wide-spreading foliage of that tree; for the boughs were shaken in an
extraordinary manner, and something appeared to be moving about amongst
the canopy of leaves. In another minute a long, unmistakable, appalling
object darted forth--a monstrous snake--suspending itself by the tail to
one of the lower boughs, and disporting playfully with its hideous head
toward the ground. Then, with a sudden coil, it drew itself back into
the tree, the entire foliage of which was shaken with the horrible
gambolings of the reptile.

Wagner remembered the frightful spectacle which he had beholden in
Ceylon, and an awful shudder crept through his frame; for, although he
knew that he bore a charmed life, yet he shrank with a loathing from the
idea of having to battle with such a horrible serpent. Starting from the
ground, he rushed--flew, rather than ran, higher up the acclivity, and
speedily entered on a wild scene of rugged and barren rocks: but he
cared not whither the windings of the natural path which he now pursued
might lead him, since he had escaped from the view of the hideous
boa-constrictor gamboling in the solitary tree.

Wearied with his wanderings, and sinking beneath the oppressive heat of
the sun, Wagner was rejoiced to find a cavern in the side of a rock,
where he might shelter and repose himself. He entered, and lay down upon
the hard soil; the sounds of the torrents, which rolled still unseen
amidst the chasms toward which he had approached full near, produced a
lulling influence upon him, and in a few minutes his eyes were sealed in
slumber. When he awoke he found himself in total darkness. He started
up, collected his scattered ideas, and advanced to the mouth of the
cavern.

The sun had set: but outside the cave an azure twilight prevailed, and
the adjacent peaks of the mountains stood darkly out from the partially
though faintly illuminated sky.

While Wagner was gazing long and intently upon the sublime grandeur of
the scene, a strange phenomenon took place. First a small cloud appeared
on the summit of an adjacent hill; then gradually this cloud became more
dense and assumed a human shape. Oh! with what interest--what deep,
enthusiastic interest, did Fernand contemplate the spectacle; for his
well-stored mind at once suggested to him that he was now the witness of
that wondrous optical delusion, called the mirage.

Some human being in the plain on the other side of that range of
mountains was the subject of that sublime scene; might it not be the
individual of whom he was in search, the owner of the doublet? But, ah!
wherefore does Wagner start with surprise?

The shadow of that human being, as it gradually assumed greater density
and a more defined shape--in a word, as it was now properly developed by
the reflection of twilight--wore the form of a female! Were there, then,
many inhabitants on the opposite side of the mountains? or was there
only one female, she whose reflected image he now beheld? He knew not;
but at all events the pleasure of human companionship seemed within his
reach; the presence of the doublet had convinced him that there was
another man upon the island, and now the mirage showed him the semblance
of a woman!

Vast--colossal--like a dense, dark, shapely cloud, stood that reflected
being in the sky; for several minutes it remained thus, and though
Wagner could trace no particular outline of features, yet it seemed to
him as if the female were standing in a pensive attitude. But as the
twilight gradually subsided, or rather yielded to the increasing
obscurity, the image was absorbed likewise in the growing gloom; until
the dusky veil of night made the entire vault above of one deep,
uniform, purple hue. Then Wagner once more returned to the cavern, with
the resolution of crossing the range of hills on the ensuing morn.




CHAPTER XLI.

THE ISLAND QUEEN.


Oh! how beautiful--how enchantingly beautiful seemed Nisida, as her
delicate feet bore her glancingly along the sunny banks of the crystal
stream, to the soft music of its waters. How the slight drapery which
she wore set off the rich undulations of that magnificent form! How the
wreaths and garlands of fantastically woven flowers became the romantic
loveliness of her person--that glowing Hebe of the South!

Holding in her fair hand a light, slim wand, and moving through the
delicious vale with all the soft abandonment of gait and limb which
feared no intrusion on her solitude, she appeared that Mediterranean
island's queen. What, though the evening breeze, disporting with her
raiment, lifted it from her glowing bosom?--she cared not; no need for
sense of shame was there! What though she laid aside her vesture to
disport in the sea at morn?--no furtive glances did she cast round; no
haste did she make to resume her garments; for whose eye, save that of
God, beheld her?

But was she happy? Alas! there were moments when despair seized upon her
soul; and, throwing herself on the yellow sand, or on some verdant bank,
she would weep--oh! she would weep such bitter, bitter tears, that those
who have been forced to contemplate her character with aversion, must
now be compelled to pity her.

Yes; for there were times when all the loveliness of that island seemed
but a hideous place of exile, an abhorrent monotony which surrounded
her--grasped her--clung to her--hemmed her in, as if it were an evil
spirit, having life and the power to torture her. She thought of those
whom she loved, she pondered upon all the grand schemes of her
existence, and she felt herself cut off from a world to which there were
so many ties to bind her, and in which she had so much to do. Then she
would give way to all the anguish of her soul--an anguish that amounted
to the deepest, blackest despair, when her glances wildly swept the
cloudless horizon, and beheld not a sail--no! nor a speck on the ocean
to engender hope. But when this tempest of grief and passion was past,
she would be angry with herself for having yielded to it; and, in order
to distract her thoughts from subjects of gloom, she would bound toward
the groves, light as a fawn, the dazzling whiteness of her naked and
polished ankles gleaming in contrast with the verdure of the vale.

One morning after Nisida had been many, many days on the island, she was
seated on the sand, having just completed her simple toilet on emerging
from the mighty bath that lay stretched in glassy stillness far as the
eye could reach, when she suddenly sprung upon her feet, and threw
affrighted looks around her. Had she possessed the faculty of hearing,
it would be thought that she was thus startled by the sound of a human
voice which had at that instant broken upon the solemn stillness of the
isle--a human voice emanating from a short distance behind her. As yet
she saw no one; but in a few moments a man emerged from the nearest
grove, and came slowly toward her.

He was dressed in a light jerkin, trunk-breeches, tight hose, and
boot--in all as an Italian gentleman of that day, save in respect to hat
and doublet, of which he had none. Neither wore he a sword by his side,
nor carried any weapons of defense; and it was evident he approached the
island queen with mingled curiosity and awe.

Perhaps he deemed her to be some goddess, endowed with the power and the
will to punish his intrusion on her realm; or peradventure his
superstitious imagination dwelt on the tales which sailors told in those
times--how mermaids who fed on human flesh dwelt on the coasts of
uninhabited islands, and assuming the most charming female forms, lured
into their embrace the victims whom shipwreck cast upon their strand,
and instead of lavishing on them the raptures of love, made them the
prey of their ravenous maws.

Whatever were his thoughts, the man drew near with evident distrust.
But, now--why does Nisida's countenance become suddenly crimson with
rage? why rushes she toward the stores which still remained piled up on
the strand? and wherefore, with the rapidity of the most feverish
impatience, does she hurl the weapons of defense into the sea, all save
one naked sword, with which she arms herself? Because her eagle glance,
quicker than that of the man who is approaching her, has recognized
_him_, ere he has even been struck with a suspicion relative to who
_she_ is--and that man is Stephano Verrina!

Now, Nisida! summon all thine energies to aid thee; for a strong, a
powerful, a remorseless man, devoured with lust for thee, is near. And
thou art so ravishingly beautiful in thy aerial drapery, and thy wreaths
of flowers, that an anchorite could not view thee with indifference! Ah!
Stephano starts--stops short--advances: the suspicion has struck him!
The aquiline countenance, those brilliant large, dark eyes, that
matchless raven hair, that splendid symmetrical maturity of form, and
withal, that close compression of the vermilion lips, O Nisida! have
been scanned in rapid detail by the brigand!

"Nisida!" he exclaimed; "Yes, it is she!"

And he bounded toward her with outstretched arms.

But the sharp sword was presented to his chest; and the lady stood with
an air of such resolute determination, that he stopped short gazing upon
her with mingled wonderment and admiration. Heavens! he had never beheld
so glorious a specimen of female loveliness as that whereon his eyes
were fastened,--fastened beyond the possibility of withdrawal. How
glossy black was that hair with its diadem of white roses! How miserably
poor appeared the hues of the carnations and the pinks that formed her
necklace, when in contrast with her flushing cheeks! How dingy were the
lilies at her waist, compared with her heaving breast!

The reason of the brigand reeled, his brain swam round, and for a moment
it seemed to him that she was not a being of this world; not the Nisida
he had known and carried off from Italy, but a goddess, another and yet
the same in all the glory of those matchless charms which had heretofore
ravished--no, maddened him!

And now the spirit of this bold and reckless man was subdued--subdued,
he knew not how nor wherefore; but still subdued by the presence of her
whom he had deemed lost in the waves, but who seemed to stand before
him, with flowers upon her brow and a sharp weapon in her hand--radiant,
too, with loveliness of person, and terrible with the fires of hatred
and indignation!

Yes! he was subdued--overawed--rendered timid as a young child in her
presence; and sinking upon his knees, he exclaimed--forgetful that he
was addressing Nisida the deaf and dumb--"Oh! fear not--I will not harm
thee! But, my God! take compassion on me--spurn me not--look not with
such terrible anger upon one who adores, who worships you! How is it
that I tremble and quail before you--I, once so reckless, so rude. But,
oh! to kiss that fair hand--to be your slave--to watch over you--to
protect you--and all this but for thy smiles in return--I should be
happy--supremely happy! Remember--we are alone on this island--and I am
the stronger; I might compel you by force to yield to me--to become
mine; but I will not harm you--no, not a hair of your head, if you will
only smile upon me! And you will require one to defend and protect
you--yes, even here in this island, apparently so secure and safe;--for
there are terrible things in this clime--dreadful beings, far more
formidable than whole hordes of savage men--monsters so appalling that
not all thy courage, nor all thy energy would avail thee a single moment
against them. Yes, lady, believe me when I tell thee this! For
many--many days have I dwelt, a lonely being, on the other side of this
isle, beyond that chain of mountains--remaining on that shore to which
the wild waves carried me on the night of shipwreck. But I hurried away
at last--I dared all the dangers of mighty precipices, yawning chasms,
and roaring torrents--the perils of yon mountains--rather than linger on
the other side. For the anaconda, lady, is the tenant of this
island--the monstrous snake--the terrible boa, whose dreadful coils, if
wound round that fair form of yours, would crush it into a hideous,
loathsome mass?"

Stephano had spoken so rapidly, and with such fevered excitement that he
had no time to reflect whether he were not wasting his words upon a
being who could not hear them; until exhausted and breathless with the
volubility of his utterance he remembered that he was addressing himself
to Nisida the deaf and dumb. But happily his appealing and his suppliant
posture had softened the lady: for toward the end of his long speech a
change came over her countenance, and she dropped the point of her sword
toward the ground.

Stephano rose, and stood gazing on her for a few moments with eyes that
seemed to devour her. His mind had suddenly recovered much of its wonted
boldness and audacity. So long as Nisida seemed terrible as well as
beautiful, he was subdued;--now that her eyes had ceased to dart forth
lightnings, and the expression of her countenance had changed from
indignation and resolute menace to pensiveness and a comparatively
mournful softness, the bandit as rapidly regained the usual tone of his
remorseless mind.

Yes; he stood gazing on her for a few moments, with eyes that seemed to
devour her:--then, in obedience to the impulse of maddening desire, he
rushed upon her, and in an instant wrenched the sword from her grasp.
But rapid as lightning, Nisida bounded away from him, ere he could wind
his arms around her; and fleet as the startled deer, she hastened toward
the groves.

Stephano, still retaining the sword in his hand, pursued her with a
celerity which was sustained by his desire to possess her and by his
rage that she had escaped him. But the race was unequal as that of a
lion in chase of a roe; for Nisida seemed borne along as it were upon
the very air. Leaving the groves on her left she dashed into the vale.
Along the sunny bank of the limpid stream she sped;--on, on toward a
forest that bounded the valley at the further end, and rose
amphitheatrically up toward the regions of the mountains!

Stephano Verrina still pursued her, though losing ground rapidly; but
still he maintained the chase. And now the verge of the forest is nearly
gained; and in its mazes Nisida hopes to be enabled to conceal herself
from the ruffian whom, by a glance hastily cast behind from time to
time, she ascertains to be upon her track. But, oh! whither art thou
flying thus wildly, beauteous Nisida?--into what appalling perils art
thou rushing, as it were, blindly? For there, in the tallest tree on the
verge of the forest to which thou now art near,--there, amidst the
bending boughs and the quivering foliage--one of the hideous serpents
which infest the higher region of the isle is disporting--the terrible
anaconda--the monstrous boa, whose dreadful coils, if wound round that
fair form of thine, would crush it into a loathsome mass!




CHAPTER XLII.

THE TEMPTATION--THE ANACONDA.


In the meantime Fernand Wagner was engaged in the attempt to cross the
chain of mountains which intersected the island whereon the shipwreck
had thrown him. He had clambered over rugged rocks and leapt across many
yawning chasms in that region of desolation,--a region which formed so
remarkable a contrast with the delicious scenery which he had left
behind him. And now he reached the base of a conical hill, the summit of
which seemed to have been split into two parts: and the sinuous tracks
of the lava-streams, now cold, and hard, and black, adown its sides,
convinced him that this was the volcano, from whose rent crater had
poured the bituminous fluid so fatal to the vegetation of that region.

Following a circuitous and naturally formed pathway round the base, he
reached the opposite side; and now from a height of three hundred feet
above the level of the sea, his eyes commanded a view of a scene as fair
as that behind the range of mountains. He was now for the first time
convinced of what he had all along suspected--namely, that it was indeed
an island on which the storm had cast him. But though from the eminence
where he stood his view embraced the immense range of the ocean, no
speck in the horizon--no sail upon the bosom of the expanse imparted
hope to his soul.

Hunger now oppressed him; for he had eaten nothing since the noon of the
preceding day, when he had plucked a few fruits in the groves on the
other side of the island. He accordingly commenced a descent toward the
new region which lay stretched before him, fair as--even fairer
than--the one which had first greeted his eyes.

But he had not proceeded many yards amidst the defiles of the rugged
rocks which nature had piled around the base of the volcano, when he
found his way suddenly barred by a vast chasm, on the verge of which the
winding path stopped.

The abyss was far too wide to be crossed save by the wing of the bird:
and in its unfathomable depths boiled and roared a torrent, the din of
whose eddies was deafening to the ear.

Wagner retraced his way to the very base of the volcano, and entered
another defile: but this also terminated on the edge of the same
precipice.

Again and again did he essay the various windings of that scene of rock
and crag: but with no better success than at first; and after passing a
considerable time in these fruitless attempts to find a means of descent
into the plains below, he began to fear that he should be compelled to
retrace his way into the region of verdure which he had quitted the day
before, and which lay behind the range of mountains. But the thought of
the hideous snake which he had seen in the tree caused a cold shudder to
pass over him--then, in the next moment, he remembered that if the
region on one side of the mountain were invested with reptiles of that
terrible species, it was not probable that the forests which he beheld
as it were at his feet, were free from the same source of apprehension.
Still he had hoped to find human companionship on this side of the
mountains which he had so far succeeded in reaching--the companionship
of the man who had cast away the doublet, and of the woman whom he had
seen in the mirage.

And was it not strange that he had not as yet overtaken, or at least
obtained a trace of, the man who thus occupied a portion of his
thoughts? If that man were still amongst the mountains, they would
probably meet; if he had succeeded in descending into the plains below,
the same pathway that conducted him thither would also be open to
Wagner. Animated with these reflections, and in spite of the hunger
which now sorely oppressed him, Wagner prosecuted with fresh courage his
search for a means of descent into the lovely regions that lay stretched
before him, when he was suddenly startled by the sound of a human voice
near him.

"My son, what dost thou amidst this scene of desolation?" were the words
which, uttered in a mild benignant tone, met his ears.

He turned and beheld an old man of venerable appearance, and whose
beard, white as snow, stretched down to the rude leathern belt which
confined the palmer's gown that he wore.

"Holy anchorite!" exclaimed Wagner--"for such must I deem thee to
be,--the sound of thy voice is most welcome in this solitude, amidst the
mazes of which I vainly seek to find an avenue of egress."

"Thus it is oft with the troubles and perplexities of the world, my
son," answered the hermit, "that world which I have quitted forever."

"And dost thou dwell in this desolate region?" asked Fernand.

"My cave is hard by," returned the old man. "For forty years have I
lived in the heart of these mountains, descending only into the plains
at long intervals, to gather the fruits that constitute my food:--and
then," he added, in a tone which, despite the sanctity of his
appearance, struck cold and ominous to the very heart of Wagner,--"and
then, too, at the risk of becoming the prey of the terrible anaconda!"

"Thou sayest, holy hermit," exclaimed Fernand, endeavoring to conquer a
feeling of unaccountable aversion which he had suddenly entertained
toward the old man, "thou sayest that thy cave is hard by. In the name
of mercy! I beseech thee to spare me a few fruits, and a cup of water,
for I am sinking with fatigue, hunger, and thirst."

"Follow me, young man," said the hermit; and he led the way to a cave
opening from a narrow fissure in the rock.

The anchorite's abode was, as Wagner had expected to find it, rude and
cheerless. A quantity of dry leaves were heaped in one corner--evidently
forming the old man's couch; and in several small hollows made in the
walls of rock, were heaps of fruit--fresh and inviting, as if they had
only just been gathered. On the ground stood a large earthen pitcher of
water. Upon this last object did the thirsty Wagner lay his left hand;
but ere he raised it, he glanced hastily round the cave in search of a
crucifix, in the presence of which he might sign the form of the cross
with his right hand. But to his astonishment the emblem of Christianity
was not there; and it now struck him for the first time that the
anchorite wore no beads around his waist.

"Young man, I can divine your thoughts," said the hermit, hastily; "but
drink, eat, and ask a blessing presently. Thou art famished, pause not
to question my motives. I will explain them fully to thee when thy body
is refreshed with that pure water and those delicious fruits."

"Water shall not pass my lips, nor fruits assuage the cravings of
hunger, until I know more of thee, old man!" exclaimed Wagner, a
terrible suspicion flashing to his mind; and without another instant's
hesitation or delay, he made the sign of the cross.

A yell of rage and fury burst from the lips of the false anchorite,
while his countenance became fearfully distorted--his eyes glared
fiercely--his whole aspect changed--and in a few moments he stood
confessed in shape, attire and features, the demon who had appeared to
Fernand in the prison of Florence!

"Fiend! what wouldst thou with me?" exclaimed Wagner, startled and yet
unsubdued by this appearance of the evil spirit amidst that region of
desolation.

"Mortal," said the demon, in his deepest and most serious tones, "I am
here to place happiness--happiness ineffable--within thy reach. Nay, be
not impatient: but listen to me for a few moments. 'Twas my power that
conducted thy ship, amidst the fury of the storm which _He_ whose name I
dare not mention raised, to the shores of this island. 'Twas my
influence which yesterday, as thou wast seated on the sunny banks,
filled thine imagination with those delicious thoughts of Nisida. And it
was I also who, by the wonders of the mirage, showed thee the form of
the only female inhabitant of this isle. And that one female,
Wagner--that woman who is now as it were within thy reach--that lovely
being whose presence on this island would teach thee to have no regret
for the world from which you are separated, and whose eyes would cast
forth rays of joy and gladness upon everything around--that charming
lady, who has already decked herself with those flowers which her fair
hands have woven into wildly fantastic arabesques, that being is thy
Nisida, the Island Queen."

"Fiend! you mock--you deceive me," cried Fernand, wildly hovering
between joyous hope and acute fear.

"Did I deceive thee, Wagner, when I showed thee thy Nisida in the power
of the corsairs?" said the demon, with a smile of bitter, sardonic
triumph. "I tell thee, then, that Nisida is on this island--there, in
the very region into which thou wouldst descend, but to which thou wilt
find no avenue save by my aid."

"Nisida is here--on this island," exclaimed Fernand in an ecstasy of
joy.

"Yes--and Stephano, the bandit, likewise," added the demon. "It was his
doublet which you found--it was he who slaked his thirst with the juice
of the fruits which I, then invisible, beheld thee contemplate with
attention."

"Stephano here also!" cried Wagner. "Oh! Nisida--to thy rescue!"

And he bounded forth from the cave, and was rushing madly down one of
the tortuous defiles leading toward the chasm, when the voice of the
demon suddenly caused him to stop short.

"Fool!--insensate mortal!" said the fiend, with a derisive laugh. "How
canst thou escape from these mountains? But tarry a moment--and behold
thy Nisida--behold also her persecutor, who lusts after her."

Thus speaking; he handed Wagner a magic telescope, which immediately
brought the most remote objects to a distance of only a few yards.

Then what a delicious scene met Fernand's eyes! He beheld Nisida bathing
in the sea--sporting like a mermaid with the wavelets--plunging into the
refreshing depths--then wringing out the water from her long raven hair,
now swimming and diving, then wading on her feet,--unconscious that a
human eye beheld her.

At length she came forth from the sea, beauteous as a Venus rising from
the ocean; and her toilet commenced upon the sand. But scarcely had she
decked herself with the flowers which she had gathered early in the
morning for the purpose, when she started and rose up; and then Wagner
beheld a man approaching her from the nearest grove.

"That is Stephano Verrina!" murmured the demon in his ears.

Fernand uttered a cry of dismay, and threw down the telescope.

"You may save her--save her yet," said the demon, speaking in a tone of
unusual haste. "In a few minutes she will be in his power--he is strong
and desperate; be mine, and consent to serve me--and in a moment Nisida
shall be clasped in thy arms--the arms of thee, her deliverer."

"No--no! I will save her without thine aid, dread fiend!" exclaimed
Wagner, a prey to the most terrible excitement.

Then making the sign of the cross, he rushed forward to leap the yawning
chasm; his feet touched the opposite side, but he lost his balance,
reeled, and fell back into the tremendous abyss, while the demon, again
baffled, and shrinking in horror from the emblem of Christianity,
disappeared with cries of rage and vexation.

Down--down fell Wagner,--turning over and over in the hideous vacancy,
and clutching vainly at the stunted shrubs and dead roots which
projected from the rugged sides of the chasm.

In another moment he was swallowed up by the boiling torrent; but his
senses did not leave him, and he felt himself hurried along with the
furious speed of the mad waters. Thus nearly a minute passed; and then
his headlong course was suddenly arrested by the boughs of a tree,
which, having given way at the root, bent over into the torrent. He
clung to the boughs as if they were arms stretched out to rescue him; he
raised himself from amidst the turbid waters--and in a few moments
reached a bank which shelved upward to the edge of a dense forest.

Precisely on the opposite or inner side there was an opening in the
rocks, and Wagner's eye could trace upward a steep but still practicable
path, doubtless formed by some torrent of the spring, which was now
dried up amidst the mountains above,--that path reaching to the very
basis of the volcano.

Thus, had circumstances permitted him to exercise his patience and
institute a longer search among the defiles formed by the crags and
rocks around the conical volcano, he would have discovered a means of
safe egress from that region without daring the desperate leap of the
chasm, desperate even for him, although he bore a charmed life, because
his limbs might have been broken against the rugged sides of the
precipice.

Between the opening to the steep path just spoken of, and the shelving
bank on which Wagner now stood, there was so narrow a space, that the
bent tree stretched completely across the torrent; thus any one,
descending from the mountains by the natural pathway, might cross by
means of the tree to the side which Fernand had gained.

"This, then, must have been the route by which the villain Stephano
emerged from the mountains," he said to himself, "and the fiend deceived
me when he declared that I could not reach the plains below without his
aid."

Such were his reflections as he hurried up the shelving bank: and when
he reached the summit his glance embraced a scene already described to
the reader.

For, flying wildly on toward the forest, was his beauteous Nisida,
scattering flowers in her whirlwind progress, those flowers that had ere
now decked her hair, her neck and her waist.

At some distance behind her was the bandit Stephano; with sword in hand
he still maintained the chase, though breathless and ready to sink from
exhaustion. Not an instant did Wagner tarry upon the top of the bank
which he had reached; but darting toward Nisida, who was now scarce
fifty yards from him, he gave vent to an ejaculation of joy.

She saw him--she beheld him: and her speed was checked in an instant
with the overpowering emotion of wonder and delight.

Then, as he hurried along the verge of the forest to encounter her--to
fold her in his fond embrace--to protect her,--she once more sprung
forward, with outstretched arms, to fly into his arms, which were open
to receive her. But at that instant there was a horrible rustling amidst
the foliage of the huge tree beneath which she was hastening on;--a
monstrous snake darted down with a gushing sound, and in another moment
the beauteous form of Nisida was encircled by its hideous coils.

Then fled that wondrous self-command which for long years she had
exercised with such amazing success:--then vanished from her mind all
the strong motives which had induced her to undertake so terrible a
martyrdom as that of simulating the loss of two faculties most dear and
most valuable to all human beings;--and with a cry of ineffable anguish,
she exclaimed, "_Fernand, save me! save me!_"




CHAPTER XLIII.

NISIDA AND WAGNER.


Oh! with what astonishment and joy would Wagner have welcomed the sound
of that voice, so long hushed, and now so musical even in its rending
agony,--had not such an appalling incident broken the spell that for
years had sealed the lips of his beloved! But he had no time for
thought--there was not a moment for reflection. Nisida lay senseless on
the ground, with the monster coiled around her--its long body hanging
down from the bough to which it was suspended by the tail.
Simultaneously with the cry of anguish that had come from the lips of
Nisida, exclamations of horror burst alike from Wagner and Stephano.

The latter stood transfixed as it were for a few moments, his eyes
glaring wildly on the dreadful spectacle before him; then, yielding to
the invincible terror that had seized upon him, he hurled away the
sword--knowing not what he did in the excitement of his mind, and fled!
But the gleaming of the naked weapon in the sunbeams met Wagner's eyes
as it fell, and darting toward it, he grasped it with a firm
hand--resolving also to use it with a stout heart. Then he advanced
toward the snake, which was comparatively quiescent--that portion of its
long body which hung between the tree and the first coil that it made
round the beauteous form of Nisida alone moving; and this motion was a
waving kind of oscillation, like that of a bell-rope which a person
holds by the end and swings gently.

But from the midst of the coils the hideous head of the monster stood
out--its eyes gleaming malignantly upon Wagner as he approached.
Suddenly the reptile, doubtless alarmed by the flashing of the bright
sword, disengaged itself like lightning from the awful embrace in which
it had retained the Lady Nisida, and sprung furiously toward Fernand.
But the blow that he aimed at its head was unerring and heavy; its skull
was cloven in two--and it fell on the long grass, where it writhed in
horrible convulsions for some moments, although its life was gone.

Words cannot be found to describe the delirium of joy which Wagner felt,
when having thus slain the terrible anaconda, he placed his hand on
Nisida's heart and felt that it beat--though languidly. He lifted her
from the ground--he carried her in his arms to the bank of the limpid
stream--and he sprinkled water upon her pale cheeks.

Slowly did she recover; and when her large black eyes at length opened,
she uttered a fearful shriek, and closed them again--for with returning
life the reminiscence of the awful embrace of the serpent came back
also. But Wagner murmured words of sweet assurance and consolation--of
love and joy, in her ears; and she felt that it was no dream, but that
she was really saved! Then, winding her arms round Fernand's neck, she
embraced him in speechless and still almost senseless trance, for the
idea of such happy deliverance was overpowering--amounting to an agony
which a mortal creature could scarcely endure.

"Oh! Nisida," at length exclaimed Wagner, "was it a delusion produced by
the horrors of that scene?--or did thy voice really greet mine ears ere
now!"

There was a minute's profound silence--during which, as they sat upon
the bank of the stream, locked in a fond embrace, their eyes were fixed
with fascinating gaze upon each other, as if they could not contemplate
each other too long--he in tenderness, and she in passion.

"Yes, Fernand," said Nisida, breaking that deep silence at last, and
speaking in a voice so mellifluously clear, so soft, so penetrating in
its tone, that it realized all the fond ideas which her lover had
conceived of what its nature would be if it were ever restored, "yes,
Fernand, dearest Fernand," she repeated, "you did indeed hear my voice,
and to _you_ never again shall I be mute."

Wagner could not allow her time to say more: he was almost wild with
rapture! His Nisida was restored to him, and no longer Nisida the deaf
and dumb, but Nisida who could hear the fond language which he addressed
to her, and who could respond in the sweetest, most melting and
delicious tones that ever came from woman's lips.

For a long time their hearts were too full, alike for total silence or
connected conversation, and while the world from which they were cut off
was entirely forgotten, they gathered so much happiness from the few
words in which they indulged, and from all that they read in each
other's eyes, that the emotions which they experienced might have
furnished sensations for a lifetime.

At length--she scarcely knew how the subject began, although it might
naturally have arisen of its own spontaneous suggestion--Nisida found
herself speaking of the long period of deception which she had
maintained in relation to her powers of speech and hearing.

"Thou lovest me well, dearest Fernand," she said in her musical Italian
tones; "and thou would'st not create a pang in my heart? Then never seek
to learn wherefore, when at the still tender age of fifteen, I resolved
upon consummating so dreadful a sacrifice as to affect dumbness. The
circumstances were, indeed, solemnly grave and strangely important,
which demanded so awful a martyrdom. But well did I weigh all the misery
and all the peril that such a self-devotion was sure to entail upon me.
I knew that I must exercise the most stern--the most remorseless--the
most inflexible despotism over my emotions--that I must crush as it were
the very feelings of my soul--that I must also observe a caution so
unwearied and so constantly wakeful, that it would amount to a
sensitiveness the most painful--and that I must prepare myself to hear
the merry jest without daring to smile, or the exciting narrative of the
world's stirring events without suffering my countenance to vary a hue!
Oh! I calculated--I weighed all this, and yet I was not appalled by the
immensity of the task. I knew the powers of my own mind, and I did not
deceive myself as to their extent. But, ah! how fearful was it at first
to hear the sounds of human voices, and dare not respond to them; how
maddening at times was it to listen to conversation in which I longed to
join, and yet be compelled to sit like a passionless statue! But mine
was a will of iron strength--a resolution of indomitable power! Even
when alone when I knew that I should not be overheard--I never essayed
the powers of my voice, I never murmured a single syllable to myself so
fearful was I lest the slightest use of the glorious gift of speech
might render me weak in my purpose. And strange as it may seem to you,
dearest Fernand, not even on this island did I yield to the temptation
of suddenly breaking that long, that awful silence which I had imposed
upon myself. And, until this day, one human being only, save myself, was
acquainted with that mighty secret of ten long years, and that man was
the generous-hearted, the noble-minded Dr. Duras. He it was who aided me
in my project of simulating the forlorn condition of the deaf and dumb:
he it was who bribed the turnkeys to admit me unquestioned to your cell
in the prison of the ducal palace. And for years, perhaps, should I have
retained my wondrous secret even from _you_, dearest Fernand; for
through dangers of many kinds--in circumstances of the most trying
nature, have I continued firm in my purpose; abjuring the faculty of
speech even when it would have saved me from much cruel embarrassment or
from actual peril. Thus, when the villain Stephano Verrina bore me away
by force from my native city, I maintained the seal upon my lips,
trusting to circumstances to enable me to escape from his power without
being compelled to betray a secret of such infinite value and importance
to myself. But when I found that I was so narrowly watched at Leghorn
that flight was impossible, I seriously debated, in my own mind, the
necessity of raising an alarm in the house where I was kept a prisoner
for two whole days; and then I reflected that I was in the power of a
desperate bandit and his two devoted adherents, who were capable of any
atrocity to forward their designs or prevent exposure. Lastly, when I
was conveyed at dead of night on board the corsair-ship, the streets
were deserted, and the pirates with whom Stephano was leagued, thronged
the port. I therefore resigned myself to my fate, trusting still to
circumstances, and retaining my secret. But that incident of to-day--oh!
it was enough to crush energies ten thousand times more powerful than
mine: it was of so horrifying a nature as to be sufficient to loose the
bands which confine the tongue of one really dumb."

And a strong shudder convulsed the entire form of Nisida, as she thus,
by her own words, recalled so forcibly to mind that terrible event which
had broken a spell of ten years' duration.

Fernand pressed her to his bosom, exclaiming, "Oh, beloved Nisida, how
beautiful dost thou appear to me!--how soft and charming is that dear
voice of thine! Let us not think of the past, at least not now; for I
also have explanations to give thee," he added, slowly and mournfully;
then, in a different and again joyous tone, he said: "Let us be happy in
the conviction that we are restored to each other; let this be a
holiday--nay, more," he added, sinking his voice almost to a whisper;
"let it be the day on which we join our hands together in the sight of
Heaven. No priest will bless our union, Nisida; but we will plight our
vows--and God will accord us his blessing."

The lady hid her blushing, glowing countenance on his breast, and
murmured in a voice melodious as the music of the stream by which they
sat, "Fernand, I am thine--thine forever."

"And I am thine, my beauteous Nisida; thine forever, as thou art mine!"
exclaimed Wagner, lifting her head and gazing on her lovely, blushing
face as on a vision of heaven.

"No; she is mine!" thundered the voice of the forgotten Stephano, and in
a moment the bandit flung himself upon Wagner, whom he attempted to hurl
into the crystal but deep river.

Fernand, however, caught the arm of the brigand and dragged him along
with him into the water, while a terrific scream burst from the lips of
Nisida. Then furious was the struggle that commenced in the depths of
the stream. But Stephano lay beneath Wagner, who held him down on the
pebbly bottom. In another moment Nisida herself plunged into the river
with the wild hope of aiding her lover to conquer his foe, or to rescue
him from the grasp which the bandit maintained upon him with the
tenacity that was strengthened rather than impaired by the agony of
suffocation.

But she rose again to the surface in an instant by the indomitable
influence of that instinct for self-preservation which no human being,
when immersed in the deep water, can resist if the art of swimming has
been attained. Again she dived to succor her lover, but her aid, even if
she could have afforded any, was no longer necessary, for Fernand rose
from the crystal depths and bore his Nisida to the bank, while the
corpse of the drowned bandit was carried away by the current.

Wagner and Nisida were now the sole human inhabitants of that isle--the
king and queen of the loveliest clime on which the sun shone. Toward the
sea-shore they repaired, hand in hand, and having partaken of the fruits
which they gathered in their way, they set to work to form a hut with
the planks, cordage, and canvas of the wreck. It will be remembered that
Nisida had saved the carpenter's tools, and thus the task became a
comparatively easy one.

By the time the sun went down a tenement was formed, rude, it is true,
but still perfect enough to harbor them in a clime where the nights were
warm and where the dews prevailed only in the verdant parts of the isle.
Then with what joyous feelings did Nisida deck the walls of the hut with
a tapestry of flowers and prepare the bridal couch with materials which
she had saved from the wreck.

Softly and sweetly shone the moon that night; and, as its silver rays
penetrated through the crevices of the little cottage so hastily and so
rudely formed, they played kissingly upon the countenances of the happy
pair who had wedded each other in the sight of Heaven.




CHAPTER XLIV.

ALESSANDRO FRANCATELLI.


In order that the reader should fully understand the stirring incidents
which yet remain to be told, it is necessary for us to explain certain
particulars connected with Alessandro Francatelli, the brother of the
beautiful Flora. It will be recollected that this young man accompanied
the Florentine envoy to Constantinople, in the honorable capacity of
secretary, some few years previous to the commencement of our tale.

Alessandro was strikingly handsome, tall, well-formed, and of great
physical strength. His manners were pleasing, his conversation agreeable
to a degree. Indeed, he had profited so well by the lessons of the
excellent-hearted Father Marco, that his mind was well stored with
intellectual wealth. He was, moreover, a finished musician, and played
the violin, at that period a rare accomplishment, to perfection. In
addition to all these qualifications, he was a skillful versifier, and
composed the most beautiful extemporaneous poetry, apparently without an
effort. But his disposition was by no means light or devoted to pursuits
which worldly-minded persons would consider frivolous. For he himself
was worldly-minded, keen, shrewd, far-seeing, and ambitious. He deplored
the ruin which had overtaken his family, and longed ardently to rebuild
its fortunes, adding thereto the laurels of glory and the honors of
rank.

The situation which he enjoyed in the establishment of the Florentine
envoy appeared to him the stepping-stone to the attainment of these
objects, but the embassy had not been long settled at Constantinople,
when Alessandro found that his master was one who, being ignorant
himself, was jealous of the talents displayed by others. Great interest
had alone procured the envoy the post which he held as negotiator
plenipotentiary with the Ottoman Porte, on behalf of the Republic of
Florence; and the Turkish reis-effendi, or minister of foreign affairs,
soon perceived that the Christian embassador was quite incompetent to
enter into the intricacies of treaties and the complex machinery of
diplomacy. But suddenly the official notes which the envoy addressed to
the reis-effendi began to exhibit a sagacity and an evidence of
far-sighted policy which contrasted strongly with the imbecility which
had previously characterized those communications. It was at that period
a part of the policy of the Ottoman Port to maintain spies in the
household of all the foreign embassadors residing in Constantinople; and
through this agency the reis-effendi discovered that the Florentine
envoy had condescended to avail himself of the brilliant talents of his
secretary, Alessandro Francatelli, to infuse spirit into his official
notes.

The reis-effendi was himself a shrewd and sagacious man; and he
recognized in the abilities evinced by the youthful secretary, those
elements which, if properly developed, would form a great politician.
The Turkish Minister accordingly resolved to leave no stone unturned, in
order to entice so promising an individual into the service of the
sultan. To accomplish this object indirect means were at first
attempted; and the secret agents of the minister sounded Alessandro upon
the subject. He listened to them at first in silence, but not
unwillingly. They grew bolder, and their speech became more open. He
encouraged them to lay bare their aims; and they hinted to him how
glorious a career might be opened to him were he to enter the service of
the high and mighty sultan, Solyman the Magnificent, who then sat upon
the proud throne of the Ottoman Empire.

The more attentively Alessandro listened, the less reserved became those
who were instructed to undermine his fidelity toward his master, the
Florentine Envoy. They represented to him how Christians, who had
abjured their creed and embraced the Moslem faith, had risen to the
highest offices, even to the post of grand vizier, or prime minister of
the empire. Alessandro was completely master of his emotions; he had not
studied for some years in the school of diplomacy without learning how
to render the expression of his countenance such as at any moment to
belie the real state of his feelings. He did not, therefore, suffer the
spies and agents of the reis-effendi to perceive how deep an impression
their words had made upon him; but he said and looked enough to convince
them that the topics of their discourse would receive the most serious
consideration at his hands. His mind was already made up to accept the
overtures thus made to him; but he affected to hesitate, for he saw that
his services were ardently longed for, and he resolved to drive as
advantageous a bargain as possible.

He was one afternoon lounging through the principal bezestein or bazaar,
when he was struck by the elegant form, imposing air, and rich apparel
of a lady who rode slowly along upon a mule, attended by four female
slaves on foot. The outlines of her figure shaped the most admirable
symmetry he had ever beheld; and though her countenance was concealed by
a thick veil, in accordance with the custom of the East, yet he seemed
to have been impressed with an instinctive conviction that the face
beneath that invidious covering was eminently beautiful. Moreover, the
eyes whose glances flashed through the two holes which were formed in
the veil so as to permit the enjoyment of the faculty of sight, were
gloriously brilliant, yet black as jet. Once, too, when the lady raised
her delicate white hand, sparkling with jewels, to arrange the folds of
that hated veil, Alessandro caught a rapid, evanescent glimpse of a neck
as white as snow.

The little procession stopped at the door of a merchant's shop in the
bazaar; the slaves assisted the lady to dismount, and she entered the
warehouse, followed by her dependents, the mule being left in charge of
one of the numerous porters who thronged in the bezestein.

Alessandro lingered near the door, and he beheld the merchant displaying
various pieces of rich brocade before the eyes of the lady, who,
however, scrupulously retained the dense veil over her countenance.
Having made her purchases, which were taken charge of by one of the
slaves, the lady came forth again; and Alessandro, forgetting that his
lingering near now amounted to almost an act of rudeness, was chained to
the spot, lost in admiration of her elegant gesture, her graceful yet
dignified carriage, and the exquisite contour of her perfect shape. Her
feet and ankles, appearing beneath the full trousers, that were gathered
in just at the commencement of the swell of the leg, were small and
beautifully shaped; and so light was her tread, that she scarcely seemed
to touch the ground on which she walked.

As the lady issued from the door of the merchant's shop, she cast a
rapid but inquiring look toward Alessandro, though whether in anger or
curiosity he was unable to determine, for the eyes only could he see,
and it was impossible for him to read the meaning of the glances they
sent forth, when unassisted by a view of the general expression worn by
her countenance at the same time.

Accident, however, favored him far more than he could have possibly
anticipated. At the very moment when the lady's head was turned toward
him, she tripped over the cordage of a bale of goods that had shortly
before been opened beneath the painted awning over the front of the
shop, and she would have fallen had not Alessandro sprung forward and
caught her in his arms.

She uttered a faint scream, for her veil had shifted aside from its
proper position; and her countenance was thus revealed to a man, and
that man evidently by his dress a Christian!

Instantly recovering her self-possession, she readjusted her veil, gave
a gentle but graceful inclination of the head toward Alessandro, mounted
her mule by the assistance of the slaves, and rode away at a somewhat
hasty pace. Alessandro stood gazing after her until she turned the angle
of the nearest street, and it struck him that her glance was for an
instant cast rapidly back toward him, ere she disappeared from his view.

And no wonder that he stood thus rooted to the spot, following her with
his eyes; for the countenance which accident had revealed to him was
already impressed upon his heart. It was one of those lovely Georgian
faces, oval in shape, and with a complexion formed of milk and roses,
which have at all times been prized in the East, as the very perfection
of female beauty; a face which, without intellectual expression,
possesses an ineffable witchery, and all the charms calculated to
fascinate the beholder. The eyes were black as jet, the hair of a dark
auburn, and luxuriantly rich in its massive beauty; the lips were of
bright vermilion, and between them were two rows of pearl, small and
even. The forehead was high and broad, and white as marble, with the
delicate blue veins visible through the transparent complexion.

Alessandro was ravished as he reflected on the wondrous beauty thus for
a moment revealed to him, but his raptures speedily changed to positive
grief when he thought how improbable it was that this fair creature
would ever cross his path again. He entered the warehouse, made a small
purchase, and inquired casually of the Turkish merchant if he knew who
the lady was. The reply was in the negative, but the merchant informed
Alessandro that he had no doubt the lady was of some rank, from the
profound respect with which her slaves treated her, and from the
readiness with which she paid the prices demanded of her for the goods
she had purchased, Turkish ladies generally being notorious for their
disposition to drive a hard bargain with traders.

Alessandro returned to the suburb of Pera, in which the mansion of the
Florentine Embassy was situated--his mind full of the beautiful creature
whose countenance he had seen for a moment, and whose soft form he had
also for a moment--a single moment--held in his arms. He could not apply
himself to the duties of his office, but feigned indisposition and
retired to the privacy of his own apartment. And never did that chamber
seem so lonely, so cold, so cheerless. His entire disposition appeared
to have become suddenly changed; he felt that the world now contained
something the possession of which was positively necessary to his
happiness. One sole idea absorbed all his thoughts: the most lovely
countenance which, in his estimation, he had ever seen was so indelibly
reflected in the mirror of his mind, that his imagination could
contemplate naught besides. He knew not that whenever he went abroad, he
was watched by one of the spies of the reis-effendi; and he was
therefore surprised when, on the following day, that secret agent of the
minister whispered in his ear, "Christian, thou lovest--and it depends
on thyself whether thou wilt be loved in return!"

Alessandro was stupefied at these words. His secret was known, or at
least suspected. He questioned the individual who had thus addressed
him, and he found that the incident of the preceding day was indeed more
than suspected--it _was_ known. He besought to know who the lady was;
but the spy would not, or could not satisfy him. He, however, promised
that he would endeavor to ascertain a point in which Alessandro appeared
to be so deeply interested. The intriguing spirit of Turkish dependents
is notorious: the reader will not therefore be surprised when we state
that in a few days the spy made his appearance in Alessandro's presence
with a countenance denoting joyous tidings. The young Italian was
impatient to learn the results of the agent's inquiries.

"I know not who the lady is," was the reply; "but this much I have to
impart to you, signor--that she did not behold you the other day with
indifference; that she is grateful for the attention you paid in
offering your aid to save her from perhaps a serious accident--and that
she will grant you a few moments' interview this evening, provided you
assent to certain conditions to be imposed upon you, respecting the
preliminary arrangements for your meeting."

"Name them! name them!" exclaimed Alessandro, wild with joy, and almost
doubting whether he were not in the midst of a delicious dream.

"That you consent to be blindfolded while being conducted into her
presence--that you maintain the most profound silence while with those
who will guide you to her abode--and that you return from the interview
under the same circumstances."

"I should be unworthy the interest which she deigns to manifest in my
behalf, were I to refuse compliance with those terms," answered
Alessandro.

"An hour after sunset," said the spy, "you will meet me at the gate of
the Mosque of Selimya;" and with those words he hurried away, leaving
the young Florentine in a state of excited hope, amounting to a delirium
of joy.

Alessandro was well aware that adventures, such as the one in which he
found himself suddenly involved, were by no means uncommon in the East;
and that ladies of the most unimpeachable virtue, as well as of the
highest rank, frequently accorded interviews of this private nature to
those men who were fortunate enough to merit their attention--such
visits being the first step toward matrimonial connections. But then he
remembered that he was a Christian, and the fair object of his devotion
was probably of the Moslem faith. What, then, would be the result? Was
some wealthy lady of high rank about to abandon her creed for his sake?
or would the sacrifice of his faith be required as the only condition on
which his complete happiness might be achieved? He knew not--cared but
little; it was sufficient for him that he was to meet the charming being
whose image had never once quitted his mind, from the first moment he
had seen her in the bezestein!

Even before the appointed hour was Alessandro pacing the square in front
of the splendid temple which the Sultan Selim--the conqueror of
Egypt--had erected, and which bore his imperial name. At length the
agent, for whom he waited, made his appearance. This man, though
actually a Turkish dependent in the service of the Florentine Envoy,
was, as before stated, neither more nor less than one of the numerous
spies placed by the reis-effendi round the person of that embassador.
Alessandro was aware of this, in consequence of the offers and
representations that had been made to him through the means of this
agent, and though the youth suspected that the man knew more concerning
the beauteous idol of his heart than he had chosen to admit, yet he had
seen enough to convince him of the inutility of questioning him on that
head.

It was, therefore, in silence that Alessandro followed his guide through
several by-streets down to the margin of the waters of the Golden Horn.
There a boat, in which two rowers and a female slave were seated, was
waiting.

"Here, must you be blindfolded," said the spy.

For a few moments Alessandro hesitated, in regret that he had gone so
far with this adventure. He had heard fearful tales of dark deeds
committed on the waters of the Bosporus and the Golden Horn; and he
himself, when roving during his leisure hours along the verdant banks of
those waters, had seen the livid corpse float with the tale-telling
bow-string fastened round the neck.

The spy seemed to divine his thoughts.

"You hesitate, signor," he said; "then let us retrace our way. But
remember," he added in a low tone, "that were treachery intended, it
would be as easy to perform the deed where you now stand, as on the
bosom of that star-lit gulf."

Alessandro hesitated no longer, but suffered himself to be completely
hooded in a cap which the spy drew over his countenance. He was then
conducted into the boat and guided to a seat next to the female slave.
The spy leapt upon the strand, the boatmen plied their oars, and the
skiff shot away from the bank, no one uttering a word.




[END OF PART I.]




_PART II._




CHAPTER XLV.

THE LADY OF CONSTANTINOPLE.


For upward of half an hour did the boat skim the surface of the Golden
Horn, the dip of the oars in the water and the rippling around the sharp
prow alone breaking the solemn silence of the night. At length the skiff
stopped, and the female slave took Alessandro's hand, whispering in a
low tone, "I will serve as thy guide, Christian; but speak not till thou
hast permission."

She then led him from the boat, up a flight of steps, and through a
garden--for he occasionally came in contact with the outstretching
branches of shrubs, and there was moreover a delicious odor of flowers,
as he proceeded in the total darkness of his blindfolding. At the
expiration of ten minutes the guide stopped; and Alessandro heard a key
turn in a lock.

"Enter there," said the slave, pushing him gently forward, and speaking
in a low tone. "Take off the cap--attire yourself in the raiment you
will find ready provided, and then pass fearlessly through the door at
the further end of the room. You will meet me again in the hall which
you will thus reach."

And, without waiting for a reply, the slave closed and locked the door
through which Alessandro had just passed. Hastily did he remove the cap,
which had indeed almost suffocated him; and he now found himself in a
small apartment, elegantly furnished in the most luxurious Oriental
fashion, and brilliantly lighted. A table spread with confectionery,
cakes, fruits, and even wines--though the fermented juice of the grape
be expressly forbidden by the laws of the Prophet Mohammed--occupied the
center of the room. Around the walls were continuous sofas, or ottomans,
so conducive to the enjoyment of a voluptuous indolence; the floor was
spread with a carpet so thick that the feet sunk into the silky texture,
as into newly fallen snow; and whichever way he turned Alessandro beheld
his form reflected in vast mirrors set in magnificent frames. There were
no windows on any side of this apartment; but there was a cupola fitted
with stained glass on the roof, and Alessandro judged that he was in one
of those voluptuous kiosks usually found in the gardens of wealthy
Turks.

Precisely as the slave had informed him, he found an elegant suit of
Moslem garments set out on the sofa for his use; and he hastened to
exchange his Italian costume for the Oriental raiment. As he thus
attired himself, it was necessary to contemplate himself in the mirror
facing him, so as properly to adjust clothes to which he was totally
unaccustomed; and it struck him that the garb of the infidel became him
better than that of the Christian. He did not, however, waste time in
the details of this strange toilet; but as soon as it was completed he
opened the door at the further end of the room, in pursuance of the
instructions he had received. Alessandro found himself in a large marble
hall, from which several flights of stairs led to the apartments above.
The place was refulgent with the light of numerous chandeliers, the
glare of which was enhanced by the vast mirrors attached to the walls,
and the crystal pillars that supported the roof.

Not a human being met Alessandro's eyes; and he began to fear either
that he had mistaken the directions he had received, or that some
treachery was intended, when a door opened, and the female slave,
wrapped in a veil, made her appearance. Placing her forefinger upon that
part of the veil which covered her lips, to enjoin silence, she led the
way up the nearest staircase, Alessandro following with a heart beating
audibly. They reached a door at which a negro male slave was stationed.

"The hakim" (physician), said Alessandro's guide, laconically addressing
herself to the negro, who bowed in silence and threw open the door. The
female slave conducted the pretended physician into a small but
splendidly furnished ante-room, in which there were several other
dependents of her own sex. A door at the further end was opened, and
Alessandro passed through into another, larger, and still more
magnificently furnished room; the door closed behind him, and he found
himself alone with the idol of his adoration.

Half seated, half lying upon cushions of scarlet brocade, the glossy
bright hue of which was mellowed by the muslin spread over it, appeared
the beauteous creature whose image was so faithfully delineated in his
memory. She was attired in the graceful and becoming dualma, a purple
vest which set close to her form, and with a species of elasticity
shaped itself so as to develop every contour.

But in accordance with the custom of the clime and age, the dualma was
open at the bosom, sloping from each lovely white shoulder to the waist,
where the two folds joining, formed an angle, at which the purple vest
was fastened by a diamond worth a monarch's ransom. The sleeves were
wide, but short, scarcely reaching to the elbow, and leaving all the
lower part of the snowy arms completely bare. Her ample trousers were of
purple silk, covered with the finest muslin, and drawn in tight a little
above the ankles, which were naked. On her feet she wore crimson
slippers cut very low, and each ornamented with a diamond. Round her
person below the waist she wore a magnificent shawl, rolled up, as it
were, negligently, so as to form a girdle or zone, and fastened in front
with two large tassels of pearls. Diamond bracelets adorned her fair
arms; and her head-dress consisted of a turban or shawl of light but
rich material, fastened with golden bodkins, the head of each being a
pearl of the best water. Beneath this turban, her rich auburn hair,
glowing like gold in the light of the perfumed lamps, and amidst the
blaze of diamonds which adorned her, was parted in massive bands,
sweeping gracefully over her temples and gathered behind the ears, then
falling in all the luxuriance of its rich clustering folds over the
cushion whereon she reclined. Her finger-nails were slightly tinged with
henna, the rosy hue the more effectually setting off the lily whiteness
of her delicate hand and full round arm. But no need had she to dye the
lashes of her eyes with the famous kohol, so much used by Oriental
ladies, for those lashes were by nature formed of the deepest jet--a
somewhat unusual but beauteous contrast with the color of her hair. The
cheeks of the lovely creature were slightly flushed, or it might have
been a reflection of the scarlet brocade of the cushion on which, as we
have said, she was half-seated, half-lying, when Alessandro appeared in
her presence.

For a few moments the young Italian was so dazzled by her beauty, so
bewildered by the appearance of that lady, whose richness of attire
seemed to denote the rank of sultana, that he remained rooted to the
spot, uncertain whether to advance, to retire, or to fall upon his knees
before her. But in an encouraging tone, and in a voice musical as a
silver bell, the lady said: "Approach, Christian!" and she pointed to a
low ottoman within a few paces of the sofa which she herself occupied.
Alessandro now recovered his presence of mind; and no longer embarrassed
and awkward, but with graceful ease and yet profound respect, he took
the seat indicated.

"Beauteous lady," he said, "how can I ever demonstrate the
gratitude--the illimitable, boundless gratitude which fills my heart,
for the joy, the truly elysian delight afforded me by this meeting?"

"You speak our language well, Christian," observed the lady, smiling
faintly at the compliment conveyed by the words of Alessandro, but
evading a direct reply.

"I have for some years past been in the service of the Florentine envoy,
lady," was the answer; "and the position which I occupy at the palace of
the embassy has led me to study the beauteous language of this clime,
and to master its difficulties. But never, never did that language sound
so soft and musical upon my ears as now, flowing from those sweet lips
of thine."

"The Moslem maiden dares not listen to the flattery of the infidel,"
said the beauteous stranger in a serious but not severe tone. "Listen to
me, Christian, with attention, for our meeting must not be prolonged
many minutes. To say that I beheld thee with indifference when we first
encountered each other in the bazaar, were to utter a falsehood which I
scorn; to admit that I can love thee, and love thee well," she added,
her voice slightly trembling, "is an avowal which I do not blush to
make. But never can the Moslem maiden bestow her hand on the infidel. If
thou lovest me--if thou wouldst prove thyself worthy of that affection
which my heart is inclined to bestow upon thee, thou wilt renounce the
creed of thy forefathers, and embrace the Mussulman faith. Nor is this
all that I require of thee, or that thou must achieve to win me. Become
a true believer--acknowledge that Allah is God and Mohammed is his
prophet--and a bright and glorious destiny will await thee. For although
thou wilt depart hence without learning my name, or who I may be, or the
place to which you have been brought to meet me,--though we shall behold
each other no more until thou hast rendered thyself worthy of my hand,
yet shall I ever be mindful of thee, my loved one! An unseen, an unknown
influence shall attend thee: thy slightest wishes will be anticipated
and fulfilled in a manner for which thou wilt vainly seek to
account,--and, as thou provest thy talents or thy valor, so will
promotion open its doors to thee with such rapidity that thou wilt
strain every nerve to reach the highest offices in the state--for then
only may'st thou hope to receive my hand, and behold the elucidation of
the mystery which up to that date will envelop thy destinies."

While the lady was thus speaking, a fearful struggle took place in the
breast of Alessandro--for the renunciation of his creed, a creed in
which he must ever in his heart continue to believe, though ostensibly
he might abjure it--was an appalling step to contemplate. Then to his
mind also came the images of those whom he loved, and who were far away
in Italy:--his aunt, who had been so kind to him, his sister whom he
knew to be so proud of him, and Father Marco, who manifested such deep
interest in his behalf. But on his ears continued to flow the honeyed
words and the musical tones of the charming temptress; and, as she
gradually developed to his imagination the destinies upon which he might
enter, offering herself as the eventual prize to be gained by a career
certain to be pushed on successfully through the medium of a powerful,
though mysterious influence--Florence, relatives, and friends, became as
secondary considerations in his mind; and by the time the lady brought
her long address to a conclusion--that address which had grown more
impassioned and tender as she proceeded--Alessandro threw himself at her
feet, exclaiming, "Lovely houri that thou art--beauteous as the maidens
that dwell in the paradise of thy prophet--I am thine. I am thine!"

The lady extended her right hand, which he took and pressed in rapture
to his lips. But the next moment she rose lightly to her feet, and
assuming a demeanor befitting a royal sultana, said in a sweet, though
impressive tone:

"We must now part--thou to enter on thy career of fame, I to set in
motion every spring within my reach to advance thee to the pinnacle of
glory and power. Henceforth thy name is Ibrahim! Go, then, my Ibrahim,
and throw thyself at the feet of the reis-effendi, and that great
minister will forthwith present thee to Piri Pasha, the grand vizier.
Toil diligently--labor arduously--and the rest concerns me. Go, then, my
Ibrahim, I say, and enter on the path which will lead thee to the summit
of fame and power!"

She extended her arms toward him--he snatched her to his breast, and
covered her cheeks with kisses. In that paradise of charms he could have
reveled forever; but the tender caresses lasted not beyond a few
moments, for the lady tore herself away from his embrace and hurried
into an adjacent apartment. Alessandro--or rather, the renegade,
Ibrahim--passed into the anteroom where his guide, the female slave,
awaited his return. She conducted him back to the hall, and advanced
toward the door of the voluptuous kiosk, where he had changed his
raiment.

"Goest thou forth a Christian still, or a true believer?" she asked
turning suddenly round.

"As a Mussulman," answered the renegade, while his heart sank within
him, and remorse already commenced its torture.

"Then thou hast no further need of the Christian garb," said the slave.
"Await me here."

She entered the kiosk, and returned in a few moments with the cap,
which, in obedience to her directions, he once more drew on his head and
over his countenance. The slave then led him into the garden, which they
treaded in profound silence. At length they reached the steps leading
down to the water, and the slave accompanied him into the boat, which
immediately shot away from the bank. Alessandro had now ample time for
calm reflection. The excitement of the hurried incidents of the evening
was nearly over, and, though his breast was still occupied with the
image of his beautiful unknown, and with the brilliant prospects which
she had opened to view, he nevertheless shrank from the foul deed of
apostasy which he had vowed to perpetrate. But we have already said that
he was essentially worldly-minded, and, as he felt convinced that the
petty jealousy of the Florentine Envoy would prevent him from rising
higher in the diplomatic hierarchy than the post of secretary, he by
degrees managed to console himself for his renegadism on the score that
it was necessary--the indispensable stepping-stone to the gratification
of his ambition.

Thus by the time the boat touched the landing-place where he had first
entered it, he had succeeded to some extent in subduing the pangs of
remorse. The female slave now bade him remove the cap from his face and
resume his turban. A few moments sufficed to make this change; and he
was about to step on shore, when the woman caught him by the sleeve of
his caftan, and, thrusting a small case of sandal-wood into his hand,
said: "She whom you saw ere now, commanded me to give thee this."

The slave pushed him toward the bank: he obeyed the impulse and landed,
she remaining in the boat, which instantly darted away again, most
probably to convey her back to the abode of her charming mistress. On
the top of the bank the renegade was accosted by the spy whom he had
left there when he embarked in the skiff.

"Allah and the Prophet be praised!" exclaimed the man, surveying
Alessandro attentively by the light of the lovely moon. "Thou art now
numbered amongst the faithful!"

The apostate bit his lips to keep down a sigh of remorse which rose to
them; and his guide, without uttering another word, led the way to the
palace of the reis-effendi. There Alessandro or Ibrahim, as we must
henceforth call him--was lodged in a splendid apartment, and had two
slaves appointed to wait upon him. He, however, hastily dismissed them,
and when alone, opened the case that had been placed into his hands by
the female slave. It contained a varied assortment of jewelry and
precious stones, constituting a treasure of immense value.




CHAPTER XLVI.

THE APOSTATE IBRAHIM.


Constantinople, like haughty Rome, is built on seven hills--the houses
being so disposed that they do not intercept the view commanded by each
on the amphitheatrical acclivities. But the streets are narrow, crooked,
and uneven; and the grand effects of the numerous stately mosques and
noble edifices are subdued, and in many cases altogether lost, either by
the very insignificant width of the thoroughfares in which they stand,
or by the contiguity of mean and miserable wooden tenements.

The mosque of St. Sophia, once a Christian church, with its magnificent
portico, supported by marble columns, its nine vast folding doors,
adorned with bas-reliefs, and its stupendous dome, a hundred and twenty
feet in diameter; the mosque of the Sultan Solyman, forming an exact
square with four noble towers at the angles, and with its huge cupola,
in the midst; the mosque of the Sultan Ahmed, with its numerous domes,
its tall minarets, and its colonnades supported by marble pillars; and
the mosque of the Sultana Valida, or queen mother of Mohammed the
Fourth, exceeding all other Mussulman churches in the delicacy of its
architecture and the beauty of its columns of marble and jasper,
supplied by the ruins of Troy--these are the most remarkable temples in
the capital of the Ottoman empire.

The Grand Bezestein, or exchange, is likewise a magnificent
structure--consisting of a spacious hall of circular form, built of
free-stone, and surrounded by shops displaying the richest commodities
of Oriental commerce. In the Ladies' Bazaar there is a marble column of
extraordinary height, and on the sides of which, from the foot to the
crown, are represented in admirable bas-reliefs the most remarkable
events which characterized the reign of the Emperor Arcadius, ere the
capital of Roman dominions of the East fell into the hands of the
descendants of Osman.

But of all the striking edifices at Constantinople, that of the Sultan's
Palace, or seraglio, is the most spacious and the most magnificent.
Christian writers and readers are too apt to confound the seraglio with
the harem, and to suppose that the former means the apartments belonging
to the sultan's ladies; whereas the word seraglio, or rather _sernil_,
represents the entire palace of which the harem, or females' dwelling,
is but a comparatively small portion.

The seraglio is a vast inclosure, occupying nearly the entire site of
the ancient city of Byzantium, and embracing a circumference of five
miles. It contains nine enormous courts of quadrangular form, and an
immense number of buildings--constituting a complete town of itself. But
within this inclosure dwell upward of ten thousand persons--the entire
court of the sultan. There reside the great officers of state, the body
guards, the numerous corps of bostandjis, or gardeners, and baltojis, or
fire-wood purveyors--the corps of white and black eunuchs, the pages,
the mutes, the dwarfs--the ladies of the harem, and all their numerous
attendants.

There are nine gates to the palace of the sultan. The principal one
opens on the square of St. Sophia, and is very magnificent in its
architecture. It is this gate which is called the Sublime Porte--a name
figuratively given to the court of the sultan, in all histories,
records, and diplomatic transactions. It was within the inclosure of the
seraglio that Alessandro Francatelli, whom we shall henceforth call by
his apostate name of Ibrahim--was lodged in the dwelling of the
reis-effendi or minister of foreign affairs. But in the course of a few
days the renegade was introduced into the presence of Piri Pasha, the
grand vizier--that high functionary who exercised a power almost as
extensive and as despotic as that wielded by the sultan himself.

Ibrahim, the apostate, was received by his highness Piri Pasha at a
private audience--and the young man exerted all his powers, and called
to his aid all the accomplishments which he possessed, to render himself
agreeable to that great minister. He discoursed in an intelligent manner
upon the policy of Italy and Austria, and gave the grand vizier
considerable information relative to the customs, resources, and
condition of these countries. Then, when the vizier touched upon lighter
matters, Ibrahim showed how well he was already acquainted with the
works of the most eminent Turkish poets and historians; and the art of
music being mentioned, he gave the minister a specimen of his
proficiency on the violin. Piri Pasha was charmed with the young
renegade, whom he immediately took into his service as one of his
private secretaries.

Not many weeks elapsed before the fame of Ibrahim's accomplishments and
rare talents reached the ears of the sultan, Solyman the Magnificent;
and the young renegade was honored with an audience by the ruler of the
East. On this occasion he exerted himself to please even more
triumphantly than when he was introduced to the grand vizier; and the
sultan commanded that henceforth Ibrahim should remain attached to his
person in the capacity of keeper of the imperial archives.

We should observe that the dispatches which the Florentine Envoy wrote
to the government of the republic, contained but a brief and vague
allusion to the apostasy of Alessandro Francatelli; merely mentioning
that the youth had become a Mussulman, and entered the service of the
grand vizier, but not stating either the name which he had adopted or
the brilliant prospects which had so suddenly and marvelously opened
before him. The Florentine Embassador treated the matter thus lightly,
because he was afraid of incurring the blame of his government for not
having kept a more stringent watch over his subordinate, were he to
attach any importance to the fact of Alessandro's apostasy. But he hoped
that by merely glancing at the event as one scarcely worth special
notice, the Council of Florence would be led to treat it with equal
levity. Nor was the embassador deceived in his calculation; and thus the
accounts which reached Florence relative to Alessandro's renegadism--and
which were not indeed communicated to the council until some months
after the occurrence of the apostasy itself--were vague and indefinite
to a degree.

And had Ibrahim no remorse? Did he never think of his lovely sister
Flora, and of his affectionate aunt who, in his boyhood, had made such
great and generous sacrifices to rear them honorably? Oh! yes;--but a
more powerful idea dominated the remembrance of kindred, and the
attachment to home--and that idea was ambition! Moreover, the hope of
speedily achieving that greatness which was to render him eligible and
worthy to possess the charming being whose powerful influence seemed to
surround him with a constant halo of protection, and to soothe down all
the asperities which are usually found in the career of those who rise
suddenly and rise highly--this ardent, longing hope not only encouraged
him to put forth all his energies to make himself master of a glorious
position, but also subdued to no small extent the feelings of
compunction which would otherwise have been too bitter, too agonizing to
endure.

His mind was, moreover, constantly occupied. When not in attendance upon
the sultan, he devoted all his time to render himself intimately
acquainted with the laws, polity, diplomatic history, resources,
condition, and finances of the Ottoman Empire; he also studied the
Turkish literature, and practiced composition, both in prose and verse,
in the language of that country which was now his own! But think not,
reader, that in his heart he was a Mussulman, or that he had
extinguished the light of Christianity within his soul. No--oh! no; the
more he read on the subject of the Mohammedan system of theology, the
more he became convinced not only of its utter falsity, but also of its
incompatibility with the progress of civilization. Nevertheless, he
dared not pray to the True God whom he had renounced with his lips; but
there was a secret adoration, an interior worship of the Saviour, which
he could not and sought not to subdue.

Solyman the Magnificent, was an enlightened prince, and a generous
patron of the arts and sciences. He did not persecute the Christians,
because he knew, in his own heart, that they were further advanced in
all human ideas and institutions than the Ottomans. He was, therefore,
delighted whenever a talented Christian embraced the Moslem faith and
entered his service; and his keen perception speedily led him to discern
and appreciate all the merits and acquirements of his favorite Ibrahim.

Such was the state of things at Constantinople, when those rapidly
successive incidents, which we have already related, took place in
Florence. At this time immense preparations were being made by the
sultan for an expedition against the Island of Rhodes, then in the
possession of the Knights of St. John, commanded by their grand master,
Villiers of Isle Adam.

This chieftain, aware of the danger which menaced him, dispatched envoys
to the courts of Rome, Genoa, Venice, and Florence, imploring those
powers to send him assistance against the expected invasion of the
Turks. Each of these states hastened to comply with this request; and
numerous bodies of auxiliaries sailed from various ports in Italy to
fight beneath the glorious banner of Villiers of Isle Adam, one of the
stanchest veteran champions of Christendom.

Thus, at the very time when Nisida and Wagner were united in the bonds
of love on the island of which they were the possessors--while, too,
Isaachar the Jew languished in the prisons of the Inquisition of
Florence, at which city the chivalrous-hearted Manuel d'Orsini tarried
to hasten on the trial and give his testimony in favor of the
Israelite--and moreover while Flora, and the Countess Giulia dwelt in
the strictest retirement with the young maiden's aunt--at this period,
we say, a fleet of three hundred sail quitted Constantinople under the
command of the kapitan-pasha, or lord high admiral, and proceeded toward
the Island of Rhodes. At the same time, Solyman the Magnificent crossed
into Asia Minor, and placing himself at the head of an army of a hundred
thousand men, commenced his march toward the coast facing the island,
and where he intended to embark on his warlike expedition. His favorite
Ibrahim accompanied him, as did also the Grand Vizier Piri Pasha, and
the principal dignitaries of the empire.

It was in the spring of 1521 that the Ottoman fleet received the army on
board at the Cape in the Gulf of Macri, which is only separated by a
very narrow strait from the Island of Rhodes; and in the evening of the
same day on which the troops had thus embarked, the mighty armament
appeared off the capital city of the Knights of St. John.




CHAPTER XLVII.

THE SIEGE OF RHODES.


On the following morning, salvoes of artillery throughout the fleet
announced to the inhabitants and garrison of Rhodes, that the sultan was
about to effect a landing with his troops.

The debarkment was not resisted; for it was protected by the cannonade
which the ships directed against the walls of the city, and the
Christians had no vessel capable of demonstrating any hostility against
the mighty fleet commanded by the kapitan-pasha.

Villiers of Isle Adam, the generalissimo of the Christian forces, had
reduced to ashes all circumjacent villages, and received their
inhabitants into the city itself. But the Ottomans cared not for the
waste and desolation thus created around the walls of the city; but
while their artillery, alike on land and by sea, maintained an incessant
fire on the town, they threw up works of defense and established depots
of provisions and ammunition. The sultan went in person accompanied by
Ibrahim, and attended by a numerous escort, to reconnoiter the
fortifications, and inspect the position of his troops.

On the other side, Villiers of Isle Adam distributed his forces in such
a manner that the warriors of each nation defended particular gates.
Thus the corps of Spaniards, French, Germans, English, Portuguese,
Italian, Auvergnese and Provincials, respectively defended eight of the
gates of Rhodes; while the lord general himself, with his body-guard,
took his post at the ninth. For the knights of Rhodes comprised natives
of nearly all Christian countries, and the mode in which Villiers thus
allotted a gate to the defense of the warriors of each nation, gave an
impulse to that emulative spirit which ever induces the soldiers of one
clime to vie with those of another.

The Ottoman troops were disposed in the following manner: Ayaz Pasha,
Beglerbeg (or governor) of Roumilia, found himself placed in front of
the walls and gates defended by the French and Germans; Ahmed Pasha was
opposed to the Spaniards and Auvergnese; Mustapha Pasha had to contend
with the English: Kasim, Beglerbeg of Anatolia, was to direct the attack
against the bastion and gates occupied by the natives of Provence; the
Grand Vizier, Piri Pasha, was opposed to the Portuguese, and the sultan
himself undertook the assault against the defenses occupied by the
Italians.

For several days there was much skirmishing, but no advantage was gained
by the Ottomans. Mines and countermines were employed on both sides, and
those executed by the Christians effected terrible havoc amongst the
Turks. At length in pursuance of the advice of the renegade Ibrahim, the
sultan ordered a general assault to be made upon the city, and heralds
went through the entire encampment, proclaiming the imperial command.
Tidings of this resolution were conveyed into the city by means of the
Christians' spies; and while the Ottomans were preparing for the attack,
Villiers of Isle Adam was actively employed in adopting all possible
means for the defense.

At daybreak, the general assault commenced, and the aga (or colonel) of
the janizaries succeeded in planting his banner on the gate intrusted to
the care of the Spaniards and Auvergnese. But this success was merely
temporary in that quarter; for the Ottomans were beaten back with such
immense slaughter, that fifteen thousand of their choicest troops were
cut to pieces in the breach and the ditch. But still the assault was
prosecuted in every quarter and every point, and the Christian warriors
acquitted themselves nobly in the defense of the city. The women of
Rhodes manifested a courage and zeal which history has loved to record
as most honorable to their sex. Some of them carried about bread and
wine to recruit the fainting and refresh the wearied, others were ready
with bandages and lint to stanch the blood which flowed from the
wounded, some conveyed earth in wheelbarrows, to stop up the breaches
made in the walls, and others bore along immense stones to hurl down
upon the assailants.

Oh! it was a glorious, but a sad and mournful sight--that death-struggle
of the valiant Christians against the barbarism of the East. And many
touching proofs of woman's courage and daring characterized that
memorable siege. Especially does this fact merit our attention:--The
wife of a Christian captain, seeing her husband slain, and the enemy
gaining ground rapidly, embraced her two children tenderly, made the
sign of the cross upon their brows, and then, having stabbed them to the
heart, threw them into the midst of a burning building near, exclaiming,
"The infidels will not now be able, my poor darlings, to wreak their
vengeance on you, alive or dead!" In another moment she seized her dead
husband's sword, and plunging into the thickest of the fight, met a
death worthy of a heroine.

The rain now began to fall in torrents, washing away the floods of gore
which, since daybreak, had dyed the bastions and the wall; and the
assault continued as arduously as the defense was maintained with
desperation. Solyman commanded in person the division which was opposed
to the gate and the fort intrusted by the lord general of the Christians
to the care of the Italian auxiliaries. But, though it was now past
noon, and the sultan had prosecuted his attack on that point with
unabated vigor since the dawn, no impression had yet been made. The
Italians fought with a heroism which bade defiance to the numerical
superiority of their assailants; for they were led on by a young
chieftain who, beneath an effeminate exterior, possessed the soul of a
lion. Clad in a complete suit of polished armor, and with crimson plumes
waving from his steel helmet, to which no visor was attached, that
youthful leader threw himself into the thickest of the medley, sought
the very points where danger appeared most terrible--and, alike by his
example and his words, encouraged those whom he commanded to dispute
every inch of ground with the Moslem assailants.

The sultan was enraged when he beheld the success with which that
Italian chieftain rallied his men again after every rebuff; and, calling
to Ibrahim to keep near him, Solyman the Magnificent advanced toward the
breach which his cannon had already effected in the walls defended so
gallantly by the Italian auxiliaries. And now, in a few minutes, behold
the sultan himself, nerved with wonderful energy, rushing on--scimiter
in hand--and calling on the young Italian warrior to measure weapons
with him. The Christian chieftain understood not the words which the
sultan uttered, but full well did he comprehend the anxiety of that
great monarch to do battle with him; and the curved scimiter and the
straight, cross-handled sword clashed together in a moment. The young
warrior knew that his opponent was the sultan, whose imperial rank was
denoted by the turban which he wore; and the hope of inflicting
chastisement on the author of all the bloodshed which had taken place on
the walls of Rhodes inspired the youth with a courage perfectly
irresistible.

Not many minutes had this combat lasted, before Solyman was thrown down
in the breach, and the cross-handled sword of his conqueror was about to
drink his heart's blood, when the renegade Ibrahim dashed forward from
amidst the confused masses of those who were fighting around, and by a
desperate effort hurled the young Italian warrior backward.

"I owe thee my life, Ibrahim," said the sultan, springing upon his feet.
"But hurt not him who has combated so gallantly: we must respect the
brave!"

The Italian chieftain had been completely stunned by his fall; he was,
therefore, easily made prisoner and carried off to Ibrahim's tent.

Almost at the same moment a messenger from Ahmed Pasha presented to the
sultan a letter, in which was stated that the grand master, Villiers of
Isle Adam, anxious to put a stop to the fearful slaughter that was
progressing, had offered to capitulate on honorable terms. This
proposition was immediately agreed to by the sultan, and a suspension of
hostilities was proclaimed around the walls. The Ottomans retired to
their camp, having lost upward of thirty thousand men during the deadly
strife of a few hours; and the Christians had now leisure to ascertain
the extent of their own disasters, which were proportionately appalling.




CHAPTER XLVIII.

THE PRISONER.


In the meantime Ibrahim had ordered his prisoner, the young Italian
chieftain, to be conveyed to his tent; and when the renegade's slaves
had disencumbered the Christian of his armor, he began to revive. As
Ibrahim bent over him, administering restoratives, a suspicion, which
had already struck him the moment he first beheld his face, grew
stronger and stronger; and the apostate at length became convinced that
he had seen that countenance on some former occasion.

Ordering his slaves to withdraw, Ibrahim remained alone with his
prisoner, who was now able to sit up on the sofa and gaze around him.

"I understand it all!" he exclaimed, the blood rushing back to his pale
cheek; "I am in the power of the barbarians!"

"Nay, call us not harsh names, brave chieftain," said Ibrahim, "seeing
that we do not treat you unworthily."

"I was wrong!" cried the prisoner; then, fixing his fine blue eyes upon
the renegade, he added, "Were you not habited as a Moslem, I should
conceive, by the purity with which you speak my native language, that
you were a Christian, and an Italian."

"I can speak many languages with equal fluency," said Ibrahim,
evasively, as a pang shot through his heart. "But tell me thy name,
Christian--for thou art a brave man, although so young."

"In my own country," answered the youth, proudly, "I am called the Count
of Riverola."

We have before stated that Ibrahim was the complete master of his
emotions: but it required all his powers of self-possession to subdue
them now, when the name of that family into which he was well aware his
sister had entered fell upon his ears. His suspicion was well founded;
he had indeed seen Francisco before this day--had seen him when he was a
mere boy, in Florence, for Alessandro was three or four years older than
the young count. But he had never, in his native land, exchanged a word
with Francisco; he had merely, occasionally, seen him in public; and it
was quite evident that even if Francisco had ever noticed him at that
time, he did not recollect him now. Neither did Ibrahim wish the young
count to ascertain who he was; for the only thing which the renegade
ever feared was the encounter of any one who had known him as a
Christian, and who might justly reproach him for that apostasy which had
led him to profess Mohammedanism.

"Lord Count of Riverola," said Ibrahim, after a short pause, "you shall
be treated in a manner becoming your rank and your bravery. Such,
indeed, was the command of my imperial master, the most glorious sultan;
but even had no such order been issued, my admiration of your gallant
deportment in this day's strife would lead to the same result."

"My best thanks are due for these assurances," returned Francisco. "But
tell me how fares the war without?"

"The grand master has proffered a capitulation, which has been
accepted," answered Ibrahim.

"A capitulation!" exclaimed Francisco. "Oh! it were better to die in
defense of the cross, than live to behold the crescent triumphant on the
walls of Rhodes!"

"The motive of the grand master was a humane one," observed Ibrahim; "he
has agreed to capitulate, to put an end to the terrific slaughter that
is going on."

"Doubtless the lord general acts in accordance with the dictates of a
matured wisdom!" exclaimed the Count of Riverola.

"Your lordship was the leader of the Italian auxiliaries?" said Ibrahim,
interrogatively.

"Such was the honorable office intrusted to me," was the reply. "When
messengers from Villiers of Isle-Adam arrived in Florence, beseeching
succor against this invasion, which has, alas! proved too successful, I
panted for occupation to distract my mind from ever pondering on the
heavy misfortunes which had overtaken me."

"Misfortunes!" exclaimed Ibrahim.

"Yes--misfortunes of such a nature that the mere thought of them is
madness!" cried Francisco, in an excited tone. "First, a beauteous and
amiable girl--one who, though of humble origin, was endowed with virtues
and qualifications that might have fitted her to adorn a palace, and
whom I fondly, devotedly loved--was-snatched from me. She disappeared I
know not how! All trace of her was suddenly lost, as if the earth had
swallowed her up and closed over her again! This blow was in itself
terrible. But it came not alone. A few days elapsed, and my sister--my
dearly beloved sister--also disappeared, and in the same mysterious
manner. Not a trace of her remained--and what makes this second
affliction the more crushing--the more overwhelming, is that she is deaf
and dumb! Oh! Heaven grant me the power to resist, to bear up against
these crowning miseries! Vain were all my inquiries--useless was all the
search I instituted to discover whither had gone the being whom I would
have made my wife, and the sister who was ever so devoted to me! At
length, driven to desperation, when weeks had passed and they returned
not--goaded on to madness by bitter, bitter memories--I resolved to
devote myself to the service of the cross. With my gold I raised and
equipped a gallant band; and a favoring breeze wafted us from Leghorn to
this island. The grand master received me with open arms; and, forming
an estimation of my capacities far above my deserts, placed me in
command of all the Italian auxiliaries. You know the rest; I fought with
all my energy, and your sultan was within the grasp of death, when you
rushed forward and saved him. The result is that I am your prisoner."

"So young--and yet so early acquainted with such deep affliction!"
exclaimed Ibrahim. "But can you form no idea, Christian, of the cause of
that double disappearance? Had your sister no attendants who could throw
the least light upon the subject?" he asked, with the hope of eliciting
some tidings relative to his own sister, the beauteous Flora.

"I dare not reflect thereon!" cried Francisco, the tears starting into
his eyes. "For, alas! Florence has long been infested by a desperate
band of lawless wretches--and my God! I apprehend the worst--the very
worst."

Thus speaking, he rose and paced the spacious tent with agitated steps;
for this conversation had awakened in his mind all the bitter thoughts
and dreadful alarms which he had essayed to subdue amidst the excitement
and peril of war. A slave now entered to inform Ibrahim that the sultan
commanded his immediate presence in the imperial pavilion.

"Christian," said Ibrahim, as he rose to obey this mandate, "wilt thou
pledge me thy word, as a noble and a knight, not to attempt to escape
from this tent?"

"I pledge my word," answered Francisco, "seeing that thou thyself art so
generous to me."

Ibrahim then went forth; but he paused for a few moments outside the
tent to command his slaves to serve up choice refreshments to the
prisoner. He then hastened to the pavilion of the sultan, whom he found
seated upon a throne, surrounded by the beglerbegs, the councilors of
state, the viziers, the lieutenant-generals of the army, and all the
high dignitaries who had accompanied him on his expedition. Ibrahim
advanced and prostrated himself at the foot of his throne; and at the
same moment two of the high functionaries present threw a caftan of
honor over his shoulders--a ceremony which signified that the sultan had
conferred upon him the title of beglerbeg, or "prince of princes."

"Rise, Ibrahim Pasha!" exclaimed Solyman, "and take thy place in our
councils, for Allah and his prophet have this day made thee their
instrument to save the life of thy sovereign."

The newly-created pasha touched the imperial slipper with his lips, and
then rising from his prostrate position, received the congratulations of
the high functionaries assembled.

Thus it was that in a few months, protected by that secret influence
which was hurrying him so rapidly along in his ambitious career, the
Italian apostate attained to a high rank in the Ottoman Empire; but he
was yet to reach the highest, next to that of the sovereign, ere he
could hope to receive the fair hand of his mysterious patroness as the
crowning joy of his prosperity, for her image, her charming image, ever
dwelt in his mind, and an ardent fancy often depicted her as she
appeared, in all the splendor of her beauty, reclining on the sofa at
the dwelling to which he had been conducted with so much precaution, as
detailed in a preceding chapter. On the following day peace was formally
concluded between the Ottomans and the knights of Rhodes, the latter
consenting to surrender the island to the formidable invaders. An
exchange of prisoners was the result, and Francisco, Count of Riverola,
again found himself free within twenty-four hours after his capture.

"Your lordship is now about to sail for your own clime," said Ibrahim,
when the moment of separation came. "Is there aught within my power that
I can do to testify my friendship for one so brave and chivalrous as
thou art?"

"Nothing, great pasha!" exclaimed Francisco, who felt his sympathy
irresistibly attracted toward Ibrahim, he knew not why, "but, on the
other hand, receive my heartfelt thanks for the kindness which I have
experienced during the few hours I have been thy guest."

"The history of thy afflictions has so much moved me," said Ibrahim
Pasha, after a brief pause, "that the interest I experience in your
behalf will not cease when you shall be no longer here. If then you
would bear in mind the request I am about to make, gallant
Christian----"

"Name it!" cried Francisco; "'tis already granted!"

"Write me from Florence," added Ibrahim, "and acquaint me with the
success of thy researches after thy lost sister and the maiden whom thou
lovest. The ships of Leghorn trade to Constantinople, whither I shall
speedily return, and it will not be a difficult matter to forward a
letter to me occasionally."

"I should be unworthy of the kind interest you take in my behalf, great
pasha, were I to neglect this request," answered Francisco. "Oh! may the
good angels grant that I may yet recover my beloved sister Nisida, and
that sweetest of maidens--Flora Francatelli!"

Francisco was too overpowered by his own emotions to observe the sudden
start which Ibrahim gave, and the pallor which instantaneously
overspread his cheeks as the name of his sister thus burst upon his
ears--that sister who, beyond doubt, had disappeared most strangely.

But, with an almost superhuman effort, he subdued any further expression
of the agony of his feelings, and, taking Francisco's hand, said, in a
low, deep tone: "Count of Riverola, I rely upon your solemn promise to
write me, and write soon and often. I shall experience a lively pleasure
in receiving and responding to your letters."

"Fear not that I shall forget my promise, your highness," responded
Francisco.

He then took leave of Ibrahim Pasha, and returned to the city of Rhodes,
whence he embarked on the same day for Italy, accompanied by the few
Florentine auxiliaries who had survived the dreadful slaughter on the
ramparts. The hustle and excitement attending the departure from Rhodes
somewhat absorbed the grief which Ibrahim felt on account of the
mysterious disappearance of his sister Flora.

Solyman left a sufficient force, under an able commander, to garrison
the island, which was speedily evacuated by Villiers of Isle Adam and
his knights; and by the middle of May the sultan, attended by Ibrahim
and the other dignitaries of the empire, once more entered the gates of
Constantinople.

Not many days had elapsed when, at a divan or state council, at which
Solyman the Magnificent himself presided, Ibrahim Pasha was desired to
give his opinion upon a particular question then under discussion. The
renegade expressed his sentiments in a manner at variance with the
policy recommended by the grand vizier; and this high functionary
replied, in terms of bitterness and even grossness, at the same time
reproaching Ibrahim with ingratitude. The apostate delivered a rejoinder
which completely electrified the divan. He repudiated the charge of
ingratitude on the ground of being influenced only by his duty toward
the sultan; and he entered upon a complete review of the policy of the
Grand Vizier Piri Pasha. He proved that the commerce of the country had
greatly fallen off--that the revenues had diminished--that arrears were
due to the army and navy--that several minor powers had not paid their
usual tribute for some years past--and, in a word, drew such a frightful
picture of the maladministration and misrule, that the grand vizier was
overwhelmed with confusion, and the sultan and other listeners were
struck with the lamentable truth of all which had fallen from the lips
of Ibrahim Pasha. Nor less were they astonished at the wonderful
intimacy which he displayed with even the minutest details of the
machinery of the government; in a word, his triumph was complete.

Solyman the Magnificent broke up the divan in haste, ordering the
members of the council to return each immediately to his own abode. In
the evening a functionary of the imperial household was sent to the
palace of the grand vizier to demand the seals of office; and thus fell
Piri Pasha.

It was midnight when the sultan sent to order Ibrahim Pasha to wait upon
him without delay. The conference that ensued was long and interesting,
and it was already near daybreak when messengers were dispatched to the
various members of the divan to summon them to the seraglio. Then, in
the presence of all the rank and talent in the capital, the sultan
demanded of Ibrahim whether he felt sufficient confidence in himself to
undertake the weight and responsibility of office. All eyes were fixed
earnestly upon that mere youth of scarcely twenty-three, who was thus
solemnly adjured.

In a firm voice he replied that with the favor of the sultan and the
blessing of the Most High, he did not despair of being enabled to
restore the Ottoman Empire to its late prosperity and glory. The
astronomer of the court declared that the hour was favorable to invest
the new grand vizier with the insignia of office; and at the moment when
the call to prayer, "God is great!" sounded from every minaret in
Constantinople, Ibrahim Pasha received the imperial seals from the hand
of the sultan.




CHAPTER XLIX.

THE NEW GRAND VIZIER.


The call to prayer, "_God is great_," sounded from every minaret in
Constantinople, when Solyman the Magnificent raised the renegade Ibrahim
to a rank second only to his own imperial station. The newly appointed
prime minister received the congratulations of the assembled dignitaries
of the empire; and when this ceremony was accomplished, he repaired to
the palace of the viziership, which Piri Pasha had vacated during the
night.

A numerous escort of slaves, and a guard of honor, composed of an entire
company of Janizaries, attended Ibrahim to his new abode, the streets
through which he passed being lined with spectators anxious to obtain a
glimpse of the new minister.

But calm, almost passionless, was the expression of Ibrahim's
countenance: though he had attained to his present high station
speedily, yet he had not reached it unexpectedly; and, even in the
moment of this, his proud triumph, there was gall mingled with the cup
of honey which he quaffed. For, oh! the light of Christianity was not
extinguished within his breast; and though it no longer gleamed there to
inspire and to cheer, it nevertheless had strength enough to burn with
reproachful flame.

The multitudes cheered and prostrated themselves as he passed; but his
salutation was cold and indifferent, and he felt at that moment that he
would rather have been wandering through the Vale of Arno, hand-in-hand
with his sister, than be welcomed in the streets of Constantinople as
the Grand Vizier of the Ottoman Empire!

O crime! thou may'st deck thy brow with flowers, and adorn thy garments
with the richest gems--thou may'st elicit the shouts of admiring
myriads, and proceed attended by guards ready to hew down those who
would treat thee with disrespect--thou may'st quit the palace of a
mighty sovereign to repair to a palace of thine own--and in thy hands
thou may'st hold the destinies of millions of human beings; but thou
canst not subdue the still small voice that whispers reproachfully in
thine ear, nor pluck from thy bosom the undying worm.

Though Ibrahim Pasha felt acutely, yet his countenance, as we have
before said, expressed nothing--he was still sufficiently master of his
emotions to retain them pent up in his own breast; and if he could not
appear perfectly happy, he would not allow the world to perceive that
his soul harbored secret care. He entered the palace now destined to
become his abode, and found himself the lord and master of an
establishment such as no Christian monarch in Europe possessed. But as
he passed through marble halls and perfumed corridors lined with
prostrate slaves--as he contemplated the splendor and magnificence, the
wealth and the luxury, by which he was now surrounded--and as he even
dwelt upon the hope--nay, the more than hope, the conviction, that he
should full soon be blest with the hand of a being whose ravishing
beauty was ever present to his mental vision--that still small voice
which he could not hush, appeared to ask what avail it was for a man, if
he gain the whole world but lose his own soul?

But Ibrahim Pasha was not the man to give way to the influence of even
reflections so harrowing as these; and he immediately applied himself to
the business of the state, to divert his mind from unpleasurable
meditations. Holding a levee that same day, he received and confirmed in
their offices all the subordinate ministers; he then dispatched letters
to the various governors of provinces to announce to them his elevation
to the grand viziership; and he conferred the Pashalic of Egypt upon the
fallen minister, Piri Pasha. In the afternoon he granted audiences to
the embassadors of the Christian powers; but the Florentine envoy, it
should be observed, had quitted Constantinople some weeks
previously--indeed, at the time when the sultan undertook his expedition
against Rhodes; for the representative of the republic had entirely
failed in the mission which had been intrusted to him by his government.

In the evening, when it was quite dusk, Ibrahim retired to his
apartment; and hastily disguising himself in a mean attire, he issued
forth by a private gate at the back part of the palace. Intent upon
putting into execution a scheme which he had hastily planned that very
afternoon, he repaired to the quarter inhabited by the Christians. There
he entered a house of humble appearance where dwelt a young Greek, with
whom he had been on friendly terms at that period when his present
greatness was totally unforeseen--indeed, while he was simply the
private secretary of the Florentine envoy. He knew that Demetrius was
poor, intelligent and trustworthy; and it was precisely an agent of this
nature that Ibrahim required for the project which he had in view.

Demetrius--such was the young Greek's name--was seated in a small and
meanly furnished apartment, in a desponding manner, and scarcely
appearing to notice the efforts which his sister, a beautiful maiden of
nineteen, was exerting to console him, when the door opened, and a man
dressed as a water-carrier entered the room.

The young Greek started up angrily, for he thought the visitor was one
of the numerous petty creditors to whom he was indebted, and whose
demands he was unable to liquidate; but the second glance which he cast,
by the light of the lamp that burnt feebly on the table, toward the
countenance of the meanly dressed individual, convinced him of his
mistake.

"His highness the grand vizier!" ejaculated Demetrius, falling on his
knees; "Calanthe!" he added, speaking rapidly to his sister, "bow down
to the representative of the sultan!"

But Ibrahim hastened to put an end to this ceremony, and assured the
brother and sister that he came thither as a friend.

"A friend!" repeated Demetrius, as if doubting whether his ears heard
aright; "is it possible that Heaven has indeed sent me a friend in one
who has the power to raise me and this poor suffering maiden from the
depths of our bitter, bitter poverty?"

"Dost thou suppose that my rapid elevation has rendered me unmindful of
former friendships?" demanded Ibrahim; although, had he not his own
purposes to serve, he would never have thought of seeking the abode, nor
inquiring after the welfare of the humble acquaintance of his obscure
days.

The young Greek knew not, however, the thorough selfishness of the
renegade's character; and he poured forth his gratitude for the vizier's
kindness and condescension with the most sincere and heart-felt fervor:
while the beauteous Calanthe's large dark eyes swam in tears of hope and
joy, as she surveyed with mingled wonder and admiration the countenance
of that high functionary whose rapid rise to power had electrified the
Ottoman capital, and whom she now saw for the first time.

"Demetrius," said Ibrahim, "I know your worth--I have appreciated your
talents; and I feel deeply for the orphan condition of your sister and
yourself. It is in my power to afford you an employment whereby you may
render me good service, and which shall be liberally rewarded. You are
already acquainted with much of my former history; and you have often
heard me speak, in terms of love and affection, of my sister Flora.
During my recent sojourn in the island of Rhodes, a Florentine nobleman,
the Count of Riverola, became my prisoner. From him I learned that he
was attached to my sister, and his language led me to believe that he
was loved in return. But alas! some few months ago Flora suddenly
disappeared; and the Count of Riverola instituted a vain search to
discover her. Too pure-minded was she to fly of her own accord from her
native city; too chaste and too deeply imbued with virtuous principles
was she to admit the suspicion that she had fled with a vile seducer.
No; force or treachery--if not _murder_," added Ibrahim, in a tone
indicative of profound emotion, "must have caused her sudden
disappearance. The Count of Riverola has doubtless ere now arrived in
Italy; and his researches will most assuredly be renewed. He promised to
communicate to me the result, but as he knew not to whom that pledge was
given--as he recognized not in me the brother of the Flora whom he
loves--I am fearful lest he forget or neglect the promise. It is,
therefore, my intention to send a secret agent to Florence--an agent who
will convey rich gifts to my aunt, but without revealing the name of him
who sends them--an agent, in a word, who may minister to the wants and
interests of my family, and report to me whether my beloved sister be
yet found, and if so, the causes of her disappearance. It seems to me
that you, Demetrius, are well fitted for this mission. Your knowledge of
the Italian language, your discreetness, your sound judgment, all render
you competent to enact the part of a good genius watching over the
interests of those who must not be allowed to learn whence flow the
bounties which suddenly pour upon them!"

"Gracious lord," said the young Greek, his countenance radiant with joy.
"I will never lose any opportunity of manifesting my devotion to the
cause in which your highness condescends to employ me."

"You will proceed alone to Italy," continued Ibrahim; "and on your
arrival in Florence, you will adopt a modest and reserved mode of life,
so that no unpleasant queries may arise as to your object in visiting
the republic."

Demetrius turned a rapidly inquiring glance upon Calanthe, who hastened
to observe that she did not fear being left unprotected in the city of
Constantinople. Ibrahim placed a heavy purse and a case containing many
costly jewels in the hands of Demetrius, saying: "These are as an
earnest of my favor and friendship;"--then, producing a second case,
tied round with a silken cord, he added, "And this is for my aunt, the
Signora Francatelli."

Demetrius promised to attend to all the instructions which he had
received; and Ibrahim Pasha took his leave of the brother and the
charming sister, the latter of whom conveyed to him the full extent of
her gratitude for his kindness and condescension toward them in a few
words uttered in a subdued tone, but with all the eloquence of her fine
dark eyes.

"Did I not love my unknown protectress," murmured Ibrahim to himself, as
he sped rapidly back to his palace, "I feel that Calanthe's eyes would
make an impression upon my heart."

Scarcely had he resumed his magnificent garb, on his return home, when a
slave announced to him that his imperial majesty, the sultan, required
his immediate attendance at the seraglio, whither he was to repair in
the most private manner possible. A sudden misgiving darted through
Ibrahim's imagination. Could Solyman have repented of the step which he
had taken in thus suddenly elevating him to the pinnacle of power? Was
his viziership to last but a few short hours? had the secret influence,
which had hitherto protected him, ceased?

Considering the times and the country in which he lived, these fears
were justifiable; and it was with a rapidly beating heart that the new
minister hastened, attended only by a single slave, to the dwelling of
his imperial master. But when he was ushered into the presence of the
sultan--his own slave remaining in the ante-room--his apprehensions were
dissipated by the smiling countenance with which the monarch greeted
him. Having signaled his attendants to retire, Solyman the Magnificent
addressed the grand vizier in the following manner:

"Thy great talents, thy zeal in our service, and the salvation which I
owed to thee in the breach at Rhodes, have been instrumental, oh,
Ibrahim! in raising thee to thy present high state. But the bounties of
the sultan are without end, as the mercy of Allah is illimitable! Thou
hast doubtless heard that among my numerous sisters, there is one of
such unrivaled beauty--such peerless loveliness, that the world hath not
seen her equal. Happy may the man deem himself on whom the fair Aischa
shall be bestowed; and thou art that happy man, Ibrahim--and Aischa is
thine."

The grand vizier threw himself at the feet of his imperial master, and
murmured expressions of gratitude--but his heart sank within him--for he
knew that in marrying the sultan's sister he should not be allowed the
enjoyment of the Mussulman privilege of polygamy, and thus his hopes of
possessing the beautiful unknown to whom he owed so much appeared to
hover on the verge of annihilation. But might not that unknown lady and
the beauteous Aischa be one and the same person? The unknown was
evidently the mistress of an influence almost illimitable; and was it
not natural to conceive that she, then, must be the sister of the
sultan? Again, the sultan had many sisters; and the one who had exerted
her interest for Ibrahim, might not be the Princess Aischa, who was now
promised to him! All these conjectures and conflicting speculations
passed through the mind of Ibrahim in far less time than we have taken
to describe their nature; and he was cruelly the prey to mingled hope
and alarm, when the sultan exclaimed, "Rise, my Vizier Azem, and follow
me."

The apostate obeyed with beating heart, and Solyman the Magnificent
conducted him along several passages and corridors to a splendidly
furnished room, which Ibrahim immediately recognized as the very one in
which he had been admitted, many months previously, to an interview with
the beauteous unknown. Yes--that was the apartment in which he had
listened to the eloquence of her soft, persuasive voice--it was there
that, intoxicated with passion, he had abjured the faith of a Christian
and embraced the creed of the false Prophet Mohammed. And, reclining on
the very sofa where he had first seen her--but attended by a troop of
charming female slaves--was the fair unknown--his secret
protectress--more lovely, more bewitching, than she appeared when last
they met.

An arch smile played upon her lips, as she rose from the magnificent
cushions--a smile which seemed to say, "I have kept my word, I have
raised thee to the highest dignity, save one in the Ottoman Empire--and
I will now crown thine happiness by giving thee my hand."

And, oh, so beauteous, so ravishingly lovely did she appear, as that
smile revealed teeth whiter than the Oriental pearls, which she wore,
and as a slight flush on her damask cheek and the bright flashing of her
eyes betrayed the joy and triumph which filled her heart--so elegant and
graceful was her faultless form, which the gorgeous Ottoman garb so
admirably became, that Ibrahim forgot all his recent compunction--lost
sight of home and friends--remembered not the awful apostasy of which he
had been guilty--but fell upon his knees in adoration of that charming
creature, while the sultan with a smile which showed that he was no
stranger to the mysteries of the past, exclaimed in a benignant tone,
"Vizier Azem! receive the hand of my well-beloved sister Aischa!"




CHAPTER L.

THE COUNT OF ARESTINO--THE PLOT THICKENS.


Return we now to the fair city of flowers--to thee, delightful
Florence--vine crowned queen of Tuscany! The summer has come, and the
gardens are brilliant with dyes and hues of infinite variety; the hills
and the valleys are clothed in their brightest emerald garment--and the
Arno winds its peaceful way between banks blushing with choicest fruits
of the earth.

But, though gay that July scene--though glorious in its splendor that
unclouded summer sun, though gorgeous the balconies filled with flowers,
and brilliant the parterres of Tuscan roses, yet gloomy was the
countenance and dark were the thoughts of the Count of Arestino, as he
paced with agitated steps one of the splendid apartments of his palace.
The old man was actually endowed with a good, a generous, a kind and
forgiving disposition; but the infidelity of his wife, the being on whom
he had so doted, and who was once his joy and his pride--that infidelity
had warped his best feelings, soured his temper, and aroused the dark
spirit of vengeance.

"She lives! she lives!" he murmured to himself, pausing for a moment to
press his feverish hand to his heated brow; "she lives! and doubtless
under the protection of her paramour! But I shall know more presently.
Antonio is faithful--he will not deceive me!"

And the count resumed his agitated walk up and down the room. A few
minutes elapsed, when the door opened slowly, and Antonio, whom the
reader may remember to have been a valet in the service of the Riverola
family, made his appearance.

The count hastened toward him, exclaiming: "What news, Antonio?
Speak--hast thou learnt aught more of--of _her_?"

"My lord," answered the valet, closing the door behind him, "I have
ascertained everything. The individual who spoke darkly and mysteriously
to me last evening, has within this hour made me acquainted with many
strange things."

"But the countess?--I mean the guilty, fallen creature who once bore my
name?" ejaculated the old nobleman, his voice trembling with impatience.

"There is no doubt, my lord, that her ladyship lives, and that she is
still in Florence," answered Antonio.

"The shameless woman," cried the Count of Arestino, his usually pale
face becoming perfectly death-like through the violence of his inward
emotions. "But how know you all this?" demanded his lordship, suddenly
turning toward the dependent; "who is your informant--and can he be
relied on? Remember I took thee into my service at thine own
solicitation--I have no guarantee for thy fidelity, and I am influential
to punish as well as rich to reward!"

"Your lordship has bound me to you by ties of gratitude," responded
Antonio, "for when discarded suddenly by the young Count of Riverola, I
found an asylum and employment in your lordship's palace. It is your
lordship's bounty which has enabled me to give bread to my aged mother;
and I should be a villain were I to deceive you."

"I believe you, Antonio," said the count: "and now tell me how you are
assured that the countess escaped from the conflagration and ruin of the
institution to which my just vengeance had consigned her--how, too, you
have learnt that she is still in Florence."

"I have ascertained, my lord, beyond all possibility of doubt," answered
the valet, "that the assailants of the convent were a terrible horde of
banditti, at that time headed by Stephano Verrina, who has since
disappeared no one knows whither; that the Marquis of Orsini was one of
the leaders in the awful deed of sacrilege, and that her ladyship the
countess, and a young maiden named Flora Francatelli, were rescued by
the robbers from their cells in the establishment. These ladies and the
marquis quitted the stronghold of the banditti together, blindfolded and
guided forth by that same Stephano Verrina whom I mentioned just now,
Lomellino (the present captain of the horde), and another bandit."

"And who is your informant? how learned you all this?" demanded the
count, trembling with the excitement of painful reminiscences
reawakened, and with the hope of speedy vengeance on the guilty pair,
his wife and the marquis.

"My lord," said Antonio, "pardon me if I remain silent; but I dare not
compromise the man----"

"Antonio," exclaimed the count, wrathfully, "you are deceiving me! Tell
me who was your informant--I command you--hesitate not----"

"My lord! my lord!" cried the valet, "is it not enough that I prove my
assertions--that I----"

"No!" cried the nobleman; "I have seen so much duplicity where all
appeared to be innocence--so much deceit where all wore the aspect of
integrity, that I can trust man no more. How know I for certain that all
this may not be some idle tale which you yourself have forged, to induce
me to put confidence in you, to intrust you with gold to bribe your
pretended informant, but which will really remain in your own pocket?
Speak, Antonio--tell me all, or I shall listen to you no more, and your
servitude in this mansion then ceases."

"I will speak frankly, my lord," replied the valet; "but in the course
you may adopt----"

"Fear not for yourself, nor for your informant, Antonio," interrupted
the count, impatiently. "Be ye both leagued with the banditti
yourselves, or be ye allied to the fiends of hell," he added, with
fiercer emphasis, "I care not so long as I can render ye the instruments
of my vengeance!"

"Good, my lord!" exclaimed Antonio, delighted with this assurance; "and
now I can speak fearlessly and frankly. My informant is that _other_
bandit who accompanied Stephano Verrina and Lomellino when the countess,
Flora, and the marquis were conducted blindfold from the robbers'
stronghold. But while they were yet all inmates of that stronghold, this
same bandit, whose name is Venturo, overheard the marquis inform
Stephano Verrina that he intended to remain in Florence to obtain the
liberation of a Jew who was imprisoned in the dungeons of the
inquisition: and this Jew, Venturo also learnt by subsequent inquiry
from Verrina, is a certain Isaachar ben Solomon."

"Isaachar ben Solomon!" ejaculated the count, the whole incident of the
diamonds returning with all its painful details to his mind. "Oh! no
wonder," he added, bitterly, "that the marquis has so much kindness for
him! But, proceed--proceed, Antonio."

"I was about to inform your lordship," continued the valet, "that
Venturo, of whom I have spoken, happened the next day to overhear the
marquis inform the countess that he should be compelled to stay for that
purpose in Florence; whereupon Flora Francatelli offered her ladyship a
home at her aunt's residence, whither she herself should return on her
liberation from the stronghold. Then it was that the maiden mentioned to
the countess the name of her family, and when Venturo represented all
these facts to me just now, I at once knew who this same Flora
Francatelli is and where she dwells."

"You know where she dwells!" cried the count, joyfully. "Then, Giulia,
the false, the faithless, the perjured Giulia is in my power! Unless,
indeed," he added, more slowly--"unless she may have removed to another
place of abode----"

"That, my lord, shall be speedily ascertained," said Antonio. "I will
instruct my mother to call, on some pretext, at the cottage inhabited by
Dame Francatelli: and she will soon learn whether there be another
female resident there besides the aunt and the niece Flora."

"Do so, Antonio," exclaimed the count. "Let no unnecessary delay take
place. Here is gold--much gold, for thee to divide between thyself and
the bandit informant. See that thou art faithful to my interests, and
that sum shall prove but a small earnest of what thy reward will be."

The valet secured about his person the well-filled purse that was handed
to him, and retired.

The Count of Arestino remained alone to brood over his plans of
vengeance. It was horrible--horrible to behold that aged and venerable
man, trembling as he was on the verge of eternity, now meditating
schemes of dark and dire revenge. But his wrongs were great--wrongs
which, though common enough in that voluptuous Italian clime, and
especially in that age and city of licentiousness and debauchery, were
not the less sure to be followed by a fearful retribution, where
retribution was within the reach of him who was outraged.

"Ha! ha!" he chuckled fearfully to himself, as he now paced the room
with a lighter step--as if joy filled his heart; "all those who have
injured me are within the reach of my vengeance. The Jew in the
inquisition; the marquis open to a charge of diabolical sacrilege--and
Giulia assuredly in Florence! I dealt too leniently with that Jew--I
sent to pay for the redemption of jewels which were my own property! All
my life have I been a just--a humane--a merciful man; I will be so no
more. The world's doings are adverse to generosity and fair-dealing. In
my old age have I learnt this! Oh! the perfidy of women toward a
doting--a confiding--a fond heart, works strange alterations in the
heart of the deceived one! I, who but a year--nay, six months ago--would
not harm the meanest reptile that crawls, now thirst for
vengeance--vengeance," repeated the old man, in a shrieking, hysterical
tone, "upon those who have wronged me! I will exterminate them at one
fell swoop--exterminate them all--all!" And his voice rang screechingly
and wildly through the lofty room of that splendid mansion.




CHAPTER LI.

THE MEETING.


On the bank of the Arno, in a somewhat retired situation, stood a neat
cottage in the midst of a little garden, surrounded by no formal pile of
bricks to constitute a wall, but protected only by its own sweet hedge
or fragrant shrubs and blooming plants. Over the portico of the humble
but comfortable tenement twined the honeysuckle and the clematis; and
the sides of the building were almost completely veiled by the vines
amidst the verdant foliage of which appeared large hunches of purple
grapes.

At an open casement on the ground floor, an elderly female, very plainly
but very neatly attired, and wearing a placid smile and a good-natured
expression upon a countenance which had once been handsome, sat watching
the glorious spectacle of the setting sun. The orb of day went down in a
flood of purple and gold, behind the western hills; and now the dame
began suddenly to cast uneasy glances toward the path that led along the
bank of the river.

But the maiden for whose return the good aunt felt anxious, was not far
distant; indeed Flora Francatelli, wearing a thick veil over her head,
was already proceeding homeward after a short ramble by the margin of
the stream, when the reverie in which she was plunged was interrupted by
the sounds of hasty footsteps behind. Ever fearful of treachery since
the terrible incident of her imprisonment in the Carmelite Convent, she
redoubled her speed, blaming herself for having been beguiled by the
beauty of the evening to prolong her walk farther than she intended on
setting out--when the increasing haste of the footsteps behind her
excited the keenest alarms within her bosom--for she now felt convinced
that she was pursued.

The cottage was already in sight, and a hundred paces only separated her
from its door, when a well-known voice--a voice which caused every fiber
in her heart to thrill with surprise and joy--exclaimed: "Flora! beloved
one; fly not! Oh! I could not be deceived in the symmetry of thy
form--the graciousness of thy gait--I knew it was thou."

And in another moment the maiden was clasped in the arms of Francisco,
Count of Riverola. Impossible were it to describe the ecstatic bliss of
this meeting--a meeting so unexpected on either side: for a minute
before, Flora had deemed the young nobleman to be far away, fighting in
the cause of the cross, while Francisco was proceeding to make inquiries
at the cottage concerning his beloved, but with a heart that scarcely
dared nourish a hope of her reappearance.

"Oh! my well-beloved Flora!" exclaimed Francisco; "and are we indeed
thus blest, or is it a delusive dream? But tell me, sweet maiden, tell
me whether thou hast ceased to think of one, from whose memory thine
image has never been absent since the date of thy sudden and mysterious
disappearance."

Flora could not reply in words--her heart was too full for the utterance
of her feelings; but as she raised the veil from her charming
countenance, the tears of joy which stood upon her long lashes, and the
heavenly smile which played upon her lips, and the deep blushes which
overspread her cheeks spoke far more eloquently of unaltered affection
than all the vows and pledges which might have flowed from the tongue.

"Thou lovest me--lovest me--lovest me still!" exclaimed the enraptured
count, again clasping her in his arms, and now imprinting innumerable
kisses on her lips, her cheeks, and her fair brow. Hasty explanations
speedily ensued, and Francisco now learnt for the first time the cause
of Flora's disappearance--her incarceration in the convent--and the
particulars of her release.

"But who could have been the author of that outrage?" exclaimed the
count, his cheeks flushing with indignation, and his hand instinctively
grasping his sword; "whom could you, sweet maiden, have offended? what
fiend thus vented his malignity on thee?"

"Hold, my lord!" cried Flora, in a beseeching tone; "perhaps you----"

And she checked herself abruptly.

"Call me not '_my lord_,' dearest maiden," said the count; "to thee I am
Francisco, as thou to me art Flora--my own beloved Flora! But wherefore
didst thou stop short thus? wherefore not conclude the sentence that was
half uttered? Oh, Flora--a terrible suspicion strikes me! Speak--relieve
me from the cruel suspicion under which I now labor; was it my
sister--my much lamented sister, who did thee that foul wrong?"

"I know not," replied Flora, weeping; "but--alas! pardon me, dear
Francisco--if I suspect aught so bad of any one connected with thee--and
yet Heaven knows how freely, how sincerely I forgive my enemy----" Her
voice was lost in sobs; and her head drooped on her lover's breast.

"Weep not, dearest one!" exclaimed Francisco. "Let not our meeting be
rendered mournful with tears. Thou knowest, perhaps, that Nisida
disappeared as suddenly and as mysteriously as thou didst; but could she
also have become the victim of the Carmelites? And did she, alas! perish
in the ruins of the convent?"

"I am well assured that the Lady Nisida was not doomed to that fate,"
answered Flora; "for had she been consigned to the convent, as a
punishment for some real offense, or on some groundless charge, she must
have passed the ordeal of the chamber of penitence, where I should have
seen her. Yes, Francisco--I have heard of her mysterious disappearance,
and I have shed many, many tears when I have thought of her, poor lady!
although," added the maiden in a low and plaintive tone, "I fear,
Francisco, that it was indeed she who doomed me to that monastic
dungeon. Doubtless, her keen perception--far more keen than in those who
are blessed with the faculties which were lost to her--enabled her to
penetrate the secret of that affection with which you had honored me,
and in which I felt so much happiness."

"I confessed my love to Nisida," interrupted Francisco; "but it was not
until your disappearance I was driven to despair, Flora. I was mad with
grief, and I could not, neither did I, attempt to conceal my emotion. I
told Nisida all: and well--oh! well--do I recollect the reply which she
gave me, giving fond assurance that my happiness would alone be
consulted."

"Alas! Was there no double meaning in that assurance?" asked Flora,
gently. "The Lady Nisida knew well how inconsistent with your high
rank--your proud fortunes--your great name, was that love which you bore
for a humble and obscure girl----"

"A love which I shall not be ashamed to own in the sight of all
Florence," exclaimed Francisco in an impassioned tone. "But if Nisida
were the cause of that cruel outrage on thee, my Flora, we will forgive
her--for she could have acted only through conscientious, though most
mistaken, motives. Mistaken, indeed! for never could I have known
happiness again hadst thou not been restored to me. It was to wean my
mind from pondering on afflictions that goaded me to despair that I
embarked in the cause of Christendom against the encroachments of Moslem
power. Thinking that thou wast forever lost to me--that my sister also
had become the victim of some murderous hand,--harassed by doubts the
most cruel--an uncertainty the most agonizing,--I sought death on the
walls of Rhodes; but the destroying angel's arrow rebounded from my
corselet--his sword was broken against my shield!

"During my voyage back to Italy--after beholding the crescent planted on
the walls where the Christian standard had floated for so many, many
years--a storm overtook the ship; and yet the destroying angel gave me
not the death I courted. This evening I once more set foot in Florence.
From my own mansion Nisida is still absent: and no tidings have been
received of her. Alas! is she then lost to me forever? Without tarrying
even to change my travel-soiled clothes, I set out to make inquiries
concerning another whom I love--and that other is thyself! Here, thanks
to a merciful Heaven, my heart has not been doomed to experience a
second and equally cruel disappointment; for I have found thee at last,
my Flora--and henceforth my arm shall protect thee from peril."

"How have I deserved so much kindness at thine hands?" murmured the
maiden, again drooping her blushing head. "And oh! what will you think,
Francisco--what will you say, when you learn that I was there--there in
that cottage--with my aunt--when you called the last time to inquire if
any tidings had been received of me----"

"You were there!" exclaimed Francisco, starting back in surprise not
unmingled with anger; "you were there, Flora--and you knew that I was in
despair concerning thee--that I would have given worlds to have heard of
thy safety,--I, who thought that some fiend in human shape had sent thee
to an early grave?"

"Forgive me, Francisco: forgive me!" cried Flora, bursting into tears;
"but it was not my fault! On the night following the one in which the
banditti stormed the convent, as I ere now detailed to your ears, I
returned home to my aunt. When the excitement of our meeting was past,
and when we were alone together, I threw myself at her feet, confessed
all that had passed between thee and me, and implored her advice.

"'Flora,' she said, while her tears fell upon me as I knelt, 'no
happiness will come to thee, my child, from this attachment which has
already plunged thee into so much misery. It is beyond all doubt certain
that the relations of the count were the authors of thy imprisonment;
and their persecutions would only be renewed, were they to learn that
the count was made aware of your reappearance in Florence. For thy sake,
then, my child, I shall suffer the impression of thy continued absence
and loss to remain on the minds of those who may inquire concerning
thee; and should his lordship call here again, most especially to him
shall I appear stricken with grief on account of thee. His passion, my
child, is one of boyhood--evanescent, though ardent while it endures. He
will soon forget thee; and when he shall have learnt to love another
there will no longer be any necessity for thee to live an existence of
concealment.'

"Thus spoke my aunt, dear Francisco, and I dared not gainsay her. When
you came the last time. I heard your voice; I listened from my chamber
door to all you said to my aunt, and I longed to fly into your arms. You
went away and my heart was nearly broken. Some days afterward we learnt
the strange disappearance of the Lady Nisida and then knew that you must
have received a severe blow, for I was well aware how much you loved
her. Two or three weeks elapsed, and then we heard that you were about
to depart to the wars. Oh! how bitter were the tears that I shed, how
fervent were the prayers that I offered up for your safety."

"And those prayers have been heard on high, beloved one, exclaimed
Francisco, who had listened with melting heart and returning tenderness
to the narrative which the maiden told so simply but so sincerely, and
in the most plaintive tones of her musical voice.

"Can you forgive me now?" asked the blushing maiden, her swimming eyes
bending on her lover glances eloquently expressive of hope.

"I have nothing to forgive, sweet girl," replied Francisco. "Your aunt
behaved with a prudence which in justice I cannot condemn; and you acted
with an obedience and submission to your venerable relative which I
could not be arbitrary enough to blame. We have both endured much for
each other, my Flora; but the days of our trials are passed; and your
good aunt will be convinced that in giving your young heart to me, you
have not confided in one who is undeserving of so much love. Let us
hasten into her presence. But one question have I yet to ask you," he
added, suddenly recollecting an idea which had ere now made some
impression on his mind. "You informed me how you were liberated from the
convent, and you mentioned the name of the Countess of Arestino, whom
circumstances had made your companion in that establishment, and to whom
your aunt gave an asylum. Know you not, dearest Flora, that fame reports
not well of that same Giulia of Arestino--and that a woman of tarnished
reputation is no fitting associate for an innocent and artless maiden
such as thou?"

"During the period that the Lady of Arestino and myself were companions
in captivity," responded Flora, with a frankness as amiable as it was
convincing, "she never in the most distant manner alluded to her love
for the Marquis of Orsini. When the marquis appeared in the convent, in
company with the robbers, I was far too much bewildered with the passing
events, to devote a thought to what might be the nature of their
connection; and even when I had more leisure for reflection, during the
entire day which I passed in the stronghold of the banditti, I saw
naught in it save what I conceived to be the bond of close relationship.
I offered her ladyship an asylum at the abode of my aunt, as I should
have given a home, under such circumstances, to the veriest wretch
crawling on the face of the earth. But in that cottage the countess and
myself have not continued in close companionship; for my aunt
accidentally learnt that fame reported not well of the Lady of Arestino,
and in a gentle manner she begged her to seek another home at her
earliest leisure. The countess implored my venerable relative to permit
her to retrain at the cottage, as her life would be in danger were she
not afforded a sure and safe asylum. Moved by her earnest entreaties, my
aunt assented; and the countess has almost constantly remained in her
own chamber. Sometimes--but very rarely--she goes forth after dusk, and
in a deep disguise; the marquis has not, however, visited the cottage
since my aunt made this discovery relative to the reputation of the Lady
of Arestino."

"Thanks, charming Flora, for that explanation!" cried the young count.
"Let us now hasten to thine aunt; and in her presence will I renew to
thee all the vows of unalterable and honorable affection which my heart
suggests, as a means of proving that I am worthy of thy love."

And, hand-in-hand, that fine young noble and that beauteous, blushing
maiden proceeded to the cottage.

Two persons, concealed in an adjacent grove, had overheard every
syllable of the above conversation. These were the valet Antonio, and
his mother, Dame Margaretha, at whose dwelling, it will be recollected,
the unfortunate Agnes had so long resided, under the protection of the
late Count of Riverola.

"This is fortunate, mother!" said Antonio, when Francisco and Flora had
retired from the vicinity of the grove. "You are spared the trouble of a
visit to the old Signora Francatelli; and I have learned sufficient to
enable me to work out all my plans alike of aggrandizement and revenge.
Let us retrace our way into the city; thou wilt return to thy home--and
I shall hence straight to the Lord Count of Arestino."




CHAPTER LII.

THE GREEK PAGE--SONG OF THE GREEK PAGE--A REVELATION.


Three months had now elapsed since Ibrahim-Pasha had risen to the
exalted rank of grand vizier, and had married the sister of Solyman the
Magnificent. The sultan daily became more attached to him; and he, on
his part, acquired influence over his imperial master. Vested with a
power so nearly absolute that Solyman signed without ever perusing the
hatti-sheriffs, or decrees, drawn up by Ibrahim,--and enjoying the
confidence of the divan, all the members of which were devoted to his
interests,--the renegade administered according to his own discretion,
the affairs of that mighty empire. Avaricious, and ever intent upon the
aggrandizement of his own fortunes, he accumulated vast treasures; but
he also maintained a household and lived in a style unequaled by any of
his predecessors in office. Having married a sister of the sultan, he
was not permitted a plurality of wives;--but he purchased the most
beauteous slaves for his harem, and plunged headlong into a vortex of
dissipation and pleasure.

For some weeks he had manifested the most ardent and impassioned
attachment toward Aischa, who, during that period, was happy in the
belief that she alone possessed his heart. But the customs of the East,
as well as the duties of his office, kept them so much apart, that he
had no leisure to discover the graces of her mind, nor to appreciate all
the powers of her naturally fine, and indeed well-cultivated intellect;
so that the beauty of her person constituted the only basis on which his
affection was maintained. The fervor of such a love soon cooled with
satiety: and those female slaves whom he had at first procured as
indispensable appendages to his rank and station, were not long in
becoming the sources of new pleasure and voluptuous enjoyment. Aischa
beheld his increasing indifference, and strove to bind him to her by
representing all she had done for him. He listened coldly at first; but
when, on several occasions, the same remonstrances were repeated, he
answered angrily.

"Had it not been for my influence," she said to him one day, when the
dispute had become more serious than preceding quarrels of the kind,
"you might still have been an humble secretary to a Christian noble."

"Not so," replied the grand vizier; "for at the very time when I first
beheld thee in the Bezestein, certain offers had been secretly conveyed
to me from the reis-effendi."

"In whose service you would have lingered as a mere subordinate for
long, long years," returned Aischa. "It was I who urged you on. Have I
not often assured you that your image dwelt in my memory after the
accident which first led to our meeting--that one of my faithful women
noticed my thoughtful mood--and that when I confessed to her the truth,
she stated to me that, by a singular coincidence, her own brother was
employed by the reis-effendi as an agent to tempt you with the offers to
which you have alluded? Then, inquiries which my slave instituted,
brought to my ears the flattering tidings that you also thought of me,
and I resolved to grant you an interview. From that moment my influence
hurried you on to power--and when you became the favorite of the mighty
Solyman, I confessed to him that I had seen and that I loved you. His
fraternal attachment to me is great--greater than to any other of his
sisters, seeing that himself and I were born of the same mother, though
at a long interval. Thus was it that my persuasion made him think higher
and oftener of you than he would else have done--and now that you have
attained the summit of glory and power, she who has helped to raise you
is neglected and loved no longer."

"Cease these reproaches, Aischa," exclaimed Ibrahim, who had listened
impatiently to her long address, "or I will give thee less of my company
than heretofore. See that the next time I visit thee my reception may be
with smiles instead of tears--with sweet words instead of reproaches."
And in this cruel manner the heartless renegade quitted his beauteous
wife, leaving her plunged in the most profound affliction.

But as Ibrahim traversed the corridors leading to his own apartments,
his heart smote him for the harshness and unfeeling nature of his
conduct; and as one disagreeable idea, by disposing the spirits to
melancholy, usually arouses others that were previously slumbering in
the cells of the brain, all the turpitude of his apostasy was recalled
with new force to his mind.

Repairing to a small but magnificently furnished saloon in a retired
part of the palace, he dismissed the slaves who were waiting at the
door, ordering them, however, to send into his presence a young Greek
page who had recently entered his service. In a few minutes the youth
made his appearance, and stood in a respectful attitude near the door.

"Come and sit at my feet, Constantine," said the grand vizier, "and thou
shalt sing to me one of those airs of thy native Greece with which thou
hast occasionally delighted mine ears. I know not how it is, boy--but
thy presence pleases me, and thy voice soothes my soul, when oppressed
with the cares of my high office."

Joy flashed from the bright black eyes of the young Greek page as he
glided noiselessly over the thick carpet, but that emotion of pleasure
was instantly changed to one of deep deference.

"Proceed," said his master, "and sing me that plaintive song which is
supposed to depict the woes of one of the unhappy sons of Greece."

"But may not its sentiments offend your highness?" asked the page.

"It is but a song," responded Ibrahim. "I give thee full permission to
sing those verses, and I should be sorry were you to subdue aught of the
impassioned feelings which they are well calculated to excite within
thee."

The page turned his handsome countenance up toward the grand vizier, and
commenced in melodious, liquid tones, the following song--


    SONG OF THE GREEK PAGE.

    "Oh, are there not beings condemned from their birth,
    To drag, without solace or hope o'er the earth,
      The burden of grief and of sorrow?
    Doomed wretches who know, while they tremblingly say,
    'The star of my fate appears brighter to-day,'
    That it is but a brief and a mocking ray,
      To make darkness darker to-morrow.

    "And 'tis not to the vile and base alone
    That unchanging grief and sorrow are known,
      But as oft to the pure and guileless;
    And he, from whose fervid and generous lip,
    Gush words of the kindest fellowship,
    Of the same pure fountain may not sip
      In return, but it is sad and smileless!

    "Yes; such doomed mortals, alas! there be
    And mine is that self-same destiny;
      The fate of the lorn and lonely;
    For e'en in my childhood's early day,
    The comrades I sought would turn away;
    And of all the band, from the sportive play
      Was I thrust and excluded only.

    "When fifteen summers had passed o'er my head,
    I stood on the battle-field strewn with the dead.
      For the day of the Moslem's glory
    Had made me an orphan child, and there
    My sire was stretched; and his bosom bare
    Showed a gaping wound; and the flowing hair
      Of his head was damp and gory.

    "My sire was the chief of the patriot band,
    That had fought and died for their native land,
      When her rightful prince betrayed her;
    On his kith and kin did the vengeance fall
    Of the Mussulman foes--and each and all
    Were swept from the old ancestral hall,
      Save myself, by the fierce invader!

    "And I was spared from that blood-stained grave
    To be dragged away as the Moslem's slave,
      And bend to the foe victorious,--
    But, O Greece! to thee does my memory turn
    Its longing eyes--and my heart-strings yearn
    To behold thee rise in thy might and spurn,
      As of yore, thy yoke inglorious!

    "But oh! whither has Spartan courage fled?
    And why, proud Athens! above thine head
      Is the Mussulman crescent gleaming?
    Have thine ancient memories no avail?
    And art thou not fired at the legend tale
    Which reminds thee how the whole world grew pale,
      And recoiled from thy banners streaming?"

"Enough, boy," exclaimed Ibrahim: then in a low tone, he murmured to
himself, "The Christians have indeed much cause to anathematize the
encroachments and tyranny of the Moslems."

There was a short pause, during which the grand vizier was absorbed in
profound meditation, while the Greek page never once withdrew his eyes
from the countenance of that high functionary.

"Boy," at length said Ibrahim, "you appear attached to me. I have
observed many proofs of your devotion during the few months that you
have been in my service. Speak--is there aught that I can do to make you
happy? Have you relations or friends who need protection? If they be
poor, I will relieve their necessities."

"My lips cannot express the gratitude which my heart feels toward your
highness," returned the page, "but I have no friends in behalf of whom I
might supplicate the bounty of your highness."

"Are you yourself happy, Constantine?" asked Ibrahim.

"Happy in being permitted to attend upon your highness," was the reply,
delivered in a soft and tremulous tone.

"But is it in my power to render you happier?" demanded the grand
vizier.

Constantine hung down his head--reflected for a few moments, and then
murmured "Yes."

"Then, by Heaven!" exclaimed Ibrahim Pasha, "thou hast only to name thy
request, and it will be granted. I know not wherefore, but I am attached
to thee much. I feel interested in thy welfare, and I would be rejoiced
to minister to thy happiness."

"I am already happier than I was--happier, because my lips have drunk in
such words flowing from the lips of one who is exalted as highly as I am
insignificant and humble." said the page, in a voice tremulous with
emotion, but sweetly musical. "Yes, I am happier," he continued--"and
yet my soul is filled with the image of a dear, a well-beloved sister,
who pines in loneliness and solitude, ever dwelling on a hapless love
which she has formed for one who knows not that he is so loved, and who
perhaps may never--never know it."

"Ah, thou hast a sister, Constantine?" exclaimed the grand vizier. "And
is she as lovely as a sister of a youth so handsome as thou art ought to
be?"

"She has been assured by those who have sought her hand, that she is
indeed beautiful," answered Constantine. "But of what avail are her
charms, since he whom she loves may never whisper in her ear the
delicious words, 'I love thee in return.'"

"Does the object of her affections possess so obdurate a heart?"
inquired the grand vizier, strangely interested in the discourse of his
youthful page.

"It is not that he scorns my sister's love," replied Constantine; "but
it is that he knows not of its existence. It is true that he has seen
her once--yet 'twere probable that he remembers not there is such a
being in the world. Thus came it to pass, my lord--an officer, holding a
high rank in the service of his imperial majesty, the great Solyman, had
occasion to visit a humble dwelling wherein my sister resided. She--poor
silly maiden! was so struck by his almost god-like beauty--so dazzled by
his fascinating address--so enchanted by the sound of his voice, that
she surrendered up her heart suddenly and secretly--surrendered it
beyond all power of reclamation. Since then she has never ceased to
ponder upon this fatal passion--this unhappy love; she has nursed his
image in her mind, until her reason has rocked with the wild thoughts,
the ardent hopes, the emotions of despair--all the conflicting
sentiments of feeling, in a word, which so ardent and so strange a love
must naturally engender. Enthusiastic, yet tender; fervent, yet melting
in her soul; and while she does not attempt to close her eyes to the
conviction that she is cherishing a passion which is preying upon her
very vitals, she nevertheless clings to it as a martyr to the stake! Oh!
my lord, canst thou marvel if I feel deeply for my unhappy sister?"

"But wherefore doth she remain thus unhappy?" demanded Ibrahim-Pasha.
"Surely there are means of conveying to the object of her attachment an
intimation how deeply he is beloved? and he must be something more than
human," he added, in an impassioned tone, "if he can remain obdurate to
the tears and sighs of a beauteous creature, such as thy sister
doubtless is."

"And were he to spurn her from him--oh! your highness, it would kill
her!" said the page, fixing his large, eloquent eyes upon the
countenance of the grand vizier. "Consider his exalted rank and her
humble position----"

"Doth she aspire to become his wife?" asked Ibrahim.

"She would be contented to serve him as his veriest slave," responded
Constantine, now strangely excited, "were he but to look kindly upon
her: she would deem herself blest in receiving a smile from his lips, so
long as it was bestowed as a reward for all the tender love she bears
him."

"Who is this man that is so fortunate as to have excited so profound an
interest in the heart of one so beautiful?" demanded the grand vizier.
"Name him to me--I will order him to appear before me--and, for thy
sake, I will become an eloquent pleader on behalf of thy sister."

Words cannot express the joy which flashed from the eyes of the page,
and animated his handsome though softly feminine countenance, as,
casting himself on his knees at the feet of Ibrahim Pasha, he murmured,
"Great lord, that man whom my sister loves, and for whom she would lay
down her life, is thyself!"

Ibrahim was for some minutes too much overcome by astonishment to offer
an observation--to utter a word; while the page remained kneeling at his
feet. Then suddenly it flashed to the mind of the grand vizier that the
only humble abode which he had entered since he had become an officer
holding a high rank in the service of Solyman, was that of his Greek
emissary, Demetrius; and it now occurred to him, that there was a
striking likeness between the young page and the beautiful Calanthe:
whom he had seen on that occasion.

"Constantine," he said, at length, "art thou, then, the brother of that
Demetrius whom I dispatched some three months ago to Florence?"

"I am, my lord--and 'tis our sister Calanthe of whom I have spoken," was
the reply. "Oh! pardon my arrogance--my presumption, great vizier!" he
continued, suddenly rising from his kneeling position, and now standing
with his arms meekly folded across his breast--"pardon the arrogance,
the insolence of my conduct," he exclaimed; "but it was for the sake of
my sister that I sought service in the household of your highness. I
thought that if I could succeed in gaining your notice--if in any way I
could obtain such favor in your eyes as to be admitted to speak with one
so highly raised above me as thou art, I fancied that some opportunity
would enable me to make those representations which have issued from my
lips this day. How patiently I have waited that occasion, Heaven knows!
how ardent have been my hopes of success, when from time to time your
highness singled me out from amongst the numerous free pages of your
princely household to attend upon your privacy--how ardent, I say, these
hopes have been, your highness may possibly divine. And now, my lord,
that I _have_ succeeded in gaining your attention and pouring this
secret into your ears, I will away to Calanthe and impart all the
happiness that is in store for her. Though the flowers may hold up their
heads high in the light of the glorious sun, yet she shall hold hers
higher in the favor of your smile. Generous master," he added, suddenly
sinking his voice to a lower tone and reassuming the deferential air
which he had partially lost in the excitement of speaking, "permit me
now to depart."

"This evening, Constantine," said the grand vizier, fixing his dark eyes
significantly upon the page, "let your sister enter the harem by the
private door in the garden. Here is a key; I will give the necessary
instructions to the female slaves to welcome her."

Constantine received the key, made a low obeisance, and withdrew,
leaving the grand vizier to feast his voluptuous imagination with
delicious thoughts of the beauteous Calanthe.




CHAPTER LIII.

THE SULTANA VALIDA--THE THREE BLACK SLAVES.


In the meantime the Princess Aischa, the now neglected wife of the grand
vizier, had repaired to the imperial seraglio to obtain an interview
with her brother, Solyman the Magnificent. The sultan, as the reader has
already learnt, was deeply attached to Aischa. Their mother, the
sultana, or empress mother, who was still alive, occupied apartments in
the seraglio. Her children entertained the greatest respect for her: and
her influence over the sultan, who possessed an excellent heart, though
his sway was not altogether unstained by cruelties, was known to be
great.

It was therefore to her mother and her brother that the beautiful Aischa
proceeded; and when she was alone with them in the Valida's apartment,
and removed her veil, they immediately noticed that she had been
weeping. Upon being questioned relative to the cause of her sorrow, she
burst into an agony of tears, and was for some time unable to reply. At
length, half regretting that she had taken the present step, Aischa
slowly revealed her various causes of complaint against the grand
vizier.

"By Allah!" exclaimed the sultan, "the ungrateful Ibrahim shall not thus
spurn and neglect the costly gift which I, his master, condescended to
bestow upon him! What! when the Shah of Persia, the Khan of the Tartars,
and the Prince of Karamania all sought thine hand, and dispatched
embassadors laden with rich gifts to our court to demand thee in
marriage, did I not send them back with cold words of denial to their
sovereigns? And was it to bestow thee, my sister, on this ungrateful
boy, who was so late naught save a dog of a Christian, ready to eat the
dirt under our imperial feet,--was it to bestow thee on such an one as
he, that I refused the offers of the Persian Shah! By the tomb of the
prophet! this indignity shall cease!"

"Restrain your wrath, my son," said the Sultana Valida. "Ibrahim must
not be openly disgraced: the effects of his punishment would redound on
our beloved Aischa. No--rather intrust this affair to me; and fear not
that I shall fail in compelling this haughty pasha to return to the arms
of his wife--ay, and implore her pardon for his late neglect."

"Oh! dearest mother, if thou canst accomplish this," exclaimed Aischa,
her countenance becoming animated with joy and her heart palpitating
with hope, "thou wouldst render me happy indeed."

"Trust to me, daughter," replied the Sultana Valida. "In the meantime
seek not to learn my intentions; but, on thy return home, send me by
some trusty slave thy pass-key to the harem. And thou, my son, wilt lend
me thine imperial signet-ring for twelve hours!"

"Remember," said the sultan, as he drew the jewel from his finger, "that
he who wears that ring possesses a talisman of immense power--a sign
which none to whom it is shown dares disobey; remember this, my mother,
and use it with caution."

"Fear not, my dearly beloved son," answered the Sultana Valida,
concealing the ring in her bosom. "And now, Aischa, do you return to the
palace of your haughty husband, who ere twelve hours be passed, shall
sue for pardon at thy feet."

The sultan and Aischa both knew that their mother was a woman of
powerful intellect and determined character; and they sought not to
penetrate into the secret of her intentions.

Solyman withdrew to preside at a meeting of the divan; and Aischa
returned to the palace of the grand vizier, attended by the slaves who
had waited for her in an anteroom leading to her mother's apartments.

It was now late in the afternoon, and the time for evening prayer had
arrived ere the Sultana Valida received the pass-key to Ibrahim Pasha's
harem. But the moment it was conveyed to her, she summoned to her
presence three black slaves, belonging to the corps of the bostanjis, or
gardeners, who also served as executioners, when a person of rank was to
be subjected to the process of bowstring, or when any dark deed was to
be accomplished in silence and with caution. Terrible appendages to the
household of Ottoman sultans were the black slaves belonging to that
corps--like snakes, they insinuated themselves, noiselessly and
ominously into the presence of their victims, and it were as vain to
preach peace to the warring elements which God alone can control, as to
implore mercy at the hands of those remorseless Ethiopians!

To the three black slaves did the Sultana Valida issue her commands; and
to the eldest she intrusted Solyman's signet-ring and the pass-key which
Aischa had sent her. The slaves bowed three times to the empress
mother--laid their hands on their heads to imply that they would deserve
decapitation if they neglected the orders they had received--and then
withdrew. There was something terribly sinister in their appearance, as
they retired noiselessly but rapidly through the long, silent and
darkened corridors of the imperial harem.

It was night--and the moon shone softly and sweetly upon the mighty city
of Constantinople, tipping each of its thousand spires and pinnacles as
with a star.

Ibrahim Pasha, having disposed of the business of the day, and now with
his imagination full of the beautiful Calanthe, hastened to the
anteroom, or principal apartment of the harem.

The harem, occupying one complete wing of the vizier's palace, consisted
of three stories. On the ground floor were the apartments of the
Princess Aischa and her numerous female dependents. These opened from a
spacious marble hall; and at the folding-doors leading into them, were
stationed two black dwarfs, who were deaf and dumb. Their presence was
not in any way derogatory to the character of Aischa, but actually
denoted the superior rank of the lady who occupied those apartments in
respect to the numerous females who tenanted the rooms above. As she was
the sister of the sultan, Ibrahim dared not appear in her presence
without obtaining her previous assent through the medium of one of the
mutes, who were remarkably keen in understanding and conveying
intelligence by means of signs. A grand marble staircase led from the
hall to the two floors containing the apartments of the ladies of the
harem; and thus, though Aischa dwelt in the same wing as those females,
her own abode was as distinct from theirs as if she were the tenant of a
separate house altogether.

On the first floor there was a large and magnificently furnished room in
which the ladies of the harem were accustomed to assemble when they
chose to quit the solitude of their own chambers for the enjoyment of
each other's society. The ceiling of the anteroom; as this immense
apartment was called, was gilt entirely over; it was supported by twenty
slender columns of crystal; and the splendid chandeliers which were
suspended to it, diffused a soft and mellow light, producing the most
striking effects on that mass of gilding, those reflecting columns, and
the wainscoted walls inlaid with mother-of-pearl, and with ivory of
different colors. A Persian carpet three inches thick was spread upon
the floor. Along two opposite sides ran continuous sofas, supported by
low, white marble pillars, and covered with purple figured velvet
fringed with gold. In the middle of this gorgeous apartment was a large
table, shaped like a crescent, and spread with all kinds of preserved
fruits, confectionery, cakes, and delicious beverages of a non-alcoholic
nature.

The room was crowded with beauteous women when the presence of Ibrahim
was announced by a slave. There were the fair-complexioned daughters of
Georgia--the cold, reserved, but lovely Circassians--the warm and
impassioned Persians--the voluptuous Wallachians--the timid Tartars--the
dusky Indians--the talkative Turkish ladies--beauties, too, of Italy,
Spain, and Portugal--indeed, specimens of female perfection from many,
many nations. Their various styles of beauty, and their characteristic
national dresses, formed a scene truly delightful to gaze upon: but the
grand vizier noticed none of the countenances so anxiously turned toward
him to mark on which his eyes would settle in preference; and the ladies
noiselessly withdrew, leaving their master alone with the slave in the
anteroom.

Ibrahim threw himself on a sofa, and gave some hasty instructions to the
slave, who immediately retired. In about a quarter of an hour he came
back, conducting into the anteroom a lady veiled from head to foot. The
slave then withdrew altogether; and Ibrahim approached the lady, saying,
"Calanthe--beauteous Calanthe! welcome to my palace."

She removed her veil; and Ibrahim fixed his eager eyes upon the
countenance thus disclosed to him; but he was immediately struck by the
marvelous resemblance existing between his page Constantine, and the
charming Calanthe. It will be remembered that when he called, in a mean
disguise, at the abode of Demetrius, he saw Calanthe for the first time,
and only for a short period; and though he was even then struck by her
beauty, yet the impression it made was but momentary: and he had so far
forgotten Calanthe as never to behold in Constantine the least
resemblance to any one whom he had seen before.

But now that Calanthe's countenance burst upon him in all the glory of
its superb Greek beauty, that resemblance struck him with all the force
of a new idea; and he was about to express his astonishment that so
wondrous a likeness should subsist between brother and sister, when the
maiden sunk at his feet, exclaiming, "Pardon me, great vizier; but
Constantine and Calanthe are one and the same thing."

"Methought the brother pleaded with marvelous eloquence on behalf of his
sister," said Ibrahim, with a smile; and raising Calanthe from her
suppliant posture, he led her to a seat, gazing on her the while with
eyes expressive of intense passion.

"Your highness," observed the maiden, after a short pause, "has heard
from my own lips how profound is the attachment which I have dared to
conceive for you--how great is the admiration which I entertain for the
brilliant powers of your intellect. To be with thee, great Ibrahim, will
I abandon my country, friends--ay, and even creed, shouldst thou demand
that concession; for in thee--and in thee only--are all my hopes of
happiness now centered!"

"And those hopes shall not be disappointed, dearest Calanthe!" exclaimed
Ibrahim, clasping her in his arms. "But a few minutes before you entered
this room a hundred women--the choicest flowers of all climes--were
gathered here; and yet I value one smile on thy lips more than all the
tender endearments that those purchased houris could bestow. For thy
love was unbought--it was a love that prompted thee to attach thyself to
me in a menial capacity----"

The impassioned language of the grand vizier was suddenly interrupted by
the opening of the door, and three black slaves glided into the
anteroom--half crouching as they stole along--and fixing on the
beauteous Calanthe eyes, the dark pupils of which seemed to glare
horribly from the whites in which they were set.

"Dogs! what signifies this intrusion?" exclaimed Ibrahim Pasha, starting
from the sofa, and grasping the handle of his scimiter.

The chief the three slaves uttered not a word of reply, but exhibited
the imperial signet, and at the same time unrolled from the coil which
he had hitherto held in his hand a long green silken bowstring. At that
ominous spectacle Ibrahim fell back, his countenance becoming ashy pale,
and his frame trembling with an icy shudder from head to foot.

"Choose between this and her," whispered the slave, in a deep tone, as
he first glanced at the bowstring and then looked toward Calanthe, who
knew that some terrible danger was impending, but was unable to divine
where or when it was to fall.

"Merciful Allah!" exclaimed the grand vizier; and throwing himself upon
the floor, he buried his face in his hands.

In another moment Calanthe was seized and gagged, before even a word or
a scream could escape her lips; but Ibrahim heard the rustling of her
dress as she unavailingly struggled with the monsters in whose power she
was. The selfish ingrate! he drew not his scimiter to defend her--he no
longer remembered all the tender love she bore him--but, appalled by the
menace of the bowstring, backed by the warrant of the sultan's signet
ring, he lay groveling on the rich Persian carpet, giving vent to his
alarms by low and piteous groans.

Then he heard the door once more close as softly as possible: he looked
up--glared with wild anxiety around--and breathed more freely on finding
himself alone! For the Ethiopians had departed with their victim! Slowly
rising from his supine posture, Ibrahim approached the table, filled a
crystal cup with sherbet to the brim, and drank the cooling beverage,
which seemed to go hissing down his parched throat--so dreadful was the
thirst which the horror of the scene just enacted had produced.

Then the sickening as well as maddening conviction struck to his very
soul, that though the envied and almost worshiped vizier of a mighty
empire--having authority of life and death over millions of human
beings, and able to dispose of the governments and patronage of huge
provinces and mighty cities--he was but a miserable, helpless slave in
the eyes of another greater still--an ephemeron whom the breath of
Solyman the Magnificent could destroy! And overcome by this conviction,
he threw himself on the sofa, bursting into an agony of tears--tears of
mingled rage and woe. Yes; the proud, the selfish, the haughty renegade
wept as bitterly as ever even a poor, weak woman was known to weep!

       *       *       *       *       *

How calm and beautiful lay the waters of the Golden Horn beneath the
light of that lovely moon which shone so chastely and so serenely above,
as if pouring its argent luster upon a world where no evil passions were
known--no hearts were stained with crime--no iniquity of human imagining
was in the course of perpetration. But, ah! what sound is that which
breaks on the silence of the night! Is it the splash of oars? No--for
the two black slaves who guide yon boat which has shot out from the
shore into the center of the gulf, are resting on the slight sculls--the
boat itself, too, is now stationary--and not a ripple is stirred up by
its grotesquely-shaped prow. What, then, was that sound?

'Twas the voice of agony bursting from woman's throat; and the boat is
about to become the scene of a deed of horror, though one of
frequent--alas! too frequent--occurrence in that clime, and especially
on that gulf.

The gag has slipped from Calanthe's mouth; and a long loud scream of
agonizing despair sweeps over the surface of the water--rending the calm
and moonlit air--but dying away ere it can raise an echo on either
shore. Strong are the arms and relentless is the black monster who has
now seized the unhappy Greek maiden in his ferocious grasp--while the
luster of the pale orb of night streams on that countenance lately
radiant with impassioned hope, but now convulsed with indescribable
horror.

Again the scream bursts from the victim's lips; but its thrilling,
cutting agony is interrupted by a sudden plunge--a splash--a gurgling
and a rippling of the waters--and the corpse of the murdered Calanthe is
borne toward the deeper and darker bosom of the Bosporus.

The sun was already dispersing the orient mists, when the chief of the
three black slaves once more stood in the presence of the grand vizier,
who had passed the night in the anteroom, alone, and a prey to the most
lively mental tortures. So noiselessly and reptile-like did the hideous
Ethiopian steal into the apartment, that he was within a yard of the
grand vizier ere the latter was aware that the door had even opened.
Ibrahim started as if from a snake about to spring upon him--for the
ominous bowstring swung negligently from the slave's hand, and the
imperial signet still glistened on his finger.

"Mighty pasha!" spoke the Ethiopian in a low and cold tone; "thus saith
the Sultana Valida: 'Cease to treat thy wife with neglect. Hasten to
her--throw thyself at her feet--implore her pardon for the past--and
give her hope of affection for the future. Shouldst thou neglect this
warning, then every night will the rival whom thou preferrest to her be
torn from thine arms, and be devoted as food for the fishes. She whom
thou didst so prefer this night that is passed sleeps in the dark green
bed of the Bosporus. Take warning, pasha; for the bowstring may be used
at last. Moreover, see that thou revealest not to the Princess Aischa
the incident of the night, nor the nature of the threats which send thee
back repentant to her arms.'"

And, with these words, the slave glided hastily from the room, leaving
the grand vizier a prey to feelings of ineffable horror. His punishment
on earth had begun--and he knew it. What had his ambition gained? Though
rich, invested with high rank, and surrounded by every luxury, he was
more wretched than the meanest slave who was accustomed to kiss the dust
at his feet.

But, subduing the fearful agitation which oppressed him--composing his
feelings and his countenance as well as he was able, the proud and
haughty Ibrahim hastened to implore admittance to his wife's chamber,
and when the boon was accorded, and he found himself in her presence, he
besought her pardon in a voice and with a manner expressive of the most
humiliating penitence. Thus, at the moment when thousands--perhaps
millions, were envying the bright fortunes and glorious destiny of
Ibrahim the Happy, as he was denominated--the dark and terrible
despotism of the Sultana Valida made him tremble for his life, and
compelled him to sue at Aischa's feet for pardon. And if, at the same
instant of his crushed spirit and wounded pride, there were a balm found
to soothe the racking fibers of his heart, the anodyne consisted in the
tender love which Aischa manifested toward him, and the touching
sincerity with which she assured him of her complete forgiveness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Return we again to that Mediterranean island on which Fernand Wagner and
the beauteous Nisida espoused each other by solemn vows plighted in the
face of Heaven, and where they have now resided for six long months. At
first how happy--how supremely happy was Nisida, having tutored herself
so far to forget the jarring interests of that world which lay beyond
the sea, as to abandon her soul without reservation to the delights of
the new existence on which she had entered. Enabled once more to use
that charming voice which God had given her, but which had remained
hushed for so many years,--able also to listen to the words that fell
from the lips of her lover, without being forced to subdue and crush the
emotions which they excited,--and secure in the possession of him to
whom she was so madly devoted, and who manifested such endearing
tenderness toward herself, Nisida indeed felt as if she were another
being, or endowed with the lease of a new life.

At first, too, how much had Wagner and Nisida to say to each other,--how
many fond assurances to give--how many protestations of unalterable
affection to make! For hours would they sit together upon the seashore,
or on the bank of the limpid stream in the valley, and converse almost
unceasingly, wearying not of each other's discourse, and sustaining the
interests and the enjoyment of that interchange of thoughts by flying
from topic to topic just as their unshackled imagination suggested. But
Fernand never questioned Nisida concerning the motive which had induced
her to feign dumbness and deafness for so many years; she had given him
to understand that family reasons of the deepest importance, and
involving dreadful mysteries from the contemplation of which she
recoiled with horror, had prompted so tremendous a self-martyrdom:--and
he loved her too well to outrage her feelings by urging her to touch
more than she might choose on that topic.

Careful not to approach the vicinity of large trees, for fear of these
dreadful tenants of the isle who might be said to divide its sovereignty
with them, the lovers--may we not venture to call them husband and
wife?--would ramble hand-in-hand, along the stream's enchanting banks,
in the calm hours of moonlight, which lent softer charms to the scene
than when the gorgeous sun was bathed all in gold. Or else they would
wander on the sands to the musical murmur of the rippling sea,--their
arms clasping each other's neck--their eyes exchanging glances of
fondness--hers of ardent passion, his of more melting tenderness. But
there was too much sensuality in the disposition of Nisida to render her
love for Wagner sufficient and powerful enough to insure permanent
contentment with her present lot.

The first time that the fatal eve drew near when he must exchange the
shape of man for that of a horrid wolf, he had said to her, "Beloved
Nisida, I remember that there are finer and different fruits on the
other side of the island, beyond the range of mountains; and I should
rejoice to obtain for thee a variety. Console thyself for a few hours
during mine absence; and on my return we shall experience renewed and
increased happiness, as if we were meeting again after a long
separation." Vainly did Nisida assure him that she reckoned not for a
more extensive variety of fruits than those which the nearest grove
yielded, and that she would rather have his society than all the
luxuries which his absence and return might bring; he overruled her
remonstrances--and she at length permitted him to depart. Then he
crossed the mountains by means of the path which he had described when
he escaped from the torrent at the point where the tree stretched across
the stream, as described in the preceding chapter; and on the other side
of the range of hills he fulfilled the dreadful destiny of the
Wehr-Wolf! On his return to Nisida--after an absence of nearly
twenty-four hours, for the time occupied in crossing and recrossing the
mountains was considerable--he found her gloomy and pensive. His long
absence had vexed her: she in the secrecy of her own heart had felt a
craving for a change of scene--and she naturally suspected that it was
to gratify a similar want that Fernand had undertaken the transmontane
journey. She received his fruits coldly; and it was some time ere he
could succeed in winning her back to perfect good humor.

The next interval of a month glided away, the little incident which had
for a moment ruffled the harmony of their lives was forgotten--at least
by Nisida;--and so devoted was Fernand in his attention, so tenderly
sincere in his attachment toward her--and so joyful, too, was she in the
possession of one whose masculine beauty was almost superhumanly great,
that those incipient cravings for change of scene--those nascent
longings for a return to the great and busy world, returned but seldom
and were even then easily subdued in her breast.

When the second fatal date after their union on the island approached,
Wagner was compelled to urge some new but necessarily trivial excuse for
again crossing the mountains; and Nisida's remonstrances were more
authoritative and earnest than on the previous occasion. Nevertheless he
succeeded in obtaining her consent: but during his absence of four or
five-and-twenty hours, the lady had ample leisure to ponder on home--the
busy world across the sea--and her well-beloved brother Francisco.
Fernand when he came back, found her gloomy and reserved; then, as he
essayed to wean her from her dark thoughts, she responded petulantly and
even reproachingly.

The ensuing month glided away as happily as the two former ones; and
though Fernand's attentions and manifestations of fondness increased, if
possible, still Nisida would frequently sigh and look wistfully at the
sea as if she would have joyed to behold a sail in the horizon. The
third time the fatal close of the month drew nigh, Wagner knew not how
to act; but some petulance on the part of Nisida furnished him with an
excuse which his generous heart only had recourse to with the deepest,
the keenest anguish. Throwing back the harsh word at her whom he loved
so devotedly, he exclaimed, "Nisida, I leave thee for a few hours until
thy good humor shall have returned;" and without waiting for a reply he
darted toward the mountains. For some time the lady remained seated
gloomily upon the sand; but as hour after hour passed away, and the sun
went down, and the moon gathered power to light the enchanting scene of
landscape and of sea, she grew uneasy and restless. Throughout that
night she wandered up and down on the sands, now weeping at the thought
that she herself had been unkind--then angry at the conviction that
Fernand was treating her more harshly than she deserved.

It was not till the sun was high in the heavens that Wagner reappeared;
and though Nisida was in reality delighted to find all her wild alarms,
in which the monstrous snakes of the isle entered largely, thus
completely dissipated, yet she concealed the joy which she experienced
in beholding his safe return, and received him with gloomy hauteur. Oh!
how her conduct went to Wagner's heart!--for he knew that, so long as
the direful necessity which had compelled his absence remained
unexplained, Nisida was justified in attributing that absence to unkind
feelings and motives on his part. A thousand times that day was he on
the point of throwing himself at her feet and revealing all the details
of that frightful destiny; but he dared not--oh! no, he dared not--and a
profound melancholy seized upon his soul. Nisida now relented, chiefly
because she herself felt miserable by the contemplation of his
unhappiness; and harmony was restored between them.

But during the fourth month of their union, the lady began to speak more
frequently and frankly of the weariness and monotony of their present
existence; and when Fernand essayed to console her, she responded by
deep-drawn sighs. His love was based on those enduring elements which
would have rendered him content to dwell forever with Nisida on that
island, which had no sameness for him so long as she was there to be his
companion; but _her_ love subsisted rather sensually than mentally; and
now that her fierce and long-pent up desires had experienced
gratification, she longed to return to the land of her birth, to embrace
her brother Francisco; yes, even though she should be again compelled to
simulate the deaf and dumb. The close of the fourth month was at hand,
and Wagner was at a loss how to act. New excuses for a fresh absence
were impossible; and it was with a heart full of anguish that he was
compelled to seize an opportunity in the afternoon of the last day of
the month, to steal away from Nisida and hasten across the mountains.
Oh! what would she think of his absence now?--an absence for which he
had not prepared her, and which was not on this occasion justified by
any petulance or willfulness on her part? The idea was maddening, but
there was no alternative.

It was noon on the ensuing day when Fernand Wagner, pale and care-worn,
again sought that spot on the strand where the rudely constructed
cottage stood; but Nisida was not within the hut. He roved along the
shore to a considerable distance, and still beheld her not. Terrible
alarms now oppressed him. Could she have done some desperate deed to rid
herself of an existence whereof she was weary? or had some fatal
accident befallen her. From the shore he hastened to the valley; and
there, seated by the side of the crystal stream, he beheld the object of
his search. He ran--he flew toward her; but she seemed not to observe
him; and when he caught a glimpse of her countenance, he shrank back in
dismay--it was so pale, and yet so expressive of deep, concentrated
rage!

But we cannot linger on this portion of our tale. Suffice it to say that
Wagner exerted all his eloquence, all his powers of persuasion to induce
Nisida to turn a kind glance upon him; and it was only when, goaded to
desperation by her stern silence and her implacable mien, he exclaimed,
"Since I am no longer worthy of even a look or a syllable, I will quit
thee forever!" It was only when these words conveyed to Nisida a
frightful menace of loneliness, that she relented and gradually suffered
herself to be appeased. But vainly did she question him relative to the
cause of his absence on this occasion; he offered a variety of excuses,
and she believed none of them.

The month that followed was characterized by many quarrels and disputes;
for Nisida's soul acquired all the restlessness which had marked it ere
she was thrown on the island, but which solitude at first and then the
possession of Wagner, had for a time so greatly subdued. Nevertheless,
there were still occasions when she would cling to Wagner with all the
confiding fondness of one who remembered how he had saved her life from
the hideous anaconda, and who looked up to him as her only joy and
solace in that clime, the beauty of which became painful with its
monotony--yes, she would cling to him as they roved along the sands
together--she would gaze up into his countenance, and as she read
assurances of the deepest affection in his fine dark eyes, she would
exclaim rapturously, "Oh! how handsome--how god-like art thou, my
Fernand! Pardon me--pardon me, that I should ever have nursed resentment
against thee!"

It was when she was in such a mood as this that he murmured in her ears,
"Nisida dearest, thou hast thy secret which I have never sought to
penetrate. I also have my secret, beloved one, as I hinted to thee on
that day which united us in this island; and into that mystery of mine
thou mayest not look. But at certain intervals I must absent myself from
thee for a few hours, as I hitherto have done; and on my return, O
dearest Nisida! let me not behold that glorious countenance of thine
clouded with anger and with gloom!"

Then ere she could utter a word of reply, he sealed her lips with
kisses--he pressed her fervently to his heart, and at that moment she
thought he seemed so divinely handsome, and she felt so proud of
possessing the love of a man invested with such superhuman beauty and
such a splendid intellect, that she attempted not a remonstrance nor a
complaint against what was but the preface to a fifth absence of
four-and-twenty hours. And when Fernand Wagner reappeared again, his
Nisida hastened to meet him as he descended from the mountains--those
mountains which were crossed over by a surefooted and agile man with so
much difficulty, and which he knew it would be impossible for him to
traverse during that mad career in which he was monthly doomed to whirl
along in his lupine shape--yes, she hurried to meet him--receiving him
with open arms--smiled tenderly upon him--and led him to the sea-shore,
where she had spread the noonday meal in the most inviting manner.

The unwearied and unchanging nature of his love had touched her heart;
and, during the long hours of his fifth absence, she had reasoned on the
folly of marring the sweet harmony which should prevail between the only
two human tenants of that island. The afternoon passed more happily than
many and many a previous day had done; Nisida thought that Fernand had
never seemed so handsome, though somewhat pale, and he fancied that his
companion had never appeared so magnificently beautiful as now, while
she lay half reclining in his arms, the rays of the setting sun faintly
illuminating her aquiline countenance, and giving a glossy richness to
the luxuriant black hair which floated negligently over her naked
shoulders.

When the last beams of the orb of day died flickeringly in the far
horizon, the tender pair retired to their hut rejoicing in the serene
and happy way in which the last few hours had glided over their
heads--when a dark figure passed along the sand and stopped at a short
distance from the door of the rudely constructed tenement.

And assuredly this was no mortal being--nor wore it now a mortal
shape--but Satan--in all the horrors of his ugliness, though still
invested with that sublimity of mien which marked the mighty fallen
angel--Satan, clothed in terrors ineffable, it was.

For a few moments he stood contemplating the hut wherein the sleepers
lay; dread lightnings flushed from his eyes, and the forked electric
fluid seemed to play round his haughty brow, while his fearful
countenance, the features of which no human pen may venture to describe,
expressed malignant hate, anticipated triumph, and tremendous scorn.

Then, extending his right hand toward the hut, and speaking in that deep
sonorous tone, which when heard by mortal ears, seemed to jar against
the very soul, he chanted the following incantation:--

    "Woman of wild and fierce desires!
    Why languish thus the wonted fires
    That arm'd thine heart and nerved thine hand
    To do whate'er thy firmness planned?
    Has maudlin love subdued thy soul,
    Once so impatient of control?
    Has amorous play enslaved the mind
    Where erst no common chains confined?
    Has tender dalliance power to kill
    The wild, indomitable will?
    No more must love thus paralyze
    And crush thine iron energies;
    No more must maudlin passion stay
    Thy despot soul's remorseless sway;
    Henceforth thy lips shall cease to smile
    Upon the beauties of this Isle;
    Henceforth thy mental glance shall roam,
    O'er the Mediterranean foam,
    Toward thy far-off Tuscan home!
    Alarms for young Francisco's weal,
    And doubts into thy breast steal;
    While retrospection carries back
    Thy memory o'er time's beaten track
    And stops at that dread hour when thou
    With burning eyes and flashing brow,
    Call'd Heaven to hear the solemn vow
    Dictated with the latest breath
    Of the fond mother on the untimely bed of death."

Thus spoke the demon; and having chanted the incantation, full of menace
and of deep design, he turned to depart.

Sleep was still upon the eyes of Fernand and Nisida as they lay in each
other's arms--the island and the sea, too, were sleeping in the soft
light of the silver moon, and the countless stars which gemmed the vault
of heaven,--when the dark figure passed along the sand, away from the
rudely-constructed tenement.




CHAPTER LIV.


When the sun rose again from the orient wave, Fernand repaired to the
grove, as was his wont, to gather fruits for the morning repast, while
Nisida bathed her fair form in the waters of the Mediterranean.

But there was a gloom upon that lady's brow, and there was a somber
flashing in her large dark eyes which denoted an incipient conflict of
emotions stirring within her breast.

She had retired to rest, as we have seen on the previous evening, with a
heart glowing toward her beloved and handsome Fernand--she had fallen
asleep with the tender sounds of his musical yet manly voice in her
ears, and the image of his beautiful countenance in her mind--but in the
night--she knew not at what hour--strange dreams began to oppress her,
ominous visions filled her with anxiety.

It seemed as if some being, having right to reproach and power to taunt,
whispered to her as she slept, stern remonstrances against the idle,
voluptuous, and dreaming life she was leading, mocking her for passing
her time in the maudlin delights of love, calling upon her to arouse her
latent energies and shake off that luxurious lethargy, teaching her to
look upon the island, beauteous though it were, as one vast prison in
which she was confined, from whence there were, nevertheless, means of
escape, raising up before her mental vision all the most alluring and
bustling scenes of her own fair, native city of Florence, then bitterly
reproaching her for having allowed her soul to be more wrapped up in the
society of Fernand Wagner, than solicitous, as it was wont to be, for
the welfare of her brother Francisco, creating, too, wild doubts in her
imagination as to whether circumstances might not, after all, have
united her brother and Flora Francatelli in the bonds of a union which
for many reasons she abhorred, and lastly thundering in her ears the
terrific accusation that she was perjured to a solemn and an awful vow
pledged by her lips, on a dread occasion, and to the dictating voice of
her dying mother.

When she awoke in the morning her brain appeared to be in confusion, but
as her thoughts gradually settled themselves in the various cells of the
seat of memory, the entire details of her long dream assumed the
semblance of a connected chain, even as we have just described them.

For these thoughts had arisen in the nature and order commanded by the
demon.

Fernand Wagner saw that the mind of his lovely companion, his charming
bride, was ruffled; and, as he embraced her tenderly, he inquired the
cause. His caresses for the moment soothed her, and induced her to
struggle against the ideas which oppressed: _for there are thoughts that
Satan excites within us_, which we can wrestle with--ay, and conquer if
we will.

Finding that Nisida became more composed, and that she treated her
mournfulness and his agitation merely as the results of a disagreeable
dream, Fernand rose, hastened to perform his own ablutions, and then
repaired to the adjacent grove, as above stated. But Nisida remained not
long in the Mediterranean's mighty bath; the moment Wagner had departed
from her presence, thoughts which had recently passed in sad procession
through her brain came back with renewed vigor; forcing themselves, as
it were, upon her contemplation, because she offered but a feeble
resistance to their returning invasion. And as she stood on the shore,
having donned her scant clothing, and now combing out her long,
luxuriant hair, to the silk richness of which the salt water had lent a
more glorious gloss--she became a prey to an increasing restlessness--an
augmenting anxiety, a longing to quit the island, and an earnest desire
to behold her brother Francisco once again, sentiments and cravings
which gave to her countenance an expression of somber lowering and
concentrated passion, such as it was wont to exhibit in those days when
her simulated deafness and dumbness forced her to subdue all the
workings of her excited soul, and compress her vermilion lips to check
the ebullition of that language which on those occasions struggled to
pour itself forth.

"O Italy! Italy!" she exclaimed in an impassioned tone; "shall I ever
behold thee again? O! my beloved native land, thou too, fair city, whose
name is fraught with so many varied reminiscences for me, am I doomed
never to visit ye more?"

"Nisida--dearest Nisida!" said Wagner, who had returned to her
unperceived, and unheard--for his feet passed noiselessly over the sand;
"wherefore those passionate exclamations? why this anxious longing to
revisit the busy, bustling world? Are not the calm and serene delights
of this island sufficient for our happiness? or art thou wearied of me
who love thee so tenderly?"

"I am not wearied of thee, my Fernand!" replied Nisida, "nor do I fail
to appreciate all thy tender affection toward me. But--I can conceal it
from myself and from thee no longer--I am overcome with the monotony of
this isle. Unvaried sunshine during the day, unchanging calmness by
night, pall upon the soul. I crave variety, even the variety that would
be afforded by a magnificent storm, or the eruption of yon sleeping
volcano. My thoughts wander in spite of myself toward Italy; I think,
too, of my brother--the young and inexperienced Francisco! Moreover,
there is in our mansion at Florence, a terrible mystery which prying
eyes may seek to penetrate,--a closet containing a fearful secret,
which, if published to the world, would heap loathing execrations and
disgrace on the haughty name of Riverola! And now Francisco is the sole
guardian of that mystery, which he himself knows not, or at least knew
not, when last we were together. But it requires a strong and energetic
mind, like my own, to watch over that awful secret. And now, Fernand,
dear Fernand, thou canst not blame me, thou wilt not reproach me, if I
experience an irresistible longing to return to my native land?"

"And know you not, Nisida," said Wagner, in a tone of mingled
mournfulness and reproach, "that, even if there were any means for thee
to return to Florence, I could not accompany thee? Dost thou not
remember that I informed thee, that being doomed to death, I escaped
from the power of the authorities--it matters not how; and that were I
to set foot in Florence, it would be to return to my dungeon?"

"Alas! all this I remember well--too well!" exclaimed Nisida. "And think
not, my Fernand, that I feel no pang, when I lay bare to thee the state
of my soul. But if it were possible for us to go to Italy, thou couldst
dwell secretly and retiredly in some suburb of Florence, and we should
be together often--very often!"

"No--Nisida," answered Wagner; "that were impossible! Never more may I
venture into that city--and if thou couldst even find the means to
revisit thy native clime, thither must thou go, and there must thou
dwell _alone_!"

For Wagner knew full well that were the lady to return to Florence, she
would hear of the frightful incidents which marked his trial and also
the day of his escape; and, though he had at first inclined to impart to
her the terrible secret of his fate--yet subsequent and more calm
deliberation in his own mind had convinced him of the imprudence of
giving her love a shock by such a tremendous--such an appalling
revelation.

"Fernand," said Nisida, breaking silence after a long pause, during
which she was wrapped in profound meditation, "thy words go to my heart
like fiery arrows! O my handsome--my beautiful--my beloved Fernand, why
does destiny thus persecute us? It is impossible for thee to return to
Florence:--it is equally impossible for me to renounce the first
opportunity which Heaven may afford for me to repair thither! My God!
wherefore do our fates tend in such opposite directions? to separate
from thee were maddening: to abandon my brother Francisco--to desert the
grave and solemn interests which demand my presence at home, were to
render myself perjured to a vow which I breathed and which Heaven
witnessed, when I knelt long years ago at the death-bed of my mother!"

"After all thou hast said, my beloved Nisida," exclaimed Fernand, in a
voice expressive of the deepest melancholy, "I should be wrong--I should
be even criminal to listen only to the whispering of my own selfishness
and retain thee here, did opportunity serve for thy departure. But on
this island shall I remain--perhaps forever! And if the time should come
when you grew wearied of that bustling world across the sea, and thy
memory traveled to this lonely isle where thy Fernand was left behind
thee,--haply thou wouldst embark to return hither and pass the remainder
of thy days with one who can never cease to love thee!"

Tears came into the eyes of Nisida--of her who so seldom, so very seldom
wept;--and throwing herself into Wagner's arms, she exclaimed, "God
grant that I may revisit my native land; and believe me, oh! believe me,
when I declare that I would come back to thee the moment the interests
of my brother no longer demanded my presence!"

They embraced fondly, and then sat down upon the sand to partake of
their morning repast.

But the thoughts of both were naturally intent upon the recent topic of
their discourse; and their conversation, though each endeavored to force
it into other channels, reverted to the subject which was now uppermost
in their minds.

"What must my poor brother Francisco conjecture to be the cause of my
prolonged, and to him mysterious absence?" said Nisida, as her eyes were
cast wistfully over the wide expanse of waters. "Methinks that I have
already hinted to thee how the foolish passion which he had conceived
for a maiden of low degree and obscure birth, compelled me, in
accordance with his nearest and best interest, to consign the object of
his boyish love to the convent of the Carmelites? Yes, and it was with
surprise and dismay incredible that I heard, ere I was torn away from
Florence by the villain Stephano, how that convent was sacked and
destroyed by unknown marauders----"

"Full intelligence of which terrible sacrilege you communicated to me by
signs the second and last time you visited me in my dungeon," observed
Wagner.

"And I heard also, with increased fear," continued Nisida, "that some of
the inmates of that convent had escaped; and, being unable, in
consequence of my simulated deafness and dumbness, to set on foot the
necessary inquiries, I could not learn whether Flora Francatelli was
amongst those who had so escaped the almost general ruin. O! if she
should have survived that fatal night--and if she should have again
encountered my brother! Alas! thou perceivest, my Fernand, how necessary
it is for me to quit the island on the first occasion which may serve
for that purpose!"

"And wouldst thou, Nisida," asked Wagner reproachfully, "place thyself
as a barrier between the Count of Riverola and her whom he loves?"

"Yes!" ejaculated Nisida, her countenance suddenly assuming a stern and
imperious expression: "for the most important interests are involved in
the marriage which he may contract. But enough of this, Fernand," she
added, relapsing into a more tender mood. "And now tell me--canst thou
blame me for the longing desire which has seized upon me--the ardent
craving to return to Florence?"

"Nay--I do not blame thee, dearest Nisida!" he exclaimed; "but I pity
thee--I feel for thee! Because," he continued, "if I understand rightly,
thou wilt be compelled to feign deafness and dumbness once more, in
order to work out thy mysterious aims;--thou wilt be compelled to submit
to that awful martyrdom--that terrible duplicity which thou wilt find so
painful and difficult to resume, after the full enjoyment of the blessed
faculties of speech and hearing."

"Alas! such will be my duty!" murmured Nisida; "and oh! that destiny is
a sad one! But," she exclaimed, after a moment's pause, and as a
reminiscence appeared suddenly to strike her, "dost thou not think that
even such a destiny as that becomes tolerable, when it is fulfilled as
the only means of carrying out the conditions of a vow breathed to a
well-beloved and dying mother? But wearisome--oh! crushingly tedious was
that mode of existence;--and the first bright day of real happiness
which I enjoyed, was that when I first knew that thou didst love me! And
again, Fernand--oh! again was I supremely happy when, one evening--thou
may'st remember well,--it was the eve that my brother and the minion
Flora exchanged tender words together in the room adjoining that where
we were seated--on that evening, Fernand, I besought by signs that thou
wouldst breathe the words--_I love thee!_ and thou didst so--and I drank
in those words as a person dying with thirst would imbibe pure spring
water placed to his lips!"

Fernand pressed Nisida to his heart--for he saw, in spite of her anxiety
to return to Italy, that she really loved him.

But though sensual and impassioned feelings led the beauteous Nisida
thus frequently to melt into softness and tenderness when she
contemplated the wondrously handsome countenance of Fernand, yet from
this day forth her longing to return to Italy became more earnest--more
irresistible; and she would compel him to sit by her side for hours
together on the shore, while she eagerly watched for the appearance of a
sail in the horizon. And Fernand, who divined her object, himself now
longed for the advent of a ship;--so sincere was his love for Nisida
that he was ready to make any sacrifice in order to promote her
happiness. Thus passed away the sixth month; and on the afternoon of the
last day thereof, when Wagner was about to observe to her that the time
had now arrived for him to pass the mountains once again, she said of
her own accord, "Fernand, my beloved, when next you visit the other side
of the island, you would do well to raise some sign, or leave some
permanent mark to show that there are inhabitants on this island. For a
ship might touch at that point--the sailors might seek the shore for
water, and they would then search to discover where those who raised the
signal-post are dwelling."

"Your wish shall be fulfilled, dearest," answered Wagner; "and without
delay will I seek the other side of the island."

They then embraced tenderly, and Fernand departed, once more to fulfill
his frightful doom! Nisida watched his receding form until it was lost
in the groves intervening between the plains and the acclivities of the
range of mountains; and then she seated herself again on the sand,
wondering of what nature her husband's secret could be, and why it
compelled him to absent himself occasionally from her. Though _he_ kept
an accurate calculation of the lapse of time, and counted the passing
days with unvarying precision, yet she retained no such faithful
calendar in her memory, and had not observed that his absence always
occurred on the last day of the month.

The hour of sunset was now rapidly approaching, and as Nisida was
wrapped in thought, but with her eyes fixed wistfully upon the mighty
bosom of the deep, a slight sound as of the rustling of garments fell
upon her ears. She started up and glanced suddenly around. But how
ineffable was her astonishment--how great was her sudden joy, when she
beheld the figure of a man approaching her; for it instantly struck her
that the same ship which had conveyed him thither might bear her away
from a scene which had latterly become insupportably monotonous.

The individual whose presence thus excited her astonishment and her
delight, was tall, thin, and attired rather in the German than in the
Italian fashion: but, as he drew nearer, Nisida experienced indefinable
emotions of alarm, and vague fears rushed to her soul--for the
expression of that being's countenance was such as to inspire no
pleasurable emotions. It was not that he was ugly;--no--his features
were well formed, and his eyes were of dazzling brilliancy. But their
glances were penetrating and reptile-like,--glances beneath which those
of ordinary mortals would have quailed; and his countenance was stamped
with a mingled sardonism and melancholy which rendered it painful to
contemplate.

Nisida attributed her feeling of uneasiness and embarrassment to the
shame which she experienced at finding herself half-naked in the
presence of a stranger, for so oppressive bad become the heat of the
summer, that her clothing was most scanty, and she had long ceased to
decorate her person with garlands and wreaths of fantastically woven
flowers.

"Fear not, lady," said the demon, for he indeed it was; "I am come to
counsel and solace, not to alarm thee."

"How knowest thou that I require counsel? and who art thou that talkest
to me of solace?" asked Nisida, her sentiment of shame yielding to one
of boundless surprise at hearing herself thus addressed by a being who
appeared to read the very inmost secrets of her soul.

"I am one who can penetrate into all the mysteries of the human heart,"
returned the fiend, in his sonorous, deep-toned voice; "and I can gather
thy history from the expression of thy countenance, the attitude in
which I first beheld thee, while thou wast still seated upon the strand,
and the mingled emotions of surprise and joy with which thou didst mark
my presence. Is it, then, difficult to imagine that thou requirest
counsel to teach thee how to proceed so as to obtain thine emancipation
from this isle? or would it be extraordinary if, moved by thy sorrow, I
offered to befriend thee? And is it not ever the way with mortals--poor,
weak, miserable beings that they are--to grow speedily dissatisfied with
their lot? In the spirit of religion ye say that Heaven controls your
destinies according to its own wise purposes; and when all goes well
with ye, and you have your desires, ye pray and are thankful, because,
forsooth," added the demon, with a smile of bitter scorn, "it is so easy
to pray when ye are contented and happy, and so easy to be thankful when
ye are pampered with all ye require. Here art thou, lady, on an island
teeming with all the choicest fruits of the earth, and enjoying an
eternal summer, where all is pleasant to the view, and to whose silent
shores the cares of the great world cannot come; and yet thou wouldst
quit this calm retreat, and rush back into the vortex of evil passions,
warring interests, conflicting pursuits! But I will not weary thee with
my reflections; although it is my nature first to upbraid and taunt
those whom I intend to serve!"

"And who art thou, strange being, that reasoneth morally with the smile
of scorn upon thy lips?" demanded Nisida, the vague alarms which had
previously influenced her reviving with additional power; "who art thou,
I say, that comest to reproach, and yet profferest thine aid?"

"No matter who I am," replied the fiend. "Some day thou may'st know me
better, if thou----"

"But how camest thou hither? Where is the ship that brought thee--the
boat that landed thee?" demanded Nisida in a tone of feverish
impatience.

"No ship brought me hither--no boat set me on the shore," answered the
demon, fixing his eyes--those piercing eyes upon Nisida's countenance,
as if to read the impression which this strange revelation made upon her
secret soul.

"Then who art thou?" exclaimed the lady, a cold shudder passing over her
entire frame, although she retreated not nor withdrew the glances which
she, through her wondrous strength of mind, was enabled to retain fixed
upon the demon's countenance.

"Seek not to learn as yet who I am," said the fiend. "Let it suffice for
thee to know that I am something more than a mere mortal--a being gifted
with powers which, in the hands of such a one as thou, would throw the
entire world into convulsions; for there is much in thee after my own
heart, beauteous Nisida of Riverola."

"Ah! thou art even acquainted with my name," cried Nisida, again
shuddering violently in spite of her powerful efforts to appear calm and
fearless.

"I am acquainted with thy name, and with all that concerns thee and
thine, Nisida," replied the fiend; "ay," he added, with a malignant
chuckle, "even to the mystery of the closet in thy late father's
chamber, and the contents of the terrible manuscript which taught thee
such dreadful secrets! I know, too, all that thou hast done to serve
thine aims--thy simulated deafness and dumbness--the assassination of
Agnes--the imprisonment of Flora in the convent----"

"Then art thou indeed some superhuman power," interrupted Nisida, in a
tone of inexpressible alarm; "and I dare hold no further converse with
thee."

"One moment--and thou wilt think differently!" exclaimed the demon. "But
I will give thee an evidence of my power. Here, take this
instrument--'tis called a telescope--and use it for a single minute.
Glance across the waters, and thou shalt behold a scene which will
interest thee somewhat, I trow."

The fiend handed her a telescope and directed her to apply it to her
eyes. She obeyed him, though reluctantly; but intense curiosity overcame
her scruples, and, moreover, her extraordinary strength of mind aided
her in supporting the presence of one whom she knew to be invested with
superhuman powers--but of what nature she feared to guess. Nisida turned
toward the sea, and used the magic telescope as directed, while the
demon stood behind her, his countenance expressing a diabolical triumph,
mingled with blighting scorn.

But ah! what does Nisida behold? The moment she applies the telescope to
her eye, she is transported as it were to her own native city. She is in
Florence--yes, in the fair capital of Tuscany. Every familiar scene is
presented to her again; and she once more views the busy crowds and the
bustling haunts of men. She sweeps them all with a hurried glance; and
then her look settled upon a young couple walking together in a secluded
place on the banks of the Arno. But oh! how terribly flashed her
eyes--how changed with wrath and concentrated rage suddenly becomes her
countenance! For in that fond pair, wandering so lovingly together on
the Arno's margin she recognized her brother Francisco and the maiden
Flora Francatelli!

"Thou hast seen enough!" cried the demon, snatching the telescope from
her hands. "And now, more than ever," he added with a malignant smile of
triumph, "dost thou long to revisit thy native land. It was to confirm
that longing that I showed thee the scene thou hast just witnessed."

"And canst thou give me the means to return thither?" demanded Nisida,
almost maddened by the spectacle that had met her eyes.

"Listen!" exclaimed the fiend, "and hear me patiently. I charge thee not
to breathe to thy Fernand one word descriptive of this interview which
thou hast had with me. Thou couldst simulate dumbness for ten long years
or more, with a success which rendered thee great and glorious in my
eyes--for I love the hypocrite and the deceiver," he added with one of
his diabolical smiles; "although I myself deceive them! Be dumb, then,
in all that relates to my visit to thee here. But thou mayst so beset
thy Fernand with earnest entreaties to give thee the means of departure
from this island--for he can do so, if he have the will--that he shall
be unable to resist thy prayer--thy fears--thy anguish, real or feigned,
whichever that anguish may be. And should he not yield to thy
intercessions, then assail him on another point. Tell him that thou wilt
never rest until thou shalt have discovered the cause of those
periodical visits which he makes to the other side of the
mountains--threaten to accompany him the next time he goes thither. But
I need not teach you how to be energetic nor eloquent. For thou art a
woman of iron mind and of persuasive tongue; and thy perseverance, as is
thy will, is indomitable. Follow my counsel, then--and, though the
future to a great extent be concealed from my view, yet I dare prophesy
success for thee! And now farewell, Nisida--farewell!"

And the demon retreated rapidly toward the forests, as if to seek the
abode of those terrible serpents whose cunning was akin to his own.

Nisida was too much astonished by the nature of the counsel which his
deep sonorous voice had wafted to her ear, to be able to utter a word
until his receding form was no longer visible, and then she exclaimed
wildly; "I have assuredly seen Satan face to face!"

And her blood ran cold in her veins. But a few moments were sufficient
to enable that woman of wondrous energy to recover her presence of mind
and collect her scattered thoughts; and she sat down on the sand to
ponder upon the strange incidents which had so terribly varied the
monotony of her existence. She thought, too, of the scene which she had
beholden on the banks of the Arno--her worst fears were confirmed; Flora
had escaped from the ruin of the Carmelite convent--was alive, was at
liberty--and was with Francisco! Oh! how she now longed for the return
of Fernand Wagner; but many hours must elapse--a night must pass--and
the orb of day which had by this time gone down, must gain the meridian
once more ere he would come back. And in the meantime, although she
suspected it not, he must fulfill the awful doom of a Wehr-Wolf, as the
reader will find by the perusal of the next chapter.




CHAPTER LV.


It was within a few minutes of sunset, as Fernand Wagner, having crossed
the mountains, hastened down that bituminous declivity constituting the
scene of desolation which separated the range of volcano hills from the
delightful plains and verdant groves stretching to the sea-shore.

A shudder passed over his frame as he beheld the solitary tree in which
he had seen the monstrous snake playing and gamboling, on the morning
when he was thrown upon this Mediterranean isle.

"Oh!" he exclaimed aloud, as he sped onward, "what happiness and also
what misery have I known in this clime. But, doomed and fated being that
I am, such is my destiny; and so must I be, here or elsewhere, in
whichever land I may visit, in whatever part of the earth I may abide.
Oh! merciful Heaven, can no prayer, no self-mortification, remove the
ban--the curse--from my devoted head?

"Oh! just Heaven," he exclaimed, stretching forth his arms toward the
sky, and with ineffable anguish depicted on his upturned countenance;
"spare me! Have I not been punished enough! Oh! take away from me this
appalling doom--let me become old, wrinkled, forlorn, and poor once
more,--let me return to my humble cot in the Black Forest, or let me
die. Almighty power! if thou wilt--but spare me--spare me now!
Wretch--wretch that I was to be dazzled by the specious promises, O
Faust! But I am justly punished--thy vengeance, O Heaven, is well
deserved--sinner, sinner that I am!"

Those were the last human sounds he uttered for several hours; for,
scarcely had they escaped his lips, when the horrible change began, and
in a few moments a wild yell rent the air, and a monstrous wolf sprung
from the spot where Wagner had fallen down in such agonizing writhings.

Away--away went the ferocious animal heading toward the sea--careering,
thundering on, as if intent on plunging into the silent depths, and
there ending its course in a watery grave.

But no: death yawns not for the Wehr-Wolf! Scarcely have its feet
touched the verge of the water, when the monster wheels round and
continues its whirlwind way without for an instant relaxing one tittle
of its speed. Away--away, through the fruit-bearing groves, clearing for
itself a path of ruin and havoc,--scattering the gems of the trees, and
breaking down the richly-laden vines; away--away flies the monster,
hideous howls bursting from its foaming mouth. The birds scream and
whistle wildly, as startled from their usual tranquil retreats, they
spread their gay and gaudy plumage, and go with gushing sound through
the evening air. He reaches the bank of a stream, and bounds along its
pleasant margin, trampling to death noble swans which vainly seek to
evade the fury of the rushing monster.

Away--away toward the forest hurries the Wehr-Wolf--impelled, lashed on
by an invincible scourge, and filling the woods with its appalling
yells--while its mouth scatters foam like thick flakes of snow. Hark,
there is an ominous rustling in one of the trees of the forest; and the
monster seems to instinctively know the danger which menaces it. But
still its course is not changed;--it seems not to exercise its own will
in shaping its course. Down the tremendous snake flings itself from the
tree--and in an instant its hideous coils are wound round the foaming,
steaming, palpitating body of the wolf. The air is rent with the yell of
agony that bursts from the throat of the horrified monster as it tumbles
over and over, as if it had run to the length of a tether--for the snake
clings with its tail to the bough from which it has darted down. But the
yielding of the wolf is only momentary; up--up it springs again--and
away,--away it careers, more madly, more desperately, more ferociously,
if possible, than before.

And the snake? Oh! poor, weak and powerless was even that dread reptile
of forty feet in length, when combated with a monster lashed on and also
protected by invisible fiends. For, as the wolf sped on again, the boa
was dragged as if by a thousand horses from its coiling hold upon the
bough--and shaken, lacerated, and affrighted, the hideous reptile
unwound itself from the ferocious animal, and fell powerless on the
grass, where the vermin of the forest attacked it with their greedy maws
ere its pestilential breath had ceased.

Away--away toward the mountains rushes the Wehr-Wolf,--those mountains
which constitute the barrier of safety to protect Nisida from the fangs
of the animal that would mangle her fair form were she to cross its
path. But, ah! he rushes up the acclivity--he clears rugged rock and
jutting crag with wondrous bounds;--just Heaven! will he pass those
heights--will he cross the range of volcanic hills?

Oh! Nisida, who art on the other side of that range, little dreamest
thou of the peril that menaces thee. Joy! joy!--the danger has passed;
the wolf turns aside from a loftier impediment of crag than had yet
appeared in its course: and down--down again toward the groves and
valleys--over the bituminous waste made by the volcano--on, on goes the
monster. Away, away, through the verdant scenes once more, fresh
havoc--fresh desolation--fresh ruin marking his maddening course,--away,
away the Wehr-Wolf speeds.

The moon rises to give a stronger and purer light to the dreadful
spectacle, a light stronger and purer than that of night itself, which
is never completely dark in the tropics. Away, away, and still on,
on--outstripping time--running a race with the fleeting moments, till
hours and hours of unrelaxing speed are numbered--thus goes the wolf.
And now he snuffs the morning air: the fresh breeze from the east raises
the foam of the Mediterranean waves, and allays the heat on the body of
the careening, bounding, and almost flying monster.

His howling grows less ferocious--his yells become less terrible; and
now his pace is a trifle more measured,--that relaxation of a whirlwind
speed gradually increasing.

'Tis done; the course is o'er--the race is run;--and the Wehr-Wolf falls
in writhing agonies upon the fresh grass, whence in a few moments rises
Fernand Wagner--a man once more! But as he throws a glance of horror
around on the scene of his night's dread employment, he starts back with
mingled aversion and alarm; for there--with folded arms, eyes terrible
to look upon, and a countenance expressing infernal triumph and bitter
scorn, stood the demon.

"Fiend, what would'st thou with me?" demanded Wagner. "Are not the
sufferings which I have just endured, enough to satisfy thy hatred of
all human beings? are not the horrors of the past night sufficient to
glut even thine insatiate heart?"

"Mortal," said the demon, speaking in his profound and awe-inspiring
tones, "didst thou take all thy miseries which at this moment afflict
thy race, combine all the bitter woes, and crushing sorrows that madden
the brains of men, mix up all the tears and collect all the sobs and
sighs that tell of human agony, then multiply the aggregate by ten
million, million times its sum, and go on multiplying by millions and
millions, till thou wast tired of counting, thou would'st not form even
an idea of that huge amount of human misery which could alone appease
me. For on man do I visit the hate wherewith my own fall has animated
me; powerless on high, where once I was so powerful, I make my kingdom
of earth and hell--and in both my influence is great and is terrible!"

"Yes--yes; too great--too terrible!" exclaimed Wagner. "But why dost
thou persecute me with thy presence? I did not call thee--I did not
invoke thine aid."

"No, but thou requirest it!" said the demon, with a satirical smile.
"Thinkest thou to be enabled to dream away thine existence in this
island, with the warm, impassioned Nisida? No, mortal--no! Already doth
she pine for her own native Italian clime; and she will end by loathing
thee and this land, if she continue to dwell here, and with only thee as
her companion. But it is in thy power to make Nisida forget
Italy--Francisco--Flora--and all the grave interests and dreadful
mysteries which seem to demand her presence in the busy world;--it is in
thy power to render her happy and contented in this island--to attach
her to thee for the remainder of thine existence--to provide her with
the means of preserving her youth and her beauty unimpaired, even as
thine own--to crush forever all those pinings and longings which now
carry her glances wistfully across the sea,--in a word, to bend her mind
to all thy wishes--her soul to all thy purposes! Yes;--it is in thy
power to do all this--and the same decision which shall place that
amount of ineffable happiness within thy reach, will also redeem thee
from the horrible destiny of a Wehr-Wolf--leaving thee thy youth and thy
beauty, and investing thee with a power equal to that enjoyed by thy
late master, Faust."

"And doubtless on the same conditions?" said Wagner, half-ironically,
and half in horror at the mere thought of surrendering his soul to
Satan.

"Art thou blind to the means of promoting thy earthly happiness?"
demanded the demon, fixing on Fernand a glance intended to appal and
intimidate, but at which he on whom it was bent quailed not. "Hast thou
not received sufficient experience of the terrific sufferings which
twelve times a year thou art doomed to endure? Knowest thou not on each
occasion thou destroyest human life, where mortal beings are in thy
path--or that thou ravagest the fair scenes which He whose name I dare
not mention has created? and art thou ignorant of the tremendous horror
and loathsome obloquy which attach themselves to the name of a
Wehr-Wolf? See--thou art already wearied of traveling through the
various climes of the earth; thou no longer delightest in cultivating
thine intellect, so marvelously adapted to receive knowledge of all
kinds; and thy power to create whole mines of wealth is exercised no
more. But thou would'st fix thine abode in this island forever, were
Nisida to remain thy companion! Well--and if thou losest her? for
assuredly a vessel will some day touch on these shores--what would'st
thou do then? All lonely, desolate, forlorn, thou would'st curse the day
that gave thee regenerated life--thou would'st seek death--and to thee
death may not come yet for many, many years! Fernand, thou art worse
than mad not to embrace my offers. Consent to become mine--mine
eternally, when thy mortal breath shall leave thy body, and in the
meantime I promise thee power illimitable--happiness such as no human
being ever yet enjoyed----"

"No--no!" exclaimed Wagner. "Rather the destiny of a Wehr-Wolf--rather
the solitude of this island for the remainder of my days--than resign
all chance of salvation! And that mine immortal soul is yet safe, the
very temptations thou offerest with such eloquent persuasion fully
proves! Oh! Heaven, of its infinite mercy, will receive the dreadful
sufferings 'tis mine to endure each month, as an atonement for that hour
of weakness, madness, folly, when dazzled by the words of Faust, and
overwhelmed by a weight of miseries, I accepted a regenerated existence.
Yes, Heaven will forgive me yet: and therefore avaunt, fiend! avaunt!"
And as he uttered these words he made the sign of the cross, and the
demon fled away howling. Wagner turned aside in dismay, and sank upon
the ground as if blasted by the lightning. A deep sleep fell on
Fernand's eyes, and in his dreams he thought he heard a solemn but
rejoicing strain of music filling the air. That divine melody seemed to
speak a language eloquent and intelligible, and to give him hope and
promise of a deliverance from the dreadful destiny which his weakness
and folly had entailed upon him. The music grew fainter and fainter, and
at the moment when it died away altogether a heavenly and radiant being
rose in the midst of a cloud, an angel, clad in white and shining
garments, and with snowy wings closed, and drooping from its shoulders.
Looking benignly upon the sleeping Wagner the angel said in a soft and
liquid tone, "Thrice hast thou resisted the temptations of the enemy of
mankind: once in thy dungeon at Florence, a second time amidst the
defiles of yon mountains, and now on this spot. He will appear to thee
no more, unless thou thyself summon him. Much hast thou already done in
atonement for the crime that endangered thy soul when, withdrawing thy
faith from Heaven, thou didst accept new life on the conditions proposed
to thee by the agent of Satan; but much more must thou yet do, ere that
atonement will be complete!" The form ceased to speak, and gradually
became fainter and fainter, until it disappeared with its glorious halo
altogether.

Then Fernand awoke, and his dream was vividly impressed upon his memory.

Assuming a kneeling posture, he clasped his hands fervently together,
and said aloud, "Merciful Heaven! be the vision one divinely sent, or be
it but the sport of an imagination fevered by a long night of suffering,
I receive it as an emblem and as a sign of hope and promise!"

He arose. The sun was now high in the heaven, and he hastened to the
shore to perform his ablutions. Refreshed in body with the bath which he
took in the Mediterranean, and in mind with the influence of the vision,
he retraced his way toward the mountains. The range was passed in
safety, and he once more set foot on that section of the island where
Nisida was so anxiously awaiting his presence.

The hour at which Fernand Wagner was accustomed to return after his
periodical excursions beyond the mountains, had long passed; for it will
be remembered that he had fallen asleep and slumbered some time, after
his restoration to human shape and his encounter with the demon. Nisida
was already a prey to the wildest alarms, which were not altogether
untainted with selfishness; for the enemy of mankind had led her to
believe that Wagner had within his reach certain means of enabling her
to quit the island, and she trembled lest death might have intervened to
snatch him away, and thus annihilate the hopes which had been so
insidiously infused into her soul. She was also distressed at his
prolonged absence on grounds more creditable to her heart, for she
shuddered at the idea that her handsome Fernand might at that very
moment be writhing in the coils of a horrible snake. Then, arousing
herself, Nisida resolved to attempt the passage of the mountains, and
seek for her lover and rescue him if possible, and if not, to die with
him. But as she drew near the craggy mountains she suddenly beheld the
object of her anxiety approaching her, and in a few minutes they were
locked in each other's arms.

"My Fernand," said Nisida at length, "I feared that some danger had
befallen you, and I was hastening to join you on the other side of these
heights, either to aid you in escaping from the peril, or to share its
consequences with you."

"Beloved Nisida!" exclaimed Wagner, "how welcome to me is this proof of
thy regard, this earnest of thy love."

"I can never cease to love you, dear Fernand," answered Nisida, turning
her fine large eyes upon his handsome face. "Oh, that I should seek to
quit thee! The thought smites me to the inmost recesses of my heart. And
yet it is to some extent thy fault, for wherefore wilt thou not
accompany me?"

"In the first place, beloved one," replied Wagner, "thou talkest as if a
ship were already in sight, or a boat lay ready to launch from this
shore; secondly, I have before assured thee that I dared not return to
Florence, and that as I cannot therefore be thy companion thither, it
would be better for me to remain on the island, to which, perhaps," he
added in a mournful tone, "you might, after all, never come back!"

"Oh! Fernand, think not so ill of your Nisida!" she cried, throwing one
of her snowy full arms round his neck, and looking earnestly, but yet
tenderly on his countenance. "Never, never shall I know happiness again
until I have revisited Florence. Each day that passes without giving me
a hope to see this aim fulfilled, increases my misery, adds to my
uneasiness, augments my anxiety--so that in a short time my suspense
will become intolerable. It is nearly so already, Fernand--but pity me;
yes--and help me, if you can!"

"Dearest Nisida, willingly would I sacrifice my own inclinations to
forward thine," exclaimed Wagner in a tone of deep sincerity; "but how
is it possible that I can aid thee? I have not wings to affix to thy
fair shoulder, I have not a voice powerful enough to raise echoes on a
shore whence assistance might be sent. Nay, look not so sternly on me,
beloved Nisida, I did not intend to vex thee with idle jestings; but
thou knowest that I cannot aid thee."

"Fernand, you love me not!" exclaimed Nisida, suddenly withdrawing her
arm from its fond position about his neck, and retreating a few paces.
"No; you do not love me as you were wont, or as I love you! You
doubtless have some means of gratifying my ardent longings. A secret
voice whispers within me that if you chose to exert all your powers, you
might render me happy--at least so happy as I could be when separated
from you! I have assured you that naught save the most important
interests would render me thus anxious to return to my native city; and
if you find me thus importunate, you should pity me, not refuse to aid
me."

"Holy Virgin! this is maddening!" cried Wagner. "Nisida--be reasonable;
how can I assist thee? how can I enable thee to cross that sea which
appears to us boundless? And thou accusest me of not loving thee,
Nisida! Oh! this is too cruel!"

"No, it is thou who art cruel!" exclaimed Nisida, in an impassioned
tone. "I know that you are not a being of an ordinary stamp, that your
intellect is as wonderful as your person is godlike,--and that you
possess a mine of knowledge in the extent of which no mortal can equal
thee. Is it strange--is it marvelous, then, that I should implore thee
to exert thy powers--the vast powers of thy glorious intelligence, to
forward my design? Nay, seek not to interrupt me, Fernand, denial is
vain! A secret voice continues to whisper within me that thou art able
to do all I ask; I know not the means to be used--I seek not to know
them; but that thou hast such means within thy reach, is a conviction
firmly impressed upon my mind. Here, then, Fernand, at thy feet, on my
knees, do I implore thee, beseech thee, not to refuse the boon which I,
thy loving wife, crave at the hands of thee, my husband, as if I were a
humble suppliant suing at the footstool of a throned king!"

"Nisida, Nisida!" cried Fernand, painfully excited by this sudden
movement on her part, and endeavoring to rise: "what means so strange a
proceeding? Rise, dearest, rise; it is not to me that you must thus
humble yourself!"

"No; I will not quit this suppliant attitude until you shall have
granted my request--my prayer," said Nisida. "Refuse me not, my Fernand.
Oh! I implore you not to refuse me! Whatever means be within your reach,
exert them on my behalf. A brother's interest, the remembrance of a
solemn vow breathed only to my lamented and much-wronged mother--and the
safeguard of a mystery, the discovery of which by curious and prying
eyes would heap infamy and disgrace upon the family that bears the name
of Riverola--all these reasons render me thus anxious to return to
Italy. And if you keep me here, Fernand, I shall pine away--I shall
perish before your eyes, and you will repent of your harshness when it
is too late. Or else," she added, speaking with wild rapidity, "I shall
be reduced to despair, and in a moment of excitement shall seek death in
those silent waters, or climb yon craggy mountains to fling myself
headlong from their summit."

"Nisida, your menaces are maddening as your supplications to me are vain
and useless!" said Wagner, himself now laboring under a fearful
excitement. "Rise, I implore you, rise, and let us endeavor to converse
more calmly--more rationally."

"Yes--I will rise," said Nisida, now affecting a sullen haughtiness, and
preparing to wield another of the weapons which the demon had placed in
her hand: "I rise, Fernand, because I feel that I was wrong thus to
abase myself--I, who bear the proud name of Riverola;"--and she tossed
her head indignantly. "Well--it seems that you are resolved to keep me
chained to your side on this island. Be it so: but henceforth let there
be no mistrust--no mystery--no secrets between us. If Italy must be
forgotten forever, then this isle shall become our world, and our
thoughts shall travel not beyond its confines. All shall be mutual
confidence--a reciprocal outpouring of our minutest thoughts. On that
condition only will existence _here_ be tolerable to us both. And now as
a proof that thou wilt assent to this proposal--than which nothing can
be more rational--let our new life of mutual confidence date from this
moment. Tell me then, my Fernand," she proceeded, assuming a winning
manner, and throwing as much pathos as possible into her sweetly musical
voice--that voice which gave new and indescribable, charms to the soft
Italian language--"tell me then, my Fernand, wherefore thou quittest me
at certain intervals--why thou invariably seekest on those occasions the
opposite side of the island--and whether thou wilt in future suffer me
to be the companion of those journeys?"

"Thou be my companion--thou, Nisida!" exclaimed Wagner, his whole frame
convulsed with mental agony. "Merciful Heaven! what fiend has prompted
thee thus to speak! Nisida," he said, suddenly exercising a strong
mastery over his emotions, as he seized her hand and pressed it with
spasmodic violence--"Nisida, as thou valuest our happiness seek not to
penetrate into my secret--proffer not that mad request again!"

And dropping her hand he paced the shore with the agitation of reviving
excitement.

"Fernand," said Nisida, approaching him, and once more speaking in a
resolute and even severe tone--"listen to me. When we met upon the
island, an accident of a terrible nature led me to forget my vow of
self-imposed dumbness; and when the excitement occasioned by that
accident had somewhat passed you were in doubt whether you had really
heard my voice or had been deluded by fevered imagination. It would have
been easy for me to simulate dumbness again; and you would have believed
that the bewilderment of the dread scene had misled you. But I chose not
to maintain a secret from thee--and I confess that my long supposed loss
of two glorious faculties was a mere deed of duplicity on my part. At
that time you said that you also had explanations to give; and yet
months and months have passed by, and confidence has not begotten
confidence. Let this mistrust on your part cease. Reveal to me the cause
of these frequent excursions across the mountains; or else the next time
that you set out on one of these mysterious journeys, I shall assuredly
become your companion."

"Now, Nisida," exclaimed Wagner, his heart rent with indescribable
tortures--"it is you who are cruel--you are unjust!"

"No, Fernand--it is you!" cried Nisida, in a thrilling, penetrating
tone, as if of anguish.

"Merciful Heaven! what misery is in store for us both!" said Wagner,
pressing his hand to his burning brow. "Oh! that some ship would appear
to bear thee away--or that my destiny were other than it is!"

And he flung himself upon the sand in a fit of blank despair. Nisida now
trembled at the violence of those emotions which she had raised in the
breast of him whom she loved; and for a minute she reproached herself
for having so implicitly obeyed the counsel of the evil spirit.

Her own feelings were worked up to that pitch of excitement with which
women--even in the strongest-minded, must have its vent in tears; and
she burst into an agony of weeping.

The sound of those sobs was more than the generous-hearted and
affectionate Fernand could bear; and starting from the sand whereon he
had flung himself, he exclaimed, "Nisida, my beloved Nisida, dry those
tears, subdue this frenzied grief! Let us say no more upon these
exciting topics this evening; but I will meditate, I will reflect upon
the morrow, and then I will communicate to thee the result of my
deliberations."

"Oh! there is then hope for me yet!" cried Nisida, joyfully; "and thou
hast the means to grant my wishes, but thou fearest to use them. We will
say no more this evening on subjects calculated to give so little
pleasure; but to-morrow, my Fernand, to-morrow."

And Nisida stopped her own utterance by pressing her lips to those of
Wagner, winding her beauteous arms most lovingly round his neck at the
same time, and pressing him to her bosom.

But that night and the ensuing morn were destined to wring the
heart-cords of the unhappy Fernand: for the influence of the demon,
though unknown and unrecognized, was dominant with Nisida.




CHAPTER LVI.


It was night--and Fernand was pacing the sand with even greater
agitation than he had manifested during the cruel scene of the evening.
He was alone on the seashore; and Nisida slept in the hut. Terrible
thoughts warred in the breast of Wagner. Nisida's language had
astonished and alarmed him: he was convinced that Satan himself had
inspired her with those ideas, the utterance of which had nearly goaded
him to madness. She had insisted on the belief that he was acquainted
with the means of enabling her to return to Italy; and yet Nisida was
not a mere girl--a silly, whimsical being, who would assert the wildest
physical impossibilities just as caprice might prompt her. No--she
really entertained that belief--but without having any ostensible
grounds to establish it.

"Such an impression could only have been made upon her mind by the fiend
who seeks to entangle me in his meshes!" murmured Wagner to himself, as
he paced the strand. "The demon has failed to tempt me as yet--thrice
has he failed;--and now he musters all his force to assail me,--to
assail me, too, in the most vulnerable points! But, O Heaven, give me
strength to resist the dread influence thus brought to bear upon me!
What course can I adopt? what plan pursue? If to-morrow must witness a
renewal of that scene which occurred this evening, I shall succumb--I
shall yield; in a moment of despair I shall exclaim, 'Yes, Nisida--I
will sacrifice everything to acquire the power to transport thee back to
Italy;'--and I shall hurry to yon mountains, and seeking their wildest
defile, shall evoke the enemy of mankind, and say, 'Come, Satan, I give
thee my soul in exchange for the illimitable power thou offerest.' And
thus will be the terrible result--the fearful catastrophe."

Big drops of agony stood upon Fernand's brow as he uttered these words.
He saw that he was hovering on the verge of a fearful abyss--and he
trembled lest he should fall, so intense was his love for Nisida. At one
moment he thought of the soothing vision, full of hope and promise,
which had occupied his slumber in the morning; at another he pondered on
the tears, the prayers, and the threats of Nisida. The conflicting
thoughts were, indeed, sufficient to urge him on to a state of utter
despair:--his eternal salvation and the happiness of her whom he loved
so tenderly were placed in such antagonistic position that they raised a
fierce--a painful--an agonizing warfare in his breast. Now he would fall
upon his knees and pray--and pray fervently for strength to continue in
the right path: then he would again give way to all the maddening
influences of his bitter reflections; and, while in this mood, had Satan
suddenly stood before him, he would have succumbed--yes, he would have
succumbed. But the fiend had no longer any power to offer direct
temptation to the wretched Wagner. Oh! if he could die that moment, how
gladly would he release himself from an existence fraught with so much
misery; but death was not yet within the reach of him who bore the doom
of a Wehr-Wolf! The morning dawned, and Fernand Wagner was still pacing
the sand--dreading to meet Nisida again, and not daring to seek to avoid
her. Were he to fly to the mountains or to the forests, she would search
after him; and thus he would only be leading her into perils amidst
yawning precipices, or where she might become the prey of the terrible
anaconda. To remain were anguish--to fly were madness!

"Oh, wretch, miserable wretch that I am!" exclaimed Wagner, as he beheld
the twilight--so short in the tropics--growing more powerful, and knew
that Nisida would soon come forth from the hut. In a few minutes the orb
of day appeared above the Orient wave--and almost at the same time the
lady made her appearance on the shore.

"Fernand, thou hast not sought repose throughout the night just past!"
she said, advancing toward him, and endeavoring to read upon his
countenance the thoughts which filled his brain.

"Nisida," he replied, in a rapid and excited tone, "I have gone through
so much during the last few hours that 'tis a marvel reason has
maintained its seat. If thou lovest me, let us forget all those topics
which have so strongly excited us both: and let us unite our prayers
that Heaven will send thee means to quit this isle and return to thy
native land."

"Fernand," said Nisida, in a tone of deep disappointment and reproach,
"I was not prepared for this. Your words imply that you possess the
power to aid my departure hence, but that you have resolved not to use
it. Is that your decision?"

"I scorn to deceive thee, Nisida, by a direct falsehood in so serious a
matter as this," exclaimed Wagner. "Knowest thou, my beloved, at what
price must be purchased the power which alone can enable _me_ to effect
thy return to Italy? canst thou divine the immeasurable sacrifice which
I must make to gratify thy wishes?"

"Fernand," answered Nisida, in a reproachful and yet resolute tone,
"there is no price that I would not pay to obtain the means of pleasing
thee!--there is no sacrifice that I should shrink from were your
happiness at stake!"

"Nisida," ejaculated Wagner, in a tone of fearful excitement, "you drive
me to despair! Have mercy upon me, Nisida, have mercy upon me! My God!
if you taunt me--if you reproach me--thus I will do all that you
command; but force me not to believe, Nisida--my well beloved
Nisida--that, in espousing thee in the sight of Heaven, I took to my
bosom a fiend instead of a woman, a relentless demon in the most
charming female shape that evil spirit ever wore. Oh! if you knew all,
you would pity me as it is. So wretched on earth you would not compel me
to renounce every hope of salvation; for, know, Nisida," he added, his
countenance wearing an expression of indescribable horror, "know that in
demanding of me this last sacrifice, you ordain that I should sell my
immortal soul to Satan!"

For a moment Nisida appeared shocked and appalled at the words which met
her ears; but she rather recoiled from the manner of fearful excitement
in which they were uttered, than from the intelligence which they
conveyed.

"He who truly loves," she said coldly, as she recovered her equanimity,
"would make _even that_ sacrifice! and now listen--Fernand," she
continued, her eyes flashing fire, and her naked bosom heaving
convulsively as she spoke, while her splendid form was drawn up to its
full height, and her whole aspect sublimely terrible and wondrously
beautiful, even in that fit of agitated passion--"listen, Fernand!" she
cried, in her musical, flute-like voice, which, however, assumed the
imperious accent and tone of command: "thou art a coward, and unworthy
such an earnest--such a profound, such a devoted love as mine, if thou
refusest to consummate a sacrifice which will make us both powerful and
great as long as we live! Consider, my Fernand--the spirit with whom
thou wouldst league thyself can endow us with an existence running over
centuries to come, can invest us with eternal youth, can place countless
treasures at our disposal, can elevate us to the proudest thrones of
Christendom! Oh! wilt thou spurn advantages like those? wilt thou refuse
to avail thyself of gifts that must render us so supremely happy? No,
no: and we can return together to my native city, we can enter Florence
in triumph, thou no longer fearing the terror of the law, I no longer
compelled to simulate the doom of the deaf and dumb! Our enemies shall
lick the dust at our feet, and we shall triumph wherever success may be
desirable. Oh! I understand that beseeching, appealing look, Fernand:
thou thinkest that I shall love thee less if this immense sacrifice be
consummated, that I shall look upon thee with loathing. No, not so: and
to convince thee that mine is a soul endowed with an iron will, that
mine is an energy which can grapple even with remorse, I will reveal to
thee a secret which thou hast perhaps never even suspected. Fernand!"
she exclaimed, now becoming absolutely terrible with the excitement that
animated her; "Fernand!" she repeated, "'twas I who murdered the girl
Agnes, in the garden of thy mansion at Florence!"

"Thou, thou, Nisida?" almost shrieked Wagner wildly; "oh, no, no! Recall
that dreadful avowal! And yet--oh! yes--I see it all--my former
suspicions are confirmed. Wretched woman. What harm did the unfortunate
Agnes do to thee?"

"I saw in her a rival, Fernand--or fancied that she was so," answered
Nisida; "I overheard your conversation with her that morning in the
garden--I saw her embrace thee tenderly--mine ears drank in her words;
oh, I remember them even now! She said, 'Oh, what a night of uneasiness
have I passed! But at length thou art restored to me; thou whom I have
ever loved so fondly; although I abandoned thee for so long a time!'
Were not those her very words? And thou didst speak to her in a tone
equally tender. Ah! I have ever suspected that she was thy mistress;
although thou didst swear upon the cross, in thy dungeon, that she was
not. But so great was my love for thee, that I smothered the dread
suspicion----"

"Suspicion," repeated Wagner, in the penetrating tone of heart-rending
anguish,--an anguish so intense that his brain whirled, and he knew not
what he said or did. "Oh, wretched woman, and thou didst slay Agnes on a
mere suspicion?"

"I hated her--even before I entertained that suspicion," exclaimed
Nisida, impatiently; "for she was the mistress of my father! Thinkest
thou that my quick ears had not gleaned the mysterious whisperings which
frequently passed between my sire and his valet Antonio, relative to the
lady who dwelt in seclusion at the abode of that menial's mother? or
thinkest thou that when I once obtained a clew to my father's degrading
passion, I scrupled to watch him, to follow him, to learn all his
proceedings? No; for it was the more easily to enact the spy upon my own
father that originally simulated the doom of the deaf and dumb. A purse
of gold induced Dame Margaretha, Antonio's mother, to give me admission
into her house; though she also believed that I was really deprived of
the faculties of hearing and of speech. But often and often was I
concealed in the chamber adjacent to that where my father passed hours
with his mistress; and it was not without advantage that I so acted. For
I discovered that amongst the presents which he had given her, were the
jewels which had belonged to my sainted mother--that mother whose wrongs
were so manifold, and whose sufferings were so great. Yes: and I
possessed myself of those jewels, leaving the girl the other gifts which
she had received from my sire.

"And now, since I am involved in relations of such import, I shall do
well to inform thee, Fernand, that I had seen and loved thee before thou
didst come as a visitor to our mansion in Florence. For it was my habit
to proceed occasionally to the dwelling of the good Dr. Duras, the
depositary of my grand secret of the feigned loss of faculties; and
while wandering alone in his garden I once beheld thee! And the moment I
beheld I loved thee. Often--often after that would I visit the kind
physician's grounds, whereof I possessed a pass-key; and my admiration
of thee led me to pass the slight boundary which separated his garden
from thine. Then I would approach the windows of thy dwelling and
contemplate thee as thou wast seated in thy favorite apartment. On the
night of my father's funeral, although so very late when all the
subsequent business connected with the reading of the will was
concluded, my mind was so perturbed and restless that I could not sleep;
and quitting the Riverola mansion by a private door, I sought the fresh
air with the hope that it would calm me. Some vague and indescribable
sentiment of curiosity, or else something that I heard on the return of
the mourners, relative to the strange scene enacted in the church, I
know not which, led me to the vicinity of your abode; and there, in your
favorite room, I beheld you seated, listening attentively to some sweet
words, doubtless, which Agnes was breathing into your ear. But she
caught a glimpse of my countenance by the light of the lamps----"

"Enough! enough!" exclaimed Wagner; "thou hast indeed cleared up
innumerable mysteries! But, oh! Nisida--would that thou hadst remained
silent--that thou hadst not drawn aside the veil which my elevated
opinion of thee had thrown over the suspicions that, I admit, from time
to time----"

"And if I have told thee all this, Fernand," interrupted Nisida,
impatiently, "it is that thou may'st be convinced not only of the
natural energy of my mind, but also of the deep love which I bear thee.
And now, now that thou seest me in my true character, a murderess if
thou wilt," she added with an emphasis of bitter scorn, "now canst thou
refuse that sacrifice----"

"Nisida! Nisida! enough crime has been perpetrated by both us, Heaven
knows!" ejaculated Wagner, still writhing with the anguish produced by
the avowal which had so lately met his ears. "Oh! accursed be the day,
blotted from the annals of Time be the hour, Nisida, when thy hand
struck the fatal dagger into the heart of Agnes."

"What! this to my face?" said Nisida, her countenance becoming crimson
with indignation, and not her face only, but her swan-like neck, her
shoulders, and her bosom. "Then she _was_ thy mistress, Fernand! And
thou didst love her, while I fancied, false one that thou art, thine
affections to be wholly and solely mine."

"Nisida," exclaimed Fernand, cruelly bewildered, "you drive me to
despair. I know not whether to loathe thee for this avowal which thou
hast made, or to snatch thee to my arms, abandon all hope of salvation,
and sacrifice myself entirely for one so transcendently beautiful as
thou art. But thy suspicions relative to Agnes are ridiculous,
monstrous, absurd. For, as surely as thou art there, Nisida--as the
heaven is above us and the earth beneath us--as surely as that I love
thee so well as to be unable to reproach thee more for the deed which
thou hast confessed--so surely, Nisida, was Agnes my own granddaughter,
and I--I, Fernand Wagner--young, strong, and healthy as thou beholdest
me, am fourscore and fifteen years of age."

Nisida started in affright, and then fixed a scrutinizing glance upon
Fernand's countenance; for she feared that his reason was abandoning
him--that he was raving.

"Ah! Nisida, I see that you do not credit my words," he exclaimed; "and
yet I have told thee the solemn, sacred truth. But mine is a sad history
and a dreadful fate; and if I thought that thou would'st soothe my
wounded spirit, console, and not revile me, pity, and not loathe me, I
would tell thee all."

"Speak, Fernand, speak!" she cried; "and do me not so much wrong as to
suppose that I could forget my love for thee--that love which made me
the murderer of Agnes. Besides," she added, enthusiastically, "I see
that we are destined for each other; that the dark mysteries attached to
both our lives engender the closest sympathies; that we shall flourish
in power, and glory, and love, and happiness together."

Wagner threw his arms around Nisida's neck, and clasped her to his
breast. He saw not in her the woman who had dealt death to his
granddaughter; he beheld in her only a being of ravishing beauty and
wondrous mind, so intoxicated was he with his passion, and so great was
the magic influence which she wielded o'er his yielding spirit. Then, as
her head reclined upon his breast, he whispered to her, in a few
hurried, but awfully significant words, the nature of his doom, the
dread conditions on which he had obtained resuscitated youth, an almost
superhuman beauty, a glorious intellect, and power of converting the
very clods of the earth into gold and precious stones at will.

"And now, dearest," he added, in a plaintive and appealing tone, "and
now thou may'st divine wherefore on the last day of every month I have
crossed these mountains; thou may'st divine, too, how my escape from the
prison of Florence was accomplished; and, though no mortal power can
abridge my days--though the sword of the executioner would fall harmless
on my neck, and the deadly poison curdle not in my veins--still, man can
bind me in chains, and my disgrace is known to all Florence."

"But thou shalt return thither, Fernand," exclaimed Nisida, raising her
countenance and gazing upon him, not with horror and amazement, but in
pride and triumph; "thou shalt return thither, Fernand, armed with a
power that may crush all thine enemies, and blast with destructive
lightning the wretches who would look slightingly on thee. Already thou
art dearer, far dearer to me than ever thou wast before; for I love the
marvelous--I glory in the supernatural--and thou art a being whom such
women as myself can worship and adore. And thou repinest at thy destiny?
thou shudderest at the idea of that monthly transformation which makes
thy fate so grand, because it is so terrible? Oh, thou art wrong, thou
art wrong, my Fernand. Consider all thou hast gained, how many, many
years of glorious youth and magnificent beauty await thee! Think of the
power with which thy boundless command of wealth may invest thee. Oh,
thou art happy, enviable, blest. But I--I," she added, the impassioned
excitement of her tone suddenly sinking into subdued plaintiveness as
her charming head once more fell upon his breast--"I am doomed to fade
and wither like the other human flowers of the earth. Oh, that thought
is now maddening. While thou remainest as thou art now, vested with that
fine, manly beauty which won my heart when first I saw thee, and before
I knew thee: I shall grow old, wrinkled, and thou wilt loathe me. I
shall be like a corpse by the side of one endowed with vigorous life.
Oh, Fernand; this may not be; and thou canst purchase the power to
bestow unperishing youth, unchanging beauty upon me; the power,
moreover, to transport us hence, and render us happy in inseparable
companionship for long, long years to come."

"Merciful heavens! Nisida," exclaimed Fernand, profoundly touched by the
urgent, earnest appeal of the lovely siren whose persuasive eloquence
besought him to seal his own eternal damnation--"would'st thou have me
yield up my soul to the enemy of mankind?"

"Do you hesitate? Can you even pause to reflect?" cried Nisida, with
whose tongue the demon himself was as it were speaking. "Oh, Fernand,
you love me not, you have never, never loved me." And she burst into a
flood of tears. Wagner was painfully moved by this spectacle, which
constituted so powerful an argument to support the persuasive eloquence
of her late appeal. His resolution gave way rapidly--the more agonizing
became her sobs the weaker grew his self-command; and his lips were
about to murmur the fatal assent to her prayer--about to announce his
readiness to summon the enemy of mankind and conclude the awful
compact--when suddenly there passed before his eyes the image of the
guardian angel whom he had seen in his vision, dim and transparent as
the thinnest vapor, yet still perceptible and with an expression of
countenance profoundly mournful. The apparition vanished in a moment;
but its evanescent presence was fraught with salvation. Tearing himself
wildly and abruptly from Nisida's embrace, Wagner exclaimed in a tone
indicative of the horror produced by the revulsion of feeling in his
mind, "No--never--never!" and, fleet as the startled deer he ran--he
flew toward the mountains. Frightened and amazed by his sudden cry and
simultaneous flight, Nisida cast her eyes rapidly around to ascertain
the cause of his alarm, thinking that some dreadful spectacle had
stricken terror to his soul. But ah--what sees she? Why do her glances
settle fixedly in one direction? What beholds she in the horizon? For a
few moments she is motionless, speechless, she cannot believe her eyes.
Then her countenance, which has already experienced the transition from
an expression of grief and alarm to one of suspense and mingled hope and
fear, becomes animated with the wildest joy; and forgetting the late
exciting scene as completely as if it had never taken place, but with
all her thoughts and feelings absorbed in the new--the one idea which
now engrosses her--she turns her eyes rapidly round toward the
mountains, exclaiming, "Fernand, dearest Fernand! a sail--a sail."

But Wagner hears her not: she stamps her foot with impatient rage upon
the sand; and in another moment the groves conceal her lover from view.

Yes; Wagner looked not round; heard not the voice of Nisida invoking him
to return, but continued his rapid flight toward the mountains, as if
hurrying in anguish and in horror from the meshes which had been spread
to ensnare his mortal soul. And now Nisida became all selfishness; there
was at length a hope, a sudden hope that she should be speedily enabled
to quit the hated monotonous island, and her fine, large dark eyes were
fixed intently upon the white sails which gradually grew more and more
palpable in the azure horizon. She was not deceived; there was no doubt,
no uncertainty, as to the nature of the object which now engrossed all
her thoughts, and filled her heart with the wildest joy. It was indeed a
ship, and its course was toward the island; for, as she gazed with fixed
and longing eyes, it by degrees assumed a more defined shape; and that
which had at first appeared to be but one small white piece of canvas,
gradually developed the outlines of many sails, and showed the tapering
spars, until at last the black hull appeared, completing the form of a
large and noble vessel. Joy! joy--she should yet be saved from the
island. And, ah--do the chances of that hoped-for safety multiply? Is it
indeed another ship which has caught her eye in the far-off horizon?
Yes; and not one only, but another, and another, and another, until she
can count seven vessels, all emerging from the mighty distance, and
spreading their snow-white canvas to the breeze which wafts them toward
the isle.

Crowds of conflicting thoughts now rush to the mind of Nisida; and she
seats herself upon the strand to deliberate as calmly as she may upon
the course which she should adopt. Alas, Fernand: thou wast not then
uppermost in the imagination of thy Nisida, although she had not
entirely forgotten thee. But the principal topic of her meditations, the
grand question which demanded the most serious weighing and balancing in
her mind, was whether she should again simulate the deafness and
dumbness which she had now for many months been accustomed to affect.
Grave and important interests and a deeply-rooted attachment to her
brother on the one side urged the necessity of so doing; but on the
other, a fearful disinclination to resume that awful duplicity--that
dreadful self-sacrifice, an apprehension lest the enjoyment of the
faculties of hearing and speech for so long a period should have
unfitted her for the successful revival and efficient maintenance of the
deceit; these were the arguments on the negative side. But Nisida's was
not a mind to shrink from any peril or revolt from any sacrifice which
her interests or her aims might urge her to encounter; and it was with
fire-flashing eyes and a neck proudly arching, that she raised her head
in a determined manner, exclaiming aloud, "Yes, it must be so. But the
period of this renewed self-martyrdom will not last long. So soon as
thine interests shall have been duly cared for, Francisco, I will quit
Florence forever, I will return to this island, and here will I pass the
remainder of my days with thee, my beloved Fernand! And that I _do_ love
thee still, Fernand, although thou hast fled from my presence as if I
were suddenly transformed into a loathsome monster, that I must ever
continue to love thee, Fernand, and that I shall anxiously long to
return to thine arms, are truths as firmly based as the foundations of
the island. Thine, then, shall be the last name, thy name shall be the
last word that I will suffer my lips to pronounce ere I once more place
the seal upon them. Yes, I love thee, Fernand; oh! would to God that
thou could'st hear me proclaim how much I love thee, my beauteous, my
strangely-fated Fernand!"

It was almost in a despairing tone that Nisida gave utterance to these
last words; for as the chance of escape from the island grew every
moment less equivocal, by the nearer approach of the fleet, which was,
however, still far from the shore, the intensity of her sensual passion
for Wagner, that passion which she believed to be the purest and most
firmly rooted love, revived; and her heart smote her for her readiness
to abandon him to the solitude of that island. But as she was now
acquainted with all the mysteries of his fate, as she knew that he could
not die for many, many years to come, nor lose that glorious beauty
which had proved alike her pleasure and her pride, her remorse and her
alarms were to a considerable degree mitigated: for she thought within
herself, _although she now spoke aloud no more_; "Death will not snatch
him from me, disease will not impair his godlike features and elegant
form, and he loves me too well not to receive me with open arms when I
shall be enabled to return to him." These were her thoughts: and
starting upon her feet, she compressed her lips tightly, as if to remind
herself that she had once more placed a seal there, a seal not to be
broken for some time. An hour had now passed since Fernand Wagner and
Nisida separated on the seashore; and he did not come back. Meantime the
fleet of ships had drawn nearer, and though she more than once
entertained the idea of hastening after Wagner to implore him to
accompany her whithersoever those vessels were bound, or at least to
part with the embrace of tenderness, yet her fear lest the ships might
sail past without touching at the island, predominated over her softer
feelings. And now, having settled in her mind the course she was to
adopt, she hastened to the stores which she had saved from the wreck of
the corsair vessel, and which had been piled up on the strand the day
after she was first thrown on that Mediterranean isle.

It will be remembered that amongst the articles thus saved were changes
of apparel, which Stephano Verrina had procured for her use at Leghorn
ere the corsair-bark set sail on that voyage from which it never
returned, and during Nisida's long sojourn on the island, she had
frequently examined those garments, and had been careful to secure them
from the effects of rain or damp, in the hope that the day would sooner
or later come when she might assume them for the purpose of bidding
adieu to that lovely but monotonous island. And now that day has come;
and the moment so anxiously longed for appeared to be rapidly
approaching. Nisida accordingly commenced her toilet, as if she had only
just risen from her couch and was preparing to dress to go abroad
amongst the busy haunts of human beings.

Her dark luxuriant hair, which so long had floated negligently upon her
ivory shoulders, was now gathered up in broad massive bands at the
sides, and artistically plaited and confined at the back of her
well-shaped head. The tight bodice was next laced over the swelling
bosom: hose and light boots imprisoned the limbs which had so often
borne her glancing along in their nudity to the soft music of the stream
in the vale or of the wavelets of the sea; broidery set off the fine
form of Nisida in all the advantage of its glowing, full and voluptuous
proportions. Then the large black veil was fastened to the plaits of her
hair, whence its ample folds swept over that admirable symmetry of
person, endowing her once more with the queen-like air which became so
well her splendid, yet haughty style of beauty! Yes: no longer subdued
by simplicity of attire--no longer tender and soft, was the loveliness
of Nisida; but grand, imperious, and dazzling did she now seem again, as
erst she seemed ere her foot trod that island-shore.

Appareled in handsome garments, and with the rich carnation glow of
health and animation on her cheeks, and with her eyes flashing the fires
of hope, but with the vermilion lips compressed, Nisida now stood on the
strand where so oft she had wandered like a naiad, feeling no shame at
her semi-nudity.

During the time occupied by her toilet, the fleet of seven ships had
approached much nearer to the island, and now they were not more than
three miles distant. The hulls, which at first had seemed quite black,
shone, as they drew closer, with the gay colors in which they were
painted, the gorgeous sunlight playing vividly on the gilding of the
prows, the streaks of red and white along the sides, and the splendid
decorations of the poop lanterns. Noble and mighty ships they
were--ships of size such as Nisida had never seen before, and in
comparison with which all the merchant-vessels she had beheld at Leghorn
were but mere boats. There was no need to raise a signal to invite them
to approach--for that fleet was evidently steering toward the island.
Whence did this fleet come? whither was it bound? to what nation did it
belong? and would those on board treat her with attention and respect?

Such were the thoughts which flashed across her brain--and her heart
beat with anxiety for the arrival of the moment which should solve those
questions. Absorbed as she was in the contemplation of the noble
ships--those mighty but graceful swans of the ocean--she did not forget
to cast, from time to time, a rapid glance around, to see if Fernand
were retracing his way toward her. Alas! no--he came not--and she must
quit the isle without embracing him--without assuring him of her
constant love--without renewing her oft-repeated promise to return. Ah!
a thought struck her: she would leave a note for him in the hut! No
sooner was the project determined on than she set about its execution;
for there were writing materials amidst the stores saved from the
corsair-wreck. A brief but tender letter was hastily penned, and then
secured in a place where she knew he must find it should he revisit the
rude tenement in which they had so often slept in each other's arms. And
that he would revisit it she both fondly hoped and firmly
believed--revisit it so soon as the excitement and the terror, under the
influence of which he had parted from her, should have subsided. Her
mind was now much easier, and her beauty was wonderfully enhanced by the
glow of animation which suffused itself over her countenance, giving
additional light to her ever brilliant eyes, and rendering her noble
aquiline face resplendent to gaze upon.

The ships came to anchor at a distance of about two miles from the
shore: and though the banners of each were fluttering in the breeze, yet
Nisida was not well skilled enough in discriminating the flags of
different nations to be able immediately to satisfy herself to which
country that fleet belonged. But as she stood with her eyes fixed on the
foremost vessel, which was also the largest, she observed that there was
a gilt crescent in the middle of the blood-red standard that floated
over her central poop-lantern; and a chill struck to her heart--for the
thought of African pirates flashed to her mind! This alarm was, however,
as evanescent as it was poignant; for another moment's reflection
convinced her that none of the princes of Africa could send so proud a
fleet to sea. Following up the chain of reasoning thus suggested, and
calling to her aid all the accounts she had read of naval fights between
the Christians and the Moslems, she at length remembered that the
blood-red banner, with the gilt crescent in the middle, denoted the
presence of the Kapitan-Pasha, or Lord High Admiral of the Ottoman
Empire. Confidently believing that peace existed between Italy and
Turkey, she had now no longer any fears as to the treatment she was
likely to experience at the hands of the Mohammedans; and it was with
unfeigned joy that she beheld a boat, which had put off from the
admiral's ship, at length approaching the shore.

As the magnificently painted and gorgeously gilt barge, which
twenty-four white-turbaned rowers urged along with almost horse-race
speed, neared the strand, Nisida observed, beneath a velvet canopy in
the stern, a personage, who by his splendid apparel, his commanding
demeanor, and the respect paid to him by the slaves accompanying him,
was evidently of exalted rank. She accordingly conceived that this must
be the kapitan-pasha himself. But she was mistaken. Her delight at the
approach of the barge, which she fondly hoped would prove the means of
her deliverance from the island, was only equaled by the surprise of
those on board at beholding a beautiful and elegantly dressed lady,
unattended and alone, on the seashore, as if awaiting their arrival.
And, during the few minutes which now elapsed ere the barge touched the
strand, it was evident that the high functionary seated beneath the
canopy surveyed Nisida with increasing wonder and admiration; while she,
on her side, could not help noticing that he was remarkably handsome,
very young, and possessing a countenance rather of an Italian than a
Turkish cast of features.

Meantime a profound silence, broken only by the slight and uniform
sounds produced by the oars, prevailed: and when the boat touched the
strand, a long and wide plank, covered with velvet, was so placed as to
enable the high functionary before alluded to to land conveniently.
Attended by two slaves, who followed at a respectful distance, the
Mussulman chief advanced toward Nisida, whom he saluted in a manner
which strengthened her suspicion that he was not of Turkish origin,
although habited in the richest Oriental costume she had ever seen, and
evidently holding some very superior office among the Ottomans. She
returned his salutation with a graceful bow and a sweet smile: and he
immediately addressed her in the Italian tongue--her own dear and
delightful language, saying, "Lady, art thou the queen of this land? or
art thou, as appearances would almost lead one to conjecture, a solitary
inhabitant here?"

For he saw that she was alone--beheld no traces of culture; and there
was but one miserable dwelling, and that such as she might have built up
with her own hands. Nisida shook her head mournfully, making signs that
she was deaf and dumb. The Mussulman chief uttered an ejaculation of
mingled surprise and grief, and surveyed the lady with additional
interest and admiration. But in a few moments his countenance assumed a
sudden expression of astonishment, as if a light had broken in upon him,
suggesting something more than a mere suspicion--nay, indeed, a positive
conviction; and having examined her features with the most earnest
attention, he abruptly took his tablets from the folds of his garment,
and wrote something on them. He then handed them to Nisida; and it was
now her turn to experience the wildest surprise--for on the page opened
to her view were these words, traced in a beautiful style of
calligraphy, and in the Italian language: "Is it possible that your
ladyship can be the Donna Nisida of Riverola?"

Nisida's eyes wandered in astonishment from the tablets to the
countenance of him who had penciled that question; but his features were
certainly not familiar to her--and yet she thought that there was
something in the general expression of that handsome face not altogether
unknown to her. As soon as she had partially recovered from the surprise
and bewilderment produced by finding that she at least was known to the
Ottoman functionary, she wrote beneath his question the following reply:
"I am indeed Nisida of Riverola, who for seven long months have been the
only inhabitant of this island, whereon I was shipwrecked, and I am now
anxious to return to Italy--or at all events to the first Christian port
at which your fleet may touch. Have mercy upon me, then; and take me
hence! But who are you, signor, that I should prove no stranger to you?"

The Ottoman chief read these words, and hastened to reply in the
following manner: "I have the honor to be the grand vizier of his
imperial highness the glorious Sultan Solyman, and my name is Ibrahim. A
few months ago I encountered your brother Francisco, Count of Riverola,
who was then in command of a body of Tuscan auxiliaries, raised to
assist in defending Rhodes against the invading arms of the mighty
Solyman. Your brother became my prisoner, but I treated him worthily. He
informed me with bitter tears of the strange and mysterious
disappearance of his well-beloved sister, who had the misfortune to be
deprived of the faculties of hearing and speech. Your brother was soon
set free, after the fall of Rhodes, and he returned to his native city.
But from all he told me of thee, lady, it was natural that I should ere
now conjecture who thou must be."

Ibrahim did not choose to add that he had remembered to have seen Nisida
occasionally in their native city of Florence, and that he was indeed
the brother of her late dependent, Flora Francatelli. But the
explanation which he did give was quite sufficient to renew her deepest
surprise, as she now learnt for the first time that during her absence
her brother had been engaged in the perils of warfare. The grand vizier
gently withdrew from Nisida's hand the tablets on which her eyes were
positively riveted; but it was only to trace a few lines to afford her
additional explanations. When he returned the tablets to her again she
read as follows: "By a strange coincidence the glorious fleet which has
wafted me hither to deliver you from this lonely isle, and which is
under the command of the kapitan-pasha in person, is bound for the
western coast of Italy. Its mission is at present known only to myself
and a faithful Greek dependent; but your ladyship shall receive worthy
attention and be duly conveyed to Leghorn. The squadron has been driven
from its course by a tempest which assailed us off the island of Candia;
our pilot lost his reckonings, and when land was descried this morning,
it was believed to be the coast of Sicily. Hast thou, lady, any means of
enlightening us as to the geographical position of this island?"

Nisida answered in the ensuing manner: "I have not the least notion of
the geographical position of the island. An eternal summer appears to
prevail in this clime, which would be a terrestrial paradise were not
the forests infested by hideous serpents of an enormous size."

Ibrahim Pasha, having read this reply, summoned from the barge the
officer in command: and to him he communicated the intelligence which he
had just received from Nisida. That officer's countenance immediately
underwent a dreadful change; and, falling on his knees at Ibrahim's
feet, he made some strong appeal, the nature of which Nisida could only
divine by its emphatic delivery and the terrified manner of the
individual. Ibrahim smiled contemptuously, and motioned the officer with
an imperious gesture to rise and return to the barge. Then, again,
having recourse to the tablets, he conveyed the following information to
Nisida: "Lady, it appears that this is the Isle of Snakes, situated in
the Gulf of Sictra, on the African coast. Horrible superstitions are
attached to this clime: and I dare not remain longer on its shore, lest
I should seriously offend the prejudices of those ignorant sailors.
Come, then, lady, you shall receive treatment due to your rank, your
beauty, and your misfortunes."

In the meantime the officer had returned to the barge, where whispers
speedily circulated in respect to the land on which that boat had
touched; and the reader may imagine the extent of the loathing which the
mere name of the isle was calculated to inspire in the breasts of the
superstitious Mussulmans, when we observe that the existence of that
island was well known to the Turks and also to the Africans, but was
left uninhabited, and was never visited knowingly by any of their ships.
Nisida saw that the grand vizier was in haste to depart, not through any
ridiculous fears on his part, because he was too enlightened to believe
in the fearful tales of mermaids, genii, ghouls, vampires, and other
evil spirits by which the island was said to be haunted, but because his
renegadism had been of so recent a date that he dared not, powerful and
altered as he was, afford the least ground for suspecting that the light
of Christianity triumphed in his soul over the dark barbarism of his
assumed creed. Seeing, then, that Ibrahim Pasha was anxious to yield to
the superstitious feelings of the sailors, Nisida intimated, with a
graceful bend of the head, her readiness to accompany him. But, as she
advanced toward the boat, she cast a rapid and searching glance behind
her. Alas! Wagner appeared not.

A feeling of uneasiness, amounting almost to a pang of remorse, took
possession of her, as she placed her foot upon the velvet-covered plank;
and for an instant she hesitated to proceed.

Could she abandon Fernand to the solitude of that isle? Could she
renounce the joys which his love had taught her to experience? And might
she not be enabled to persuade him to make that sacrifice which would
invest him with a power that she herself would direct and wield
according to her own pleasure and suitably to her own interests? But,
oh! that hesitation lasted not more than a moment; for her feet were on
the plank leading to the barge, and at a short distance floated the ship
that would bear her away from the isle.

One longing, lingering look upon the shore of that island where she had
enjoyed so much happiness, even if she had experienced so much anxiety;
one longing, lingering look, and she hesitated no more. Ibrahim escorted
her to a seat beneath the velvet canopy; the officer in command gave the
signal, the barge was shoved off, the rowers plied their oars, and the
island was already far behind, ere Nisida had the courage to glance
toward it again!




CHAPTER LVII.


Let us now return to Fernand Wagner, whom we left flying from his
Nisida, flying in horror and alarm from her whom he nevertheless loved
so tenderly and devotedly. He fled as if from the brink of the yawning
pit of hell, into which the malignant fiend who coveted his soul was
about to plunge him. Nor once did he look back. Absorbed as his feelings
were in the full conviction of the tremendous peril from which he had
just escaped, he still found room for the reflection that were he to
turn and catch but one glimpse of the beauteous, oh! too beauteous
creature from whom he had torn himself away, he should be lost. His mind
was bent upon the salvation of his immortal soul; and he knew that the
enemy of mankind was assailing him with a power and with an energy which
nothing save the assistance of Heaven could enable him to resist. He
knew also that Heaven helps only those who are willing and anxious to
help themselves; and of this doctrine he had received a striking and
triumphant proof in the sudden and evanescent appearance of his guardian
angel at the instant when, overpowered by the strong, the earnest, and
the pathetic pleading of the siren Nisida, he was about to proclaim his
readiness to effect the crowning sacrifice. And it was to avoid the
chance of that direful yielding--to fly from a temptation which became
irresistible when embellished with all the eloquence of a woman on whom
he doted, that Wagner sped with lightning rapidity toward the mountains.

But the beauteous form of Nisida met not now his eyes; and deeply,
profoundly, ardently as he still loved her, and felt that he must ever
love her, yet, to speak soothly, he deplored not that she was no longer
there. The vision of the previous night had so firmly established hope
in his soul, that he had prepared and tutored himself, during his
journey across the mountains, to sacrifice all his happiness on earth to
insure the eternal felicity of heaven.

No. Nisida was not there. But as he drew closer to the shore, he beheld,
to his ineffable joy, the dark spot gradually assume that defined shape
which left no room to doubt the truth of his vision, even were he
inclined to be skeptical. For there, indeed, touching the strand, but
still so far in the water that a slight exertion would send it
completely afloat, was a large boat, curiously shaped, and painted in a
variety of fantastic colors. It had a mast standing, but the sail was
lowered and, on a closer inspection, the boat proved to be altogether
unimpaired.

"Heaven delights to effect its wise intentions by natural means,"
thought Wagner within himself. "But surely it could not have been
through the agency of Nisida that this boat was left upon the shore?
No," he added aloud, after a still closer inspection; "the rope fastened
to the prow has been snapped asunder! Doubtless the boat became detached
from one of the ships which appeared off the island yesterday, and
which," he said in a low murmuring voice, and with an ill-subdued sigh,
"have afforded Nisida the means of departure hence."

He sat down, exhausted; and as he found leisure for recollection--as his
thoughts composed themselves and settled down into something like
collected calmness--he felt a sensation of indescribable joy at having
triumphed over the appalling temptations which had beset him. And in his
soul a voice seemed to be singing an anthem of delight and gratitude;
and he soon experienced a serenity of mind such as he had not known for
many hours past! When man, having yielded to temptation, succeeds in
escaping the perils of the consequences, he beholds a strong motive for
self-gratulation;--but how ineffably more sweet is it to be able to
reflect that the temptation itself has been avoided in the first
instance, and that the dangers of the results have never even been
risked.

Thus thought Wagner:--but not for a moment did he attribute to any
strength of mind on his own part, the escape which had just been
effected from the snares set by the evil one. No; he acknowledged within
himself, and with all due humility, that the hand of the Almighty had
sustained him in his most trying moments of peril; and ere he thought of
resuming his journey to that side of the island on which Nisida was not,
he knelt in fervent prayer. Rising from his knees, his eyes accidentally
swept the sea:--and he was riveted to the spot from which he was about
to turn away--for the white sails of the Ottoman fleet met his
astonished view. He remained gazing on those objects for some time,
until he was convinced they were nearing the island. For a few moments a
deep regret took possession of him:--he should lose his Nisida
irrevocably! But his next impulse was to wrestle with this feeling--to
combat this weakness. How could he have hoped ever to rejoin her without
rendering himself again liable to the witchery of her siren tongue--the
eloquence of her silver-toned voice--the persuasiveness of her graceful
manners? No; it were better that she should depart; it were preferable
that he should lose her and preserve his immortal soul. Thus reasoned
he;--and that reasoning was effectual. He waited only long enough to
assure himself that the fleet was positively approaching the island:--he
then knew that she would depart;--and, without permitting himself to
yield again to the weakness which had for a few moments threatened to
send him back within the sphere of Nisida's fatal influence, he tore
himself away from that point amongst the heights which commanded the
view of the side of the island where she was. Hastening around the base
of the volcano, he reached the defiles leading to that part of the isle
where he had periodically fulfilled his dreadful destiny as a Wehr-Wolf.
Carefully avoiding the outskirts of the forest and the knots of large
trees, he proceeded toward the shore; and his heart was rent with
feelings of deep anguish as he everywhere beheld the traces of
destruction left behind him by his recent run in the horrible form of a
savage monster. Then, too, when melancholy thoughts had once again
entered his soul, the image of Nisida appeared to flit before him in the
most tempting manner; and the more he endeavored to banish from his
memory the recollection of her charms, the more vividly delineated did
they become.

At length jealousy took possession of him;--and suddenly stopping short
in his progress toward the shore, he exclaimed aloud, "What if she
should be wooed and won by another? If she return to her native land, as
assuredly she now will, she may meet some handsome and elegant cavalier
who will succeed in winning her passions:--and I--I, who love her so
well--shall be forgotten! Oh! this is madness! To think that another may
possess her, clasp her in his arms, press his lips to hers, feel her
fragrant breath fan his cheek, play with the rich tresses of her
beauteous hair, oh! no, no, the bare thought is enough to goad me to
despair! She must not depart thus, we have separated, if not in anger at
least abruptly, too abruptly, considering how we have loved, and that we
have wedded each other in the sight of Heaven! Heaven!" repeated Wagner,
his tone changing from despair to a deep solemnity; "heaven! Oh! I
rejoice that I gave utterance to the word;--for it reminds me that to
regain my Nisida I must lose heaven!"

And, as if to fly from his own reflections, he rushed on toward the sea;
and there he stopped to gaze, as oft before he had gazed, on the mighty
expanse, seeming, in the liquid sunlight, as it stretched away from the
yellow sand, a resplendent lake of molten silver bounded by a golden
shore.

"How like to the human countenance art thou, oh mighty sea!" thought
Wagner, as he stood with folded arms on the brink of the eternal waters.
"Now thou hast smiles as soft and dimples as beautiful as ever appeared
in the face of innocence and youth, while the joyous sunlight is on
thee. But if the dark clouds gather in the heaven above thee, thou
straightway assumed a mournful and a gloomy aspect, and thou growest
threatening and somber. And in how many varied voices dost thou speak.
Oh, treacherous and changeful sea! Now thou whisperest softly as if thy
ripples conveyed faint murmurs of love;--but, if the gale arise, thou
canst burst forth into notes of laughter as thy waters leap to the shore
with bounding mirth;--and, if the wind grow higher, thou canst speak
louder and more menacingly; till, when the storm comes on, thou lashest
thyself into a fury,--thou boilest with rage, and thy wrathful voice
vies with the rush of the tempest and the roar of the thunder! Deceitful
sea--imaging the beauties, thoughts, and passions of the earth! Within
thy mighty depths, too, thou hast gems to deck the crowns of kings and
the brows of loveliness; and yet thou cravest for more--more--and
engulfest rich argosies with all their treasures--thou insatiate sea!
And in thy dark caverns are the skeletons of the myriads of human beings
whom thou hast swallowed up in thy fury; and whose bones are trophies
which thou retainest in thy fathomless depths, as the heart of man
enshrineth the relics of those hopes which have wasted away and
perished!"

Thus thought Wagner, as he stood gazing upon the sea, then so calm and
beautiful, but which he knew to be so treacherous. When wearied of the
reflections which that scene inspired, and not daring to allow his mind
to dwell upon the image of Nisida, he repaired to the nearest grove and
refreshed himself with the cooling fruits which he plucked. Then he
extended his rambles amongst the verdant plains, and strove strenuously
to divert his thoughts as much as possible from the one grand and
mournful idea--the departure of Nisida from the island! But vainly did
he endeavor to fix his attention upon the enchanting characteristics of
that clime;--the flowers appeared to him less brilliant in hue than they
were wont to be--the fruits were less inviting--the verdure was of a
less lively green--and the plumage of the birds seemed to have lost the
bright gloss that rendered its colors so gorgeous in the sunlight. For,
oh! the powers of his vision were almost completely absorbed in his
mind; and that mind was a mirror wherein was now reflected with a
painful vividness all the incidents of the last few hours.

But still he was sustained in his determination not to retrace his way
to the spot where he had left Nisida; and when several hours had passed,
and the sun was drawing near the western horizon, he exclaimed, in a
moment of holy triumph, "She has doubtless by this time quitted the
island, and I have been enabled to resist those anxious longings which
prompted me to return and clasp her in my arms! O God! I thank thee that
thou hast given me this strength!"

Wagner now felt so overcome with weariness after his wanderings and
roamings of so many hours, especially as the two preceding nights had
been sleepless for him--that he sat down upon a piece of low rock near
the shore. A quiet, dreamy repose insensibly stole over him: in a few
minutes his slumber was profound. And now he beheld a strange vision.
Gradually the darkness which appeared to surround him grew less intense;
and a gauzy vapor that rose in the midst, at first of the palest bluish
tint possible, by degrees obtained more consistency, when its nature
began to undergo a sudden change, assuming the semblance of a luminous
mist. Wagner's heart seemed to flutter and leap in his breast, as if
with a presentiment of coming joy; for the luminous mist became a
glorious halo, surrounding the beauteous and holy form of a protecting
angel, clad in white and shining garments, and with snowy wings drooping
slowly from her shoulders! And ineffably--supernally benign and
reassuring was the look which the angel bent upon the sleeping Wagner,
as she said in the softest, most melodious tones, "The choir of the
heavenly host has hymned thanks for thy salvation! After thou hadst
resisted the temptations of the enemy of mankind when he spoke to thee
with his own lips, an angel came to thee in a dream to give thee
assurance that thou hadst already done much in atonement for the crime
that endangered thy soul; but he warned thee then that much more
remained to be done ere that atonement would be complete. And the rest
is now accomplished; for thou hast resisted the temptations of the evil
one when urged by the tongue and in the melodious voice of lovely woman!
This was thy crowning triumph: and the day when thou shalt reap thy
reward is near at hand; for the bonds which connect thee with the
destiny of a Wehr-Wolf shall be broken, and thy name shall be inscribed
in Heaven's own Book of Life! And I will give thee a sign, that what
thou seest and hearest now in thy slumber is no idle and delusive vision
conjured up by a fevered brain. The sign shall be this: On awaking from
thy sleep, retrace thy way to the spot where this morning thou didst
separate from her whom thou lovest; and there shalt thou find a boat
upon the sand. The boat will waft thee to Sicily; and there, in the town
of Syracuse, thou must inquire for a man whose years have numbered one
hundred and sixty-two; for that man it is who will teach thee how the
spell which has made thee a Wehr-Wolf may be broken."

Scarcely had the angel finished speaking, when a dark form rose suddenly
near that heavenly being; and Wagner had no difficulty in recognizing
the demon. But the enemy of mankind appeared not armed with terrors of
countenance, nor with the withering scorn of infernal triumph; for a
moment his features denoted ineffable rage--and then that expression
yielded to one of the profoundest melancholy, as if he were saying
within himself, "There is salvation for repentant man, but none for me!"
A cloud now seemed to sweep before Wagner's eyes; denser and more dense
it grew--first absorbing in its increasing obscurity the form of the
demon, and then enveloping the radiant being who still continued to
smile sweetly and benignly upon the sleeping mortal until the glorious
countenance and the shining garments were no longer visible, but all was
black darkness around. And Fernand Wagner continued to sleep profoundly.

Many hours elapsed ere he woke; and his slumber was serene and soothing.
At length when he opened his eyes and slowly raised his head from the
hard pillow which a mass of rock had formed, he beheld the rich red
streaks in the eastern horizon, heralding the advent of the sun; and as
the various features of the island gradually developed themselves to his
view, as if breaking slowly from a mist, he collected and rearranged in
his mind all the details of the strange vision which he had seen. For a
few minutes he was oppressed with a fear that his vision would indeed
prove the delusive sport of his fevered brain; for there seemed to be in
its component parts a wild admixture of the sublime and the fantastic.
The solemn language of the angel appeared strangely diversified by the
intimation that he would find a boat upon the shore, that this boat
would convey him to a place where he was to inquire for a man whose age
was one hundred and sixty-two years, and that this man was the being
destined to save him from the doom of a Wehr-Wolf.

Then, again, he thought that heaven worked out its designs by means
often inscrutable to human comprehension: and he blamed himself for
having doubted the truth of the vision. Feelings of joy therefore
accompanied the reassurance of his soul; and, having poured forth his
thanksgivings for the merciful intervention of Providence in his behalf,
he tarried not even to break his fast with the fruits clustering at a
short distance from him, but hastened to retrace his way across the
mountains, no longer doubting to find the sign fulfilled and the boat
upon the shore. And now these thoughts rose within him. Should he again
behold Nisida? Was the fleet, which he had seen on the previous day,
still off the island? Or had it departed, bearing Nisida away to another
clime?

He expected not to behold either the fleet or his loved one; for he felt
convinced that the angel would not send him back within the influence of
her temptations. Nor was he mistaken, for having traversed the volcanic
range of heights, he beheld naught to break the uniform and monotonous
aspect of the sunlit sea. But, on drawing nearer to the shore, he saw a
dark spot almost immediately in front of the little hut which Nisida and
himself had constructed, and wherein they had passed so many, many happy
hours.

He now advanced with a beating heart to the hut. The door was closed.
Was it possible that Nisida might be within? Oh, how weak in purpose is
the strongest minded of mortals. For an instant a pleasing hope filled
Wagner's breast; and then, again summoning all his resolutions to his
aid, he opened the door, resolved, should she indeed be there, to remain
proof against all the appeals she might make to induce him to sacrifice
to their mundane prosperity his immortal soul. But the hut was empty. He
lingered in it for a few moments; and the reminiscences of happy hours
passed therein swept across his brain. Suddenly the note which Nisida
had left for him met his eyes; and it would be representing him as
something far more or else far less than human, were we to declare he
did not experience a feeling of intense pleasure at beholding the
memorial of her love. The tears flowed down his cheeks as he read the
following lines:

    "The hour approaches, dearest Fernand, when, in all probability,
    I shall quit the island. But think not that this hope is
    unaccompanied by severe pangs. Oh, thou knowest that I love
    thee, and I will return to thee, my own adored Fernand, so soon
    as my presence shall be no longer needed at Florence. Yes, I
    will come back to thee, and we will not part until death shall
    deprive thee of _me_--for I must perish first, and while thou
    still remainest in all the glory of regenerated youth. Alas,
    thou hast fled from me this morning in anger--perhaps in
    disgust. But thou wilt forgive me, Fernand, if, yielding to some
    strange influence which I could not control, I urged an appeal
    so well calculated to strike terror into thy soul. Oh, that I
    could embrace thee ere I leave this isle; but alas! thou comest
    not back--thou hast fled to the mountains. It is, however, in
    the ardent hope of thy return to this spot, that I leave these
    few lines to assure thee of my undying affection, to pledge to
    thee my intention to hasten back to thine arms as soon as
    possible, and to implore thee not to nourish anger against thy
    devoted                                                NISIDA."

Wagner placed the letter to his lips, exclaiming, "Oh, wherefore did an
evil influence ever prove its power on thee, thou loving, loved, and
beauteous being. Why was thy hand raised against the hapless Agnes?
wherefore did fate make thee a murderess--and why, oh, why didst thou
assail me with prayers, tears, reproaches, menaces, to induce me to
consign my soul to Satan? Nisida, may Heaven manifest its merciful
goodness unto thee, even as that same benign care has been extended to
me."

Fernand then placed the letter in his bosom, next to his heart, and
dashing away the tears from his long lashes, began to turn his attention
toward the preparation for his own departure from the island. As he
approached the pile of stores, he beheld the light drapery which Nisida
had lately worn, but which she had laid aside previous to leaving the
island; and he also observed that the rich dress, which he had often
seen her examine with care, was no longer there.

"How beautiful she must have appeared in the garb!" he murmured to
himself. "But, alas! she returns to the great world to resume her former
character of the deaf and dumb."

Nisida and himself had often employed themselves in gathering quantities
of those fruits which form an excellent aliment when dried in the sun;
and there was a large supply of these comestibles now at his disposal.
He accordingly transferred them to the boat; then he procured a quantity
of fresh fruits; and lastly he filled with pure water a cask which had
been saved by Nisida from the corsair-wreck. His preparations were
speedily completed; and he was about to depart, when it struck him that
he might never behold Nisida again, and that she might perform her
promise of returning to the island sooner or later. He accordingly
availed himself of the writing materials left amongst the stores, to pen
a brief but affectionate note, couched in the following terms:

    "DEAREST NISIDA,--I have found, read, and wept over thy letter.
    Thou hast my sincerest forgiveness, because I love thee more
    than man ever before loved woman. Heaven has sent me the means
    of escape from this island--and the doom at which my regenerated
    existence was purchased, will shortly lose its spell. But
    perhaps my life may be surrendered up at the same time; at all
    events, everything is dark and mysterious in respect to means by
    which that spell is to be broken. Should we never meet again,
    but shouldst thou return hither and find this note, receive it
    as a proof of the unchanging affection of thy

                                                      "FERNAND."

The letter was placed in the hut, in precisely the same spot where the
one written by Nisida had been left; and Wagner then hastened to the
boat, which he had no difficulty in pushing away from the shore. Without
being able to form any idea of the direction in which the island of
Sicily lay, but trusting entirely to the aid of Heaven to guide him to
the coast whither his destiny now required him to proceed, he hoisted
the sail and abandoned the boat to the gentle breeze which swept the
surface of the Mediterranean.

       *       *       *       *       *

The state-cabins--they might more properly be called spacious
apartments--occupied by the Grand Vizier Ibrahim Pasha, on board the
ship of the lord high admiral, were fitted up in a most sumptuous and
luxurious manner. They consisted of two large saloons in a suit, and
from each of which opened, on either side, a number of small cabins,
tenanted by the officers immediately attached to the grand vizier's
person, and the page and slaves in attendance on him.

The first of the two large saloons was lighted by a handsome conical
skylight on the deck: the innermost had the advantage of the stern
windows. The drapery--the curtains, the carpets, the sofas, and the
hangings were all of the richest materials; the sides and ceilings of
the cabin were beautifully painted and elaborately gilded, and the
wood-work of the windows was incrusted with thin slabs of
variously-colored marbles, on which were engraved the ciphers of the
different lord high admirals who had hoisted their flags at any time on
board that ship. For the state-apartments which we are describing
properly belonged to the kapitan-pasha himself; but they had been
surrendered to the grand vizier, as a mark of respect to the superior
rank of this minister, during his stay on board.

The little cabins communicating with the large saloons were in reality
intended to accomodate the ladies of the kapitan-pasha's harem; but
Ibrahim did not turn them to a similar use, because it was contrary to
Ottoman usage for the Princess Aischa, being the sultan's sister, to
accompany her husband on any expedition; and he had received so menacing
a warning in the fate of Calanthe not to provoke the jealousy of Aischa
or the vengeance of her mother, the Sultana Valida, that he had brought
none of the ladies of his own harem with him. Indeed, since the violent
death of Calanthe the harem had been maintained at Constantinople rather
as an appendage of high rank than as a source of sensual enjoyment.

Nisida of Riverola was treated with the utmost deference and attention
by the Grand Vizier, Ibrahim Pasha; and on reaching the lord high
admiral's ship, she was instantly conducted to the innermost saloon,
which she was given to understand by signs would be exclusively
appropriated to her own use. The slaves occupying the small cabins
opening therefrom were removed to another part of the ship; and the key
of the door connecting the two saloons was handed by the polite Ibrahim
to the lady as a guaranty, or at least an apparent one, of the respect
with which she should be treated and the security she might hope to
enjoy.

The fleet weighed anchor and set sail again almost immediately after the
return of the grand vizier to the admiral's ship; and as she was wafted
away from the Island of Snakes, Nisida sat at the window of her splendid
saloon gazing at the receding shores, and so strangely balancing between
her anxiety to revisit Florence and her regrets at abandoning Fernand
Wagner, that while smiles were on her lips, tears were in her eyes, and
if her bosom palpitated with joy at one moment it would heave with
profound sighs at the next.

In the afternoon four male slaves entered Nisida's cabin, and spread
upon the table a magnificent repast, accompanied with the most delicious
wines of Cyprus and Greece--and while the lady partook slightly of the
banquet, two other slaves appeared and danced in a pleasing style for
several minutes. They retired, but shortly returned, carrying in their
hands massive silver censers, in which burnt aloes, cinnamon and other
odoriferous woods diffused a delicious perfume around. The four slaves
who attended at table removed the dishes on splendid silver salvers, and
then served sherbet and a variety of delicious fruits; and when the
repast was terminated, they all withdrew, leaving Nisida once more
alone. The Island of Snakes had been lost sight of for some hours, and
the fresh breeze of evening was playing upon the cheeks of the Lady
Nisida as she sat at the open casement of her splendid saloon, watching
the ships that followed in the wake of that in which she was, when the
sounds of voices in the adjacent cabin attracted her attention; and as
the partition was but slight, and the persons discoursing spoke Italian,
she could not help overhearing the conversation which there look place,
even if she had possessed any punctilious feelings to have prevented her
from becoming a willing listener.

"The Lady Nisida is a magnificent woman, Demetrius," observed a voice
which our heroine immediately recognized to be that of the grand vizier.
"Such a splendid aquiline countenance I never before beheld! Such eyes,
too, such a delicious mouth, and such brilliant teeth! What a pity 'tis
that she has not the use of her tongue! The voice of such a glorious
creature, speaking mine own dear Italian language, would be music
itself. And how admirably is she formed--upon somewhat too large a
scale, perhaps, to precisely suit my taste, and yet the contours of her
shape are so well rounded--so perfectly proportioned in the most
harmonious symmetry, that were she less of the Hebe she would be less
charming."

"Is your highness already enamored of Donna Nisida?" asked the person to
whom the grand vizier had addressed the preceding observations.

"I must confess that I am, Demetrius," replied Ibrahim; "I would give a
year of my life to become her favored lover for one day. But considering
that I hope to see my sister Flora become the wife of Donna Nisida's
brother Francisco, I must restrain this passion of mine within due
bounds. But wherefore do you sigh thus heavily, Demetrius?"

"Alas! my lord, the mention you make of your sister reminded me that I
once possessed a sister also," returned the Greek in a plaintive tone.
"But when I returned to Constantinople, I sought vainly for her, and
Heaven knows what has become of her, and whether I shall ever see her
more. Poor Calanthe! some treachery has doubtless been practiced toward
thee!"

"Don't give way to despair, Demetrius," said the grand vizier. "Who
knows but Calanthe may have espoused some youth on whom her affections
were set----"

"Ah! my lord!" interrupted the Greek, "it is considerate--it is kind on
the part of your highness to suggest such a consolatory belief; but
Calanthe would not keep an honorable bridal secret. Yet better were it
that she should be dead--that she should have been basely murdered by
some ruthless robber, than that she should live dishonored. However, I
will not intrude my griefs upon your highness, although the friendship
and the condescension which your highness manifests toward me, emboldens
me to mention these sorrows in your presence."

"Would that I could really console thee, Demetrius," answered Ibrahim,
with well-affected sincerity; "for thou hast shown thyself a sincere
friend to my poor sister Flora. And now that we are alone together,
Demetrius, for almost the first time since this hastily undertaken
voyage began, let us recapitulate in detail all the occurrences which
have led me to enter upon the present expedition the real nature of
which you alone know, save my imperial master. And, moreover, let us
continue to discourse in Italian; for thou canst speak that language
more fluently than I can express myself in thy native Greek; besides, it
rejoices my heart," he added with a sigh, "to converse in a tongue so
dear as that of the land which gave me birth. And, if Donna Nisida only
knew that in the representative of the mighty Solyman she had beholden
the brother of her late menial, Flora, how surprised would she be!"

"And it were not prudent that she should learn that fact, my lord!"
observed Demetrius, "for more reasons than one; since from sundry hints
which the Signora Francatelli, your lordship's worthy aunt, dropped to
me, it is easy to believe that the Donna Nisida was averse to the
attachment which her brother Francisco had formed, and that her ladyship
indeed was the means of consigning your highness' sister to the convent
of the Carmelites."

"Albeit I shall not treat Count Francisco's sister the less worthily,
now that she is in my power," said Ibrahim Pasha; "indeed, her matchless
beauty would command my forbearance, were I inclined to be vindictive.
Moreover, deaf and dumb as she is, she could not obtain the least
insight into my plans; and therefore she is unable to thwart them."

The reader may suppose that not one single word of all this conversation
was lost upon Nisida, who had indeed learnt, with the most unbounded
wonderment, that the high and mighty grand vizier of the Ottoman
Empire--a man enjoying an almost sovereign rank, and who bore a title
which placed him on a level with the greatest princes of Christendom,
was the brother of the detested Flora Francatelli! During a short pause
which ensued in the dialogue between Ibrahim Pasha and his Greek
confidant, Nisida stole gently up to the door in the partitions between
the two saloons, so fearful was she of losing a single word of a
discourse that so deeply interested and nearly concerned her.

"But, as I was saying ere now, Demetrius," resumed the grand vizier,
who, young as he was, had acquired all the methodical habits of a wise
statesman, "let us examine in detail the whole posture of affairs in
Florence, so that I may maturely consider the precise bearings of the
case, and finally determine how to act. For, although I have at my
disposal a fleet which might cope with even that of enterprising England
or imperious France, though twenty thousand well-disciplined soldiers on
board these ships are ready to draw the sword at my nod, and though, as
the seraskier and sipehsalar of the armies of the sultan, I am
responsible for my actions to his majesty alone, yet it is not a small
thing, Demetrius, to march an invading force into the heart of Italy,
and thereby risk a war with all Christendom. Therefore, let us pause to
reflect upon every detail of all those incidents which occurred two
months ago at Florence."

"Good, my lord," said Demetrius. "I will therefore begin with my arrival
in that fair city, to which I repaired with all possible dispatch, as
soon as I had received the instructions of your highness. It would
appear that the Lord Count of Riverola reached Florence the same day as
myself, he having been detained at the outset of his voyage home from
Rhodes by contrary winds and a severe storm. It was somewhat late in the
evening when I called at the cottage of the Signora Francatelli, your
highness' worthy aunt; for I previously passed a few hours in
instituting by indirect means as many inquiries concerning her
circumstances and welfare as could be prudently made. To my grief,
however, I could not ascertain any tidings concerning your highness'
sister; and I therefore came to the mournful conclusion that her
disappearance still remained unaccounted for. Pondering upon the sad
tidings which, in this respect, I should have to forward to your
highness, and having already devised a fitting tale whereby to introduce
myself to your lordship's aunt, I went to the cottage, which, as I heard
in the course of a subsequent conversation, Don Francisco of Riverola
had just quitted. Your highness' aunt received me with as much
cordiality as she could well show toward a stranger. Then, in accordance
with my pre-arranged method of procedure, I stated I was sent by a son
of a debtor to the estate of the late Signor Francatelli, to repay to
any of his surviving relations a large sum of money which had been so
long--so very long owing, and the loss of which at the time had mainly
contributed to plunge Signor Francatelli into embarrassment. I added
that the son of the debtor having grown rich, had deemed it an act of
duty and honor to liquidate this liability on the part of his deceased
father. My tale was believed; the case of jewels, which I had previously
caused to be estimated by a goldsmith in Florence, was received as the
means of settling the fictitious debt; and I was forthwith a welcome
friend at the worthy lady's table."

"The stratagem was a good one, Demetrius," observed the grand vizier.
"But proceed, and fear not that thou wilt weary me with lengthened
details."

"I stayed to partake of the evening repast," continued the Greek; "and
the Signora Francatelli grew confiding and communicative, as was nothing
more than natural, inasmuch as I necessarily appeared in the light of
the agent of a worthy and honorable man who had not forgotten the
obligation to a family that had suffered by his father's conduct. I
assured the signora that the person by whom I was employed to liquidate
that debt, would be rejoiced to hear of the success of the Francatellis,
and I ventured to make inquiries concerning the orphan children of the
late merchant."

"Proceed, Demetrius," said the grand vizier, "spare not a single
detail."

"Your highness shall be obeyed," returned the Greek, though now speaking
with considerable diffidence. "The worthy lady shook her head
mournfully, observing that Alessandro, the son of the late merchant, was
in Turkey, she believed; and then she rose hastily, and opening a door
leading to a staircase, called her niece to descend, as 'there was only
a friend present.' I was overjoyed to learn thus unexpectedly, that the
Signora Flora had reappeared; and when she entered the room, could
scarcely conceal my delight beneath that aspect of mere cold courtesy
which it became a stranger to wear. The young lady appeared perfectly
happy, and no wonder! For when she had retired, after staying a few
minutes in the room, her good aunt, in the fullness of her confidence in
me, not only related all the particulars of the Signora Flora's
immurement in the Carmelite Convent, but also explained to me her
motives for so long concealing the young lady's return home, as I have
heretofore narrated to your highness. The worthy aunt then informed me
that the Count of Riverola had only returned that day from the
wars--that he had made honorable proposals to her on behalf of the
Signora Flora--and that it was intended to sustain the mystery which
veiled the young lady's existence and safety in the cottage, until the
marriage should have been privately effected, when it would be too late
for the count's friends to interfere or renew their persecutions against
your lordship's sister. Your highness' aunt dropped hints intimating her
suspicion that the Lady Nisida was the principal, if not indeed the sole
means of those persecutions which had consigned the innocent young
maiden to the Carmelite Convent. And the more I reflect on this point,
in view of all I know of the affairs, and of Donna Nisida's strange and
resolute character, the more I am convinced that she really perpetrated
that diabolical outrage."

"Were it not for young Francisco's sake, and that I should bring
dishonor into a family with which my sister will, I hope, be soon
connected with marriage ties," exclaimed Ibrahim, "I would avenge myself
and my sister's wrongs by forcing the cruel Nisida to yield herself to
my arms. But no, it must not be."

And Nisida, who overheard every syllable, curled her lips, while her
eyes flashed fire at the dark menace which the renegade had dared to
utter, qualified though it were by the avowal of the motive which would
prevent him from putting it into execution.

"No, it must not be," repeated Ibrahim. "And yet, she is so wondrously
beautiful that I would risk a great deal to win her love. But proceed,
Demetrius--we now come to that portion of the narrative which so nearly
concerns my present proceedings."

"Yes, my lord, and God give your highness success!" exclaimed the young
Greek. "Having taken leave of your excellent aunt, who invited me to
visit her again, as I had casually observed that business would detain
me in Florence for some time, and having promised the strictest secrecy
relative to all she had told me, I repaired to the inn at which I had
put up, intending to devote the next day to writing the details of all
those particulars which I have just related, and which I purposed to
send by some special messenger to your highness. But it then struck me
that I should only attract undue attention to myself by conducting at a
public tavern a correspondence having so important an aspect, and I
accordingly rose very early in the morning to sally forth to seek after
a secluded but respectable lodging, I eventually obtained suitable
apartments in the house of a widow named Dame Margaretha, and there I
immediately took up my abode. Having written my letters to your
highness, I was anxious to get them expedited to Constantinople, for I
was well aware that your highness would be rejoiced to hear that your
beloved sister was indeed in the land of the living, that she was in
good health, and that a brilliant marriage was in store for her. I
accordingly spoke to Dame Margaretha relative to the means of obtaining
a trusty messenger who would undertake a journey to Constantinople. The
old woman assured me that her son Antonio, who was a valet in the
service of the Count of Arestino, would be able to procure me such a
messenger as I desired, and in the course of the day that individual was
fetched by his mother to speak to me on the subject. Having repeated my
wishes to him, he asked me several questions which seemed to indicate a
prying disposition, and a curiosity as impertinent as it was
inconvenient. In fact, I did not like his manner at all; but conceiving
that his conduct might arise from sheer ignorance, and from no sinister
motive, I still felt inclined to avail myself of his assistance to
procure a messenger. Finding that he could not sift me, he at length
said that he had no doubt a friend of his, whom he named Venturo, would
undertake my commission, and he promised to return with that individual
in the evening. He then left me, and true to his promise, he came back
shortly after dusk, accompanied by this same Venturo. The bargain was
soon struck between us, and he promised to set off that very night for
Rimini, whence vessels were constantly sailing for Constantinople. I
gave him a handsome sum in advance, and also a sealed packet, addressed
to your highness' private secretary, but containing an inclosure, also
well sealed, directed to your highness, for I did not choose to excite
the curiosity of these Italians by allowing them to discover that I was
corresponding with the grand vizier of the Ottoman Empire, Venturo
accordingly left me, promising to acquit himself faithfully of his
mission."

"Your plans were all wisely taken," said the grand vizier, "and no human
foresight could have anticipated other than successful results. Proceed,
for although you have hastily sketched all these particulars to me
before, yet I am anxious to consider them in more attentive detail."

"Having thus disposed of that important business," resumed the young
Greek, "I went out to saunter through the streets of Florence, and while
away an hour or two in viewing the splendid appearance of that charming
city, when lighted up with the innumerable lamps of its palaces and
casinos. At length I entered a dark and obscure street, which I knew
must lead toward the river. I had not proceeded far down the street when
I heard the sound of many steps rapidly approaching, as if of a patrol.
I stepped aside under a deep archway, but as chance would have it, they
stopped short within a few paces of the spot where I was shrouded in the
utter obscurity of the arch. I should have immediately passed on my way,
but was induced to stop by hearing a voice which I recognized to be that
of Venturo, whom I believed to be already some miles away from Florence.
I was perfectly astounded at this discovery, and if I had entertained
any doubts as to the identity of that voice, they were speedily cleared
up by the conversation between the men. 'We had better separate here,'
said Venturo, 'and break into at least two parties, as at the bottom of
this street we shall come within the blaze of the lights of the casinos
on the Arno's bank.' 'Well spoken,' returned a voice which, to my
increasing wonder, I recognized to be that of Antonio, my landlady's
son; 'you and I, Venturo, will keep together, and our friends can go on
first. We will follow them in a few minutes, and then unite again at the
angle of the grove nearest to Dame Francatelli's cottage. What say you,
Lomellino?' 'Just as you think fit, Antonio,' returned a third person,
whom I naturally concluded to be the individual addressed as Lomellino.
'You, or rather your master, the Count of Arestino, pays for this
business, and so I am bound to obey you.' 'Listen, then,' resumed
Antonio, 'the young Count of Riverola, whom I have traced to the cottage
this evening, will no doubt be coming away about the time we shall all
meet down there; and therefore we shall have nothing to do but to carry
him off to the cave.' 'Why is the Count of Arestino so hostile to young
Riverola?' demanded the man who had answered to the name of Lomellino.
'He cares nothing about young Riverola, either one way or the other,'
replied Antonio, 'but I have persuaded his lordship that if Francisco be
left at large, he will only use his influence to mitigate the vengeance
of the law against the Countess Giulia, who is the friend of Flora
Francatelli: and so the Count of Arestino has consented to follow my
advice and have Francisco locked up until the inquisition has dealt with
the countess, her lover, the Marquis of Orsini, and the Francatellis,
aunt and niece.' 'Then you have a spite against this man,' said
Lomellino. 'Truly have I,' responded Antonio. 'You remember that night
when you, with Stephano Verrina and Piero, got into the Riverola Palace
some months ago? Well, I don't know who discovered the plot, but I was
locked in my room, and next morning young Francisco dismissed me in a
way that made me his mortal enemy: and I must have vengeance. For this
purpose I have urged on the count to cause Flora Francatelli, whom
Francisco loves and wishes to marry, to be included in the proceedings
taken by the inquisition at his lordship's instigation against the
Countess Giulia and the Marquis d'Orsini; and the old aunt must
necessarily be thrown in, into the bargain, for harboring sacrilegious
persons.' 'And so young Francisco is to lose his mistress, Flora, and be
kept a prisoner in the cavern till he has been condemned along with the
others?' said Lomellino. 'Neither more nor less than what you imagine,
and I only wish I had the Lady Nisida also in my power, for I have no
doubt she instigated her brother to turn me off suddenly like a common
thief, because from all you have since told me, Lomellino, I dare swear
it was she who got an inkling of our intentions to plunder the Riverola
Palace; though how she could have done so, being deaf and dumb, passes
my understanding.' 'Well, well,' growled Lomellino, 'it is no use to
waste time talking of the past: let us only think of the present. Come,
my men, we will go on first, as already agreed.' Three or four armed
ruffians then put themselves in motion, passing close by the place where
I was concealed, but fortunately without discovering my presence."

"Oh! those miscreants would have assuredly murdered you, my faithful
Demetrius," said the grand vizier.

"Of that, my lord, there is little doubt," returned the young Greek;
"and I must confess that I shuddered more than once while listening to
the discourse of the cold-blooded monsters. But Venturo and Antonio
still remained behind for a few minutes, and the discourse which took
place between them, gave me a still further insight into the characters
of the gang. 'Well, Venturo,' said Antonio, after a short pause, 'have
you examined the packet which was intrusted to you?' 'I have, and the
contents are written in Greek or Arabic, or some such outlandish tongue,
for I could not read a word of them,' answered Venturo; 'and so I
thought the best plan was to destroy them.' 'You acted wisely,' observed
Antonio; 'by the saints! it was a good thought of mine to introduce you
to my mother's lodger as a trustworthy messenger! If he only knew that
we had shared his gold, and were laughing at him for his credulity, he
would not be over well pleased. His purse appears to be pretty well
lined, and when we have got all our present business off our hands we
will devote our attention to the lodger. The Arno is deep and a
foreigner the less in the city will not be noticed.' 'Not at all,'
answered Venturo; 'but let us now hasten to join our companions. At what
time are the officers of the inquisition to visit the cottage?' 'They
are no doubt already in the neighborhood,' replied Antonio, 'and will
pounce upon their victims as soon as young Francisco leaves the place.
Another set of officers are after the Marquis of Orsini.' The two
miscreants then departed, continuing their conversation in a low tone as
they went along the street, but I overheard no more."

"The wretches!" exclaimed the grand vizier, in an excited voice. "But
vengeance will light upon them yet!"

"Heaven grant that they may not go unpunished!" said Demetrius. "Your
highness may imagine the consternation with which I had listened to the
development of the damnable plots then in progress; but I nevertheless
experienced a material solace in the fact that accident had thus
revealed to me the whole extent of the danger which menaced those whom
your highness held dear. Without pausing to deliberate, I resolved, at
all risks, to proceed at once to the cottage, and, if not too late, warn
your aunt and lovely sister of the terrible danger which menaced them.
Nay, more--I determined to remove them immediately from Florence--that
very night--without an unnecessary moment's delay. Darting along the
streets, as if my speed involved matters of life and death, I succeeded
in passing the two villains, Venturo and Antonio, before they had
entered the sphere of the brilliant illuminations of the casinos in the
vale of Arno; and I beard one say to the other, 'There's some cowardly
knave who has just done a deed of which he is no doubt afraid.'
Convinced by this remark that they suspected not who the person that
passed them so rapidly was, I hurried on with increasing speed, and
likewise with augmented hope to be enabled to save not only your
lordship's aunt and sister from the officers of the inquisition, but
also the young Count of Riverola from the power of his miscreant
enemies. Alas! my anticipations were not to be fulfilled! I lost my way
amongst a maze of gardens connected with the villas bordering on the
Arno; and much valuable time at such a crisis was wasted in the circuits
which I had to make to extricate myself from the labyrinth and reach the
bank of the river. At length I drew within sight of the cottage; but my
heart beat with terrible alarms as I beheld lights moving rapidly about
the house. 'It is too late,' I thought: and yet I rushed on toward the
place. But suddenly the door opened, and by a glare of light within, I
saw three females closely muffled in veils, led forth by several armed
men. It instantly struck me that the third must be the Countess Giulia
of Arestino to whom I heard the miscreants allude. I stopped short--for
I knew that any violent demonstration or interference on my part would
be useless, and that measures of another kind must be adopted on behalf
of the victims. As the procession now advanced from a cottage, I
concealed myself in the adjacent grove, wondering whether Count
Francisco had been already arrested or whether he had managed to elude
his enemies. The procession, consisting of the officers of the
inquisition with their three female prisoners, who were dragged rather
than led along, passed by the spot where I lay concealed; and the deep
sobs which came from the unfortunate ladies, gagged though they
evidently were, filled my heart with horror and anguish. As soon as they
had disappeared I struck further into the grove, knowing by its
situation that the outlet on the other side would conduct me to the
nearest road to that quarter of the city in which I lodged. But scarcely
had I reached the outskirts of the little wood in the direction which I
have named, when I saw a party of men moving on in front of me, through
the obscurity of the night. It struck me that this party might consist
of Antonio, Venturo, and other worthies, and I determined to ascertain
whether Count Francisco had fallen into their hands. I accordingly
followed them as cautiously as possible, taking care to skirt the grove
in such a manner that I was concealed by its deep shade, whereas those
whom I was watching proceeded further away from the trees. Thus the
party in advance and myself continued our respective paths for nearly a
quarter of an hour, during which I ascertained beyond all doubt that the
men whom I was following were really the villains of the Antonio gang,
and that they had a prisoner with them who could be no other than the
Count of Riverola.

"At length the grove terminated, and I was about to abandon further
pursuit as dangerous, when it struck me that I should be acting in a
cowardly and unworthy manner not to endeavor to ascertain the locality
of the cave of which I had heard the miscreants speak, and to which they
were most probably conveying him who was so dear to the beautiful
Signora Flora. Accordingly I managed to track the party across several
fields to a grove of evergreens. But as they advanced without caring how
they broke through the crackling thickets, the noise of their movements
absorbed the far fainter sounds which accompanied my progress. So
successful was my undertaking that I was soon within twenty paces of
them. But it was profoundly dark, and I was unable to observe their
movements. I computed the distance they were from me, and calculated so
as to form an idea of the exact spot where they were standing; for, by
an observation which one of the villains let drop, I learnt that they
had reached the entrance of their cavern. It also struck me that I heard
a bell ring as if in the depths of the earth, and I concluded that this
was a signal to obtain admittance. While I was weighing these matters in
my mind, Lomellino suddenly exclaimed, 'Let the prisoner be taken down
first; and have a care, Venturo, that the bandage is well fastened.'
'All right, captain,' was the reply; and thus I ascertained that
Lomellino was the chief of some band most probably, I thought, of
robbers; for I remembered the allusions which had been made that evening
by Antonio to a certain predatory visit some months previously to the
Riverola mansion. 'God help Francisco,' I said within myself, as I
reflected upon the desperate character of the men who had him in their
power; and then I was consoled by the remembrance that he was merely to
be detained as a prisoner for a period, and not harmed."

"Unfortunately such demons as those Florentine banditti are capable of
every atrocity," observed the grand vizier.

"True, my lord," observed Demetrius; "but let us hope that all those in
whom your highness is interested, will yet be saved. I shall, however,
continue my narrative. Three or four minutes had elapsed since the
robbers had come to a full stop, when I knew by the observations made
amongst them, that they were descending into some subterranean place. I
accordingly waited with the utmost anxiety until I was convinced that
they had all disappeared with their prisoner; and then I crept
cautiously along to the place at which I had already reckoned them to
have paused. I stooped down, and carefully felt upon the ground, until I
was enabled to ascertain the precise point at which the marks of their
footsteps had ceased. At this moment the moon shone forth with such
extreme brilliancy, that its beams penetrated the thick foliage; and I
now observed with horror that I had advanced to the very verge of a
steep precipice, on the brink of which the grove suddenly ceased. Had
not the moon thus providentially appeared at that instant, I should have
continued to grope about in the utter darkness, and have assuredly
fallen into the abyss. I breathed a fervent prayer for this signal
deliverance. But not a trace of any secret entrance to a cavern could I
find--no steps, no trap-door! Well aware that it would be dangerous for
me to be caught in that spot, should any of the banditti emerge suddenly
from their cave, I was reluctantly compelled to depart. But before I
quitted the place, I studied it so well that I should have no difficulty
in recognizing it again. In fact, just at the precise spot where the
footsteps of the banditti ceased, an enormous chestnut tree, which for
more than a century must have continued to draw from the earth its
nourishment, slopes completely over the precipice, while on the right of
this tree, as you face the abyss, is a knot of olives, and on the left
an umbrageous lime. These features of the spot I committed to memory,
with the idea that such a clew to the robbers' retreat might not
eventually prove useless.

"I will extirpate that nest of vipers--that horde of remorseless
banditti!" exclaimed Ibrahim Pasha, in a tone indicative of strong
excitement.

"Your highness has the power," responded Demetrius; "but the Florentine
authorities must be completely impotent in respect to such a formidable
horde of lawless men. The remainder of my narrative is soon told, my
lord," returned the young Greek. "I returned to my lodgings in safety,
but determined not to remain there a single hour longer than necessary.
For apart from the resolve which I had formed already, in consequence of
the various and unforeseen incidents which had occurred, to return to
Constantinople, the murderous designs of Antonio and Venturo in respect
to myself, would have hastened my removal at all events to another
lodging. That night sleep never visited my eyes--so amazed and grieved
was I at the calamities which had befallen those who were so dear to
your highness. Very early in the morning I arose from a feverish bed and
sallied forth to learn tidings of the Marquis of Orsini. 'For,' thought
I, 'if this nobleman has escaped arrest by the officers of the
inquisition, he might be enabled to effect somewhat in aiding the female
victims.' But I heard at his dwelling that he had been arrested the
previous evening on a charge of sacrilege, perpetrated with others, in
respect to the Carmelite Convent. Frustrated in this quarter, I repaired
to the principal clerk of the criminal tribunal, and inquired the name
and address of a lawyer of eminence and repute. The clerk complied with
my demand, and recommended me to Angelo Duras, the brother of a
celebrated Florentine physician."

"Both of whom are known to me by name," observed the grand vizier; "and
Angelo Duras is a man of unblemished integrity. It delights me much to
know you employed him."

"I found him, too," continued Demetrius, "a kind-hearted and benevolent
man. He received me with affability; and I narrated to him as much as
necessary of the particulars which I have detailed to your highness.
Without stating by whom I was employed, I merely represented to him that
I was deeply interested in the Francatelli family, and that it was of
the utmost importance to obtain a delay for two or three months in the
criminal proceedings instituted against those innocent females, as, in
the meantime, I should undertake a journey to a place at some
considerable distance, but the result of which would prove materially
beneficial to the cause of the accused. He observed that the interest of
the Count of Arestino, who would doubtless endeavor to hasten the
proceedings in order to wreak speedy vengeance upon his wife and the
Marquis of Orsini, was very powerful to contend against; but that gold
could accomplish much. I assured him that there would be no lack of
funds to sustain even the most expensive process; and I threw down a
heavy purse as an earnest of my ability to bear the cost of the suit. He
committed to paper all the particulars that I had thought it prudent to
reveal to him, and after some consideration, said, 'I now see my way
clearly. I will undertake that the final hearing of this case, at least
so far as it regards the Francatellis, shall be postponed for three
months. You may rely upon the fulfillment of this promise, let the Count
of Arestino do his worst.' Thus assured, I quitted the worthy pleader,
and proceeded to visit Father Marco, who, as I had happened to learn
when in conversation with your highness' aunt, was the family confessor.
I found that excellent man overwhelmed with grief at the calamities
which had occurred; and to him I confided, under a solemn promise of
inviolable secrecy, who the present grand vizier of the Ottoman Empire
really was, and how I had been employed by you to visit Florence for the
purpose of watching over the safety of your relatives. I however
explained to Father Marco that his vow of secrecy was to cease to be
binding at any moment when the lives of the Francatellis should be
menaced by circumstances that might possibly arise in spite of all the
precautions that I had adopted to postpone the final hearing of their
case; and that should imminent peril menace those lives, he was
immediately to reveal to the Duke of Florence the fact of the
relationship of the Francatellis with one who has power to punish any
injury that might be done to them. Though well knowing, my lord, the
obstinancy of the Christian states in venturing to beard Ottoman might,
I considered this precaution to be at all events a prudent one; and
Father Marco promised to obey my injunctions in all respects."

"I was not mistaken in thee, Demetrius," said the grand vizier, "when I
chose thee for that mission on account of thy discreetness and
foresight."

"Your highness' praises are my best reward," answered the Greek. "I have
now done all that I could possibly effect or devise under the
circumstances which prompted me to think or act; and it grieved me that
I was unable to afford the slightest assistance to the young Count of
Riverola. But I dare not wait longer in Italy; and I was convinced that
the authorities in Florence were too inefficient to root out the horde
of banditti, even had I explained to them the clew which I myself
obtained to the stronghold of those miscreants. I accordingly quitted
Florence in the afternoon of the day following the numerous arrests
which I have mentioned; and had I not been detained so long at Rimini,
by adverse winds, your highness would not have been kept for so many
weeks without the mournful tidings which it was at length my painful
duty to communicate in person to your lordship."

"That delay, my faithful Demetrius," said the grand vizier, "was no
fault of thine. Fortunately the squadron was already equipped for sea;
and, instead of repairing to the African frontier to chastise the daring
pirates, it is on its way to the Tuscan coast, where, if need be, it
will land twenty thousand soldiers to liberate my relations and the
young Count of Riverola. A pretext for making war upon the Italian
states has been afforded by their recent conduct in sending auxiliaries
to the succor of Rhodes; and of that excuse I shall not hesitate to
avail myself to commence hostilities against the proud Florentines
should a secret and peaceful negotiation fail. But now that thou hast
recapitulated to me all those particulars which thou didst merely sketch
forth at first, it seems to me fitting that I anchor the fleet at the
mouth of the Arno, and that I send thee, Demetrius, as an envoy in a
public capacity, but in reality to stipulate privately for the release
of those in whom I am interested."

Thus terminated the conference between Ibrahim Pasha and his Greek
dependent--a conference which had revealed manifold and astounding
occurrences to the ears of the Lady Nisida of Riverola. Astounding
indeed! Francisco in the hands of the formidable banditti--Flora in the
prison of the inquisition--and the Ottoman grand vizier bent upon
effecting the marriage which Nisida abhorred--these tidings were
sufficient to arouse all the wondrous energies of that mind which was so
prompt in combining intrigues and plots, so resolute in carrying them
out, and so indomitable when it had formed a will of its own.

Ominous were the fires which flashed in her large dark eyes, and
powerful were the workings of those emotions which caused her heaving
bosom to swell as if about to burst the bodice which confined it, when,
retreating from the partition floor between the two saloons, and
resuming her seat at the cabin-windows to permit the evening breeze to
fan her fevered cheek, Nisida thought within herself, "It was indeed
time that I should quit that accursed island, and return to Italy!"




CHAPTER LVIII.


The roseate streaks which the departing glories of a Mediterranean
sunset left lingering for a few minutes in the western horizon, were
yielding to the deeper gloom of evening, a few days after the scene
related in the preceding chapter, as Nisida rose from her seat at the
open windows of her splendid saloon on board the Ottoman Admiral's ship,
and began to lay aside her apparel, preparatory to retiring to rest. She
was already wearied of the monotonous life of ship-board; and the
strange revelations which the discourse between Ibrahim Pasha and
Demetrius had developed to her ears, rendered her doubly anxious to set
foot upon her native soil.

The grand vizier had paid his respects to her every day since she first
embarked on board the Turkish ship; and they exchanged a few
observations, rather of courtesy than in any deeper interest, by means
of the tablets. Ibrahim's manner toward her was respectful; but when he
imagined himself to be unperceived by her, his eyes were suddenly
lighted up with the fires of ardent passion; and he devoured her with
his burning glances. She failed not to notice the effect which her
glorious beauty produced upon him, and she studiously avoided the
imprudence of giving him the least encouragement; not from any innate
feeling of virtue, but because she detested him as a man who was bent on
accomplishing a marriage between her brother and Flora Francatelli. This
hatred she concealed, and even the eagle-sighted Ibrahim perceived not
that he was in any way displeasing to the lovely Nisida. With the
exception of the grand vizier, and the slaves who waited upon her, the
lady saw no one on board the ship; for she never quitted the saloon
allotted to her, but passed her time chiefly in surveying the broad sea
and the other vessels of the fleet from the windows, or in meditating
upon the course which she should pursue on her arrival in Florence.

But let us return to the thread of our narrative. The last tints of the
sunset were, we said, fading away, when the Lady Nisida commenced her
preparations for retiring to rest. She closed the casements, satisfied
herself that the partition door between the two saloons was well
secured, and then threw herself upon the voluptuous couch spread in one
of the smaller cabins opening from her own magnificent apartment. She
thought of Fernand, her handsome Fernand, whom she had abandoned on the
Isle of Snakes, and profound sighs escaped her. Then she thought of
Francisco; and the idea of serving that much-beloved brother's interests
afforded her a consolation for having thus quitted the clime where she
had passed so many happy days with Wagner.

At length sleep fell upon her, and closed over the large, dark,
brilliant eyes the white lids, beneath the transparent skin of which the
blue veins were so delicately traced; and the long, jetty lashes reposed
on the cheeks which the heat of the atmosphere tinged with a rich
carnation glow. And when the moon arose that night, its silver rays
streamed through the window set in the porthole of that small cabin,
upon the beauteous face of the sleeper.

But hark! there is the light sound of a footfall in the saloon from
which that cabin opens.

The treacherous Ibrahim possesses a key to the partition door; and
having successfully wrestled with his raging desires until this moment,
he is at length no longer able to resist the temptation of invading the
sanctity of Nisida's sleeping-place. Already has he set his foot upon
the very threshold of the little side-cabin, having traversed the
spacious saloon, when a hand is laid upon his shoulder, and a voice
behind him says in a low tone, "Your highness has forgotten the fate of
the murdered Calanthe."

Ibrahim started, shook the hand from off him, and exclaimed, "Dog of a
negro! what and who has made thee a spy upon my actions?"

At the same instant that Ibrahim felt the hand on his shoulder, and
heard the well-known voice uttering the dreadful warning in his ears,
Nisida awoke. Her first impulse was to start up; but, checking herself
with wondrous presence of mind, as the part of the deaf and dumb person
which she had imposed upon herself to play flashed with lightning
velocity across her brain--comprehending, too, in an instant, that the
grand vizier had violated her privacy, but that some unknown succor was
at hand, she remained perfectly motionless, as if still wrapped up in an
undisturbed slumber. The grand vizier, and the individual whom he had in
his rage addressed as a "dog of a negro," retreated into the saloon,
Nisida holding her very breath so as not to lose a word that might pass
between them should their dialogue be resumed.

"Your highness asks me what and who has made me a spy upon your
actions," said the negro in a low, monotonous voice, and speaking with
mingled firmness and respect. "Those questions are easily answered. The
same authority which ordered me to wrest from thine arms some months
past the lady who might be unfortunate enough to please your highness'
fancy, exercises an unceasing supervision over you, even on this ship,
and in the middle of the mighty sea. To that authority all your deeds
and acts are matters of indifference save those which would render your
highness faithless to an adoring wife. Remember, my lord, the fate of
Calanthe, the sister of your dependent Demetrius, she who was torn from
your arms, and whose beauteous form became food for the fishes of the
Bosporus."

"How knew you who she was?" demanded the grand vizier, in a low, hoarse
voice, the power of his utterance having been temporarily suspended by
the rage that filled his soul at finding his iniquitous design in
respect to Nisida thus suddenly baffled by the chief of the three black
slaves, whose attendance in this expedition had been forced upon him by
the Sultana Valida; "how knew you who she was?" he again asked.

"Rather demand, my lord, what can escape the prying eyes of those by
whom your highness has been surrounded ever since the seals of office
were in your grasp," returned the slave.

"But you would not betray that secret to Demetrius, who is now devoted
to me, who is necessary to me, and who would loathe me were he to learn
the dreadful fate of his sister!" said the grand vizier, with rapid and
excited utterance.

"I have no eyes and no ears, great pasha," said the negro, "save in
respect to those matters which would render you faithless to the sister
of the sultan."

"Would to Heaven that you had neither eyes nor ears at all--that you did
not exist, indeed!" exclaimed Ibrahim, unable to repress his wrath;
then, in a different and milder tone, he immediately added, "Slave, I
can make thee free--I can give thee wealth--and thou mayest dwell in
happy Italy, whither we are going, for the remainder of thy days.
Reflect, consider! I love that deaf and dumb Christian woman who
sleepeth there--I already love her to distraction! Thwart me not, good
slave, and thou mayest command my eternal gratitude."

"My lord, two other slaves overhear every word that now passes between
us," responded the Ethiopian, his voice remaining calm and monotonous;
"and even were we alone in all respects, I would not betray the trust
reposed in me. But not on your highness would the effects of your
infidelity to the Princess Aischa fall. No, my lord--I have no authority
to harm you. Had your highness succeeded in your purpose ere now, the
bow-string would have forever stifled the breath in the body of that
deaf and dumb Christian lady; and her corpse would have been thrown
forth from these windows into the sea. Such are my instructions, my
lord; and thus every object of your sated passion must become your
victim also."

"Better--better were it," exclaimed Ibrahim, in a tone denoting the
profoundest mental anguish, "to be the veriest mendicant who implores
alms at the gate of the mosque of St. Sophia, than the grand vizier of
the Ottoman Empire."

With these words he rushed into the adjoining saloon, the negro
following and fastening the door behind him. Nisida now began to breathe
freely once more. From what perils had she escaped! The violation of her
couch by the unprincipled Ibrahim would have been followed by her
immediate assassination at the hands of the Ethiopian whom the
sultana-mother had placed as a spy on the actions of her son-in-law. On
the other hand, she felt rejoiced that the incident of this night had
occurred; for it had been the means of revealing to her a secret of
immense importance in connection with the grand vizier. She remembered
the terms of grief and affection in which Demetrius had spoken of the
disappearance of Calanthe; and she had heard enough on that occasion to
convince her that the Greek would become the implacable enemy of any man
who had wronged that much-loved sister. How bitter, then, would be the
hatred of Demetrius--how dreadful would be the vengeance which he must
crave against him whose lustful passion had led to the murder of
Calanthe. Yes, Ibrahim, thy secret is now in possession of Nisida of
Riverola; in the possession of that woman of iron mind and potent
energy, and whom thou fondly believest to be deaf and dumb!

Nisida slept no more that night, the occurrences of which furnished her
with so much food for profound meditation: and with the earliest gleam
of dawn that tinged the eastern heaven, she rose from her couch.
Entering the saloon, she opened the windows to admit the gentle breeze
of morning; and ere she commenced her toilet, she lingered to gaze upon
the stately ships that were plowing the blue sea in the wake of the
admiral's vessel wherein she was. Suddenly her eyes fell upon what
appeared to be a small speck at a little distance; but as this object
was moving rapidly along on the surface of the Mediterranean, it soon
approached sufficiently near to enable her to discern that it was a boat
impelled by a single sail. Urged by an undefinable and yet a strong
sentiment of curiosity, Nisida remained at the saloon window, watching
the progress of the little bark, which bounded over the waves with
extraordinary speed, bending gracefully to the breeze that thus wafted
it onward. Nearer and nearer toward the vessel it came, though not
pursuing the same direction; and in five minutes it passed within a few
yards of the stern of the kapitan-pasha's ship.

But, oh! wondrous and unaccountable fact. There, stretched upon his back
in that bounding boat, and evidently buried in deep slumber, with the
rays of the rising sun gleaming upon his fine and now slightly flushed
countenance, lay he whose image was so indelibly impressed upon the
heart of Nisida--her handsome and strangely-fated Fernand Wagner! The
moment the conviction that the sleeper was indeed he struck to the mind
of Nisida, she would have called him by name--she would have endeavored
to awake him, if only to exchange a single word of fondness, for her
assumed dumbness was for the moment forgotten; but she was rendered
motionless and remained speechless--stupefied, paralyzed, as it were,
with mingled wonder and joy; wonder that he should have found the means
of escape from the island, and joy that she was thus permitted to behold
him at least once again. But the pleasure which this incident excited in
her mind was transitory indeed; for the boat swept by, as if urged on by
a stronger impulse than that of the gentle breeze of morning--and in
another minute Nisida beheld it no more.

The sun was setting behind the western hills of Sicily as Fernand Wagner
entered the squalid suburb which at that period stretched from the town
of Syracuse to the sea. His step was elastic, and he held his head
high--for his heart was full of joyous and burning hope. Hitherto the
promises of the angel who had last appeared to him were completely
fulfilled. The boat was wafted by a favorable breeze direct from the
Island of Snakes to the shores of Sicily; and he had landed in the
immediate vicinity of Syracuse--the town in which a further revelation
was to be made in respect to the breaking of the spell which had fixed
upon him the frightful doom of the Wehr-Wolf! But little suspected
Fernand Wagner that one morning, while he slept, his boat had borne him
through the proud fleet of the Ottomans--little wist he that his beloved
Nisida had caught sight of him as he was wafted rapidly past the stern
of the kapitan-pasha's ship! For on that occasion he had slept during
hours; and when he had awakened, not a bark nor sail save his own was
visible on the mighty expanse of water.

And now it was with elastic step and joyous heart that the hero of our
tale entered the town of Syracuse. But suddenly he remembered the
singular nature of the inquiry that he was there to make--an inquiry
concerning a man whose years had numbered one hundred and sixty-two!

"Nevertheless," thought Wagner, "that good angel who gave me a sign
whereby I should become convinced of the reality of her appearance, and
whose promises have all been fulfilled up to this point, could not
possibly mislead me. No; I will obey the command which I received, even
though I should visit every human dwelling in the town of Syracuse! For
Heaven works out its wise purposes in wondrous manners; and it is not
for me to shrink from yielding obedience to its orders, nor to pause to
question their propriety. And oh! if I can but shake off that demon
influence which weighs upon my soul--if I can but escape from the
shackles which still enchain me to a horrible doom, how sincere will be
my thanks to Heaven, how unbounded my rejoicings!"

As Wagner had reached this point in his meditations, he stopped at the
door of a barber shop of mean appearance--the pole, with the basin
hanging to it, denoting that the occupant of the place combined, as was
usual in those times, the functions of shaver and blood-letter or
surgeon. Hastily surveying the exterior of the shop, and fancying that
it was precisely the one at which his inquiries should commence--barbers
in that age being as famous for their gossiping propensities as in
this--Fernand entered, and was immediately accosted by a short,
sharp-visaged, dark-complexioned old man, who pointed to a seat, saying
in a courteous, or rather obsequious tone, "What is your will, signor?"

Fernand desired the barber-surgeon to shave his superfluous beard and
trim his hair; and while that individual was preparing his lather and
sharpening his razor in the most approved style of the craft, Wagner
asked in a seemingly careless tone, "What news have you, good master, in
Syracuse?"

"Naught of importance, signor," was the reply; "mere everyday matters.
Syracuse is indeed wretchedly dull. There were only two murders and
three attempts at assassination reported to the lieutenant of police
this morning, and that is nothing for a town usually so active and
bustling as ours. For my part, I don't know what has come over the
people? I stepped as far as the dead-house just now to view the body of
a young lady, unclaimed as yet, who had her head nearly severed from her
trunk last night; and then I proceeded to the great square to see
whether any executions are to take place to-morrow; but really there is
nothing of any consequence to induce one to stir abroad in Syracuse just
at this moment."

"Murders and attempts at assassination are matters of very common
occurrence amongst you, then?" said Wagner, inquiringly.

"We get a perfect surfeit of them, signor," returned the barber, now
applying the soap to his customer's face. "They fail to create any
sensation now, I can assure you. Beside, one gets tired of executions."

"Naturally enough," said Fernand. "But I have heard that there are some
very extraordinary personages in Syracuse; indeed, there is one who has
lived to a remarkable age----"

"The oldest person I know of, is the Abbot of St. Mary's," interrupted
the barber, "and he----"

"And he----" repeated Wagner, with feverish impatience.

"Is ninety-seven and three months, signor; a great age, truly,"
responded the barber-surgeon.

Fernand's hopes were immediately cooled down; but thinking that he ought
to put his inquiry in a direct manner, he said: "Then it is not true
that you have in Syracuse an individual who has reached the wondrous age
of a century three-score and two?"

"Holy Virgin have mercy upon you, signor!" ejaculated the barber, "if
you really put faith in the absurd stories that people tell about the
Rosicrucians!"

"Ah! then the people of Syracuse do talk on such matters?" said Wagner,
conceiving that he had obtained a clew to the aim and object of his
inquiry.

"Have you never heard, signor, of the Order of the Rosy Cross?" demanded
the barber, who was naturally of a garrulous disposition, and who now
appeared to have entered on a favorite subject.

"I have heard, in my travels, vague mention made of such an order,"
answered Fernand; "but I never experienced any curiosity to seek to
learn more--and, indeed, I may say, that I know nothing of the
Rosicrucians save their mere name."

"Well, signor," continued the barber, "for common pass-talk, it is as
good a subject as any other; but no one shall ever persuade me either
that there is really such an order as the Brothers of the Rosy Cross, or
that it is possible for human beings to attain the powers attributed to
that fraternity."

"You interest me much by your remarks, good leech," exclaimed Fernand;
"I pray you to give me further explanation."

"With infinite pleasure, signor, since you appear to desire it,"
returned the barber, still pursuing his tonsorial duties. "You must know
that there are many wild legends and stories abroad concerning these
invisible beings denominated Rosicrucians. But the one which gains most
general credence is that the brotherhood was founded by a certain
Christianus Rosencrux, a German philosopher, who fancied that the arts
and sciences might be developed in such a manner as to confer the
greatest possible blessings on the human race."

"Then the aims of Rosencrux are entirely good and philanthropic?" said
Wagner, interrogatively.

"As a matter of course, signor," said the barber; "and therefore, if
such a man ever did live, he must have been an insane visionary--for who
would believe that knowledge could possibly make us richer, happier, or
better? All the philosophy in the universe could never convert this shop
into a palace."

"But you are wandering from your subject, my good friend," gently
remonstrated Fernand.

"I crave your pardon, signor. Let me see. Oh, I recollect; we were
talking of Christianus Rosencrux. Well, signor, the fabled philosopher
was a monk, and a very wise as well as a very good man. I am only
telling you the most generally received legend, mind, and would not have
you think that I believe it myself. So this Rosencrux, finding that his
cloistral existence was inconvenient for the prosecution of his studies,
traveled into the East, and spent many years in acquiring the knowledge
handed down to the wise men of those climes by the ancient Magi and
Chaldeans. He visited Egypt, and learnt many wonderful secrets by
studying the hieroglyphics on the Egyptian pyramids. I forget how long
he remained in the East; but it is said that he visited every place of
interest in the Holy Land, and received heavenly inspirations on the
spot where our Saviour was crucified. On his return to Europe, he saw
full well that if he revealed all his knowledge at once, he would be put
to death by the inquisition as a wizard, and the world would lose the
benefit of all the learning he had acquired. So says the legend; and it
goes on to recite that Christianus Rosencrux then founded the order of
the Rosy Cross, which was nothing more or less than a brotherhood of
wise men whom he initiated in all his secrets, with the intention that
they should reveal from time to time small portions thereof, and thus
give to the world by very slow degrees that immense amount of knowledge
which he supposed would have stupefied and astounded everybody if made
public all at once."

"Strange--most strange," thought Wagner within himself, "that I should
never have gleaned all these details before, eager as my inquiries and
researches in the pursuit of knowledge have been. But Heaven has willed
everything for the best; and it is doubtless intended that my salvation
shall proceed from the very quarter which was least known to me, and
concerning which I have manifested the most contemptuous indifference,
in the sphere of knowledge!"

"You appear to be much interested, signor," said the barber, "in this
same tale of Christianus Rosencrux. But there is too much intelligence
depicted on your countenance to allow me to suppose that you will place
any reliance on the absurd story. How is it possible, signor, that an
order could have existed for so many years without any one member ever
having betrayed the secrets which bind them all together? Moreover,
their place of abode and study is totally unknown to the world; and if
they inhabited the deepest caverns under the earth accident must, sooner
or later, have led to its discovery. Believe me, signor, 'tis naught
save a ridiculous legend; though a poor, ignorant man myself, I hope I
have too much good sense and too much respect for my father-confessor,
to suppose for a minute that there is on earth any set of men more
learned than the holy ministers of the church."

"How long ago is Christianus Rosencrux reported to have lived?" demanded
Wagner, suddenly interrupting the garrulous and narrow-minded Sicilian.

"There we are again!" he ejaculated. "The credulous declare that
Rosencrux discovered in the East the means of prolonging existence, and
though he was born as far back as the year 1359, he is still alive."

Had not the barber turned aside at that precise instant to fill an ewer
and place a towel for his customer's use, he would have been surprised
by the sudden start and the expression of ineffable joy which denoted
Fernand's emotions, as by a rapid calculation mentally made, our hero
perceived that if Rosencrux were born in 1359, and alive at that
moment--namely, in 1521--his age would be exactly one hundred and
sixty-two!

"It is Christianus Rosencrux, then," he said to himself, "whom I have
inquired for--whom I am to see--and who will dissolve the spell that has
been placed upon me. But where shall I seek him? whither shall I go to
find his secret abode?"

The duties of the barber were completed; and Wagner threw down a piece
of gold, saying, "Keep that coin, friend, for your discourse has greatly
interested me, and has indeed well deserved it."

The poor old man had never possessed in all his life so much money at
one time; and so vast was his joy that he could only mutter a few broken
sentences to express his gratitude.

"I require not thanks, my good friend," said Wagner. "But one word ere I
depart. Knowest thou the spot which rumor indicates as the abode of that
sect of whom we have been speaking?"

"Nay, excellent signor," replied the barber; "there your question
masters me; for in this case rumor goes not to such a length as to
afford hints for an investigation which would prove its utter fallacy.
All that I have heard, signor, concerning the Rosicrucians, you have
learnt from my lips; and I know no more."

Wagner, finding that further inquiry in that quarter was useless, took
leave of the old man, and traversing the suburb, entered the town of
Syracuse.




CHAPTER LIX.


Fernand was now at a loss how to act. He felt convinced that it was
useless to institute any further inquiries relative to the whereabouts
of the secret Order of the Rosy Cross; because, had popular rumor ever
hinted at any clew in that respect, the garrulous and inquisitive barber
would have been sure to hear of it. He was not, however, disheartened.
No--very far from that; for he was confident that the same supernal
power that had hitherto directed him, and which was rapidly clearing
away all obstacles in his path toward perfect emancipation from the
influence of the evil one, would carry him to a successful and
triumphant issue. Throwing himself, therefore, entirely on the wisdom
and mercy of Heaven, he roamed about the town of Syracuse, without any
settled object in view, until he was much wearied and it was very late.
He then entered a miserable hostel, or inn--the best, however, that he
could discover; and there, having partaken of some refreshment, he
retired to the chamber allotted to him. Sleep soon visited his eyes; but
he had not long enjoyed the sweets of slumber, when that balmy repose
was interrupted either by a touch or sound, he knew not which. Starting
up in his couch, he perceived a tall figure, muffled in a huge dark
mantle, and wearing a slouched broad-brimmed hat, standing by the side
of the bed.

"Rise, Fernand Wagner," said a mild but masculine voice, "and follow me.
He whom thou seekest has sent me to lead thee to him."

Wagner did not hesitate to obey this mandate, which he felt certain was
connected with the important business that had borne him to Syracuse.
His apparel was speedily assumed; and he said, "I am ready to follow
thee, stranger, whoever thou art, and whithersoever thou mayst lead; for
my faith is in Heaven."

"Those who have faith shall prosper," observed the stranger, in a solemn
tone.

He then led the way noiselessly down the steep staircase of the inn, and
issued forth by the front gate, closely followed by Wagner. In deep
silence did they proceed through the dark, narrow, and tortuous streets,
leaving at length the town behind them, and then entering upon a barren
and uneven waste. By degrees an object, at first dimly seen in the
distance, and by the uncertain moonlight, which was constantly
struggling with the dark clouds of a somewhat tempestuous night, assumed
a more defined appearance, until a mass of gigantic ruins at length
stood out from the somber obscurity. In a few moments the moon shone
forth purely and brightly; and its beams, falling on decayed buttresses,
broken Gothic arches, deep entrance-ways, remnants of pinnacles and
spires, massive walls of ruined towers, gave a wildly romantic and yet
not unpicturesque aspect to the remains of what was evidently once a
vast monastic institution. The muffled stranger led the way amongst the
ruins, and at last stopped at a gate opening into a small square
inclosure formed by strong iron railings, seven feet high and shaped at
the points like javelins. Passing through the gateway, the guide
conducted Wagner into a cemetery, which was filled with the marble tombs
of the mitered abbots who had once held sway over the monastery and the
broad lands attached to it.

"You behold around you," said the muffled stranger, waving his arm
toward the ruins, "all that remains of a sanctuary once the most
celebrated in Sicily for the piety and wisdom of its inmates. But a
horrible crime, a murder perpetrated under circumstances unusually
diabolical, the criminal being no less a person than the last lord abbot
himself, and the victim a beauteous girl whom he had seduced, rendered
this institution accursed in the eyes of God and man. The monks
abandoned it: and the waste over which you have passed is now the
unclaimed but once fertile estate belonging to the abbey. The
superstition of the Sicilians has not failed to invent terrific tales in
connection with these ruins: and the belief that each night at twelve
o'clock the soul of the guilty abbot is driven by the scourge of the
demon through the scene alike of his episcopal power and his black
turpitude, effectually prevents impertinent or inconvenient intrusion."

The observation with which the muffled stranger concluded his brief
narrative, convinced Wagner that it was amongst those ruins the brethren
of the Rosy Cross had fixed their secret abode. But he had no time for
reflection, inasmuch as his guide hurried him on amidst the tombs, on
which the light of the silver moon now streamed with a power and an
effect that no dark cloud for the time impaired. Stopping at the base of
one of the most splendid monuments in the cemetery, the muffled stranger
touched some secret spring, and a large marble block immediately opened
like a door, the aperture revealing a narrow flight of stone steps.
Wagner was directed to descend first, a command which he obeyed without
hesitation, his guide closing the marble entrance ere he followed. For
several minutes the two descended in total darkness. At length, a faint,
glimmering light met Wagner's view; and as he proceeded it grew stronger
and stronger, until it became of such dazzling brilliancy that his eyes
ached with the supernatural splendor. That glorious luster was diffused
from a silver lamp, hanging to the arched roof of a long passage, or
corridor of masonry, to which the stone steps led.

"Fernand Wagner," said the guide, in his mild and somewhat monotonous
voice, "thou now beholdest the eternal lamp of the Rosicrucians. For a
hundred and twenty years has that lamp burnt with as powerful a luster
as that which it now sheds forth; and never once--no, not once during
that period, has it been replenished. No human hand has touched it since
the day when it was first suspended there by the great founder of our
sect."

All doubt was now dispelled from the mind of Wagner--if a doubt he had
even for a moment entertained since the muffled stranger had summoned
him from the inn:--he was indeed in the secret abode of the holy sect of
the Rosy Cross! His guide, too, was a member of that brotherhood--and
there, almost too dazzling to gaze upon, burnt the eternal lamp which
was the symbol of the knowledge cherished by the order! Wagner turned to
gaze in wonder and admiration upon his guide: and beneath the broad brim
of the slouched hat, he beheld a countenance venerable with years,
imposing with intelligence, and benevolent with every human charity.
"Wise and philanthropic Rosicrucian!" exclaimed Wagner, "I offer thee my
deepest gratitude for having permitted me to enter this sanctuary. But
how camest thou to learn that I sought admittance hither? and unveil to
me the great mysteries of this place."

"We are the servants of holy angels, who reveal to us in visions the
will of the Most High," answered the Rosicrucian; "and they who
commanded me to bring thee hither, will induce thine heart to retain our
secret inviolable."

"Not for worlds," cried Wagner, with an enthusiasm which denoted
sincerity, "would I betray ye!"

"'Tis well," said the Rosicrucian, with philosophic calmness--as if he
put more faith in the protecting influence of Heaven than in the
promises of man. "I shall not accompany thee further. Follow that
passage: at the extremity there are two corridors branching off in
different directions; but thou wilt pursue the one leading to the right.
Proceed fearlessly, and stop not till thou shalt stand in the presence
of the founder of the sect."

Fernand hastened to obey these directions, and having threaded the two
passages, he entered a large and rudely-hollowed cavern, where the
feelings of mingled awe and suspense with which he had approached it
were immediately changed into deep veneration and wonder as he found
himself in the presence of one who, by his appearance, he knew could he
none other than Christianus Rosencrux! Never had Fernand beheld a being
of such venerable aspect; and, though old--evidently very old, as indeed
Wagner knew him to be--yet the founder of the celebrated Rosicrucians
manifested every appearance of possessing a vigorous constitution, as he
was assuredly endowed with a magnificent intellect. His beard was long
and white as snow; a century and three score years had not dimmed the
luster of his eyes; and his form, though somewhat bent, was masculine
and well-knit. He was seated at a table covered with an infinite variety
of scientific apparatus; and articles of the same nature were strewed
upon the ground. To the roof hung an iron lamp, which indeed burnt
faintly after the brilliant luster of the eternal flame that Wagner had
seen in the passage; but its flickering gleam shone lurid and ominous on
a blood-red cross suspended to the wall. Fernand drew near the table,
and bowed reverentially to the Rosicrucian chief, who acknowledged his
salutation with a benignant smile.

"Wagner," he said, in a firm but mild tone, "I have been forewarned of
thy coming, and am prepared to receive thee. Thy constant and unvarying
faith in Heaven has opened to thee the gates of salvation; and it is
mine to direct thee how to act, that the dreadful doom which thou hast
drawn upon thyself may be annihilated soon and forever."

The venerable man paused, and Fernand again bowed lowly and with
profound respect.

"So soon as the morning's sun shall have revisited this hemisphere,"
continued Rosencrux, "thou must depart for Italy. Start not,
Fernand--but prepare to obey that power which will sustain thee. On
arriving in Italy, proceed direct to Florence; and fear not to enter
that city even in the broad daylight. Thou wilt not be harmed! There
await the current of those circumstances that must lead to the grand
event which is ordained to break the spell that has cast upon thee the
doom of a Wehr-Wolf. For as thou didst voluntarily unite thyself in the
face of heaven with Donna Nisida of Riverola, so it is decreed, for the
wisest purposes, that a circumstance intimately connected with her
destiny must become a charm and a talisman to change thine own. On thine
arrival in Florence, therefore, seek not to avoid Lady Nisida; but
rather hasten at once to her presence--and again I say, a supernal power
will protect thee from any baneful influence which she might still
exercise over thee. For, the spell that the evil one hath cast upon
thee, Fernand Wagner, shall be broken only on that day and in that hour
when thine eyes shall behold the skeletons of two innocent victims
suspended to the same beam!"

Having uttered these words in a louder and hurried, but not the less
impressive tone, than he had at first used, Christianus Rosencrux
motioned impatiently for Wagner to depart. And Fernand, amazed and
horrified at the dreadful words which had met his ears, retreated from
the cavern and sped rapidly back to the spot where he had quitted his
guide, whom he found waiting his return beneath the undying lamp. The
Rosicrucian conducted Wagner in silence from that deep and subterranean
abode beneath the tomb; thence through the cemetery amidst the ruins of
the monastery--and across the wild waste, back to Syracuse; nor did the
muffled brother of the Rosy Cross take leave of Fernand until they had
reached the door of the hostel. There they parted, the Rosicrucian
invoking a blessing upon the head of Wagner, who regained his chamber
without disturbing the other inmates of the house: but with the
conflicting emotions of ardent hopes and appalling fears, and holy
aspirations, filling his breast. By degrees, however, as he was enabled
to reason to himself with increasing calmness, the fears and the doubts
became fainter and fainter, while the hopes and the aspirations grew
stronger and stronger: and at length, throwing himself upon his knees,
he exclaimed fervently, "O Lord, deal with me as thou wilt--thy will be
done!"

It was late in the afternoon of a sultry day, toward the close of
September, or, to be more particular, on the 25th of that month, that a
numerous and brilliant cavalcade, on emerging from a grove which bounded
one of the sinuosities of the Arno, came within sight of the towers and
pinnacles of Florence.

On the white felt turbans of a hundred and fifty Ottoman soldiers
glistened the crescent, the symbol of Islamism; and their steel-sheathed
scimiters and the trappings of their horses sent forth a martial din as
they were agitated by the rapidity of the march.

Forty-eight slaves, also mounted on steeds procured at Leghorn, followed
the soldiers with a short interval between the two corps, and in the
space thus left, rode the Greek Demetrius and Lady Nisida of Riverola.
The latter wore the garb of her sex, and sat upon her horse with the
grace of an amazonian queen.

The moment the cavalcade came in sight of the fair City of Flowers, a
flush of joy and triumph suddenly diffused itself over Nisida's
countenance; and her lips were simultaneously compressed to prevent the
utterance of that exclamation of gladness which her heart sent up to her
tongue.

Demetrius now commanded a temporary halt; addressing himself to a
Turkish youth, who had been attached to his person in the capacity of
secretary, he said, "Yakoub, hie thou in advance, with an escort of two
soldiers and two slaves, and push on to Florence. There seek an
immediate interview with the president of the council of state, and
acquaint that high functionary with the tidings of my approach. Thou
wilt inform him that I am about to enter Florence in the peaceful
capacity of envoy from the puissant and most glorious Ibrahim Pasha, the
vizier of the sultan, to treat on divers matters interesting to the
honor of the Ottoman Porte and the welfare of all Italy. In the
meantime, I shall so check our speed that we may not reach the city
until after sunset, which arrangement will afford you two full hours to
accomplish the mission which I now trust to thee."

Yakoub bowed, and hastened to obey the commands which he had
received--speeding toward Florence, attended by two soldiers and two
slaves. Demetrius then ordered his party to dismount and rest for a
short space upon the banks of the Arno. Some of his slaves immediately
pitched a tent, into which he conducted Nisida; and refreshments were
served to them.

When the repast was concluded, and they were left alone together for a
few minutes, Nisida's manner suddenly changed from calm patrician
reserve to a strange agitation--her lips quivered, her eyes flashed
fire;--and then, as if desperately resolved to put into execution the
idea which she had formed, she seized Demetrius by the hand, bent her
head toward him, and murmured in the faintest whisper possible, "Start
not to hear the sound of my voice! I am neither deaf nor dumb. But this
is not the place for explanations. I have much to tell, you much to
hear--for I can speak to thee of Calanthe, and prove that he whom thou
servest so zealously is a wretch meriting only thy vengeance."

"My God! my God!--what marvels are now taking place!" murmured the
Greek, surveying Nisida in profound astonishment not unmingled with
alarm.

"Silence--silence, I implore you!" continued she, in the rapid, low, and
yet distinctly audible whisper, "for _your_ sake--for _mine_, betray me
not! Deaf and dumb must I appear--deaf and dumb must I yet be deemed for
a short space. But to-night, at twelve o'clock, you will meet me,
Demetrius, in the garden of the Riverola mansion;--and then I will
conduct you to an apartment where we may confer without fear of being
overheard--without danger of interruption."

"I will not fail thee, lady," said the Greek, scarcely able to recover
from the amazement into which Nisida's sudden revelation of her power of
speech and hearing had thrown him: then, as an oppressive feeling seized
upon his soul, he demanded, "But Calanthe, lady, in the name of heaven!
one word more and let that word give me hope that I may see my sister
again!"

"Demetrius," answered Nisida, her countenance becoming ominous and
somber, "you will never behold her more. The lust of Ibrahim Pasha--nay,
start not so violently--brought destruction and death upon Calanthe!"

The features of the young Greek were at first distorted with anguish,
and tears started from his eyes: but in the next moment their expression
changed to one denoting the fiercest rage.

Nisida understood all that was passing in his soul; and she bent upon
him a significant glance, which said more eloquently than language could
have done--"Yes, vengeance thou shalt have!"

She then rose from the velvet cushions which had been spread upon the
ground within the tent, and waving her hand in token of temporary
farewell to Demetrius, hastened forth, mounted her horse, and departed,
alone and unattended, toward Florence.

Great was the surprise that evening of the numerous servants and
dependents at the Riverola mansion, when Donna Nisida suddenly
reappeared after an absence of very nearly seven months--and that
absence so unaccountable to them! Although her haughty and imperious
manner had never been particularly calculated to render her beloved by
the menials of the household, yet her supposed affliction of deafness
and dumbness had naturally made her an object of interest; and,
moreover, as close upon three months had elapsed since Count Francisco
himself had disappeared in a strange and alarming way two days only
after his return from the wars, the domestics were pleased to behold at
least one member of the lost family come back amongst them. Thus it was
with sincere demonstrations of delight that the dependents and menials
welcomed Donna Nisida at Riverola; and she was not ungracious enough to
receive their civilities with coldness. But she speedily escaped from
the ceremonies of this reception: and, intimating by signs to the female
minions who were about to escort her to her apartments that she was
anxious to be alone, she hurried thither, her heart leaping with joy at
the thought of being once more beneath the roof of the palace of her
forefathers. And, Fernand--wast thou forgotten? Oh! no--no; in spite of
all her revived schemings and new plots, Nisida, thy well-beloved
Nisida, had room in her heart for thine image! On reaching her own suit
of apartments, the key of which had been handed to her by one of the
female dependents, Nisida found everything in the same state as when she
last was there; and it appeared to her a dream, yes, a very wondrous
dream, that she had been absent for nearly seven months, and during that
period had seen and experienced such strange vicissitudes. The reader
need scarcely be informed that Nisida's first impulse, on entering her
own suit of apartments in the Riverola mansion, was to hasten and gaze
once more upon the portrait of her mother, and intent, earnest,
enthusiastic was the upraised look now fixed upon that portrait, even as
when we first saw Nisida contemplating the sweet and benignant
countenance in the second chapter of our narrative. Yes:--and again was
her gaze indicative of a devotion, an adoration, a worship.

"Oh! my sainted mother," thought Nisida within her breast, "I have not
proved ultimately faithless to the solemn vows I pledged to thee upon
thy death-bed! No; if for a time I yielded to the voluptuous idleness of
love and passion in that now far off Mediterranean isle, yet, at last
did I arouse myself to energy for young Francisco's sake, and I came
back as soon as Heaven sent me the means of return to the place where my
presence may best serve _his_ interests, and carry out _thy_ wishes!
For, oh! when thou wast alive, my worshiped, my adored mother, how good,
how kind, how affectionate wast thou toward me. And that tenderness of a
mother for her offspring, ah! how well can I comprehend it now; for I
also shall soon become a mother. Yes, Fernand! within the last week I
have received the conviction that a being bearing thine image will see
the light in due time; and the honor of the proud name of Riverola
requires that our child must not be born of an unwedded mother! But wilt
thou seek me out, Fernand? Oh! where art thou now? whither was the bark,
in which I beheld thee last, wafting thee away?"

And, all the while that these thoughts were agitating within her mind,
Donna Nisida kept her eyes intently fixed on the portrait; but on
reflecting a second time that should she fail to meet with Wagner soon
again, or should he prove faithless to her, or if, indeed, he should
nurse resentment and loathing for her on account of her unworthy conduct
toward him on the island, and that her child should be born of an
unwedded mother,--when, we say, she thought of this dread probability a
second time, she burst into tears, and turned away from the
contemplation of her mother's countenance. And Nisida so seldom wept,
that when tears did escape the usually sealed up springs of her
emotions, they came in torrents, and were most bitter and painful to
shed. But she at length triumphed over her feelings, or rather, their
outpourings relieved her; and now the remembrance of another duty which
she had resolved upon performing the moment she should reach home again
was uppermost in her mind. She contemplated a visit to the mysterious
closet--the dark cabinet of horrible secrets, in order to ascertain
whether curiosity had triumphed over Francisco's prudence, or if any one
indeed had violated the loneliness of that chamber in which the late
Count of Riverola, had breathed his last. She accordingly took a lamp in
her hand, for it was now far advanced in the evening, and proceeded to
the apartment where a father's dying injunctions had been given to her
brother, and which that father and that brother had so little suspected
to have been heard and greedily drunk in by her ears. The door of the
room was locked; Nisida accordingly proceeded forthwith to her brother's
chamber; and there, in a secret place where she knew he had been
accustomed to keep papers or valuables, she found the key of the chamber
containing the mysterious closet, but not the key of the closet itself.
Of this latter circumstance she was glad; inasmuch as she conceived that
he had adopted her counsel to carry it invariably secured about his
person, so that no prying domestics might use it in his absence.
Returning, therefore, with the one key which she had found, she entered
the apartment where her father had breathed his last.

Unchanged was its appearance, in mournfulness and gloom unchanged, in
arrangements and features precisely the same as when she last was there,
on the night when she intercepted the banditti in their predatory visit.
She drew aside the hangings of the bed, a cloud of dust flew out--and
for a few moments she stood gazing on the couch where the dark spirit of
her sire had fled from its mortal tenement! And as she still lingered
near the bed, the remembrance of the death-scene came so vividly back to
her mind, that for an instant she fancied she beheld the cold, stern,
relentless countenance of the late Count of Riverola upon the pillow;
and she turned away more in loathing and abhorrence than alarm, for
through her brain flashed in dread association with his memory, the
awful words--"And as the merciless scalpel hacked and hewed away at the
still almost palpitating flesh of the murdered man, in whose breast the
dagger remained deeply buried--a ferocious joy--a savage, hyena-like
triumph filled my soul; and I experienced no remorse for the deed I had
done!"

Yes, she turned aside, and was advancing rapidly toward the mysterious
closet, when--holy God!--was it reality or imagination? Was it a human
being or a specter from another world? For a tall, dark form, muffled
apparently in a long cowl--or it might be a cloak, but Nisida was too
bewildered to discriminate aright--glided from the middle of the room
where her eyes first beheld it, and was lost to view almost as soon as
seen. Strong minded as Nisida was, indomitable as was her courage, and
far away as she was from being superstitious, yet now she staggered,
reeled, and would have fallen had she not come in contact with the
mysterious closet, against which she leaned for support. She gasped for
breath, and her eyes were fixed wildly upon the door by which the
figures had disappeared. Nevertheless, she had so far retained her
presence of mind as to grasp the lamp firmly in her hand, for at that
moment, after such a fright, in the room where her father had died, and
in the close vicinity of the fearful cabinet, even Nisida would have
fainted with terror to be left in darkness.

"'Twas imagination--naught save imagination," she thought within
herself, as she exerted all her power to surmount the alarms that had
seized upon her. "But no! I remember to have closed the door carefully
behind me, and now it is open!"

As that reminiscence and conviction flashed to her mind, she nerved
herself to advance into the passage; but all was silent, and not a soul
was there save herself. Scarcely knowing what to think, yet ashamed to
give way to superstitious fears, Nisida retraced her steps, and
proceeded to examine the door of the closet. She was satisfied that it
had never been opened since the night of her father's death; for the
seals which she had induced Francisco to place upon the lock next day
were still there. But all the while she was thus scrutinizing the door,
the lock, and the seals, she could not help occasionally casting a
furtive glance around, to convince herself that the tall, dark, muffled
form was not standing behind her: and, as she retraced her way to her
own apartments, she stopped now and then through dread that _other_
footsteps beside her own echoed in the long and lonely corridors of the
old mansion. She, however, regained her chamber in safety, and fell into
a deep reverie respecting the tall figure she had seen. Were it not for
the fact, of which she was confident, of her having closed the door on
entering the room where her father had died, she would have concluded
that her imagination had deluded her; but she now feared lest she might
be watched by spies for some unknown and hostile purpose. It was
perplexing, to say the least of it; and Nisida determined to adopt all
possible precautions against her secret enemies, whoever they might be.

She accordingly arose from her seat--put off her upper garment--donned
her thin but strong corselet--and then assumed the black velvet robe
which reached up to her throat, concealing the armor beneath. Her
flexible dagger--that fatal weapon which had dealt death to the
unfortunate Agnes--was next thrust into the sheath formed by the wide
border of her stomacher; and Nisida smiled with haughty triumph as if in
defiance to her foes. She then repaired to one of the splendid saloons
of the mansion; and ere she sat down to the repast that was served up,
she dispatched a note acquainting Dr. Duras with her return, and
requesting his immediate presence. In about half an hour the physician
arrived, and his joy at beholding Nisida again was only equaled by his
impatience to learn the cause of her long absence and all that had
befallen her during the interval.

She made a sign for the old man to follow her to the retirement of her
own apartments; and then, having closed the door, she said to him in a
low tone, "Doctor, we will converse by means of signs no more; for,
though still forced to simulate the deaf and dumb in the presence of the
world, yet now--with you, who have all along known my terrible
secret--our discourse must be too important to be carried on by mere
signs."

"Nisida," returned Duras, also in a low and cautious tone, "thou knowest
that I love thee as if thou wast my own daughter; and thy voice sounds
like music upon my ears. But when will the dreadful necessity which
renders thee dumb before the world--when will it cease, Nisida?"

"Soon--soon, doctor--if thou wilt aid me," answered the lady.

A long and earnest conversation then ensued; but it is not necessary to
give the details to the reader, inasmuch as their nature will soon
transpire. Suffice it to say that Nisida urged a particular request,
which she backed by such explanation and we must also say
misrepresentations as she thought suitable to her purpose; and that Dr.
Duras eventually, though not without compunction and hesitation, at
length acceded to her prayer. She then gave him a brief account of her
abduction from Florence by the villain Stephano--her long residence on
the island of snakes--and her deliverance from thence by the Ottoman
fleet, which was now off the port of Leghorn. But she said nothing of
Fernand Wagner: nor did she inform the physician that she was acquainted
with the cause of Francisco's disappearance and the place where he was
detained. At length Dr. Duras took his leave; but ere he left the room
Nisida caught him by the hand, saying, in a low, yet impressive
tone--"Remember your solemn promise, my dear friend, and induce your
brother to leave Flora Francatelli to her fate."

"I will--I will," answered the physician. "And after all you have told
me, and if she be really the bad, profligate, and evil-disposed girl you
represent her, it will be well that the inquisition should hold her
tight in its grasp."

With these words Dr. Duras departed, leaving Nisida to gloat over the
success which her plans had thus far experienced.




CHAPTER LX.


It was verging toward midnight, and the moon was concealed behind dark
clouds, when a tall figure, muffled in a cloak, climbed over the railing
which inclosed one portion of the spacious garden attached to the
Riverola Palace. That person was Fernand Wagner. He had arrived in
Florence two days before that on which Nisida returned to the ancestral
dwelling:--he had entered the city boldly and openly in the joyous
sun-light--and yet no one molested him. He even encountered some of the
very sbirri who had arrested him in the preceding month of February;
they saluted him respectfully--thus showed that they recognized him--but
offered not to harm him. His trial, his condemnation, and his escape
appeared all to have been forgotten. He repaired to his mansion; his
servants, who had remained in possession of the dwelling, received him
with demonstrations of joy and welcome as if he had just returned under
ordinary circumstances from a long journey. Truly, then, he was blessed
by the protection of Heaven. And--more wondrous still--on entering his
favorite room he beheld all his pictures in their proper places, as if
none of them had ever been removed--as if the confiscation of several by
the criminal tribunal had never taken place. Over the one which had
proclaimed the secret of his doom to the judges and the audience on the
occasion of his trial, still hung the black cloth; and an undefinable
curiosity--no, not a sentiment of curiosity, but one of hope--impelled
him to remove the covering. And how exquisite was his joy, how great his
amazement, how sincere his thanksgivings, when he beheld but a blank
piece of canvas. The horrible picture of the Wehr-Wolf, a picture which
he had painted when in a strangely morbid state of mind--had
disappeared. Here was another sign of Heaven's goodness--a further proof
of celestial mercy.

On instituting inquiries, Fernand had learnt that Donna Nisida had not
yet come back to Florence: but he employed trusty persons to watch and
give him notice of her arrival the instant it should occur. Thus Nisida
had not been half an hour at the Riverola mansion when Fernand was made
acquainted with her return. From the conversation which had taken place
between them at various times on the island, and as the reader is well
aware, Wagner felt convinced that Nisida would again simulate deafness
and dumbness; and he was therefore desirous to avoid giving her any
surprise by appearing abruptly before her--a proceeding which might
evoke a sudden ejaculation, and thus betray her secret. Moreover, he
knew not whether circumstances would render his visits, made in a public
manner, agreeable to her: and, perhaps--pardon him, gentle
reader--perhaps he was also curious to learn whether she still thought
of him, or whether the excitement of her return had absorbed all tender
feelings of that nature.

Influenced by these various motives, Wagner muffled himself in a long
Tuscan cloak and repaired to the vicinity of the Riverola mansion. He
passed through the gardens without encountering any one, and, perceiving
a side door open, he entered the building. Ascending the stairs, he
thought that he should be acting in accordance with the advice given him
by Rosencrux, and also consistent with prudence, were he at once to seek
an interview with Nisida privately. He therefore repaired in the
direction of the principal saloons of the palace; but losing his way
amidst the maze of corridors, he was about to retire, when he beheld the
object of his search, the beautiful Nisida, enter a room with a lamp in
hand. He now felt convinced that he should meet her alone, and he
hurried after her. In pursuance of his cautious plan, he opened the door
gently, and was already in the middle of the apartment, when he
perceived Nisida standing by the side of a bed, and with her head fixed
in that immovable manner which indicates intent gazing upon some object.
Instantly supposing that some invalid reposed in that couch, and now
seized with a dreadful alarm lest Nisida, on beholding him, should utter
a sudden ejaculation which would betray the secret of her feigned
dumbness, Fernand considerately retreated with all possible speed: nor
was he aware that Nisida had observed him, much less that his appearance
there had excited such fears in her breast, those fears being greatly
enhanced by his negligence in leaving the door open behind him.

Oh! had Nisida known it was thou, Fernand Wagner, how joyous, how happy
she would have been; for the conviction that she bore the pledge of your
mutual passion had made her heart yearn that eve to meet with thee
again. And was it a like attraction on thy part, or the mysterious
influence that now guided all thy movements, which induced thee at
midnight to enter the Riverola gardens again, that thou mightest be, as
it were, upon the same spot where she dwelt, and scent the fragrance of
the same flowers that perfumed the atmosphere which she breathed? Oh!
doubtless it was that mysterious influence; for thou hast now that power
within thee which made thee strong to resist all the blandishments of
the siren, and to prefer the welfare of thine own soul to aught in this
world beside!

We said, then, at the commencement of this chapter that Fernand entered
the Riverola gardens shortly after midnight. But scarcely had he crossed
the iron railings, turned into the nearest path formed by shrubs and
evergreens, when he was startled by hearing another person enter the
grounds in the same unceremonious manner. Fernand accordingly stood aside
in the deep shade of the trees; and in a few moments a figure, muffled
like himself in a cloak, passed him rapidly by. Wagner was debating in
himself what course he should pursue--for he feared that some treachery
was intended toward Nisida--when to his boundless surprise, he heard the
mysterious visitant say in a low tone. "Is it you, lady?"--to which
question the unmistakable and never-to-be-forgotten voice of his Nisida
answered, "'Tis I, Demetrius. Follow me noiselessly, and breathe not
another word for the present!"

Fernand was shocked and grieved at what he had just heard, and which
savored so strongly of an intrigue. Had not his ears deceived him? was
this the Nisida from whom he had parted but little more than three weeks
back, and who had left him that tender note which he had found in the
hut on the island? But he had no time for reflection; the pair were
moving rapidly toward the mansion--and Wagner unhesitatingly followed,
his footsteps being soundless on the damp soil of the borders of
flowers, and his form being concealed by the shade of the tall
evergreens which he skirted.

He watched Nisida and her companion until they disappeared by a small
private door at the back of the mansion; and this door was by them
incautiously left unlocked, though shut close. It opened rapidly to
Wagner's hand, and he found himself at the foot of a dark staircase, the
sound of ascending steps on which met his ears. Up that narrow flight he
sped, noiselessly but hastily; and in a few moments he was stopped by
another door which had just closed behind those whom he was following.
Here he was compelled to pause, in the hope that the partition might not
be so thick as completely to intercept the sounds of the voices in the
chamber; but after listening with breathless attention for a few
minutes, he could not catch even the murmuring of a whisper. It now
struck him that Nisida and her companion might have passed on into a
room more remote than the one to which that door had admitted them; and
he resolved to follow on. Accordingly, he opened the door with such
successful precaution that not a sound--not even the creaking of the
hinge was the result; and he immediately perceived that there was a
thick curtain within; for it will be recollected that this door was
behind the drapery of Nisida's bed. At the same time, a light, somewhat
subdued by the thick curtain, appeared; and the sound of voices met
Fernand's ears.

"Signor," said the melodious voice of Nisida, in its sweetest, softest
tones, "it is due to myself to tender fitting excuse for introducing you
thus into my private chamber; but the necessity of discoursing together
without fear of interruption, and in some place that is secure from the
impertinence of eavesdroppers, must serve as an apology."

"Lady," replied Demetrius, "it needed no explanation of your motive in
bringing me hither to command on my part that respect which is due to
you."

A weight was removed from Wagner's mind: it was assuredly no tender
sentiment that had brought Nisida and the Greek together this night; and
the curiosity of Fernand was therefore excited all the more strongly.

"We will not waste time in unnecessary parlance," resumed Nisida, after
a short pause; "nor must you seek to learn the causes--the powerful
causes, which have urged me to impose upon myself the awful sacrifice
involved in the simulation of loss of speech and hearing. Suffice it for
you to know that, when on board the kapitan-pasha's ship, I overheard
every syllable of the conversation which one day took place between the
apostate Ibrahim and yourself,--a conversation wherein you gave a
detailed account of all your proceedings at Florence, and in the course
of which you spoke feelingly of your sister Calanthe."

"Alas! poor Calanthe!" exclaimed Demetrius, in a mournful tone; "and is
she really no more?"

"Listen to me while I relate the manner in which I became aware of her
fate," said Nisida.

She then explained the treacherous visit of the grand vizier to the
cabin wherein she had slept on board the Ottoman admiral's ship--the way
in which the Ethiopian slave had interfered to save her--and the
conversation that had taken place between Ibrahim and the negro,
revealing the dread fate of Calanthe.

"Is it possible that I have served so faithfully a man possessed of such
a demon-heart?" cried Demetrius. "But I will have vengeance, lady; yes,
the murdered Calanthe shall be avenged!"

"And I too must have vengeance upon the proud and insolent vizier who
sought to violate all the laws of hospitality in respect to me,"
observed Nisida, "and who seeks to marry his sister, the low-born Flora,
the sister of the base renegade, to the illustrious scion of the noble
house of Riverola! Vengeance, too, must I have upon the wretch Antonio,
the panderer to my father's illicit and degrading _amours_--the
miscreant who sought to plunder this mansion, and who even dared to
utter threats against me in that conversation with his accomplice
Venturo, which you, signor, overheard in the streets of Florence. This
game wretch it is, too, who consigned my brother to the custody of
banditti; and though, for certain reasons, I deplore not that captivity
which Francisco has endured, inasmuch as it has effectually prevented
him from interesting himself on behalf of Flora Francatelli, yet as
Antonio was animated by vengeance only in so using my brother, he shall
pay the penalty due on account of all his crimes!"

"And in the task of punishing Antonio, lady," said Demetrius, "shall I
be right glad to aid--for did not the villain deceive me infamously in
respect to the dispatches which I sought to forward to Constantinople
when last I was at Florence? and, not contented with that vile
treachery, even plotted with his accomplice Venturo against my life."

"Vengeance, then, upon our enemies, Demetrius!" exclaimed Nisida. "And
this is how our aims shall be accomplished," she continued, in a lower
and less excited tone: "The ambitious views of Ibrahim Pasha must
experience a signal defeat; and as he is too powerful to be personally
injured by us, we must torture his soul by crushing his relations--we
must punish him through the medium of his sister and his aunt. This
evening I had a long discourse with Dr. Duras, who is devoted to my
interests, and over whom I wield a wondrous power of persuasion. He has
undertaken to induce his brother, Angelo Duras, to abandon the cause of
the Francatellis; and the inquisition will, therefore, deal with them as
it lists. Father Marco I can also manage as I will; he understands the
language in which the deaf and dumb converse, for he has so long been
confessor to our family. To-morrow I will undertake to send him to Rome
on some charitable mission connected with the church. Thus the only
persons whom you secured when last you were in Florence, in the
interests of the Francatellis, will cease to watch over them; and, as
they are accused of being accomplices in the sacrilege perpetrated in
the Carmelite Convent, naught will save them from the flames of the
_auto-da-fe_."

"Oh! spirit of the murdered Calanthe," exclaimed Demetrius, with savage
joy, "thou wilt be avenged yet! And thou, false vizier, shalt writhe in
the flames at the stake!"

"Now, as for Antonio, and the rest of the banditti who stormed the
convent and gave freedom to the hated Flora--who have likewise captured
my brother--and who have so long been a terror to Florence," continued
Nisida; "we must annihilate them all at one blow; not a soul of the gang
must be spared!"

Nisida knew full well that at least some of the banditti were acquainted
with the fact that she was the murderess of Agnes, and that they could
also tell an awkward tale of how she sought to bribe them to rescue
Fernand Wagner in case of an adverse judgment on the part of the
criminal tribunal. The total annihilation of the horde was consequently
the large aim at which she aspired, and her energetic mind shrunk not
from any difficulties that might appear in the way toward the execution
of that object.

"The design is grand, but not without its obstacles," observed
Demetrius. "Your ladyship will moreover adopt measures to rescue the
Lord Count of Riverola first."

"By means of gold everything can be accomplished amongst villains,"
returned Nisida, "and the necessary preliminaries to the carrying out of
our object rest with you, signor. To-morrow morning must you seek
Antonio. He knows not that you suspect his villainy and, as you will say
nothing relative to the failure in the arrival of your dispatches at
Constantinople, he will rest secure in the belief that you have not yet
discovered that deed of treachery. You must represent yourself as the
mortal enemy of the Count of Riverola, and so speak as to lead Antonio
to confess to you where he is and offer to become the instrument of your
vengeance. Then bribe Antonio heavily to deliver up Francisco into your
power to-morrow night at a particular hour, and at a place not far from
the spot where you know the secret entrance of the banditti's stronghold
to be."

"All this, lady," said Demetrius, "can be easily arranged. Antonio would
barter his soul for gold; much more readily, then, will he sell the
Count of Riverola to one who bids high for the possession of the noble
prisoner."

"But this is not all," resumed Nisida, "'tis merely the preface to my
plan. So soon as the shades of to-morrow's evening shall have involved
the earth in obscurity, a strong party of your soldiers, properly
disguised, but well armed, must repair in small sections, or even
singly, to that grove where you have already obtained a clew to the
entrance of the robbers' stronghold. Let them conceal themselves amongst
the trees in the immediate vicinity of the enormous chestnut that
overhangs the precipice. When the robbers emerge from their
lurking-place with Francisco, your soldiers will immediately seize upon
them. Should you then discover the secret of the entrance to the
stronghold, the object will be gained,--your men will penetrate into the
subterranean den,--and the massacre of the horde will prove an easy
matter. But should it occur that those banditti who may be employed in
leading forth my brother, do shut up the entrance of their den so
speedily that your dependents discover not its secrets, then must we
trust to bribery or threats to wrest that secret from the miscreants. At
all events Antonio will be present to accompany Francisco to the place
which you will appoint to meet them; and as the villain will fall into
your power, it will perhaps prove less difficult to induce him to betray
his comrades, than it might be to persuade any of the banditti
themselves."

"Lady, your plan has every element of success," observed Demetrius; "and
all shall be done as you suggest. Indeed, I will myself conduct the
expedition. But should you thus at once effect the release of Don
Francisco, will he not oppose your designs relative to the condemnation
of Flora Francatelli by the inquisition?"

"Dr. Duras is well acquainted with the precise process," answered
Nisida; "and from him I learnt that the third examination of the
prisoners will take place to-morrow, when judgment will be pronounced
should no advocate appear to urge a feasible cause of delay."

"The arrests took place on the 3d of July," said Demetrius; "and Angelo
Duras undertook to obtain a postponement for three months. To-morrow,
lady, is but the 26th of September."

"True," responded Nisida; "but were a delay granted, it would be for
eight days--and thus you perceive how nicely Angelo Duras had weighed
all the intricacies of the case, and how accurately he had calculated
the length of the term to be gained by the exercise of the subtleties of
the inquisitorial law. Therefore, as no advocate will appear to demand
delay, Flora is certain to be condemned to-morrow night, and the release
of Francisco may take place simultaneously--for when once the grand
inquisitor shall have pronounced the extreme sentence, no human power
can reverse it. And now," added Nisida, "but one word more. The grand
vizier commanded you to dispatch a courier daily to Leghorn with full
particulars of all your proceedings; see that those accounts be of a
nature to lull the treacherous Ibrahim into security--for, were he to
learn that his aunt and sister are in dread peril, he would be capable
of marching at the head of all his troops to sack the city of Florence."

"Fear not on that subject, lady," answered Demetrius. "I will so amuse
the demon-hearted grand vizier by my dispatches, that he shall become
excited with joyous hopes--so that the blow--the dread blow which we are
preparing for him--may be the more terribly severe."

The Greek then rose to take his leave of Donna Nisida; and Wagner,
having closed the secret door as noiselessly as he had opened it,
hurried away from the Riverola mansion bewildered and grieved at all he
had heard--for he could no longer conceal from himself that a very fiend
was incarnate in the shape of her whom he had loved so madly.

Having tossed on a feverish couch for upward of an hour,--unable to
banish from his mind the cold blooded plot which Nisida and Demetrius
had resolved upon in order to consign Flora Francatelli and her equally
innocent aunt to the stake,--Wagner at last slept through sheer
exhaustion. Then Christianus Rosencrux appeared to him in a dream and
said:--"Heaven hath chosen thee as the instrument to defeat the
iniquitous purposes of Riverola in respect of two guiltless and
deserving women. Angelo Duras is an upright man; but he is deluded and
misled by the representations made to him by Nisida, through his
brother, the physician, relative to the true character of Flora. In the
evening at nine o'clock, hie to Angelo Duras--command him in the name of
justice and humanity, to do his duty toward his clients--and he will
obey thee. Then, having performed this much, speed thou without delay to
Leghorn, and seek the grand vizier, Ibrahim Pasha. To him shalt thou
merely state that Demetrius is a traitor, and that tremendous perils
hang over the heads of the vizier's much-loved relatives. Manifest no
hatred to the vizier on account of his late treacherous intention with
regard to the honor of Nisida: for vengeance belongeth not to mortals.
And in these measures only, of all the deeply ramified plots and designs
which thou didst hear discussed between Nisida and Demetrius, shall thou
interfere. Leave the rest to Heaven."

The founder of the Rosicrucians disappeared: and when Fernand awoke late
in the day--for his slumber had been long and deep--he remembered the
vision which he had seen, and resolved to obey the order he had
received.

Beneath the massive and heavy tower of the Palazzo del Podesta, or Ducal
Palace of Florence, was the tribunal of the holy inquisition. Small,
low, and terribly somber in appearance was this court--with walls of the
most solid masonry, an arched roof, and a pavement formed of vast blocks
of dark-veined marble. Thither the light of heaven never penetrated; for
it was situate far below the level of the earth, and at the very
foundation of that tower which rose, frowning and sullen, high above.
Iron lamps diffused a lurid luster around, rendering ghastly the
countenance alike of the oppressors and the oppressed; and when it was
deemed necessary to invest the proceedings with a more awe-inspiring
solemnity than usual, torches, borne by the familiars or officers of the
inquisition, were substituted for these iron lamps. Over the
judgment-seat was suspended a large crucifix. On one side of the court
were three doors,--one communicating with the corridor and flight of
stone steps leading to and from the tribunal; the second affording
admission into the torture-chamber and the third opening to the prisons
of the inquisition.

It was about seven o'clock in the evening, on the 26th of September,
that Flora Francatelli and her aunt were placed before the grand
inquisitor, to be examined for the second time. When the familiars,
habited in their long, black, ecclesiastical dresses with the strange
cowls or hoods shading their stern and remorseless countenances, led in
the two females from the separate cells in which they had been confined,
the first and natural impulse of the unhappy creatures was to rush into
each other's arms;--but they were immediately torn rudely asunder, and
so stationed in the presence of the grand inquisitor as to have a
considerable interval between them.

But the glances which the aunt and niece exchanged, gave encouragement
and hope to each other, and the sentiments which prompted those glances
were really cherished by the persecuted females; inasmuch as Father
Marco, who had been permitted to visit them occasionally, dropped sundry
hints of coming aid, and powerful, though invisible, protection--thereby
cheering their hearts to some little extent, and mitigating the
intensity of their apprehensions. Flora was very pale--but never,
perhaps, had she appeared more beautiful--for her large blue eyes
expressed the most melting softness, and her dark brown hair hung
disheveled over her shoulders, while her bosom heaved with the agitation
of suspense.

"Woman," said the grand inquisitor, glancing first to the aunt and then
to the niece, his eyes, however, lingering upon the latter, "know ye of
what ye are accused? Let the younger speak first."

"My lord," answered Flora, in a firmer tone than might have been
expected from the feelings indicated by her outward appearance, "when on
a former occasion I stood in the presence of your eminence, I expressed
my belief that secret enemies were conspiring, for their own bad
purposes, to ruin my beloved relative and myself; and yet I call Heaven
to witness my solemn declaration that knowingly and willfully we have
wronged no one by word or deed."

"Young woman," exclaimed the grand inquisitor, "thou hast answered my
questions evasively. Wast thou not an inmate of that most holy
sanctuary, the convent of Carmelite nuns? wast thou not there the
companion of Giulia of Arestino? did not a sacrilegious horde of
miscreants break into the convent, headed or at least accompanied by a
certain Manuel d'Orsini who was the lover of the countess? was not this
invasion of the sacred place undertaken to rescue that guilty woman? and
did she not find an asylum at the abode of your aunt, doubtless with
your connivance, until the day of her arrest?"

"None of those circumstances, my lord," replied Flora, "do I attempt to
deny: but it is so easy to give them a variety of colorings, some of
which, alas! may seem most unfavorable to my venerable relative and to
myself. Oh, my lord, do with me what thou wilt," exclaimed Flora,
clasping her hands together in a single paroxysm of anguish; "but
release that aged woman, suffer not my beloved aunt--my more than mother
to be thus persecuted! have mercy, my lord, upon _her_--oh! have mercy,
great judge, upon her."

"Flora--dearest Flora," cried Dame Francatelli, the tears trickling fast
down her countenance, "I do not wish to leave you--I do not seek to be
set free--I will stay in this dreadful place so long as you remain a
prisoner also; for though we are separated----"

"Woman," exclaimed the grand inquisitor, not altogether unmoved by this
touching scene, "the tribunal cannot take heed of supplications and
prayers of an impassioned nature. It has to do with facts, not
feelings."

At this moment there was a slight sensation amongst the familiars
stationed near the door of the judgment-hall; and an individual who had
just entered the court, and who wore the black robe and the cap or toque
of a counselor, advanced toward the grand inquisitor.

"My lord," said the advocate, with a reverential bow, "the day after the
arrest of these females, I submitted to the council of state a memorial,
setting forth certain facts which induced the president of the council
to issue his warrant to order the postponement of the second examination
of the two prisoners now before your eminence, until this day."

"And the case has been postponed accordingly," answered the grand
inquisitor. "It will now proceed, unless reasonable cause be shown for
further delay. The prisoners are obstinate. Instead of confessing their
heinous crimes, and throwing themselves on the mercy of Heaven--for past
the hope of human mercy they are--they assuredly break forth into
impassioned language, savoring of complaint. Indeed, the younger
attributes to the machinations of unknown enemies the position in which
she is placed. Yet have we positive proof that she was leagued with
those who perpetrated the sacrilege which ended in the destruction of
the Carmelite Convent; and the elder prisoner gave refuge not only to
the young girl, her niece, but also to a woman more guilty still--thus
rendering herself infamous as one who encouraged and concealed the
enemies of the church, instead of giving them up to the most holy
inquisition. Wherefore," continued the grand inquisitor, "it remaineth
only for me to order the prisoners to be put to the torture, that they
may confess their crimes and receive the condemnation which they merit."

At the terrible word "_torture_," Dame Francatelli uttered a cry of
agony--but it was even more on account of her beloved niece than
herself; while Flora, endowed with greater firmness than her aunt, would
have flown to console and embrace her, had not the familiars cruelly
compelled the young maiden to retain her place.

"My lord," said Angelo Duras--for he was the advocate who appeared on
behalf of the prisoners--"I formally and earnestly demand a delay of
eight days ere this final examination be proceeded with."

"It is impossible," returned the grand inquisitor, while his words went
like ice-shafts to the hearts of the unhappy women. "In addition to the
charges against them which I have already glanced at, it appeareth that
one Alessandro Francatelli, who is nearly related to them both, hath
abjured the Christian faith and become a Mussulman. This fact was
reported many months ago to the council of state: and in the cottage
lately habited by the prisoners was found a costly set of jewels,
ornamented with sundry Moslem devices and symbols, all of which are
hateful to the true Catholic. It is therefore natural to suppose that
they themselves have secretly abjured their country's religion, and have
already received the reward of their apostasy."

"No--never, never!" exclaimed the aunt, clasping her hands together, and
showing more anguish by this cruel suspicion than by any other portion
of the treatment which she had received at the hands of the inquisition.

On her side, Flora appeared to be astounded at the accusation made
against her aunt and herself by the grand inquisitor.

"My lord," said Angelo Duras, "the very statement which has just been
put forth by your eminence furnishes a new ground whereon I base my
requisition for a delay of eight days, in order to prepare a fitting
defense on behalf of the prisoners. The council of state is now sitting
in deliberation on certain demands made by the newly arrived Ottoman
envoy, and should your eminence refuse my requisition for a delay, it
will be my duty forthwith to apply to that august body."

The grand inquisitor endeavored to reason with the advocate on the
inconvenience of obstructing the business of the tribunal--but Angelo
Duras, knowing that he had the law on his side, was firm; and the judge
was finally compelled to accord the delay. Flora and her aunt were
accordingly conveyed back each to her separate cell; while Angelo Duras
retired, murmuring to himself, "I shall doubtless offend my brother by
my conduct in this respect, after my solemn promise to him to abandon
the cause of the Francatellis; but I prefer having obeyed that young man
of godlike aspect and persuasive manner who visited me ere now to abjure
me not to neglect my duty."

The next case that occupied the attention of the grand inquisitor on the
present occasion was that of the Jew Isaachar ben Solomon. The old man
was indeed a miserable spectacle. His garments hung loosely about his
wasted and attenuated form--his countenance was wan and ghastly--but the
fire of his eyes was not altogether quenched. He was heavily
chained--and, as he walked between the two familiars who led him into
the tribunal, he could scarcely drag himself along. For the persecuted
old man had been confined for nearly seven months in the prison of the
inquisition; and during that period he had suffered acutely with the
damps of his dungeon--the wretched food doled out to him--and the
anguish occasioned by conscious innocence unjustly accused of a dreadful
crime.

"Jew," said the grand inquisitor, "when last thou wast examined by me,
thou didst obstinately refuse to confess thy grievous sins. This is the
day for the final investigation of thy case: and thou may'st produce
witnesses in thy favor, if thou canst."

"My lord," replied Isaachar ben Solomon, in a weak and tremulous voice,
"unless Heaven should work a miracle in my favor, I have no hope in this
life. I do not fear death, my lord; for, persecuted, reviled, despised,
accused as I am, I can yet lay my hand on my heart and say I have never
injured a fellow-creature. But, my lord," he continued, his voice
growing stronger with excitement, "it is sufficient that I am a Jew to
insure my condemnation; and yet strange indeed is that Christian faith,
or rather should I say, most inconsistent is the conduct of those who
profess it, in so far as this ruthless persecution of my race is
concerned. For where, my lord, is your charity, where is your tolerance,
where is your mercy? If I be indeed involved in mental darkness, 'tis
for you to enlighten me with argument, not coerce me with chains. Never
have I insulted a Christian on account of his creed: wherefore should I
be insulted in mine? Granting that the Jew is in error, he surely
deserves pity, not persecution. For how came I by the creed which I
profess? Even as your lordship obtained yours, which is that of
Christian. Our parents reared us each in the belief which they
respectively professed; and there is no more merit due to your eminence
for being a Christian, than there is blame to be attached to me for
being a Jew. Had all the religions of the earth been submitted to our
consideration when we were children, and had it been said to each of us,
'Select a faith for yourself,' then there might be some merit in
choosing the one most popular and the most assuredly conducive to
personal safety. But such was not the case, my lord; and I am a Jew for
the same reason that you are a Christian--and I cling to the creed of my
forefathers even as you adhere tenaciously to that faith which your
ancestors have handed down to you. Reproach me not, then, because I am a
Jew. And now I will pass to another subject, my lord," continued
Isaachar, becoming more and more animated as he proceeded.

"I am accused of a fearful crime, of murder. The evidence rests upon the
fact that stains of blood were observed upon the floor of a room in my
house. The answer is simple. Two men--one of noble birth, the other a
robber, fought in the room; and the blood of one of them flowed from a
slight wound. This is the truth--and yet I know that I am not believed.
Merciful heavens! of what would you accuse me? Of murder!--and it was
hinted, when last I stood before your eminence, that the Jews have been
known to slay Christian children as an offering to Heaven. My lord, the
Jews worship the same God as the Christians--for the Christians adopt
that book in which the Jews put faith. Then I appeal to your eminence
whether the God whom the Christians worship would delight in such
sacrifices?--and as you must answer 'Nay,' the reply acquits the Jews
also of the hideous calumny sought to be affixed upon us. The Jews, my
lord, are a merciful and humane race. The records of your tribunals will
prove that the Jews are not addicted to the shedding of blood. They are
too patient--enduring--and resigned, to be given to vengeance. Behold
how they cling to each other--how they assist each other in
distress;--and charity is not narrowed to small circles, my lord, it is
a sentiment which must become expansive, because it nourisheth itself
and is cherished by those good feelings which are its only reward. Think
you, my lord, that if I saw a fellow-creature starving in the street, I
should wait to ask him whether he were a Christian, a Jew, or a
Mussulman? Oh! no--no; the world's bread was given for men of all
nations and all creeds!"

Isaachar would have continued his address to the grand inquisitor; but
sheer exhaustion compelled him to desist--and he would have sunk upon
the cold marble, had not the familiars supported him.

"By his own words is he convicted of disbelief in the most holy Catholic
faith," said the grand inquisitor. "But I find, by a memorial which was
addressed to me many mouths ago--indeed, very shortly after the arrest
of this miserable unbeliever--and signed by Manuel Marquis of Orsini,
that the said marquis hath important evidence to give on behalf of the
Jew. Now, though Manuel d'Orsini be himself a prisoner of the holy
office, yet as he hath not yet been judged, he is a competent witness."

Orders were then given to introduce the marquis; and Isaachar ben
Solomon murmured to himself, "Is it possible that the young man can have
felt sympathy for me? Ah, then I was not mistaken in him; in spite of
his dissipation and his wildness he possesses a generous heart."

In a few minutes the Marquis of Orsini was led into the judgment-hall.
He was chained;--but he carried his head erect--and, though his
countenance was pale and careworn, his spirit was not crushed. He bowed
respectfully, but not cringingly, to the grand inquisitor, and bestowed
a friendly nod of recognition upon the Jew.

"This memorial, dated in the month of March last, was signed by you?"
said the grand inquisitor interrogatively, as he displayed a paper to
the marquis.

"That memorial was signed by me," answered Orsini, in a firm tone, "and
I rejoice that your eminence has at length granted me an opportunity of
explaining the matter hinted at therein. Your eminence sits there, it is
presumed, to administer justice; then let justice be done toward this
innocent man--albeit that he is a Jew--for solemnly do I declare that
the blood which stained the floor in Isaachar's house flowed from my
right arm. And it may not be amiss to observe," continued the marquis,
"that the worthy Jew there did not only bind the wound for me with as
much care as if I myself had been an Israelite, or he a Christian--but
he moreover offered me the aid of his purse; and therefore am I under
obligations to him which I can never wholly discharge. In good sooth, my
lord," added Manuel, in whom neither a lengthened imprisonment nor the
awful solemnity of the present scene could entirely subdue the flippancy
which was habitual to his speech,--"in good sooth, my lord, he is a
splendid specimen of a Jew--and I pray your eminence to discharge him
forthwith."

"This levity ill becometh you, Manuel d'Orsini," said the grand
inquisitor; "for you yourself are in terrible danger."

Then, upon a signal given, the familiars conveyed the marquis back to
his dungeon: but ere he left the judgment-hall, he had the satisfaction
of beholding the Jew's eyes fixed upon him with an expression of
boundless gratitude and deep sympathy. Tears, too, were trickling down
the cheeks of the Israelite: for the old man thought within himself,
"What matters it if the rack dislocate my limbs? But it is shocking--oh!
it is shocking to reflect that thy fellow-creatures, noble youth, shall
dare to deface and injure that godlike form of thine!"

"Jew," suddenly exclaimed the grand inquisitor, "I put no faith in the
testimony of the witness who has just appeared in thy favor. Confess thy
sins--avow openly that thou hast murdered Christian children to obtain
their blood for use in thy sacrifices--and seek forgiveness from Heaven
by embracing the faith of Jesus!"

The unhappy Israelite was so appalled by the open, positive, and
undisguised manner in which an atrocious charge was revived against him,
that he lost all power of utterance, and stood stupefied and aghast.

"Away with him to the torture-chamber!" cried the grand inquisitor, in a
stern and remorseless tone.

"Monster!" exclaimed the Jew, suddenly recovering his speech, as that
dreadful mandate warned him that he would now require all his
energy--all his presence of mind:--"monster!" he repeated, in a voice
indicative of loathing and contempt;--"and thou art a Christian!"

The familiars hurried Isaachar away to the torture-chamber, which, as we
before stated, opened upon the tribunal. And terrible, indeed, was the
appearance of that earthly hell--that terrestrial hades, invented by
fiends in human shape--that den of horrors constituting, indeed, a
fitting foretaste of trans-stygian torment! The grand inquisitor
followed the victim and the familiars into this awful place: and, on a
signal being given by that high functionary, Isaachar was stripped of
all his upper clothing, and stretched on the accursed rack. Then
commenced the torture--the agonizing torture by means of that infernal
instrument, a torture which dislocated the limbs, appeared to tear the
members asunder, and produced sensations as if all the nerves of the
body were suddenly being drawn out through the brain.

"Dost thou confess? and wilt thou embrace the Christian faith?" demanded
the grand inquisitor from time to time.

"I have nothing to confess--I will not renounce the creed of my
forefathers!" answered Isaachar in a tone of bitter agony, as he writhed
upon the rack, while every fresh shock and jerk of the infernal engine
seemed as if it would tear the very life out of him. But the old man
remained firm in the declaration of his innocence of the dreadful crime
imputed to him: stanch also to his creed did he remain; and having
endured the full extent of that special mode of torture, he was borne
back to his dungeon, cruelly injured, with dislocated limbs, blood
streaming from his mouth and nostrils, and these terrible words of the
grand inquisitor ringing in his ears--"Obstinate and impenitent one,
Satan claims thee as his own; therefore art thou condemned to death by
fire at the approaching _auto de-fe_!"

Half an hour afterward another human being lay stretched upon that
accursed rack, and agonizing--oh! most agonizing were the female shrieks
and rending screams which emanated from the lips of the tortured victim,
but which reached not beyond the solid masonry of those walls and the
massive iron-plated door. The white and polished arms were stretched out
in a position fearfully painful beyond the victim's head, and the wrists
were fastened to a steel bar by means of a thin cord, which cut through
flesh, muscle and nerve to the very bone! The ankles were attached in a
similar manner to a bar at the lower end of the rack, and thus from the
female's hands and feet thick clots of gore fell on the stone pavement.
But even the blood flowed not so fast from her lacerated limbs as
streamed the big drops of agony from her distorted countenance--that
countenance erst so beautiful, and so well beloved by thee, Manuel
d'Orsini! For, oh! upon that rack lay stretched the fair and half-naked
form of Giulia of Arestino, its symmetry convulsing in matchless
tortures, the bosom palpitating awfully with the pangs of that earthly
hell, and the exquisitely-modeled limbs enduring all the hideous pains
of dislocation, as if the fibers that held them in their sockets were
drawn out to a tension at which they must inevitably snap in halves!

But who gazes on that awful spectacle? whose ears drink in those
agonizing screams, as if they made a delicious melody? With folded arms,
compressed lips, and remorseless, though ashy pale countenance, the old
Lord of Arestino stands near the rack; and if his eyes can for a moment
quit that feast which they devour so greedily, it is but to glance with
demoniac triumph toward Manuel d'Orsini, whom an atrocious refinement of
cruelty, suggested by the vengeful count himself, has made a spectator
of that appalling scene! And terrible are the emotions which rend the
heart of the young marquis! But he is powerless--he cannot stretch forth
a hand to save his mistress from the hellish torments which she is
enduring, nor can he even whisper a syllable to inspire her with courage
to support them. For he is bound tightly--the familiars, too, have him
in their iron grasp, and he is gagged! Nevertheless he can see, and he
can hear; he can behold the rending tortures of the rack--and he is
compelled to listen to the piercing screams which the victim sends
forth. If he close his eyes upon the horrible spectacle, imagination
instantly makes it more horrible even still; and, moreover, in the true
spirit of a chivalrous heart, he seeks by the tenderness of his glances
to impart at least a gleam of solace to the soul of her who has
undergone so much, and is suffering now so much more, through her fatal
love of him! The grand inquisitor, who is an intimate friend of the
Count of Arestino, ministers well and faithfully to the infernal
vengeance of that old Italian noble: for the remorseless judge urges on
the torturers to apply the powers of the rack to the fullest extent; and
while the creaking sound of wheels mingles with the cracking noise of
dislocating limbs, the Count of Arestino exclaims, "I was once humane
and benevolent, Giulia, but thy conduct has made me a fiend!"

"A fiend!" shrieked the tormented woman: "Oh! yes--yes--thou art a
fiend--a very fiend--I have wronged thee--but this vengeance is
horrible--mercy--mercy!--oh! for one drop of water--mercy--mercy!"

The rack gave the last shock of which its utmost power was capable--a
scream more dreadful, more agonizing, more piercing than any of its
predecessors, rent this time the very walls of the torture-chamber: and
with this last outburst of mortal agony, the spirit of the guilty Giulia
fled forever! Yet was not the vengeance of the Count of Arestino
satisfied; and the grand inquisitor was prepared to gratify the hellish
sentiment to the fullest extent. The still warm and palpitating corpse
of the countess was hastily removed from the rack: and the familiars
stripped--nay, tore off the clothing of Manuel d'Orsini. The countenance
of the young nobleman was now terribly somber, as if the darkest
thoughts were occupying his inmost soul, and his eyes were bent fixedly
on the dreadful engine, to the tortures of which it appeared to be his
turn to submit.

The familiars, in order to divest him of his garments, and also to
stretch him in such a way on the rack that his arms might be fastened
over his head to the upper end of that instrument, had removed the
chains and cords which had hitherto bound him. And now the fatal moment
seemed to be at hand, and the familiars already grasped him rudely to
hurl him on the rack, when, as if suddenly inspired by a superhuman
strength, the young nobleman dashed the men from him; then, with
lightning speed, he seized a massive iron bar that was used to move the
windlass of the rack, and in another instant, before a saving arm could
intervene, the deadly instrument struck down the Count of Arestino at
the feet of the grand inquisitor, who started back with a cry of horror!
The next moment the marquis was again powerless and secure in the grasp
of the familiars--but he had accomplished his purpose, he had avenged
his mistress and himself--and the old Lord of Arestino lay, with
shattered skull, a corpse upon the cold pavement of the torture-chamber!

"Back--back with the murderer to his dungeon!" exclaimed the grand
inquisitor, in a tone of fearful excitement and rage. "We must not
afford him a chance of dying upon that engine of torture. No--no: the
lingering flames of the _auto-da-fe_ are reserved for the Marquis
d'Orsini!"

And in pursuance of the sentence thus pronounced, Manuel was hurried
away to his dark and solitary cell, there to remain a prey to all the
dreadful thoughts which the occurrences of that fatal evening were so
well calculated to marshal in horrible array to his imagination.




CHAPTER LXI.


While these awful scenes were being enacted in the subterranes of the
holy inquisition, Demetrius was actively engaged in directing those
plans and effecting those arrangements which the scheming disposition of
Nisida of Riverola had suggested. We should observe that in the morning
he had sought and found Antonio, with whom he had so expertly managed
that the villain had fallen completely into the snare spread to entrap
him, and had not only confessed that he held at his disposal the liberty
of the Count of Riverola, but had also agreed to deliver him up to the
Greek. In a word, every thing in this respect took place precisely as
Nisida had foreseen. Accordingly, so soon as it was dark in the evening,
sixty of the Ottoman soldiers quitted by two and threes the mansion
which the Florentine Government had appropriated as a dwelling for the
envoy and his suit. The men whom Demetrius thus intrusted with the
execution of his scheme, and whose energy and fidelity he had previously
secured by means of liberal reward and promise of more, were disguised
in different ways, but were all well armed. To be brief, so well were
the various dispositions taken, and so effectually were they executed,
that those sixty soldiers had concealed themselves in the grove
indicated by their master, without having excited in the minds of the
Florentine people the least suspicion that anything unusual was about to
take place. It was close upon eleven o'clock at night, when Demetrius,
after having obtained a hasty interview with Nisida, whom he acquainted
with the progress of the plot, repaired to the grove wherein his men
were already distributed, and took his station in the midst of the knot
of olives on the right of the huge chestnut tree which overhung the
chasm.

Nearly a quarter of an hour elapsed, and naught was heard save the
waving of the branches and the rustling of the foliage, as the breeze of
night agitated the grove; but at the expiration of that brief period,
the sound of voices was suddenly heard close by the chestnut tree--not
preceded by any footsteps nor other indication of the presence of
men--and thus appearing as if they had all at once and in an instant
emerged from the earth.

Not a moment had elapsed--no, not a moment--ere those individuals whose
voices were thus abruptly heard, were captured and secured by a dozen
Ottoman soldiers, who sprung upon them from the dense thickets around or
dropped amongst them from the branches overhead--and so admirably was
the swoop made, that five persons were seized, bound and held powerless
and incapable of resistance ere the echo of the cry of alarm which they
raised had died away in the maze of the grove. And simultaneously with
the performance of this skillful maneuver, a shrill whistle was wafted
from the lips of Demetrius through the wood, and as if by magic, a dozen
torches were seen to light up and numbers of men, with naked scimiters
gleaming in the rays of those firebrands, rushed toward the spot where
the capture had been made. The effect of that sudden illumination--those
flashing weapons--and that convergence of many warriors all toward the
same point, was striking in the extreme, and as the glare of the torches
shone on the countenances of the four men in the midst of whom was
Francisco (the whole five, however, being held bound and powerless by
the Ottoman soldiers), it was evident that the entire proceeding had
inspired the guilty wretches with the most painful alarm. Demetrius
instantly knew that the handsome and noble-looking young man in the
midst of the group of captives and captors, must be Don Francisco of
Riverola, and he also saw at a glance that one of the ruffians with him
was Antonio. But he merely had leisure at the moment to address a word
of reassurance and friendship to Nisida's brother--for, lo! the secret
of the entrance to the robbers' stronghold was revealed--discovered!
Yes--there, at the foot of the tree, and now rendered completely visible
by the glare of the torch-light, was a small square aperture, from which
the trap door had been raised to afford egress to the captured party.

"Secure that entrance!" cried Demetrius, hastily; "and hasten down those
steps, some dozen of you, so as to guard it well!"--then, the instant
this command was obeyed he turned toward Francisco, saying, "Lord of
Riverola--am I right in thus addressing you?"

"Such is my name," answered Francisco; "and if you, brave chief, will
but release me and lend me a sword, I will prove to thee that I have no
particular affection for these miscreants."

Demetrius gave the necessary order--and in another moment the young
Count of Riverola was not only free, but with a weapon in his hand. The
Greek then made a rapid, but significant--fatally significant sign to
his men; and--quick as thought,--the three robbers and their confederate
Antonio were strangled by the bowstrings which the Ottomans whipped
around their necks. A few stifled cries--and all was over! Thus perished
the wretch Antonio--one of those treacherous, malignant, and avaricious
Italians who bring dishonor on their noble nation,--a man who had sought
to turn the vindictive feelings of the Count of Arestino to his own
purposes, alike to fill his purse and to wreak his hateful spite on the
Riverola family! Scarcely was the tragedy enacted, when Demetrius
ordered the four bodies to be conveyed down the steps disclosed by the
trap-door; "for," said he, "we will endeavor so to direct our
proceedings that not a trace of them shall be left upon ground; as the
Florentines would not be well-pleased if they learnt that foreign
soldiers have undertaken the duties which they themselves should
perform." Several of the Ottomans accordingly bore the dead bodies down
the steps; and Demetrius, accompanied by Francisco, followed at the head
of the greater portion of the troops, a sufficient number, however,
remaining behind to constitute a guard at the entrance of the
stronghold.

While they were yet descending the stone stairs, Demetrius seized the
opportunity of that temporary lull in the excitement of the night's
adventures, to give Francisco hasty but welcome tidings of his sister;
and the reader may suppose that the generous-hearted young count was
overjoyed to learn that Nisida was not only alive, but also once more an
inmate of the ancestral home. Demetrius said nothing relative to Flora;
and Francisco, not dreaming for a moment that his deliverer even knew
there was such a being in existence, asked no questions on that subject.
His anxiety was not, however, any less to fly to the cottage; for it
must be remembered that he was arrested first, on the 3d of July, and
had yet to learn all the afflictions which had fallen upon Flora and her
aunt--afflictions of the existence whereof he had been kept in utter
ignorance by the banditti during his long captivity of nearly three
months in their stronghold. But while we are thus somewhat digressing,
the invaders are penetrating further into the stronghold. Headed by
Demetrius and Francisco, and all carrying their drawn scimiters in their
hands, the corps proceeded along a vast vaulted subterrane, paved with
flag-stones, until a huge iron door, studded with nails, barred the way.

"Stay!" whispered Francisco, suddenly recollecting himself, "I think I
can devise a means to induce the rogues to open this portal, or I am
much mistaken."

He accordingly seized a torch and hurried back to the foot of
the stone-steps; in the immediate vicinity of which he searched narrowly
for some object. At last he discovered the object of his
investigation--namely a large bell hanging in a niche, and from which a
strong wire ran up through the ground to the surface. This bell
Francisco set ringing, and then hurried back to rejoin his deliverers.
Scarcely was he again by the side of Demetrius, when he saw that his
stratagem had fully succeeded; for the iron door swung heavily round on
its hinges--and in another moment the cries of terror which the two
robber-sentinels raised on the inner side, were hushed forever by the
Turkish scimiters. Down another flight of steps the invaders then
precipitated themselves, another door, at the bottom, having been opened
in compliance with the same signal which had led to the unfolding of the
first--and now the alarm was given by the sentinels guarding the second
post--those sentinels flying madly on, having beholden the immolation of
their comrades. But Demetrius and Francisco speedily overtook them just
as they emerged from another long vaulted and paved cavern-passage, and
were about to cross a plank which connected the two sides of a deep
chasm in whose depths a rapid stream rushed gurgling on.

Into the turbid waters the two fugitive sentinels were cast: over the
bridge poured the invaders, and into another caverned corridor, hollowed
out of the solid rock, did they enter, the torch-bearers following
immediately behind the Greek and the young count. It was evident that
neither the cries of the surprised sentinels nor the tread of the
invaders had alarmed the main corps of the banditti; for, on reaching a
barrier formed by massive folding doors, and knocking thereat, the
portals instantly began to move on their hinges--and in rushed the
Ottoman soldiers, headed by their two gallant Christian leaders. The
robbers were in the midst of a deep carouse in their magnificent
cavern-hall, when their festivity was thus rudely interrupted.

"We are betrayed!" thundered Lomellino, the captain of the horde; "to
arms! to arms!"

But the invaders allowed them no time to concentrate themselves in a
serried phalanx, and tremendous carnage ensued. Surprised and taken
unaware as they were, the banditti fought as if a spell were upon them,
paralyzing their energies and warning them that their last hour was
come. The terrible scimiters of the Turks hewed them down in all
directions; some, who sought to fly, were literally cut to pieces.
Lomellino fell beneath the sword of the gallant Count of Riverola; and
within twenty minutes after the invaders first set foot in the
banqueting hall, not a soul of the formidable horde was left alive!

Demetrius abandoned the plunder of the den to his troops; and when the
portable part of the rich booty had been divided amongst them, they
returned to their own grove, into which the entrance of the stronghold
opened. When the subterrane was thus cleared of the living, and the dead
alone remained in that place which had so long been their home, and was
now their tomb, Demetrius ordered his forces to disperse and return to
their quarters in Florence in the same prudent manner which had
characterized their egress thence a few hours before. Francisco and
Demetrius, being left alone together in the grove, proceeded by
torchlight to close the trap-door, which they found to consist of a
thick plate of iron covered with earth, so prepared, by glutinous
substances no doubt, that it was hard as rock; and thus, when the trap
was shut down, not even a close inspection would lead to a suspicion of
its existence, so admirably did it fit into its setting and correspond
with the soil all around.

It required, moreover, but a slight exercise of their imaginative powers
to enable Demetrius and Francisco to conjecture that every time any of
the banditti had come forth from their stronghold they were accustomed
to strew a little fresh earth over the entire spot, and thus afford an
additional precaution against the chance of detection on the part of any
one who might chance to stray in that direction. We may also add that
the trap-door was provided with a massive bolt which fastened it inside
when closed, and that the handle of the bell-wire, which gave the signal
to open the trap, was concealed in a small hollow in the old
chestnut-tree. Having thus satisfied his curiosity by means of these
discoveries, Demetrius accompanied Francisco to the city; and during
their walk thither, he informed the young count that he was an envoy
from the Ottoman Grand Vizier to the Florentine Government--that he had
become acquainted with Nisida on board the ship which delivered her from
her lonely residence on an island in the Mediterranean--and that as she
had by some means or other learnt where Francisco was imprisoned, he had
undertaken to deliver him. The young count renewed his warmest thanks to
the chivalrous Greek for the kind interest he had manifested in his
behalf; and they separated at the gate of the Riverola mansion, into
which Francisco hurried to embrace his sister; while Demetrius repaired
to his own abode.

The meeting between Nisida and her brother Francisco was affecting in
the extreme; and for a brief space the softer feelings in the lady's
nature triumphed over those strong, turbulent, and concentrated passions
which usually held such indomitable sway over her. For her attachment to
him was profound and sincere; and the immense sacrifice she had made in
what she conceived to be his welfare and interests had tended to
strengthen this almost boundless love.

On his side, the young count was rejoiced to behold his sister, whose
strange disappearance and long absence had filled his mind with the
worst apprehensions. Yes, he was rejoiced to see her once more beneath
the ancestral roof; and, with a fond brother's pride, he surveyed her
splendid countenance, which triumph and happiness now invested with an
animation that rendered her surpassingly beautiful!

A few brief and rapidly-given explanations were exchanged between them,
by means of the language of the fingers,--Francisco satisfying Nisida's
anxiety in respect to the success of her project, by which the total
extermination of the banditti had been effected,--and she conveying to
him as much of the outline of her adventures during the last seven
months as she thought it prudent to impart. They then separated, it
being now very late; and, moreover, Nisida had still some work in hand
for that night. The moment Francisco was alone, he exclaimed aloud, "Oh!
is it possible that this dear sister who loves me so much, is really the
bitter enemy of Flora? But to-morrow--to-morrow I must have a long
explanation with Nisida; and Heaven grant that she may not stand in the
way of my happiness! Oh, Flora--dearest Flora, if you knew how deeply I
have suffered on your account during my captivity in that accursed
cavern! And what must you have thought of my disappearance--my absence!
Alas! did the same vengeance which pursued me wreak its spite also on
thee, fair girl?--did the miscreant, Antonio, who boastingly proclaimed
himself to my face the author of my captivity, and who sullenly refused
to give me any tidings of those whom I cared for, and of what was
passing in the world without,--did he dare to molest thee? But suspense
is intolerable, I cannot endure it even for a few short hours! No--I
will speed me at once to the dwelling of my Flora, and thus assuage her
grief and put an end to my own fears at the same time!"

Having thus resolved, Francisco repaired to his own apartment, enveloped
himself in a cloak, secured weapons of defense about his person, and
then quitted the mansion, unperceived by a living soul. Almost at the
same time, but by another mode of egress--namely, the private staircase
leading from her own apartments into the garden, and which has been so
often mentioned in the course of this narrative--Donna Nisida stole
likewise from the Riverola palace. She was habited in male attire; and
beneath her doublet she wore the light but strong cuirass which she
usually donned ere setting out on any nocturnal enterprise, and which
she was now particularly cautious not to omit from the details of her
toilet, inasmuch as the mysterious appearance of the muffled figure,
which had alarmed her on the previous evening, induced her to adopt
every precaution against secret and unknown enemies. Whither was the
Lady Nisida now hurrying, through the dark streets of Florence?--what
new object had she in contemplation?

Her way was bent toward an obscure neighborhood in the immediate
vicinity of the cathedral; and in a short time she reached the house in
which Dame Margaretha, Antonio's mother, dwelt. She knocked gently at
the door, which was shortly opened by the old woman, who imagined it was
her son that sought admittance; for, though in the service of the Count
of Arestino, Antonio was often kept abroad late by the various
machinations in which he had been engaged, and it was by no means
unusual for him to seek his mother's dwelling at all hours.

Margaretha, who appeared in a loose wrapper hastily thrown on, held a
lamp in her hand; and when its rays streamed not on the countenance of
her son, but showed the form of a cavalier handsomely appareled, she
started back in mingled astonishment and fear. A second glance, however,
enabled her to recognize the Lady Nisida; and an exclamation of wonder
escaped her lips. Nisida entered the house, closed the door behind her,
and motioned Dame Margaretha to lead the way into the nearest apartment.
The old woman obeyed tremblingly; for she feared that the lady's visit
boded no good; and this apprehension on her part was not only enhanced
by her own knowledge of all Antonio's treachery toward Count Francisco,
but also by the imperious manner, determined looks, and strange disguise
of her visitress. But Margaretha's terror speedily gave way to
indescribable astonishment when Nisida suddenly addressed her in a
language which not for many, many years, had the old woman heard flow
from that delicious mouth!

"Margaretha," said Nisida, "you must prepare to accompany me forthwith!
Be not surprised to hear me thus capable of rendering myself
intelligible by means of an organ on which a seal was so long placed. A
marvelous cure has been accomplished in respect to me, during my absence
from Florence. But you must prepare to accompany me, I say; your son
Antonio----"

"My son!" ejaculated the woman, now again trembling from head to foot,
and surveying Nisida's countenance in a manner denoting the acutest
suspense.

"Your son is wounded--mortally wounded in a street skirmish----"

"Wounded!" shrieked Margaretha. "Oh, dear lady--tell me all--tell me the
worst! What has happened to my unfortunate son? He is dead--he is dead!
Your manner convinces me that hope is past!"

And she wrung her hands bitterly, while tears streamed down her wrinkled
cheeks.

"No, he is not dead, Margaretha!" exclaimed Nisida; "but he is
dying--and he implored me, by everything I deemed sacred, to hasten
thither and fetch you to him, that he may receive your blessing and
close his eyes in peace."

"In peace!" repeated the old woman bitterly: then, to herself she said,
"Donna Nisida suspects not his perfidy--knows not all his wickedness."

"Delay not," urged the lady, perceiving what was passing in her mind.
"You are well aware that my brother, who, alas! has disappeared most
mysteriously, dismissed Antonio abruptly from his service many months
ago; but, whatever were the cause, it is forgotten, at least by me. So
tarry not, but prepare to accompany me."

Margaretha hastened to her bedroom, and reappeared in a few minutes,
completely dressed and ready to issue forth.

"Keep close by me," said Nisida, as she opened the house-door; "and
breathe not a word as we pass through the streets. I have reasons of my
own for assuming a disguise, and I wish not to be recognized."

Margaretha was too much absorbed in the contemplation of the afflicting
intelligence which she had received, to observe anything at all
suspicious in these injunctions; and thus it was that the two females
proceeded in silence through the streets leading toward the Riverola
mansion.

By means of a pass-key Nisida opened the wicket-gate of the spacious
gardens, and she traversed the grounds, Margaretha walking by her side.
In a few minutes they reached a low door, affording admission into the
basement-story of the palace, and of which Nisida always possessed the
key.

"Go first," said the lady, in a scarcely audible whisper; "I must close
the door behind us."

"But wherefore this way?" demanded Margaretha, a sudden apprehension
starting up in her mind. "This door leads down to the cellars."

"The officers of justice are in search of Antonio--and I am concealing
him for your sake," was the whispered and rapid assurance given by
Nisida. "Would you have him die in peace in your arms, or perish on the
scaffold?"

Margaretha shuddered convulsively, and hurried down the dark flight of
stone steps upon which the door opened. Terrible emotions raged in her
bosom--indescribable alarms, grief, suspicion, and also a longing
eagerness to put faith in the apparent friendship of Nisida.

"Give me your hand," said the lady; and the hand that was thrust into
hers was cold and trembling.

Then Nisida hurried Margaretha along a narrow subterranean passage, in
which the blackest night reigned; and, though the old woman was a prey
to apprehensions that increased each moment to a fearful degree, she
dared not utter a word either to question--to implore--or to
remonstrate. At length they stopped; and Nisida, dropping Margaretha's
hand, drew back heavy bolts which raised ominous echoes in the vaulted
passage. In another moment a door began to move stubbornly on its
hinges; and almost at the same time a faint light gleamed
forth--increasing in power as the door opened wider, but still attaining
no greater strength than that which a common iron lamp could afford.
Margaretha's anxious glances were plunged into the cellar or vault to
which the door opened, and whence the light came: but she saw no one
within. It, however, appeared as if some horrible reminiscence,
connected with the place, came back to her startled mind; for, falling
on her knees, and clinging wildly to her companion, she cried in a
piercing tone, "Oh! lady, wherefore have you brought me hither?--where
is my son?--what does all this horrible mystery mean? But, chiefly now
of all--why, why are we here--at this hour?"

"In a few moments you shall know more!" exclaimed Nisida; and as she
spoke, with an almost superhuman strength she dragged, or rather, flung
the prostrate woman into the vault, rushing in herself immediately
afterward, and closing the door behind her.

"Holy God!" shrieked Margaretha, gazing wildly round the damp and naked
walls of solid masonry, and then up at the lamp suspended to the arched
ceiling, "is this the place? But no! you are ignorant of all that; it
was not for that you brought me hither! Speak, lady, speak! Where is
Antonio? What have I done to merit your displeasure? Oh, mercy! mercy!
Bend not those terrible glances upon me! Your eyes flash fire! You are
not Nisida--you are an evil spirit! Oh, mercy! mercy!"

And thus did the miserable woman rave, as, kneeling on the cold, damp
ground she extended her tightly-clasped hands in an imploring manner
toward Nisida, who, drawn up to her full height, was contemplating the
groveling wretch with eyes that seemed to shoot forth shafts of
devouring flame! Terrible, indeed, was the appearance of Nisida! Like to
an avenging deity was she--no longer woman in the glory of her charms
and the elegance of her disguise, but a fury--a very fiend, an
implacable demoness, armed with the blasting lightnings of infernal
malignity and hellish rancor!

"Holy Virgin, protect me!" shrieked Margaretha, every nerve thrilling
with the agony of ineffable alarm.

"Yes, call upon Heaven to aid you, vile woman!" said Nisida, in a thick,
hoarse, and strangely altered voice, "for you are beyond the reach of
human aid! Know ye whose remains--or rather the mangled portions of
whose remains--lie in this unconsecrated ground? Ah! well may you start
in horror and surprise, for I know all--all!"

A terrific scream burst from the lips of Margaretha; and she threw her
wild looks around as if she were going mad.

"Detestable woman!" exclaimed Nisida, fixing her burning eyes more
intently still on Margaretha's countenance: "you are now about to pay
the penalty of your complicity in the most odious crimes that ever made
nights terrible in Florence! The period of vengeance has at length
arrived! But I must torture ere I slay ye! Yes, I must give thee a
foretaste of that hell to which your soul is so soon to plunge down!
Know, then, that Antonio--your son Antonio--is no more. Not three hours
have elapsed since he was slain--assassinated--murdered, if you will so
call it--and by my commands."

"Oh! lady, have pity upon me--pity upon me, a bereaved mother!" implored
the old woman, in a voice of anguish so penetrating, that vile as she
was, it would have moved any human being save Nisida. "Do not kill
me--and I will end my miserable days in a convent! Give me time to
repent of all my sins--for they are numerous and great! Oh! spare me,
dear lady--have mercy upon me--have mercy upon me!"

"What mercy had you on them whose mangled remains are buried in the
ground beneath your feet?" demanded Nisida, in a voice almost suffocated
with rage. "Prepare for death--your last moment is at hand!" and a
bright dagger flashed in the lamp-light.

"Mercy--mercy!" exclaimed Margaretha, springing forward, and grasping
Nisida's knees.

"I know not what mercy is!" cried the terrible Italian woman, raising
the long, bright, glittering dagger over her head.

"Holy God! protect me! Lady--dear lady, have pity upon me!" shrieked the
agonized wretch, her countenance hideously distorted, and appallingly
ghastly, as it was raised in such bitterly earnest appeal toward that of
the avengeress. "Again I say mercy--mercy!"

"Die, fiend!" exclaimed Nisida; and the dagger, descending with
lightning speed, sunk deep into the bosom of the prostrate victim. A
dreadful cry burst from the lips of the wretched woman; and she fell
back--a corpse!

"Oh! my dear--my well-beloved and never-to-be-forgotten mother!" said
Nisida, falling upon her knees by the side of the body, and gazing
intently upward--as if her eyes could pierce the entire building
overhead, and catch a glimpse of the spirit of the parent whom she thus
apostrophized--"pardon me--pardon me for this deed! Thou didst enjoin me
to abstain from vengeance--but when I thought of all thy wrongs, the
contemplation drove me mad--and an irresistible power--a force which I
could not resist--has hurried me on to achieve the punishment of this
wretch who was so malignant an enemy of thine; dearest mother, pardon
me--look not down angrily on thy daughter!"

Then Nisida gave way to all the softer emotion which attended the
reaction that her mind was now rapidly undergoing, after being so highly
strung, as for the last few hours it was--and her tears fell in
torrents. For some minutes she remained in her kneeling position, and
weeping, till she grew afraid--yes, afraid of being in that lonely
place, with the corpse stretched on the ground--a place, too, which for
other reasons awoke such terrible recollections in her mind.

Starting to her feet--and neither waiting to extinguish the lamp, which
she herself had lighted at an early period of the night, nor to withdraw
her dagger from the bosom of the murdered Margaretha--Nisida fled from
the vault, and regained her own apartment in safety, and unperceived.

       *       *       *       *       *

When morning dawned, Nisida rose from a couch in which she had obtained
two hours of troubled slumber, and, having hastily dressed herself,
proceeded to the chamber of her brother Francisco.

But he was not there--nor had his bed been slept in during the past
night.

"He is searching after his Flora," thought Nisida. "Alas, poor
youth--how it grieves me thus to be compelled to thwart thee in thy
love! But my oath--and thine interests, Francisco, demand this conduct
on my part. And better--better it is that thou shouldst hear from
strangers the terrible tidings that thy Flora is a prisoner in the
dungeon of the inquisition, where she can issue forth only to proceed to
the stake! Yes--and better, too, is it that she should die, than that
this marriage shall be accomplished!"

Nisida quitted the room, and repaired to the apartment where the morning
repast was served up.

A note, addressed to herself, lay upon the table. She instantly
recognized the handwriting of Dr. Duras, tore open the billet, and read
the contents as follows:

    "My brother Angelo came to me very late last night and informed
    me that a sense of imperious duty compelled him to change his
    mind relative to the two women Francatelli. He accordingly
    appeared on their behalf, and obtained a delay of eight days.
    But nothing can save them from condemnation at the end of this
    period, unless indeed immense interests be made on their account
    with the duke. My brother alone deserves your blame, dear
    friend; let not your anger fall on your affectionate and devoted
    servant.

                                               "JERONYMO DURAS."

Nisida bit her lips with vexation. She now regretted she had effected
the liberation of Francisco before she was convinced that Flora was past
the reach of human mercy;--but, in the next moment she resumed her
haughty composure, as she said within herself, "My brother may essay all
_his_ influence: but mine shall prevail!"

Scarcely had she established this determination in her mind, when the
door was burst open, and Francisco--pale, ghastly, and with eyes
wandering wildly--staggered into the apartment.

Nisida, who really felt deeply on his account, sprung forward--received
him in her arms--and supported him to a seat.

"Oh! Nisida, Nisida!" he exclaimed aloud, in a tone expressive of deep
anguish; "what will become of your unfortunate brother? But it is not
you who have done this! No--for you were not in Florence at the time
which beheld the cruel separation of Flora and myself!"

And, throwing himself on his sister's neck, he burst into tears. He had
apostrophized her in the manner just related, not because he fancied
that she could hear or understand him; but because he forgot, in the
maddening paroxysms of his grief, that Nisida was (as he believed) deaf
and dumb! She wound her arms round him--she pressed him to her
bosom--she covered his pale forehead with kisses; while her heart bled
at the sight of his alarming sorrow.

Suddenly he started up--flung his arms wildly about--and exclaimed, in a
frantic voice, "Bring me my steel panoply! give me my burgonet--my
cuirass--and my trusty sword;--and let me arouse all Florence to a sense
of its infamy in permitting that terrible inquisition to exist! Bring me
my armor, I say--the same sword I wielded on the walls of Rhodes--and I
will soon gather a trusty band to aid me!"

But, overcome with excitement, he fell forward--dashing his head
violently upon the floor, before Nisida could save him. She pealed the
silver bell that was placed upon the breakfast-table, and assistance
soon came. Francisco was immediately conveyed to his chamber--Dr. Duras
was sent for--and on his arrival, he pronounced the young nobleman to be
laboring under a violent fever. The proper medical precautions were
adopted; and the physician was in a few hours able to declare that
Francisco was in no imminent danger, but that several days would elapse
ere he could possibly become convalescent. Nisida remained by his
bedside, and was most assiduous--most tender--most anxious in her
attentions toward him; and when he raved, in his delirium, of Flora and
the inquisition, it went to her very heart to think that she was
compelled by a stern necessity to abstain from exerting her influence to
procure the release of one whose presence would prove of far greater
benefit to the sufferer than all the anodynes and drugs which the skill
of Dr. Duras might administer!




CHAPTER LXII.

THE SICK-ROOM--FLORENCE IN DISMAY.


It was about an hour past daybreak on the 1st of October,--five days
after the incidents related in the three preceding chapters. Nisida,
worn out with long watchings and vigils in her brother's chamber, had
retired to her own apartment; but not before she had seen Francisco fall
into a sleep which, under the influence of a narcotic ordered by the
physician, promised to be long and soothing. The lady had not quitted
the chamber of the invalid ten minutes, when the door was slightly
opened; and some one's looks were plunged rapidly and searchingly into
the room:--then the visitor, doubtless satisfied by the result of his
survey, stole cautiously in.

He advanced straight up to the table which stood near the bed, drew a
small vial from the bosom of his doublet--and poured its crystal
contents into the beverage prepared to quench the thirst of the invalid.
Then, as he again secured the vial about his person, he murmured, "The
medicament of Christian Rosencrux will doubtless work greater wonders
than those of Dr. Duras, skilled though the latter be!"

Having thus mused to himself, the visitor shook Francisco gently; and
the young count awoke, exclaiming petulantly that he was athirst. A
goblet of the beverage containing the Rosicrucian fluid, was immediately
conveyed to his lips, and he drank the refreshing draught with
eagerness.

The effect was marvelous, indeed;--a sudden tinge of healthy red
appeared upon the cheeks a moment before so ashy pale--and fire once
more animated the blue eyes--and Francisco recovered complete
consciousness and self-possession for the first time since the dread
morning when he was attacked with a dangerous illness.

He closed his eyes for a few minutes; and when he opened them again, he
was surprised to perceive by his bedside a young, well-attired, and very
handsome man, whose countenance appeared to be familiar to him.

"Count of Riverola," said the visitor, bending over him, and speaking in
a low but kind tone, "despair not! Succor is at hand--and ere
forty-eight hours shall have passed away, your well-beloved Flora will
be free!"

Joy lighted up the countenance of the young nobleman, as these
delightful words met his ears; and, seizing his consoler's hand, he
exclaimed:

"A thousand thanks for this assurance! But, have we not met before?--or
was it in those wild dreams which have haunted my imagination that I
have seen thee?"

"Yes--we have met before, count," was the reply. "Dost thou not remember
Fernand Wagner?"

Francisco passed his hand across his brow, as if to settle his scattered
thoughts: then, at the expiration of a few moments, he said: "Oh! yes--I
recollect you--I know that I had conceived a great friendship for you,
when some strange incident--I cannot remember what, and it is of no
matter--parted us!"

"Do not excite yourself too much by racking your memory to decipher the
details of the past," returned Wagner. "I dare not stay another minute
with you now: therefore listen attentively to what more I have to say.
Yield yourself not up to despondency--on the contrary, cherish every
hope that is dear to you. Within a few days Flora shall be yours!
Yes--solemnly do I assure you that all shall take place as I affirm. But
YOUR agency is not needed to insure her liberation: Heaven will make use
of OTHER means. Compose your mind, then,--and suffer not yourself to be
tortured by vain fears as to the future. Above all, keep my visit to
thee a profound secret--intimate not to thy sister Nisida that thou hast
seen me. Follow my counsel in all these respects--and happiness is in
store for thee!"

Fernand pressed the young count's hand warmly as he terminated these
rapidly delivered injunctions, and then retreated from the chamber ere
the invalid had time to utter a syllable indicative of his gratitude.

But how different was Francisco now--how different did Nisida find him,
on her return to his room, from what he was when she had left him two
hours before! Nor less was Dr. Duras astonished, at his next visit, to
perceive that his patient had made in those two hours as rapid strides
toward convalescence as he could barely have hoped to see accomplished
in a week.

In obedience to a hint rapidly conveyed by a signal from Nisida to the
physician, the latter touched gently upon the subject of Flora
Francatelli; but Francisco, resolute in his endeavors to follow the
advice of Fernand Wagner, and to avoid all topics calculated to excite,
responded briefly, and immediately spoke on another matter.

But he did not think the less deeply on that interesting subject. No; he
cherished the image of his Flora, and the hope of being yet united to
her, with an enthusiasm which a love so ardent as his passion alone
could feel.

And Nisida congratulated herself on the conviction which she now very
naturally entertained, that he had resigned himself to the loss of the
young maiden, and was exerting his utmost to banish her altogether from
his memory!

Throughout the day Francisco continued to improve rapidly, and on the
following morning he was enabled to leave his couch. Indeed, his
recovery was so marvelously quick that Dr. Duras considered it to be a
perfect phenomenon in the history of medicine; and Nisida looked upon
the physician, whom she conceived to be the author of this remarkable
change, with unfeigned admiration.

It was verging toward the hour of sunset, the 2d of October, when a
rumor of a most alarming nature circulated with the celerity of
wild-fire through the city of Florence. At first the report was received
with contemptuous incredulity; but by degrees--as circumstances tended
to confirm it--as affrighted peasants came flying into the town from
their country homes, bearing the dread tidings, the degenerate and
voluptuous Florentines gave way to all the terrors which, in such cases,
were too well adapted to fill the hearts of an emasculated people with
dismay.

For, while the dwellers of the City of Flowers were thinking only of the
gay festival which invariably commenced their winter season, while the
nobles and wealthy burghers were whiling their time pleasantly in the
regilding and decoration of their palaces or mansions, while the duke
was projecting splendid banquets, and the members of the council of
state were dreaming of recreation and enjoyment, rather than of the
duties of office, while, too, preparations were being made for the
approaching _auto-da-fe_--that terrible spectacle which the inquisition
annually offered to the morbid tastes of a priest-ridden people--while,
in a word, Florence seemed wrapped up in security and peace--at such a
moment the astounding intelligence arrived, that a mighty army was
within a few hours' march of the sovereign city of Tuscany!

Yes; this was the news that suddenly spread confusion and dismay
throughout Florence, the news which told how the Ottoman fleet, for some
days past moored off the port of Leghorn, had vomited forth legions, and
how the formidable force was approaching at a rapid rate, under the
command of the grand vizier in person, the seraskier and sipehsalar of
the armies of the sultan!

The moment these things were bruited abroad in the city, Demetrius, the
Greek, fled secretly; for he too well understood that his treacherous
intentions had, in some unaccountable manner, transpired, and reached
the ears of Ibrahim Pasha. Nisida was perfectly astounded; and, for the
first time in her life, she felt her energies paralyzed--all her powers
of combination suddenly laid prostrate. As for Francisco, he could not
help thinking that the invasion of Italy by the Turks was connected with
the succor so mysteriously, but confidently promised by Wagner; although
he was not only ignorant of the relationship subsisting between the
grand vizier and his beloved Flora, but was even unaware of the fact
that this high functionary was the same Ibrahim whose prisoner he had
been for a few hours on a former occasion in the Island of Rhodes.

The council of state assembled to deliberate upon the proper course
which should be adopted at so critical a moment; but when the resources
of Florence and the means of resisting the invaders were scrutinized,
when it was discovered that there were not three thousand soldiers to
defend the place, nor arms sufficient to equip more than fifteen hundred
volunteers in addition to the regular force, all idea of attempting to
make a stand against an army which was in reality twenty thousand
strong, but which the exaggerations of fear had trebled in amount, was
ultimately abandoned.

The sun went down, and was succeeded by no illuminations that night.
Florence was in mourning. A spell had fallen upon the City of Flowers;
her streets were deserted; and within the houses, those who possessed
wealth were busily engaged in concealing their gold and jewels in
cellars, holes dug in the ground, or at the bottom of wells. The general
consternation was terrific indeed; and the solemn stillness which
prevailed throughout the town so lately full of animation and happiness
was even more dreadful than that which had accompanied the plague two
centuries before.

It was near midnight when messengers from the grand vizier, who was now
within three miles' march of the city, arrived at the western gate, and
demanded admission, that they might obtain an immediate audience of the
duke. The request was directly complied with, and the envoys were
conducted to the palazzo, where the prince immediately assembled the
council of state to receive them, himself presiding.

The audience was in other respects strictly private; but the nature of
the interview was soon proved to have been most unexpectedly pacific;
for two hours after the reception of the envoys, criers proceeded
throughout the city, proclaiming the joyful news that the grand vizier
had of his own accord proposed such terms as the council of state had
not hesitated to accept.

Thus, at two o'clock in the morning, were the Florentines at first
alarmed by hearing the monotonous voices of the criers breaking upon the
solemn stillness; but their fear changed into gladness ineffable, ere
those functionaries had uttered a dozen words of the proclamation which
they were intrusted to make.

What the terms were did not immediately transpire; but two circumstances
which occurred ere it was daybreak, and which, though conducted with
considerable secrecy, nevertheless soon became generally known--these
circumstances, we say, afforded ample scope for comment and gossip.

The first was the occupation of the Riverola Palace by the Ottoman
soldiers who had accompanied Demetrius as an escort, and whom he had
left in Florence; and the second was the fact that two females, closely
muffled up, were removed from the prison of the inquisition, and
delivered over to the charge of the grand vizier's messengers, who
conveyed them out of the city.

But the curiosity excited by these incidents was absorbed in the general
anxiety that was evinced by the Florentine people to feast their eyes
with the grand, interesting, and imposing spectacle which the dawn of
day revealed to their view.

For, far as the eye could reach, on the western side of Florence, and
commencing at the distance of about a quarter of a mile from the city, a
mass of innumerable tents and pavilions showed where the Ottoman army
was encamped! Myriads of banners, of all colors, floated from the tall
javelins to which they were affixed before the entrance of the chief
officers' tents, and in front of the entire encampment waved, at the
summit of a spear planted in the ground, the three crescents, which
invariably accompany the march of a Turkish army. The sunbeams glittered
on thousands of bright crescents; and the brazen pommels of the mounted
sentinels' saddles shone like burnished gold. It was, indeed, a grand
and imposing spectacle:--and the din of innumerable voices mingling with
the sounds of martial music, reached the ears of those Florentines who,
more daring than the rest, advanced nearly up to the outposts of the
encampment.

But in the meantime, a scene of profound and touching interest had taken
place in the gorgeous pavilion of the grand vizier.

While it was yet dark--and ere that martial panorama of tents and
pavilions developed itself to the admiring and astonished eyes of the
Florentines--two females, closely muffled in handsome cashmere shawls,
which had been presented to them for the purpose, were treading the
Ottoman encampment, under the guidance of the messengers to whom they
had been consigned.

It is hardly necessary to inform the reader that these females were the
elder Signora Francatelli and her beautiful niece Flora.

Their sudden and most unexpected deliverance from the terrible dungeons
of the inquisition, and the profound respect with which they were
treated by those into whose charge the familiars of the holy office had
surrendered them, inspired them with the most lively joy; and their
congratulations were expressed by frequent pressures of each other's
hands as they proceeded in company with their guides. But they knew not
by whom, or how, nor wherefore they had been released--and yet a vague
suspicion, founded solely on the fact that their conductors wore the
Ottoman garb, that Alessandro must be in some way connected with the
matter, had entered their minds. It was, at all events, clear that no
harm was intended them, for they were not treated as prisoners, and thus
they hastened on in confidence and hope.

It was not until they had left the city some distance behind, that the
bright moon showed them a confused mass of white objects in front; and
they were both marveling what the strange and unknown spectacle could
be, when their party was suddenly challenged by the sentries of an
outpost. The leader of the little escort gave the watchword; and now, as
the two females drew nearer to the encampment, the mass of white objects
became more shapely, until, in a few minutes, the pointed tops of the
tents and pavilions stood out in strong relief against the now purple
sky.

What could this unusual spectacle mean? They were still in the dungeons
of the inquisition when the alarm, caused by an approaching army, had
circulated through Florence; and the rumor had not reached their ears.
For the first time since the moment of their release they now hung back,
and manifested signs of fear.

"Be not terrified, ladies," said the chief of the escort, speaking in
excellent Italian; "ye have no cause for apprehension! Before you spread
the innumerable tents of the Ottoman army; and it is to the presence of
this mighty host that ye are indebted for your freedom."

"But whither are you taking us?" inquired Flora, scarcely reassured.

"To the pavilion of his Highness, Ibrahim-Pasha, the grand vizier of the
glorious Sultan Solyman," answered the Turk; "and at the hands of that
powerful minister ye will receive naught but honorable and kind
treatment."

"Know you, signor," inquired Flora, "if there be in the Ottoman camp a
young man who, when a Christian," she added, with a profound sigh, "bore
the name of Alessandro Francatelli?"

"There is such a young man," responded the Turkish messenger; "and you
will see him presently."

"Oh! is it then to him that we owe our deliverance?" demanded the
beauteous maiden, her heart fluttering with varied emotions at the idea
of meeting her brother. "Is he attached to the person of that mighty man
whom you denominate the grand vizier? and shall we see him in the
pavilion of his highness?"

"You will see him in the pavilion of his highness," answered the Turk.

"And the grand vizier himself--is he a good, kind man?" asked Flora. "Is
my brother--I mean Alessandro--a favorite with him?"

"I believe that the mighty Ibrahim loves no man more than Alessandro
Francatelli, lady," said the Turk, highly amused by these questions
which were put to him, although his manner was respectful and calm.

"Then there is a chance that Alessandro will rise in the service of the
sultan?" continued Flora, naturally anxious to glean all the information
she could respecting her brother.

"There is not a more enviable personage in the imperial service than he
whom you style Alessandro Francatelli."

"Heaven be thanked that he is so prosperous, poor boy!" exclaimed the
aunt, who had been an attentive listener to the preceding discourse.
"But your grand vizier, signor, must be very powerful to have a great
army at his disposal."

"The grand vizier, lady," returned the Ottoman envoy, "is second only to
the sultan, and in him we see a reflection of the imperial majesty. At a
sign from the great and potent Ibrahim every scimiter throughout this
host of twenty thousand men would leap from its sheath in readiness to
strike where and at whom he might choose to order. Nay, more, lady--he
has the power to gather together mighty armies, so numerous that they
would inundate Christendom as with a desolating sea. Allah be thanked!
there is no limit to the power of the mighty Ibrahim so long as he
holdeth the seals of his great office."

The two females made no further observation aloud; but they thought
profoundly on all that they had just heard. For in a short time they
were to stand in the presence of this puissant chief whom the Ottomans
seemed to worship as a god, and who wielded a power which placed him on
a level with the proudest potentates in the Christian world.

In the meantime the little party had entered the precincts of the
Ottoman encampment, a complete city of tents and pavilions, ranged in
the most admirable order, and with all the regularity of streets.

A solemn silence prevailed throughout the camp, interrupted only by the
measured pace and the occasional challenge of sentinels.

At length Flora and her aunt perceived, in the clear moonlight, a
pavilion loftier, larger, and more magnificent than any they had yet
seen. The pinnacle glittered as if it were tipped with a bright star;
the roof was of dazzling whiteness; and the sides were of dark velvet,
richly embroidered with gold. It stood in the midst of a wide space, the
circumjacent tents forming a complete circle about it. Within this
inclosure of tents the sentries were posted at very short intervals; and
instead of walking up and down, they stood motionless as statues, their
mighty scimiters gleaming in the moonlight.

In profound silence did the little party proceed toward the entrance of
the vast pavilion, which the females had no difficulty in discerning to
be the habitation of the potent and dreaded chief into whose presence
they were now repairing.

In front of this splendid tent floated two large banners, each from the
summit of a tall javelin, the head of which was of burnished gold. One
of these enormous flags was green; the other was blood-red. The first
was the sacred standard of the Prophet Mohammed, and accompanied the
grand vizier in his capacity of representative and vice-regent of the
sultan; and the latter was the banner which was always planted in front
of the pavilion inhabited by the seraskier, or commander-in-chief of the
Ottoman army.

At the entrance of the vast tent stood four mounted sentinels, horses
and men alike so motionless that they seemed to be as many equestrian
statues.

"In a few moments," whispered the leader of the little escort to the two
females, "you will be in the presence of the grand vizier, who will
receive you alone."

"And Alessandro Francatelli?" inquired Flora, in a tone of
disappointment, "will he not be there also?"

"Fear not, you shall behold him shortly," answered the Turk; and passing
behind the mounted sentinels, he drew aside the velvet curtain, at the
same time bidding Flora and her aunt enter the pavilion.

A blaze of light bursting forth from the interior of the magnificent
tent dazzled and bewildered them, as the Ottoman gently gushed them
onward--for they hung back in vague and groundless alarm.

The curtain was instantly closed behind them; and they now found
themselves inside the gorgeous abode of the grand vizier. The pavilion
was decorated in the most sumptuous manner. Crystal chandeliers were
suspended to the spars which supported the canvas ceiling; and the
pillars which supported those spars were gilt and inlaid with
mother-of-pearl. Rich sofas placed around the sides--vases, some
containing flowers and others delicious perfumes--tables laden with
refreshments of the most exquisite kind,--in a word, all the evidences
of enormous wealth and all the accessories of luxurious splendor were
displayed in this sumptuous abode.

At the further end of the pavilion was seated an individual, whom, by
the intimation they had already received, and by the magnificence of his
attire, Flora and her aunt immediately knew to be the grand vizier. He
soon granted them the opportunity they so anxiously awaited, and it was
not a great while ere they found themselves completely reassured, and
conversing with a freedom which they had hardly hoped would characterize
their interview.

But who can describe the wonder and amazement which overwhelmed Flora
and her aunt, when, in the person of the grand vizier, was revealed to
them the long absent brother and nephew, Alessandro Francatelli!

It is needless to give in detail the events which were narrated in their
conversation. After a long and interesting recapitulation of the
thrilling events which had attended them thus far, they turned to that
more immediate matter which lay nearest their hearts.

When the Count of Riverola at length joined the party, the young
nobleman, taking Flora's hand, exclaimed:

"I am anxious to secure this jewel as soon as possible. Our union may be
celebrated privately and without useless pomp and ceremony; a few hours
hence may see us allied to part no more. I have a friend in
Florence--Fernand Wagner----"

"And if he be your friend, count, you cannot possess one more likely to
be sincere!" exclaimed the vizier.

"He has, indeed, proved a warm friend to me," continued Francisco. "Two
days ago I was stretched upon a bed of sickness--delirious, my mind
wandering, and my reason gone----"

"Merciful heavens!" cried Flora, shuddering from head to foot, and
contemplating her intended husband with the deepest solicitude.

"Yes, I was in a desperate state," said the count. "But Wagner came--he
breathed words of hope in my ears, and I recovered rapidly; so rapidly
and so completely that I feel not as if I had ever known indisposition
save by name. I was, however, about to observe that there is an oratory
in Signor Wagner's mansion; and there may the ceremony be performed.
Fernand is, moreover, well acquainted with the language by which the
deaf and dumb communicate their ideas; and through friendship for me he
will break the tidings of my marriage to my sister."

"Be it as you propose," said the grand vizier; then, after a moment's
pause, he added, speaking in a low and mysterious whisper: "and if you
will not shrink from the contact of the renegade at the altar of God--a
renegade in name only, and not in heart--a renegade to suit his worldly
purposes, and not from conviction--then shall I be present at the
ceremony. Yes," he continued, perceiving that his aunt, his sister, and
the young count surveyed him with mingled pleasure and amazement--"yes,
in a deep disguise I will quit the encampment and enter Florence, for it
would grieve me deeply to be excluded from the solemn scene."

"Dearest Alessandro--for thus you will permit me still to call you,"
exclaimed his aunt, "your words have made my happiness complete. Oh! you
are still a Christian in heart, thank God!"

"Not for worlds would I that you should be absent from the ceremony
which makes your sister the Countess of Riverola!" exclaimed Francisco.

The arrangements so happily come to and so amicably digested, were now
to be carried into effect. The expectant bridegroom accordingly took a
temporary leave of the vizier, Flora and the aunt, and returned to the
city to seek his friend Fernand Wagner, it being understood that those
whom he had just left should meet him at that signor's mansion by
mid-day.

The morning was now breaking: and every roof top in Florence was crowded
with persons anxious to obtain a view of the encampment, as we have
stated at the close of the preceding chapter.




CHAPTER LXIII.

THE MANUSCRIPT.


In accordance with the plans detailed in the preceding chapter,
Francisco and Flora, accompanied by the good dame Francatelli, and
preceded by a suitable guard, now departed from the gorgeous pavilion of
the grand vizier, on their way to the mansion of Wagner.

On arriving at the walls of the city, the Ottoman guard left them, and
retraced their steps to the Turkish encampment, while our little party
proceeded on its way through the now crowded streets, and soon arrived
at the residence of Wagner.

With many congratulations did Fernand receive them; and being informed
of the purport of their visit, hastened to acquaint his chaplain of the
duties that were required of him; and before the sun was an hour higher
in the heavens, Francisco, Count of Riverola, and Flora Francatelli were
joined together in the indissoluble bonds of wedlock.

It was now, for the first time since his recovery, that the recollection
of the solemn oath Francisco had made to his dying father came across
his mind--that on that day and that hour in which he was married, he and
his bride should visit the secret chamber: and he hurriedly told Wagner
that it was of the utmost importance that he should be at the Riverola
palace within the hour; and at the same time he requested his kind
friend to accompany him.

On arriving at the Riverola palace, the party were instantly admitted,
notwithstanding that the Turkish soldiers placed there by the grand
vizier still guarded the gates: and Francisco proceeded alone to his
sister's apartment, where he found her sitting, busied in conjecturing
the cause of her recent detention--for Ibrahim, on the completion of the
marriage ceremony, of which he had been an unseen observer, had given
orders to free her from all restraint on her person.

On perceiving Francisco, Nisida tenderly embraced him; and by signs he
informed her that a person wished to be admitted to her presence. Having
signified her acquiescence, Francisco retired, and in a few moments
returned, leading by the hand his blushing bride, while Wagner followed,
a few paces in the rear.

No sooner had Nisida's eyes fallen on the form of Flora, than she
started from her seat, her eyes flashing with concentrated hate, and her
haughty lip curled in withering contempt, for well she guessed the
purport of her visit: but the next moment her eyes fell on the advancing
form of her adored Wagner--and those eyes, lit up as with the fires of
hell, lost their demoniac glare in the beams of love which gleamed in
their dark depths; and her lip of scorn was changed into an enchanting
smile of the sweetest welcome--a transition from hate to love, a change
of feelings as well as features of which woman, loving woman, alone is
capable--and the next moment, regardless of the presence of Francisco
and Flora, she rushed into the arms of her long-lost, her adored Wagner.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nisida was now acquainted with the marriage of her brother, the secret
chamber had been visited, the manuscript brought forth to be read; but
one of the party that but a few moments before occupied that room was no
more--_Fernand Wagner was dead_! True to the letter were the words of
the founder of the order of the Rosy Cross, that "the spell which the
Evil One hath cast upon thee, Fernand Wagner, shall be broken only on
that day and that hour when thine eyes shall behold the bleached
skeletons of two innocent victims suspended to the same beam."

Flora and Francisco had visited the secret chamber alone, but the scream
of horror which came from the bride on seeing the spectacle which there
presented itself to her, brought Wagner and Nisida to their side.
Instantly on seeing the skeletons, the prophecy of Rosencrux rushed on
the mind of Wagner; a complete revolution came over his whole frame,
beautiful visions floated before his eyes, as of angels waiting to
receive him and herald him to eternal glory; then stretching forth his
arms, as if to embrace something immaterial, he fell heavily to the
earth, and in a few moments he had breathed his last in the arms of
Nisida.

       *       *       *       *       *

We will now proceed to the reading of the manuscript, and pass over a
detail of the indescribable agony that rent the heart of Nisida on
seeing her beloved Wagner a corpse, and the revulsion of her feelings on
beholding the loathsome change that came over the face and form of the
once god-like Fernand, a repetition of which would grate too harshly on
the feelings of the reader.


THE MANUSCRIPT.

"In order that you, Francisco--and she who as your bride, shall
accompany you on your visit to the secret cabinet wherein you are
destined to find this manuscript--in order, I say, that you may both
fully comprehend the meaning of the strange and frightful spectacle
there prepared to meet your eyes, it is necessary that I should enter
into a full and perfect detail of certain circumstances, the study of
which will, I hope, prove beneficial to the lady whom you may honor with
the proud name of Riverola.

"In the year 1494 I visited Naples on certain pecuniary business, an
intimation of which I found amongst the private papers of my father, who
had died about ten months previously. I was then just one-and-twenty,
and had not as yet experienced the influence of the tender passion. I
had found the ladies of Florence so inveterately given to intrigue, and
had seen so many instances in which the best and most affectionate of
husbands were grossly deceived by their wives, that I had not only
conceived an abhorrence at the idea of linking my fortunes with one of
my own countrywomen, but even made a solemn vow that if ever I married,
my choice should not fall upon a Tuscan. It was with such impressions as
these that I quitted Florence on the business to which I have alluded:
and I cared not if I never returned thither--so shallow, heartless, and
superficial did its gay society appear to me.

"On my arrival at Naples I assumed the name of Cornari, and,
representing myself as a young man of humble birth and moderate fortune,
mixed in the best society that would receive a stranger of such poor
pretensions. I had already learned at Florence that the fair sex are
invariably dazzled by titles and riches; and I had a curiosity to try
whether I should be at all sought after when apparently unpossessed of
such qualifications. Not that I had any serious thoughts of matrimony;
for I was far from being so romantic as to suppose that any beautiful
lady of high birth would fall in love with me so long as I passed for
plain Signor Cornari. No; it was merely a whim of mine--would that I had
never undertaken to gratify it.

"I was altogether unattended by any retinue, having quitted Florence
with only a single valet, who died of sudden illness on the road. Thus
did I enter Naples alone, with my package of necessaries fastened to the
saddle of the steed that bore me. I put up at a small, but respectable
hostel; and the first few days of my residence at the Neapolitan capital
were passed in making inquiries concerning the individual whose large
debt to my deceased father had been the principal cause of my journey
thither.

"I found him, at length, but perceiving that he was totally unable to
liquidate the claim upon him, I did not discover my real name, and took
my leave, resolving to think no more of the matter.

"Returning to the inn, I happened to pass through one of the most
squalid and miserable parts of the city, when my attention was suddenly
fixed upon the most charming female figure I had ever seen in my life.
The object of my interest was respectably but plainly clad; indeed, she
appeared to belong to the class of petty tradespeople. Her form was most
perfect in its symmetry; her gait was peculiarly graceful, and her
manners were evidently modest and reserved: for she looked neither to
the right nor to the left, but pursued her way with all the
unobtrusiveness of strict propriety. I longed to behold her face; and,
quickening my steps, presently passed her. I then had an opportunity of
beholding the most beautiful countenance that ever adorned a woman.
Heaven seemed to smile through the mirror of her mild black eyes; and
there was such an indescribable sweetness in the general expression of
her face, that it might have served a limner to copy for the countenance
of an angel! She saw that I gazed intently upon her, and instantly
turned aside into another street; for I should observe that females of
the lower orders in Naples are not permitted to wear veils.

"I stood looking after her until she was lost to my view; and then I
went slowly back to the inn, my mind full of the image of the beautiful
unknown.

"Day after day did I rove through that same quarter of the city in the
hope of meeting her again; and every evening did I return to my lonely
chamber, chagrined and disappointed. My spirits sank, my appetite fled,
and I grew restless and melancholy. At length I one morning beheld her
in the flower-market, and I stood gazing on her with such enthusiastic,
and yet such respectful admiration, that though she turned away, still
methought it was not with a feeling of resentment.

"I was transfixed to the spot for some minutes, and it was not until she
had disappeared amidst the crowd gathered in that quarter, that I could
so collect my scattered thoughts as to curse my folly for having omitted
such an opportunity of accosting her. I however inquired of an old woman
of whom she had purchased some flowers, who she was; but all the
information I could glean was, that she had recently been in the habit
of buying a few flowers every Wednesday of that same old woman. I went
away more contented than I had felt for many days, because I now felt
certain that I knew where to meet the lovely creature again.
Nevertheless, during the six succeeding days I rambled about the flower
market and the squalid quarter of the city where I had first seen her,
but my search was unsuccessful; and the greater the disappointment I
experienced, the more powerful grew my love. Yes, it was indeed love
which I now felt, for the first time, and for a being to whom I had
never spoken--whom I had only seen twice, and on these occasions only
for a few minutes, and whom I knew, by her garb, to belong to the poorer
class. But on the following Wednesday I saw her for the third time; and
when she beheld me standing near the old woman's flower stall, she
appeared vexed and surprised, and was about to turn away. I however
approached her, besought her to accept of the choicest nosegay which I
had been able to find, and continued to speak to her in so ardent, yet
respectful a manner, that she no longer viewed me with resentment, but
with something approaching to interest. And if I had been charmed by her
beauty when as yet I had seen her at a comparative distance, how
enraptured was I now by a nearer contemplation of that heavenly
countenance.

"I assured her that her image had never been absent from my heart since
first I saw her, that I should never know peace or happiness again until
she would give me some hope, and that I would sooner die than have her
construe my words into an insult. She was touched by the earnestness and
evident sincerity of my manner; and, encouraged by her silence, I
proceeded hastily to inform her that my name was Cornari, that I was a
young man of humble birth, but that I possessed a modest competency, and
was my own master. I then pressed her to accept my nosegay; but,
suddenly bursting into tears, she exclaimed--

"'O, signor, you know not whom you have thus honored with your notice,'
and hurried away, leaving me absolutely stupefied with astonishment and
grief. It immediately struck me that she was a lost and degraded
creature, who dared not respond to a virtuous love. But a few moments'
reflection told me that such innocence, such artlessness, such candor
never could be assumed--never feigned; no, they were most natural! And
this conviction, added to the intense curiosity which now inspired me to
fathom the mystery of her singular remark, rendered me more anxious than
ever to meet with her again. Several weeks passed without seeing the
gratification of my wish; and I was becoming seriously ill with
disappointment and defeated hope, when accident led me to encounter her
once more. She would have avoided me, but I absolutely compelled her to
stop. Seizing her hand, I said,--

"'Look at me--behold to what I am reduced--mark these pale and sunken
cheeks, and have pity on me!'

"'And I, too,' she murmured, 'have been very miserable since we last
met.'

"'Then you have thought of me?' I exclaimed, retaining her hand still in
mine, and reading love in the depths of her large dark eyes.

"'I have,' she answered bitterly, withdrawing her hand at the same time;
then in a tone of deep anguish she added, 'I implore you to let me
proceed on my way; and if you value your own happiness you will never
seek to see me more.'

"'But my happiness depends on seeing you often,' I exclaimed; 'and if
the offer of an honest heart be acceptable, I have that to give.'

"She shuddered dreadfully from head to foot.

"'Surely you are not married already?' I said, rendered desperate by her
strange and incomprehensible manner.

"'I married!' she absolutely shrieked forth. Then perceiving that I was
perfectly amazed and horrified by the wild vehemence of her
ejaculations, she said in a subdued, melancholy tone, 'I adjure you to
think of me no more.'

"'Listen, beauteous stranger,' I exclaimed; 'I love and adore you. My
happiness is at stake. Repeat that cruel adjuration, and you inflict a
death-blow. If I be loathsome to your sight, tell me so; but leave me
not a prey to the most horrible suspense. If you have a father, I will
accompany you to him and make honorable proposals.'

"'My father!' she murmured, while her countenance was suddenly swept by
a passing expression of anguish so intense that I began to tremble for
her reason.

"I implored her to speak candidly and openly, and not in brief sentences
of such ominous mystery. She scarcely appeared to listen to my words,
but seemed totally absorbed in the mental contemplation of a deeply
seated woe. At length she suddenly turned her large dark eyes upon me,
and said in a low, plaintive, profoundly touching tone:

"'Signor Cornari, again I adjure you to think of me no more. But for my
own sake I would not have you believe that unmaidenly conduct on my part
is the cause of the solemn prayer I thus make to you. No, no; I have
naught wherewith I can reproach myself; but there are reasons of
terrible import that compel me to address you in this manner.
Nevertheless,' she added, more slowly and hesitatingly, 'if you really
should continue to entertain so deep an interest in me as to render you
desirous to hear the last explanation from my lips, then may you rely
upon meeting me on this spot, and at the same hour, fifteen days hence.'

"She then hurried away. How that fortnight passed I can scarcely tell.
To me it appeared an age. I was deeply, madly enamored of that strange,
beautiful, and apparently conscientious being; and the mystery which
involved her threw around her a halo of interest that fanned the flame
of my passion. I was prepared to make any sacrifice rather than abandon
all hope of calling her my own. The proud title of Riverola was as
nothing in my estimation when weighed in the balance against her
charms--her bewitching manner--her soft, retiring modesty. I moreover
flattered myself that I was not indifferent to her; and I loved her all
the more sincerely because I reflected that if she gave her heart to me,
it would be to the poor and humble Cornari, and not to the rich and
mighty Lord of Riverola.

"At length the day--the memorable day--came; and she failed not to keep
her appointment. She was pale--very pale--but exquisitely beautiful; and
she smiled in spite of herself when she beheld me. She endeavored to
conceal her emotions, but she could not altogether subdue the evidence
of that gratification which my presence caused her.

"'You have disregarded my most earnest prayer,' she said, in a low and
agitated tone.

"'My happiness depends upon you,' I answered; 'in the name of Heaven
keep me not in suspense; but tell me, can you and will you be mine?'

"'I could be thine, but I dare not,' she replied, in a voice scarcely
audible.

"'Reveal to me the meaning of this strange contradiction, I implore
you!' said I, again a prey to the most torturing suspense. 'Do you love
another?'

"'Did I love another,' she exclaimed, withdrawing the hand which I had
taken, 'I should not be here this day.'

"'Pardon me,' I cried; 'I would not offend you for worlds! If you do not
love another, can you love me?'

"Again she allowed me to take her hand; and this concession, together
with the rapid but eloquent glance she threw upon me, was the answer to
my question.

"'Then, if you can love me,' I urged, 'why cannot you be mine?'

"'Because,' she replied, in that tone of bitterness which did me harm to
hear it, 'you are born of parents whose name and whose calling you dare
mention; whereas you would loathe me as much as you now declare that you
love me, were you to learn who my father is! For mother, alas! I have
none; she has been dead many years!' And tears streamed down her cheeks.
I also wept, so deeply did I sympathize with her.

"'Beloved girl,' I exclaimed, 'you wrong me! What is it to me if your
father be the veriest wretch, the greatest criminal that crawls upon the
face of the earth, so long as you are pure and innocent?'"

"'No, no,' she cried hastily, 'you misunderstand me. There breathes not
a more upright man than my father.'

"'Then wherefore should I be ashamed to own my marriage with his
daughter?' I asked in an impassioned manner.

"'Because,' she said, in a tone of such intense anguish that it rent my
heart as she began to speak; 'because,' she repeated slowly and
emphatically, 'he is viewed with abhorrence by that world which is so
unjust; for that which constitutes the stigma is hereditary office in
his family--an office that he dares not vacate under pain of death; and
now you can too well comprehend that my sire is the PUBLIC EXECUTIONER
OF NAPLES!'

"This announcement came upon me like a thunderbolt. I turned sick at
heart--my eyes grew dim--my brain whirled--I staggered and should have
fallen had I not come in contact with a wall. It appeared to me
afterward that sobs of ineffable agony fell upon my ears, while I was
yet in a state of semi-stupefaction--and methought likewise that a
delicate, soft hand pressed mine convulsively for a moment. Certain it
was, that when I recovered my presence of mind, when I was enabled to
collect my scattered thoughts, the executioner's daughter was no longer
near me. I was in despair at the revelation which had been
made--overwhelmed with grief, too, at having suffered her thus to
depart--for I feared that I should never see her more. Before me was my
hopeless love, behind me, like an evil dream, was the astounding
announcement which still rang in my ears, though breathed in such soft
and plaintive tones! Three or four minutes were wasted in the struggles
of conflicting thoughts, ere I was sufficiently master of myself to
remember that I might still overtake the maiden who had fled from me. It
struck me that her father's dwelling must be near the criminal prison;
and this was in the squalid quarter of the town where I had first
encountered her. Thither I sped--into the dark streets, so perilous
after dusk, I plunged; and at length I overtook the object of my
affection, just as she was skirting the very wall of the prison. I
seized her by the hand and implored her to forgive me for the manner in
which I had received the last explanation to which I had urged her.

"'It was natural that you should shrink in loathing from the bare idea,'
she said, in a tone which rent my heart. 'And now leave me, signor; for
further conversation between us is useless.'

"'No,' I exclaimed; 'I will not leave you until I shall have exacted
from you a promise that you will be mine, and only mine! For I could not
live without you; and most unjust should I be, most unworthy of the name
of a man, if I were to allow a contemptible prejudice to stand in the
way of my happiness.'

"She returned no answer, but the rapidity of her breathing and the ill
subdued sobs which interrupted her respiration at short intervals,
convinced me that a fierce struggle was taking place within her bosom.
For it was now quite dark and I could not see her face; the hand,
however, which I held clasped in my own, trembled violently.

"'Beautiful maiden,' I said after a long pause, 'wherefore do you not
reply to me? Were I the proudest peer in Christendom, I would sacrifice
every consideration of rank and family for your sake. What more can man
say? What more can he do?'

"'Signor Cornari,' she answered at length, 'prudence tells me to fly
from you; but my heart prompts me to remain. Alas! I feel that the
latter feeling is dominant within me!'

"'And you will be mine?' I demanded eagerly.

"'Thine forever!' she murmured, her head sinking upon my breast.

"But I shall not dwell unnecessarily on this portion of my narrative.
Suffice it to say we parted, having arranged another meeting for the
next evening. It was on this occasion that I said to her:

"'Vitangela, I have thought profoundly on all that passed between us
yesterday; and I am more than ever determined to make you my wife. Let
us away to your father, and demand his consent to our union.'

"'Stay,' she said, in an emphatic tone, 'and hear me patiently ere you
either renew the promise to wed me, or reiterate your desire to seek my
father. You must know,' she continued, while I listened with painful
suspense, 'that my father will not oppose a step in which his daughter's
happiness is involved. But the very moment that sees our hands joined,
will behold the registry of the marriage in the book kept by the
lieutenant of police; and thereby will be constituted a record of the
name of one who, if need be, must assume the functions of that office
which my sire now fills.'

"'What mean you, Vitangela?' I demanded, horrified by the dim yet
ominous significance of these horrible words.

"'I mean,' she continued, 'that the terrible post of public executioner
must remain in our family while it exists; and those who form marriages
with us, are considered to enter into our family. When my father dies,
my brother will succeed him, but should my brother die without leaving
issue, or having a son to take his place, you, signor, if you become my
husband, will be forced to assume the terrible office.'

"'But I am not a Neapolitan,' I exclaimed; 'and I should hope that when
we are united, you will not insist upon dwelling in Naples.'

"'I would give worlds to leave this odious city,' she said,
emphatically.

"'Nothing detains me here another day, nor another hour,' I cried; 'let
the priest unite our hands, and we forthwith set off for Florence. But
why should not our marriage take place privately, unknown even to your
father? and in that case no entry could be made in the books of the
lieutenant of police.'

"'You have expressed that desire which I myself feared to utter, lest
you should think it unmaidenly,' she murmured. 'For your sake I will
quit home and kindred without further hesitation.'

"I was rejoiced at this proof of affection and confidence on her part;
and it was arranged between us that we should be married on the ensuing
evening, and in the most private way possible.

"Before we parted, however, I drew from her a solemn pledge that, when
once she had become my wife, she would never even allude to her
family--that she would not communicate to them the name of her husband
nor the place of our abode, under any circumstance--in a word, that she
would consider her father and brother as dead to her,--and she to them.

"With streaming eyes and sobbing heart she gave the sacred promise I
required, ratifying it with an oath which I made her repeat to my
dictation.

"On the ensuing evening Vitangela met me according to appointment, and
it was then I revealed to her my real name and rank.

"'Dearest girl,' I said, 'you gave me your heart, believing me to be a
poor and humble individual; and you have consented to become my wife and
abandon home and kindred for my sake. Profoundly then do I rejoice that
it is in my power to elevate you to a position of which your beauty,
your amiability and your virtue render you so eminently worthy; and in
my own native Florence, no lady will be more courted, nor treated with
greater distinction than the Countess of Riverola.'

"She uttered an exclamation of sorrow and would have fallen to the
ground if I had not supported her.

"'Oh!' she murmured, 'I would have been happier were you indeed the
humble Signor Cornari!'

"'No; think not thus,' I urged, 'wealth and rank are two powerful aids
to happiness in this life. But at all events; my beloved Vitangela, you
now recognize more than ever the paramount necessity which induces you
to maintain inviolate your solemn vow of yesterday.'

"'I require no such inducement to compel me to keep that pledge,' she
answered. 'Think you that I would bring disgrace on the name, whether
humble or lofty, with which you have proposed to honor me? Oh!
no--never, never!"

"I embraced her fondly; and we proceeded to the dwelling of a priest, by
whom our hands were united in the oratory attached to his abode. At
daybreak we quitted Naples, and in due time we reached Florence, where
my bride was received with enthusiastic welcome by all the friends of
the Riverola family. My happiness appeared to have been established on a
solid foundation by this alliance; and the birth of Nisida in 1495--just
one year after the marriage--was a bond which seemed to unite our hearts
the more closely if possible. Indeed, I can safely assert that not a
harsh word ever passed between us, nor did aught occur to mar our
complete felicity for years after our union. In 1500, however, a
circumstance took place which proved to be the first link in the chain
of incidents destined to wield a dire influence over my happiness. It
was in the month of April of that year--oh! how indelibly is the
detested date fixed on my memory--the Duke Piero de Medici gave a grand
entertainment to all the aristocracy of Florence. The banquet was of the
most excellent description; and the gardens of the palace were
brilliantly illuminated. The days of Lorenzo the Magnificent seemed to
have been revived for a short period by his degenerate descendant. All
the beauty and rank of the republic were assembled at this festival; but
no lady was more admired for the chaste elegance of her attire, the
modest dignity of her deportment, and the loveliness of her person, than
Vitangela, Countess of Riverola. After the banquet the company proceeded
to the gardens, where bands of music were stationed, and while some
indulged in the exhilarating dance, others sauntered through the
brilliantly lighted avenues. I need not inform you that no husband,
unless he were anxious to draw down upon himself the ridicule which
attaches itself to extreme uxoriousness, would remain linked to his
wife's side all the evening at such an entertainment as the one of which
I am speaking. I was therefore separated from the countess, whom I left
in an arbor with some other ladies, and I joined the group which had
assembled around the prince. I know not exactly how it was I happened to
quit my companions, after a lively conversation which had probably
lasted about an hour; certain, however, it is that before midnight I was
proceeding alone down a long avenue in which utter darkness reigned, but
outside of which the illuminations shone brilliantly.

"Suddenly I heard voices near me; and one of them appeared to be that of
the Countess of Riverola--but they were speaking in so subdued a tone
that I was by no means confident in my suspicion. The voices approached;
and a sentiment of curiosity, unaccountable at the time, as I believed
Vitangela to be purity itself, impelled me to listen more attentively.
To conceal myself was not necessary; I had to remain perfectly still for
my presence to be unknown, utter darkness prevailing in the avenue. The
persons who were conversing advanced.

"'You know,' said the soft and whispering voice which I believed to be
that of my wife, 'you know how sincerely, how tenderly I love you, and
what a frightful risk I run in according you thus a few moments' private
discourse!'

"The voice of a man made some reply, the words of which did not reach my
ears; then the pair stopped and I heard the billing sound of kisses. O! how
my blood boiled in my veins! I grasped the handle of my sword--but I was
nailed to the spot--my state of mind was such that though I longed--I
thirsted for vengeance--yet was I powerless--motionless--paralyzed. To
the sound of kisses succeeded those of sobbing and of grief on the part
of the lady whose voice had produced such a terrible effect upon me.

"'Holy Virgin!' I thought, 'she deplores the fate that chains her to her
husband! she weeps because she has not courage to fly with her lover!'
and now I experienced just the same sensations as those which stunned
and stupefied me on that evening at Naples when I first heard that
Vitangela was the child of the public executioner. Several minutes must
have passed while I was in this condition of comparative insensibility;
or rather while I was a prey to the stunning conviction that I was
deceived by her whom I had loved so well and deemed so pure. When I
awoke from that dread stupor all was still in the dark avenue; not a
footstep, not a whispering voice was heard. I hurried along amidst the
trees, my soul racked with the cruelest suspicions. And yet I was not
confident that it was positively my wife's voice that I had heard; and
the more I pondered on the circumstance, the more anxious was I to
arrive at the conviction that I had indeed been deceived by some voice
closely resembling hers. I accordingly hurried back to the arbor where I
had last seen her in the company of several Florentine ladies. Joy
animated my soul when I beheld Vitangela seated in that arbor, and in
the very spot, too, where I had beheld her upward of an hour previously.
But she was now alone.

"'Where are your friends?' I asked, in a kind tone, as I approached and
gently took her hand.

"'Indeed I know not,' she replied, casting a hurried glance around, and
now appearing surprised to find that there was not another lady near
her. She seemed confused; and I also observed that she had been weeping
very recently. The joy which had for a moment animated me, was now
succeeded by a sudden chill that went to my heart death-like--icy. But,
subduing my emotion, I said:

"'Your ladyship has not surely remained here ever since I last saw you,
more than an hour ago?'

"'Yes,' she responded, without daring to raise her eyes to meet mine. I
knew that she lied, most foully lied: her confusion, her whole manner
betrayed her. But I exercised a powerful mastery over my mind; the
suspicion which I had all along entertained was strengthened greatly,
but not altogether confirmed; and I resolved to wait for confirmation
ere I allowed my vengeance to burst forth. Moreover, it was necessary to
discover who the gallant might be--the favored one who had superseded me
in the affections of Vitangela! I, however, promised myself that when
once my information was complete, my revenge should be terrible; and
this resolution served as a solace for the moment, and as an inducement
for me to conceal alike the suspicions I had imbibed and the dreadful
pain they had caused me.

"Presenting my hand, therefore, to Vitangela, I escorted her to that
part of the ground where the company were now assembled, and where I
hoped that some accident might make known to me the person of the
gallant with whom, as I supposed, she had walked in the avenue.
Anxiously, but unsuspected, did I watch the manner of the countess every
time she returned the salutation of the various nobles and cavaliers
whom we encountered in our walk; but not a blush, not a sign of
confusion on her part, not one rapidly dealt, but significant glance,
afforded me the clew I so ardently sought. And yet it struck me that she
often cast furtive and uneasy, or rather searching looks hither and
thither, as if to seek and single out some one individual in the
multitudes moving about the illuminated gardens. She was certainly
pre-occupied, and even mournful, but I affected not to observe that a
cloud hung over her spirits, and in order to throw her completely off
her guard, I talked and laughed quite as gayly as was my wont. To be
brief, the festivities terminated a little before sunrise, and I
conducted the countess back to our mansion. From that night forth I
maintained the strictest watch upon her conduct and proceedings. I
appointed Margaretha, the mother of my page Antonio, to act the spy upon
her; but weeks and months passed, and nothing occurred to confirm the
terrible suspicion that haunted me night and day. I strove to banish
that suspicion from my mind--Heaven knows how hard I tried to crush it.
But it was immortal--and it beset me as if it were the ghost of some
victim I had ruthlessly murdered. Vitangela saw that my manner had
somewhat changed toward her, and she frequently questioned me on the
subject. I, however, gave her evasive answers, for I should have been
ashamed to acknowledge my suspicion if it were false, and it was only by
keeping her off her guard I should receive confirmation if it were true.
Thus nearly nine months passed away from the date of the ducal banquet,
and then you, Francisco, were born. The presence of an heir to my name
and wealth was a subject of much congratulation on the part of my
friends; but to me it was a source of torturing doubts and racking
fears. You never bore the least--no, not the least resemblance, either
physical or mental, to me; whereas the very reverse was the case with
Nisida, even in her infancy. From the moment of your birth--from the
first instant that I beheld you in the nurse's arms--the most agonizing
feelings took possession of my soul. Were you indeed my son?--or were
you the pledge of adulterous love? Merciful heavens! in remembering all
I suffered when the terrible thoughts oppressed me, I wonder that you,
Francisco, should now be alive--that I did not strangle you as you lay
in your cradle. And, oh God! how dearly I could have loved you,
Francisco, had I felt the same confidence in your paternity as in that
of your sister Nisida! But no--all was at least doubt and uncertainty in
that respect--and, as your cast of features and physical characteristics
developed themselves, that hideous doubt and that racking uncertainty
increased until there were times when I was nearly goaded to do some
desperate deed. Those mild blue eyes--that rich brown hair--that
feminine softness of expression which marked your face belonged not to
the family of Riverola!

"Time wore on, and my unhappiness increased. I suspected my wife, yet
dared not proclaim the suspicion. I sought to give her back my love, but
was utterly unable to subdue the dark thoughts and crush the maddening
uncertainties that agitated my soul. At last I was sinking into a state
of morbid melancholy, when an incident occurred which revived all the
energies of my mind. It was in 1505--Nisida being then ten years old,
and you, Francisco, four--when Margaretha informed me one evening that
the countess had received a letter which had thrown her into a state of
considerable agitation, and which she had immediately burned. By
questioning the porter at the gate of the mansion, I learnt that the
person who delivered the letter was a tall, handsome man of about
thirty-two, with brown hair, blue eyes, and a somewhat feminine
expression of countenance. Holy Virgin! this must be the gallant--the
paramour of my wife--the father of the boy on whom the law compelled me
to bestow my own name. Such were the ideas that immediately struck me;
and I now prepared for vengeance. Margaretha watched my wife narrowly,
and on the evening following the one on which the letter had been
delivered, Vitangela was seen to secure a heavy bag of gold about her
person, and quit the mansion by the secret staircase of her
apartment--that apartment which is now the sleeping-place of your sister
Nisida.

"Margaretha followed the countess to an obscure street, at the corner of
which the guilty woman encountered a tall person, enveloped in a cloak,
and who was evidently waiting for her. To him she gave the bag of gold,
and they embraced each other tenderly. Then they separated--the countess
returning home, unconscious that a spy watched her movements. Margaretha
reported all that had occurred to me; and I bade her redouble her
attention in watching her mistress. Now that the lover is once more in
this city, I thought, and well provided with my gold to pursue his
extravagance, there will soon be another meeting--and then for vengeance
such as an Italian must have. But weeks and months again passed without
affording the opportunity which I craved; yet I knew that the day must
come--and I could tutor myself to await its arrival, if not with
patience, at least with so much outward composure as to lull the
countess into belief of perfect security.

"Yes, weeks and months passed away, ay, and years, too, and still I
nursed my hopes and projects of vengeance, the craving for which
increased with the lapse of time.

"And now I come to the grand, the terrible, the main incident in this
narrative. It was late one night, in the month of January, 1510, Nisida
being then fifteen and thou, Francisco, nine, that Margaretha came to me
in my own apartment and informed me that she had seen the tall gallant
traverse the garden hastily and obtain admission into the countess'
chamber by means of the secret staircase. The hour for vengeance had at
length come. Margaretha was instantly dispatched to advise two bravoes
whose services I had long secured for the occasion, that the moment had
arrived when they were to do the work for which they had been so well
paid in advance, and by the faithful performance of which they would
still further enrich themselves. Within half an hour all the
arrangements were completed. Margaretha had retired to her own chamber
and the bravoes were concealed with me in the garden. Nor had we long to
wait. The private door opened shortly, and two persons appeared on the
threshold. The night was clear and beautiful, and from my hiding-place I
could discern the fondness of the embrace that marked their parting. And
they parted, too, never to meet again in this life!

"Vitangela closed the door--and her lover was passing rapidly along
amidst the trees in the garden, when a dagger suddenly drank his heart's
blood. That dagger was mine, and wielded by my hand! He fell without a
groan--dead, stone-dead at my feet. Half of my vengeance was now
accomplished; the other half was yet to be consummated. Without a
moment's unnecessary delay the corpse was conveyed to a cellar beneath
the northern wing of the mansion: and the two bravoes then hastened, to
Vitangela's chamber, into which they obtained admission by forcing the
door of the private staircase. In pursuance of the orders which they had
received from me, they bound and gagged her, and conveyed her through
the garden to the very cellar where, by the light of a gloomy lamp, she
beheld her husband standing close by a corpse!

"'Bring her near!' I exclaimed, unmoved by the looks of indescribable
horror which she threw around.

"When her eyes caught sight of the countenance of that lifeless being,
they remained fixed with frenzied wildness in their sockets, and even if
there had been no gag between her teeth, I do not believe that she could
have uttered a syllable. And now commenced the second act in this
appalling tragedy! While one of the bravoes held the countess in his
iron grasp, in such a manner that she could not avert her head, the
other, who had once been a surgeon, tore away the garments from the
corpse, and commenced the task which I had before assigned to him. And
as the merciless scalpel hacked and hewed away at the still almost
palpitating flesh of the murdered man, in whose breast the dagger
remained deeply buried,--a ferocious joy--a savage, hyena-like triumph
filled my soul; and I experienced no remorse for the deed I had done!
Far--very far from that--for as the work progressed, I exclaimed--

"'Behold, Vitangela, how the scalpel hews that form so loved by thee!
Now hack away at the countenance--deface that beauty--pick out those
mild blue eyes!'--and I laughed madly!

"The countess fainted, and I ordered her to be carried back to her
apartment, where Margaretha awaited her. Indeed I had naturally foreseen
that insensibility would result from the appalling spectacle which I
compelled my wife to witness: and Margaretha was prepared to breathe
dreadful menaces in her ears the moment she should recover--menaces of
death to herself and both her children if she should reveal, even to her
father confessor, one tittle of the scene which that night had been
enacted! The surgeon-bravo did his work bravely; and the man who had
dishonored me was reduced to naught save a skeleton! The flesh and the
garments were buried deep in the cellar; the skeleton was conveyed to my
own chamber, and suspended to a beam in the closet where you, Francisco,
and your bride, are destined to behold it--ALONG WITH ANOTHER!

"My vengeance was thus far gratified--the bravos were dismissed, and I
locked myself up in my chamber for several days, to brood upon all I had
done, and occasionally to feast my eyes with the grim remains of him who
had dared to love my wife. During those days of seclusion I would see no
one save the servant who brought me my meals. From him I learnt that the
countess was dangerously ill--that she was indeed dying, and that she
besought me to visit her if only for a moment. But I refused--implacably
refused. I was convinced that she craved my forgiveness; and that I
could not give.

"Dr. Duras, who attended upon her, came to the door of my chamber and
implored me to grant him an interview:--then Nisida sought a similar
boon; but I was deaf to each and all.

"Yes--for there was still a being on whom I yet longed to wreak my
vengeance;--and that being was yourself, Francisco? I looked upon you as
the living evidence of my dishonor--the memorial of your mother's
boundless guilt. But I recoiled in horror from the idea of staining my
hands with the blood of a little child--yet I feared if I came near
you--if I saw your clinging affectionately to Vitangela--if I heard you
innocently and unconsciously mock me by calling me 'father!'--I felt I
should be unable to restrain the fury of my wrath!

"I know not how long I should have remained in the seclusion of my own
chamber--perhaps weeks and months, but one morning shortly after
daybreak, I was informed by the only servant whom I would admit near me,
that the countess had breathed her last during the night, and that
Nisida was so deeply affected by her mother's death, that she, poor
girl, was dangerously ill. Then I became frantic on account of my
daughter; and I quitted my apartment, not only to see that proper aid
was administered to her, but to complete the scheme of vengeance which I
had originally formed. Thus, in the first place, Dr. Duras was enjoined
to take up his abode altogether in the Riverola Palace, so long as
Nisida should require his services; and, on the other hand, a splendid
funeral was ordered for the Countess Riverola. But Vitangela's remains
went not in the velvet-covered coffin to the family vault;--no--her
flesh was buried in the same soil where rotted the flesh of her
paramour--and her skeleton was suspended from the same beam to which his
bones had been already hung. For I thought within myself: 'This is the
first time that the wife of a Count of Riverola has ever brought
dishonor and disgrace upon her husband; and I will take care that it
shall be the last. To Nisida will I leave all my estates--all my wealth,
save a miserable pittance as an inheritance for the bastard Francisco.
She shall inherit the title, and the man on whom she may confer her hand
shall be the next Count of Riverola. The wedding-day will be marked by a
revelation of the mystery of this cabinet; and the awful spectacle will
teach him, whoever he may be, to watch his wife narrowly--and will teach
_her_ what it is to prove unfaithful to a fond husband! To both, the
lesson will be as useful as the manner of conveying it will be
frightful, and they will hand down the tradition to future scions of the
Riverola family. Francisco, too, shall learn the secrets of the cabinet;
he shall be taught why he is disinherited--why I have hated him: and
thus even from the other world shall the spirits of the vile paramour
and the adulterous wife behold the consequences of their crime
perpetuated in this.'

"Such were my thoughts--such were my intentions. But an appalling
calamity forced me to change my views. Nisida, after a long and painful
illness, became deaf and dumb; and Dr. Duras gave me no hope of the
restoration of her lost faculties.

"Terrible visitation! Then was it that I reasoned with myself--that I
deliberated long and earnestly upon the course which I should pursue. It
was improbable that, afflicted as Nisida was, she would ever marry; and
I felt grieved, deeply grieved, to think that you, Francisco, being
disinherited, and Nisida remaining single, the proud title of Riverola
would become extinct; I therefore resolved on the less painful
alternative of disinheriting you altogether; and I accordingly made a
will by which I left you the estates, with the contingent title Count of
Riverola, under certain conditions which might yet alienate both
property and rank from you, and endow therewith your sister Nisida. For
should she recover the faculties of speech and hearing by the time she
shall have attained the age of thirty-six, she will yet be marriageable
and may have issue; but should that era in her life pass, and she still
be deaf and dumb, all hope of her recovery will be dead!

"Thus if she still be so deeply afflicted at that age, you, Francisco,
will inherit the vast estates and the lordly title which, through the
circumstances of your birth, it grieves me to believe will ever devolve
upon you.

"Such were my motives for making that will which you are destined to
hear read, doubtless before the time comes for you to peruse this
manuscript. And having made that will, and experiencing the sad
certainty that my unfortunate daughter will never become qualified to
inherit my title and fortune, but that the name of Riverola must be
perpetuated through your marriage, I have determined that to you and to
your bride alone shall the dread secrets of the cabinet be revealed."

Thus terminated the manuscript.

       *       *       *       *       *

Powerful in meaning and strong in expression as the English language may
be rendered by one who has the least experience in the proper
combination of words, yet it becomes totally inadequate to the task of
conveying an idea of those feelings--those harrowing emotions--those
horrifying sentiments, which were excited in the breasts of Francisco di
Riverola and the beautiful Flora by the revolution of the manuscript. At
first the document begat a deep and mournful interest, as it related the
interviews of the late count with Vitangela in the streets of Naples;
then amazement was engendered by the announcement of that lovely and
unhappy being's ignominious parentage--but a calmness was diffused
through the minds of Flora and Francisco, as if they had found a resting
place amidst the exciting incidents of the narrative when they reached
that part which mentioned the marriage.

Their feelings were, however, destined to be speedily and most painfully
wrung once more; and Francisco could scarcely restrain his
indignation--yes, his indignation even against the memory of his
deceased father--when he perused those injurious suspicions which were
recorded in reference to the honor of his mother. Though unable to
explain the mystery in which all that part of the narrative was
involved, yet he felt firmly convinced that his mother was innocent; and
he frequently interrupted himself in the perusal of the manuscript to
give utterance to passionate ejaculations expressive of that opinion.
But it was when the hideous tragedy rapidly developed itself, and the
history of the presence of two skeletons in the closet was detailed, it
was then that language became powerless to describe the mingled wrath
and disgust which Francisco felt, or to delineate the emotions of
boundless horror and wild amazement that were excited in the bosom of
Flora. In spasmodic shuddering did the young countess cling to her
husband when she had learned how fearfully accurate was the manner in
which the few lines of the manuscript which she had read many months
previously in Nisida's boudoir, fitted in the text, and how appalling
was the tale which the entire made. She was cruelly shocked, and her
heart bled for that fine young man whom she was so proud to call her
husband, but whom his late father had loathed to recognize as a son. And
Nisida--what were her feelings as she lay stretched upon a couch,
listening to the contents of the manuscript which she had read before?
At first one hope--one idea was dominant in her soul, the hope that
Flora would be crushed even to death by revelations which were indeed
almost sufficient to overwhelm a gentle disposition and freeze the vital
current in the tender and compassionate heart.

But as Francisco read on, and when he came to those passages which
described the sufferings and the cruel fate of her mother, then Nisida
became a prey to the most torturing feelings--dreadful emotions were
expressed by her convulsed countenance and wildly-glaring eyes--and she
muttered deep and bitter anathemas against the memory of her own father.
For well does the reader know that she had loved her mother to
distraction; and thus the horrifying detail of the injuries heaped upon
the head and on the name of that revered parent aroused all her fiercest
passions of rage and hate as completely as if that history had been new
to her, and as if she were now becoming acquainted with it for the first
time. Indeed, so powerful, so terrible, was the effect produced by the
revival of all those dread reminiscences and heart-rending emotions on
the part of Nisida that, forgetting her malignant spite and her infernal
hope with regard to Flora, she threw her whole soul into the subject of
the manuscript: and the torrent of feelings to which she thus gave way
was crushing and overwhelming to a woman of such fierce passions, and
who had received so awful a shock as that which had stretched her on the
couch where she now lay. For the fate of him whom she had loved with
such ardor, and the revulsion that her affection experienced on account
of the ghastly spectacle which Wagner presented to her view in his dying
moments--the disgust and loathing which had been inspired in her mind by
the thought that she had ever fondled that being in her arms and
absolutely doted on the superhuman beauty that had changed to such
revolting ugliness, it was all this that had struck her down--paralyzed
her--inflicted a mortal, though not an instantaneous blow upon that
woman so lately full of energy, so strong in moral courage, and so full
of vigorous health. Thus impressed with the conviction that her end was
approaching, the moment the perusal of the manuscript was concluded the
Lady Nisida said, in a faint and dying tone of voice:

"Francisco, draw near--as near as possible--and listen to what I have
now to communicate, for it is in my power to clear up all doubt, all
mystery relative to the honor of our sainted mother, and convince thee
that no stigma, no disgrace attaches itself to thy birth!"

"Alas! my beloved sister," exclaimed the young count, "you speak in a
faint voice, you are very ill! In the name of the Holy Virgin! I conjure
you to allow me to send for Dr. Duras!"

"No, Francisco," said Nisida, her voice recovering somewhat of its power
as she continued to address him: "I implore you to let me have my own
way, to follow my own inclinations! Do not thwart me, Francisco; already
I feel as if molten lead were pouring through my brain, and a tremendous
weight lies upon my heart! Forbear, then, from irritating me, my
well-beloved Francisco----"

"Oh! Nisida," cried the young count, throwing his arms around his
sister's neck and embracing her fondly; "if you love me now, if you ever
loved me, grant me one boon! By the memory of our sainted mother I
implore you, by your affection for her I adjure you, Nisida----"

"Speak, speak, Francisco," interrupted his sister, hastily: "I can
almost divine the nature of the boon you crave--and--my God!" she added,
tears starting from her eyes, as a painful thought flashed across her
brain,--"perhaps I have been too harsh--too severe! At all events, it is
not now--on my death-bed--that I can nurse resentment----"

"Your death-bed!" echoed Francisco, in a tone or acute anguish, while
the sobs which convulsed the bosom of the young countess were heard
alike by him and his sister.

"Yes, dearest brother, I am dying," said Nisida, in a voice of profound
and mournful conviction; "and therefore let me not delay those duties
and those explanations which can alone unburden my heart of the weight
that lies upon it! And first, Francisco, be thy boon granted--for I know
that thou wouldst speak to me of her who is now thy bride. Come to my
arms, then. Flora, embrace me as a sister, and forgive me if thou canst,
for I have been a fierce and unrelenting enemy to thee!"

"Oh, let the past be forgotten, my friend, my sister!" exclaimed the
weeping Flora, as she threw herself into Nisida's outstretched arms.

And the young wife and the young woman embraced each other tenderly--for
deep regrets and pungent remorse at last attuned the mind of Nisida to
sweet and holy sympathy.

"And now," said Nisida, "sit down by my side, and listen to the
explanations which I have promised. Give me your hand. Flora, dear
Flora, let me retain it in mine; for at the last hour, and when I am
about to leave this fair and beauteous earth, I feel an ardent longing
to love those who walk upon its face, and to be loved by them in return.
But, alas, alas!" she added, somewhat bitterly, "reflections and
yearnings of this nature come too late! O Flora! the picture of life is
spread before you--while from me it is rapidly receding, and dissolving
into the past. Like our own fair city of palaces and flowers, when seen
from a distance beneath the glorious lights of the morning, may that
glorious picture continue to appear to thee; and may'st thou never draw
near enough to recognize the false splendors in which gorgeous hues may
deck the things of this world; may'st thou never be brought so close to
the sad realities of existence as to be forced to contemplate the
breaking hearts that dwell in palaces, or to view in disgust the slime
upon flowers."

"Nisida," said Francisco, bending over his sister, and speaking in a
voice indicative of deep emotion, "the kind words you utter to my
beloved Flora shall ever--ever remain engraven upon my heart."

"And on mine also," murmured the young countess, pressing Nisida's hand
with grateful ardor, while her eyes, radiant with very softness, threw a
glance of passionate tenderness upon her generous-hearted and handsome
husband.

"Listen to me," resumed Nisida, after a short pause, during which she
gave way to all the luxury of those sweet and holy reflections which the
present scene engendered: and these were the happiest moments of the
lady's stormy life. "Listen to me," she repeated; "and let me enter upon
and make an end of my explanations as speedily as possible. And first,
Francisco, relative to our sainted--our innocent--our deeply-wronged and
much-injured mother. You have already learned that she was the daughter
of the public executioner of Naples; and you have heard that ere she
became our father's wife she swore a solemn oath--she pledged herself in
the most solemn manner that she would never even allude to her
family--that she would not communicate to them the name of her husband
nor the place of his abode, under any circumstances--in a word, that she
would consider her father and brother as dead to her! And yet she had a
tender heart; and after she became the Countess of Riverola she very
often thought of the parent who had reared her tenderly and loved her
affectionately; she thought also of her brother Eugenio, who had ever
been so devoted to his sister. But she kept her promise faithfully for
five years; until that fatal day of April, 1500, which our father has so
emphatically mentioned in his narrative. It was in the garden belonging
to the ducal palace that she suddenly encountered her brother
Eugenio----"

"Her brother!" ejaculated Francisco, joyfully. "Oh! I knew, I felt
certain that she was innocent."

"Yes, she was indeed innocent," repeated Nisida, "But let me pursue my
explanations as succinctly as possible. It appeared that the old
man--the executioner of Naples--was no more; and Eugenio, possessing
himself of the hoardings of his deceased father, had fled from his
native city to avoid the dread necessity of assuming the abhorrent
office. Accident led the young adventurer to Florence in search of a
more agreeable employment as a means whereby to earn his livelihood, and
having formed the acquaintance of one of the duke's valets, he obtained
admittance to the gardens on that memorable evening when the grand
entertainment was given. In spite of the strict injunctions he had
received not to approach the places occupied by the distinguished
guests, he drew near the arbor in which our mother had been conversing
with other ladies, but where she was at that moment alone. The
recognition was immediate, and they flew into each other's arms. It
would have been useless, as well as unnatural, for our mother to have
refused to reveal her rank and name; her brilliant attire was sufficient
to convince her brother that the former was high, and inquiry would
speedily have made him acquainted with the latter. She accordingly drew
him apart into a secluded walk and told him all; but she implored him to
quit Florence without delay, and she gave him her purse and one of her
rich bracelets, thereby placing ample resources at his disposal. Five
years passed away, and during that period she heard no more of her
brother Eugenio. But at the expiration of that interval she received a
note stating that he was again in Florence--that necessity had alone
brought him hither, and that he would be at a particular place at a
certain hour to meet either herself or some confidential person whom she
might instruct to see him. Our mother filled a bag with gold, and put
into it some of her choicest jewels, and thus provided, she repaired in
person to the place of appointment. It grieved her generous heart thus
to be compelled to meet her brother secretly, as if he were a common
robber or a midnight bravo; but for her husband's peace, and in
obedience to the spirit of the oath which imperious circumstances had
alone led her in some degree to violate, she was forced to adopt that
sad and humiliating alternative."

"Alas! poor mother!" sobbed Francisco, deeply affected by this
narrative.

"Again did five years elapse without bringing tidings to our mother of
Eugenio," continued Nisida, "and then he once more set foot in Florence.
The world bad not used him well--Fortune had frowned upon him--and,
though a young man of fine spirit and noble disposition, he failed in
all his endeavors to carve out a successful career for himself. Our
mother determined to accord him an interview in her own apartment. She
longed to converse with him at her ease--to hear his tale from his own
lips--to sympathize with and console him. Oh! who could blame her if in
so doing she departed from the strict and literal meaning of that vow
which had bound her to consider her relations as dead to her? But the
fault--if fault it were--was so venial, that to justify it is to invest
it with an importance which it would not have possessed save for the
frightful results to which it led. You have already heard how foully he
was waylaid, how ruthlessly he was murdered! Holy Virgin! my brain
whirls when I reflect upon that hideous cruelty which made our mother
the spectator of his dissection; for, even had he been a lover--even
were she guilty--even if the suspicions of our father had all been
well-founded----"

"Dwell not upon this frightful topic, my beloved Nisida!" exclaimed
Francisco, perceiving that she was again becoming greatly excited, for
her eyes dilated and glared wildly, her bosom heaved in awful
convulsions, and she tossed her arms frantically about.

"No, I will not--I dare not pause to ponder thereon," she said, falling
back upon the pillow, and pressing her hands to that proud and haughty
brow behind which the active, racking brain appeared to be on fire.

"Tranquilize yourself, dearest sister," murmured Flora, bending over the
couch and pressing her lips on Nisida's burning cheek.

"I will, I will, Flora, whom I now love as much as I once hated!"
exclaimed the dying lady. "But let me make an end of my explanations.
You already know that our dear mother was gagged when she was compelled
to witness the horrible deeds enacted in the subterranean charnel-house
by the dim light of a sickly lamp; but even if she had not been, no word
would have issued from her lips, as the manuscript justly observes.
During her illness, however, she sought an interview with her husband
for the purpose of proving to him her complete innocence, by revealing
the fact that his victim was her own brother! But he refused all the
entreaties proffered with that object, and our unfortunate mother was
forced to contemplate the approach of death with the sad conviction that
she should pass away without the satisfaction of establishing her
guiltlessness in the eyes of our father. Then was it that she revealed
everything to me--to me alone--to me, a young girl of only fifteen when
those astounding facts were breathed into my ears. I listened with
horror, and I began to hate my father, for I adored my mother. She
implored me not to give way to any intemperate language or burst of
passion which might induce the inmates of the mansion to suspect that I
was the depositary of some terrible secret.

"'For,' said our mother, when on her death-bed, 'if I have ventured to
shock your young mind by so appalling a revelation, it is only that you
may understand wherefore I am about to bind you by a solemn vow to love,
protect, and watch over Francisco, as if he were your own child, rather
than your brother. His father, alas! hates him. This I have observed
ever since the birth of that dear boy, but it is only by means of the
dread occurrence of the other night that I have been able to divine the
origin of that dislike and unnatural loathing. Your father, Nisida,'
continued my mother, 'believes that I have been unfaithful, and suspects
that Francisco is the offspring of a guilty _amour_. With this terrible
impression upon his mind, he may persecute my poor boy; he may
disinherit him; he may even seek to rid him of life. Kneel, then, by my
bedside, Nisida, and swear by all you deem sacred--by the love you bear
for me--and by your hopes of salvation, that you will watch unweariedly
and unceasingly over the welfare and the interests of Francisco--that
you will make any sacrifice, incur any danger, or undergo any privation,
to save him from the effects of his father's hate--that you will exert
all possible means to cause the title and fortune of his father to
descend to him, and that you will in no case consent to supplant him in
those respects--and lastly, that you will keep secret the dread history
of my brother's fate and your knowledge of your father's crime.' To all
these conditions of the vow I solemnly and sacredly pledged myself,
calling Heaven to witness the oath. But I said to our mother, 'My father
will not forever remain locked up in his own apartment; he will come
forth sooner or later, and I must have an opportunity of speaking to
him. May I not justify you, my dear mother, in his eyes? May I not
assure him that Eugenio was your brother? He will then cease to hate
Francisco, and may even love him as he loves me; and you may then have
no fears on his account."

"'Alas! the plan which you suggest may not be put into execution,'
replied our dying mother; 'for were your father to be aware that I had
revealed the occurrences of that dread night to you, Nisida, he would
feel that he must be ever looked upon as a murderer by his own child!
Moreover, such appears to be the sad and benighted state of his mind,
that he might peradventure deem the tale relative to Eugenio a mere
excuse and vile subterfuge. No; I must perish disgraced in his eyes,
unless he should accord ere I die, the interview which yourself and the
good Dr. Duras have so vainly implored him to grant me.'

"Our dear mother then proceeded to give me other instructions,
Francisco, relative to yourself; but these," added Nisida, glancing
toward Flora, "would _now_ be painful to unfold. And yet," she
continued, hastily, as a second thought struck her, "it is impossible,
my sweet Flora, that you can be weak-minded--for you have this day seen
and heard enough to test your mental powers to the extreme possibility
of their endurance. Moreover, I feel that my conduct toward you requires
a complete justification; and that justification will be found in the
last instructions which I received from the lips of my mother."

"Dearest Nisida," said the young countess, "no justification is
needed--no apology is required in reference to that subject; for your
kind words, your altered manner toward me now, your recognition of me as
a sister, made so by union with your brother--oh! this would efface from
my mind wrongs ten thousand times more terrible than any injury which I
have sustained at your hands. But," continued Flora, in a slow and
gentle tone, "if you wish to explain the nature of these instructions
which you received from the lips of your dying parent, let not my
presence embarrass you."

"Yes, I do wish to render my explanation as complete as possible,
dearest Flora," replied Nisida; "for if I have acted severely toward
you, it was not to gratify any natural love of cruelty, nor any mean
jealousy or spite; on the contrary, the motives were engendered by that
imperious necessity which has swayed my conduct, modeled my disposition,
and regulated my mind ever since that fatal day when I knelt beside my
mother's death-bed, and swore to obey her last words. For thus did she
speak, Flora--'Nisida, there is one more subject relative to which I
must advise you, and in respect to which you must swear to obey me. My
own life furnished a sad and terrible lesson of the impropriety of
contracting an unequal marriage. All my woes--all my sorrows--all the
dreadful events which have occurred--may be traced to the one great fact
that the Count of Riverola espoused a person of whose family he was
ashamed. Nisida,' she continued, her voice becoming fainter and fainter,
'watch you narrowly and closely over the welfare of Francisco in this
respect. Let him not marry beneath him; let him not unite himself to one
whose family contains a single member deserving obloquy or reproach.
Above all, see that he marries not till he shall have reached an age
when he will be capable of examining his own heart through the medium of
experience and matured judgment. If you see him form a boyish attachment
of which you have good and sufficient reason to disapprove, exert
yourself to wean him from it: hesitate not to thwart him; be not moved
by the sorrows he may manifest at the moment; you will be acting for his
welfare; and the time will speedily come when he will rejoice that you
have rescued him from the danger of contracting a hasty, rash, and
ill-assorted marriage.' These were the last instructions of our mother,
Francisco; and I swore to obey them. Hence my sorrow, my fears, my anger
when I became aware of the attachment subsisting between yourself, dear
brother, and you, my sweet Flora: and that sorrow was enhanced--those
fears were augmented--that danger was increased, Flora, when I learnt
that your brother Alessandro had renounced the creed of the true God,
and that your family thereby contained a member deserving of obloquy and
reproach. But that sorrow, those fears, and that anger have now departed
from my soul. I recognize the finger of Heaven--the will of the Almighty
in the accomplishment of your union, despite of all my projects, all my
intrigues to prevent it. I am satisfied, moreover, that there is in this
alliance a fitness and a propriety which will insure your happiness: and
may the spirit of my sainted mother look down from the empyrean palace
where she dwells, and bless you both, even as I now implore the divine
mercy to shed its beauties and diffuse its protecting influence around
you."

Nisida had raised herself up to a sitting posture as she uttered this
invocation so sublimely interesting and solemnly sincere; and the
youthful pair, simultaneously yielding to the same impulse, sank upon
their knees to receive the blessing of one who had never bestowed a
blessing on mortal being until then! She extended her hands above those
two beautiful, bending heads: and her voice, as she adjured Heaven to
protect them, was plaintively earnest and tremulously clear, and its
musical sound seemed to touch the finest chord of sympathy, devotion,
and love that vibrated in the hearts of that youthful noble and his
virgin bride. When this solemn ceremony was accomplished, an immense
weight appeared to have been removed from the soul of the Lady Nisida of
Riverola; and her countenance wore a calm and sweet expression, which
formed a happy contrast with the sovereign hauteur and grand contempt
that were wont to mark it.

"I have now but little more to say in explanation of my past conduct,"
she resumed, after a long pause. "You can readily divine wherefore I
affected the loss of those most glorious faculties which God has given
me. I became enthusiastic in my resolves to carry out the injunctions of
my dear and much-loved mother; and while I lay upon a bed of sickness--a
severe illness produced by anguish and horror at all I had heard from
her lips, and by her death, so premature and sad--I pondered a thousand
schemes, the object of which was to accomplish the great aims I had in
view. I foresaw that I--a weak woman--then, indeed, a mere girl of
fifteen--should have to constitute myself the protectress of a brother
who was hated by his own father; and I feared lest that hatred should
drive him to the adoption of some dreadful plot to rid himself of your
presence, Francisco--perhaps even to deprive you of your life. I knew
that I must watch all his movements and listen to all his conversations
with those unprincipled wretches who are ever ready to do the bidding of
the powerful and the wealthy. But how was all this to be
accomplished?--how was I to become a watcher and a listener--a spy ever
active, and an eavesdropper ever awake--without exciting suspicions
which would lead to the frustration of my designs, and perhaps involve
both myself and my brother in ruin? Then was it that an idea struck me
like a flash of lightning; and like a flash of lightning was it terrible
and appalling, when breaking on the dark chaos of my thoughts. At first
I shrank from it--recoiled from it in horror and dismay;--but the more I
considered it--the longer I looked that idea in the face--the more I
contemplated it, the less formidable did it seem. I have already said
that I was enthusiastic and devoted in my resolves to carry out the
dying injunctions of my mother:--and thus by degrees I learnt to reflect
upon the awful sacrifice which had suggested itself to my imagination as
a species of holy and necessary self-martyrdom. I foresaw that if I
affected the loss of hearing and speech, I should obtain all the
advantages I sought and all the means I required to enable me to act as
the protectress of my brother against the hatred of my father. I
believed also that I should not only be considered as unfit to be made
the heiress of the title and fortune of the Riverola family, but that
our father, Francisco, would see the absolute necessity of treating you
in all respects as his lawful and legitimate son, in spite of any
suspicions which he might entertain relative to your birth. There were
many other motives which influenced me, and which arose out of the
injunctions of our mother,--motives which you can well understand, and
which I need not detail. Thus it was that, subduing the grief which the
idea of making so tremendous a sacrifice excited, on the one hand--and
arming myself with the exultation of a martyr, on the other,--thus it
was that I resolved to simulate the character of the deaf and dumb. It
was, however, necessary to obtain the collusion of Dr. Duras; and this
aim I carried after many hours of argument and persuasion. He was then
ignorant--and still is ignorant--of the real motives which had prompted
me to this self-martyrdom;--but I led him to believe that the gravest
and most important family interests required that moral immolation of my
own happiness;--and I vowed that unless he would consent to aid me, it
was my firm resolve to shut myself up in a convent and take the veil.
This threat, which I had not the least design of carrying into effect,
induced him to yield a reluctant acquiescence with my project: for he
loved me as if I had been his child. He was moreover consoled somewhat
by the assurance which I gave him, and in which I myself felt implicit
confidence at the time, that the necessity for the simulation of
deafness and dumbness on my part would cease the moment my father should
be no more. In a word, the kind Dr. Duras promised to act entirely in
accordance with my wishes; and I accordingly became Nisida the deaf and
dumb!"

"Merciful heavens! that immeasurable sacrifice was made for me!" cried
Francisco, throwing himself into the arms of his sister and imprinting a
thousand kisses on her cheeks.

"Yes--for your sake and in order to carry out the dying commands of our
mother, the sainted Vitangela?" responded Nisida. "I shall not weary you
with a description of the feelings and emotions with which I commenced
that long career of duplicity; by the very success that attended the
part which I had undertaken to perform you may estimate the magnitude
and the extent of the exertions which it cost me thus to maintain myself
a living--a constant--and yet undetected lie! Ten years passed away--ten
years, marked by many incidents which made me rejoice, for your sake,
Francisco, that I had accepted the self-martyrdom which circumstances
had suggested to me. At length our father lay upon his death bed: and
then--oh! then I rejoiced--yes, rejoiced, though he was dying; for I
thought that the end of my career of duplicity was at hand. Judge, then,
of my astonishment--my grief--my despair, when I heard the last
injunctions which our father addressed to you, Francisco, on that bed of
death. What could the mystery of the closet mean? Of that I _then_ knew
nothing. Wherefore was I to remain in complete ignorance of the
instructions thus given to you? And what was signified by the words
relative to the disposal of our father's property? For you may remember
that he spoke thus, addressing himself of course to you:--'You will find
that I have left the whole of my property to you. At the same time my
will specifies certain conditions relative to your sister Nisida, for
whom I have made due provision only in the case--which is, alas! almost
in defiance of every hope!--of her recovery from that dreadful
affliction which renders her so completely dependent upon your
kindness.' These ominous and mysterious words seemed to proclaim defeat
and overthrow to all the hopes that I had formed relative to the
certainty of your being left the sole and unconditional heir alike to
title and estate. I therefore resolved to maintain the character of the
deaf and dumb until I should have fathomed the secrets of the closet,
and have become acquainted with the conditions of the will. Oh! well do
I remember the glance which the generous-hearted Duras cast toward me,
when, returning to the chamber, he inquired by means of that significant
look whether the last words of our dying father were prognostic of hope
for me--whether, indeed, the necessity of sustaining the dreadful
duplicity would cease when he should be no more. And I remember, also,
that the look and the sign, by which I conveyed a negative answer were
expressive of the deep melancholy that filled his soul."

"Alas! my dear self-sacrificed sister," murmured Francisco, tears
trickling down his cheeks.

"Yes--my disappointment was cruel indeed," continued Nisida. "But the
excitement of the scenes and incidents which followed rapidly the death
of our father, restored my mind to its wonted tone of fortitude, vigor,
and proud determination. That very night, Francisco, I took the key of
the cabinet from your garments, while you slept--I sped to the chamber
of death--I visited the depository of horrible mysteries--and for the
first time I became aware that two skeletons were contained in that
closet! And whose fleshless relics those skeletons were, the dreadful
manuscript speedily revealed to me. Then was it also for the first time
that I learnt how Margaretha was the detestable spy whose agency had led
to such a frightful catastrophe in respect to Eugenio and Vitangela;
then I became aware that our mother's corpse slept not in the vault to
which a coffin had been consigned:--in a word, the full measure of our
sire's atrocity--O God! that I should be compelled thus to speak--was
revealed to me! But on Margaretha have I been avenged," added Nisida, in
a low tone, and with a convulsive shudder produced by the recollection
of that terrible night when she immolated the miserable woman above the
grave where lay a portion of the remains of her mother and of Eugenio.

"You have been avenged on Margaretha, sister," ejaculated Francisco,
surveying Nisida with apprehension.

"Yes," she replied, her large black eyes flashing with a scintillation
of the former fires: "that woman--I have slain her! But start not,
Flora--look not reproachfully upon me, Francisco: 'twas a deed fully
justified, a vengeance righteously exercised, a penalty well deserved!
And now let me hasten to bring my long and tedious explanations to a
conclusion--for they have occupied a longer space than I had at first
anticipated, and I am weak and faint. Little, however, remains to be
told. The nature of our father's will compelled me to persist in my
self-martyrdom: for I had sworn to my dying mother not to accept any
conditions or advantages which should have the effect of disinheriting
you, Francisco."

"Oh! what a debt of gratitude do I owe thee, my beloved sister!"
exclaimed the young count, deeply affected by the generous sacrifices
made by Nisida on his behalf.

"And think you I have experienced no reward?" asked the lady in a sweet
tone, and with a placid smile: "do you imagine that the consciousness of
having devoted myself to the fulfillment of my adored mother's wishes
has been no recompense? Yes--I have had my consolations and my hours of
happiness, as well as my sufferings and periods of profound affliction.
But I feel a soft and heavenly repose stealing over me--'tis a sweet
sleep, and yet it is not the slumber of death! No, no; 'tis a delicious
trance into which I am falling--'tis as if a celestial vision----"

She said no more. Her eyes closed, she fell back and slept soundly.

"Merciful Heavens! my sister is no more!" exclaimed Francisco, in terror
and despair.

"Fear not, my beloved husband," said Flora; "Nisida sleeps, and 'tis a
healthy slumber. The pulsations of her heart are regular; her breath
comes freely. Joy, joy, Francisco, she will recover!"

"The Holy Virgin grant that your hope may be fulfilled!" returned the
young count. "But let us not disturb her. We will sit down by the
bedside, Flora, and watch till she shall awake."

But scarcely had he uttered these words when the door of the chamber
opened, and an old man of venerable appearance, and with a long beard as
white as snow, advanced toward the newly married pair.

Francisco and Flora beheld him with feelings of reverence and awe, for
something appeared to tell them that he was a mortal of no common order.

"My dear children," he said, addressing them in a paternal manner, and
his voice firm, but mild, "ye need not watch here for the present.
Retire, and seek not this chamber again until the morning of to-morrow.
Fear nothing, excellent young man, for thou hast borne arms in the cause
of the cross. Fear nothing, amiable young lady, for thou art attended by
guardian angels."

And as the venerable man thus addressed them severally, he extended his
hands to bless them; and they received that blessing with holy meekness,
and yet with a joyous feeling which appeared to be of glorious augury
for their future happiness. Then, obedient to the command of the
stranger, they slowly quitted the apartment--urged to yield to his will
by a secret influence which they could not resist, but which
nevertheless animated them with a pious confidence in the integrity of
his purpose. The door closed behind them, and Christian Rosencrux
remained in the room with the dead Wagner and the dying Nisida.




CHAPTER LXIV.


While the incidents related in the last few chapters were taking place
at the Riverola Palace, the council of state had assembled to receive
the grand vizier, the mighty Ibrahim, who had signified his intention of
meeting that august body at three o'clock in the afternoon. Accordingly,
as soon as he had witnessed the marriage ceremony which united his
sister to the Count of Riverola, he returned from Wagner's mansion to
his own pavilion in the midst of the Ottoman encampment. There he
arrayed him in a manner becoming his exalted rank, and mounting his
splendid caparisoned steed, he repaired with a brilliant escort to the
ducal palace. The streets of the city of Florence were thronged with
multitudes eager to gain a sight of the representative of the sultan--a
view of the man whose will and pleasure swayed the greatest empire in
existence at that period of the world's age!

And as Ibrahim passed through those avenues so well known to
him--threaded those thoroughfares, each feature of which was so
indelibly impressed upon his memory--and beheld many, many familiar
spots, all of which awakened in his mind reminiscences of a happy
childhood, and of years gone by; when, too, he reflected that he had
quitted Florence poor, obscure, and unmarked amidst the millions of his
fellow-men; and that now, as he entered the beauteous city, multitudes
came forth to gaze upon him, as on one invested with a high rank and
enjoying a power mighty to do much; when he thought of all this, his
bosom swelled with mingled emotions of pride and tenderness, regret and
joy; and while tears trembled upon his long black lashes, a smile of
haughty triumph played on his lips. On, on the procession goes, through
the crowded streets and across the spacious squares, watched by the eyes
of transcendent beauty and proud aristocracy from the balconies of
palaces and the casements of lordly mansions; on, on, amidst a wondering
and admiring populace, and grateful, too, that so great a chief as
Ibrahim should have spared their city from sack and ruin.

At length the grand vizier, attended by the great beglerbegs and pashas
of his army, entered the square of the ducal palace; and as his prancing
steed bore him proudly beneath the massive arch, the roar of artillery
announced to the City of Flowers that the Ottoman Minister was now
within the precincts of the dwelling of the Florentine sovereign. The
duke and the members of the council of state were all assembled in the
court of the Palazzo to receive the illustrious visitor, who, having
dismounted from his horse, accompanied the prince and those high
dignitaries to the council-chamber. When the personages thus assembled
had taken their seats around the spacious table, covered with a rich red
velvet cloth, the grand vizier proceeded to address the duke and the
councilors.

"High and mighty prince, and noble and puissant lords," he said, in the
tone of one conscious of his power, "I am well satisfied with the manner
in which my demands have been fulfilled up to this moment. Two ladies,
in whom I feel a deep and sincere interest, and who were most unjustly
imprisoned to suit the vindictive purposes of the Count of Arestino,
have been delivered up to me: and ye have likewise agreed to make full
and adequate atonement for the part which Florence enacted in the late
contest between the Christians and Mussulmans in the Island of Rhodes. I
have therefore determined to reduce my demands upon the republic, for
indemnity and compensation, to as low a figure as my own dignity and a
sense of that duty which I owe to my sovereign (whom God preserve many
days!) will permit. The sum that I now require from your treasury,
mighty prince and puissant lords, is a hundred thousand pistoles; and in
addition thereto, I claim peculiar privileges for Ottoman vessels
trading to Leghorn, guaranty of peace on the part of the republic for
three years, and the release of such prisoners now in the dungeons of
the inquisition, whom it may seem good to me thus to mark out as
deserving of your mercy."

"A hundred thousand pistoles, my lord, would completely exhaust the
treasury of the republic," said the duke, with dismay pictured upon his
countenance.

"Think you," cried the grand vizier, angrily, "that I shall dare to face
my imperial master, on my return to Constantinople, unless I be able to
lay at his feet a sum adequate to meet the expenses incurred by this
expedition of a great fleet and a powerful army?"

"Your highness will at least accord us a few days wherein to obtain the
amount required," said the duke, "for it will be necessary to levy a tax
upon the republic!"

"I grant you until sunset, my lord--until sunset this evening." added
the grand vizier, speaking with stern emphasis. "And if you will permit
me to tender my advice, you will at once command the grand inquisitor
and the Count of Arestino to furnish the sum required: for the former, I
am inclined to suspect, is a most unjust judge, and the latter, I am
well convinced, is a most cruel and revengeful noble."

"The Count of Arestino is no more, your highness," answered the duke.
"The Marquis of Orsini murdered him before the very eyes of the grand
inquisitor, and will therefore head the procession of victims at the
approaching _auto-da-fe_."

"By the footstool of Allah! that shall not be!" exclaimed Ibrahim. "The
machinations of the Count of Arestino threw into the inquisition
dungeons those two ladies whom ye delivered up to me last night; and it
was my intention, when I spoke of releasing certain prisoners ere now,
to stipulate for the freedom of all those whom the vengeance of that
count has immured in your accursed prison-house. See then, my lords,
that all those of whom I speak be forthwith brought hither into our
presence!"

It may be proper to inform the reader that Flora had solicited her
brother to save the Marquis of Orsini and the Countess Giulia, to whom
the young wife of Francisco had been indebted for her escape from the
Carmelite Convent; for, as the secrets of the torture chamber were never
suffered to transpire, she was of course ignorant of the death of the
guilty Giulia, and of the assassination of the Count of Arestino by the
Marquis of Orsini.

At the command of Ibrahim Pasha, who spoke in a firm and resolute
manner, the duke summoned a sentinel from the corridor adjoining the
council chamber, and issued the necessary orders to fulfill the desire
of the grand vizier. Nearly a quarter of an hour elapsed during which
one of the councilors drew up the guaranty of peace and of the
commercial privileges demanded by Ibrahim. At length the door opened,
and several familiars made their appearance, leading in Manuel d'Orsini
and Isaachar ben Solomon, both heavily chained. The former walked with
head erect, and proud bearing; the latter could scarcely drag his
wasted, racked, and tottering limbs along, and was compelled to hang
upon the arms of the familiars for support. Nevertheless, there was
something so meek--so patient and so resigned in the expression of the
old and persecuted Israelite's countenance, that Ibrahim Pasha's soul
was touched with a sentiment of pity in his behalf.

"But these are not all the prisoners," exclaimed the grand vizier,
turning angrily toward the duke; "where is the Countess Giulia of
Arestino?"

"My lord, she is no more," answered the prince.

"And Heaven be thanked that she is indeed no more!" cried Manuel
d'Orsini, in a tone of mingled rage and bitterness. "Fortunate is it for
her that death has snatched her away from the grasp of miscreants in
human shape and who call themselves Christians. My lord," he continued,
turning toward Ibrahim, "I know not who you are; but I perceive by your
garb that you are a Moslem, and I presume that your rank is high by the
title addressed to you by the duke----"

"Presume not thus to intrude your observations on his highness the grand
vizier!" exclaimed one of the councilors in a severe tone.

"On the contrary," said Ibrahim Pasha, "let him speak, and without
reserve. My Lord of Orsini, fear not--I will protect you."

"The remark I was about to make, illustrious vizier," cried Manuel, "is
brief, though it may prove not palatable to the patrons of the
inquisition and the supporters of that awful engine of despotism and
cruelty," he added, glancing fiercely at the duke and the assembled
councilors. "I was anxious to observe that the Christian Church has
founded and maintained that abhorrent institution; and that there is
more true mercy--more genuine sympathy--and more of the holy spirit of
forgiveness in the breast of this reviled, despised and persecuted Jew,
than in the bosoms of all the miserable hypocrites who have dared to
sanction the infernal tortures which have been inflicted upon him. For
myself, I would not accept mercy at their hands; and I would rather go
in the companionship of this Jew to the funeral pile, than remain alive
to dwell amongst a race of incarnate fiends, calling themselves
Christians!"

"This insolence is not to be borne," exclaimed the duke, starting from
his seat, his countenance glowing with indignation.

"Your highness and all the councilors now assembled well merit the
reproaches of the Marquis of Orsini," said the grand vizier, sternly.
"But it is for _me_ to command here, and for _you_ to obey, proud
prince! Let the chains be removed from those prisoners forthwith."

The duke sank back in his chair, and, subduing his rage as well as he
was able, he made a sign to the familiars to set the Jew and the marquis
at liberty.

"Grand vizier," exclaimed Manuel, "the life and the liberty which, at
your all-powerful nod are restored to me will prove irksome and
valueless if I be compelled to remain in a Christian land. Confer not
favors by halves, my lord--render me completely grateful to you! Take me
into your service--even as a slave, if your highness will; but let me
accompany to a Mussulman country a Mussulman who can teach the
Christians such a fine lesson of mercy and forgiveness."

"You shall go with me to Constantinople, Manuel--but not as a slave,"
returned Ibrahim, profoundly touched by the sincere tone and earnest
manner of the young noble; "no--you shall accompany me as a friend."

"A thousand thanks, grand vizier, for this kindness--this generosity!"
said the marquis, deeply affected; then as a sudden idea struck him, he
turned toward the Jew exclaiming, "But we must not leave this old man
behind us. 'Twere the same as if we were to abandon a helpless child in
the midst of a forest inhabited by ferocious wolves."

"Yes--yes--let me accompany you, excellent young man!" murmured
Isaachar, clinging to the arm of the marquis, for their chains were now
knocked off. "You were the first Christian who ever spoke kindly to me;
and I have no kith--no kindred on the face of the earth. I am a
lone--desolate old man; but I have wealth--much wealth, Manuel
d'Orsini--and all that I have shall be thine."

"The Jew shall accompany us, my lord," said Ibrahim, addressing himself
to the marquis; then, turning toward the duke, he exclaimed in a severe
tone, "But a few hours remain till sunset, and the ransom of a hundred
thousand pistoles must be paid to me; or I will deliver up this proud
palace and the homes of the councilors now assembled to the pillage of
my troops."

"Nay--nay, my lord!" cried the Jew, horror-struck at the threat; "bring
not the terrors of sack, and storm, and carnage into this fair city! A
hundred thousand pistoles, your highness says,--a hundred thousand
pistoles," he added, in a slower and more musing tone; "'tis a large
sum--a very large sum! And yet--to save so many men and their innocent
families from ruin--from desolation---- Yes, my lord," he exclaimed,
hastily interrupting himself--"I--I will pay you the ransom-money."

"No--by Allah!" ejaculated Ibrahim; "not a single pistole shall be thus
extorted from thee! Sooner shall the Florentine Treasury grant thee an
indemnification for the horrible tortures which thou hast endured, than
thy wealth be poured forth to furnish this ransom-money. Come, my Lord
of Orsini--come, worthy Jew," continued the grand vizier, rising from
his seat, "we will depart to the Ottoman encampment."

"Patience, your highness, for a few hours," urged the duke, "and the
hundred thousand pistoles shall be counted out before thee."

"This poor man," answered the grand vizier, indicating the Jew with a
rapid glance, "has been so racked and tortured in your accursed
prison-house, that he cannot be too speedily placed under the care of my
own chirurgeon. For this reason I depart at once; see that the ransom be
dispatched to my pavilion ere the sun shall have set behind the western
hills."

With these words the grand vizier bowed haughtily to the duke, and
quitted the council chamber. Manuel d'Orsini followed, supporting
Isaachar ben Solomon; and, on reaching the court, one of Ibrahim's
slaves took the Jew up behind him on his steed. The marquis was provided
with a horse; and the cavalcade moved rapidly away from the precincts of
the ducal palace. Profiting by the hint which Ibrahim Pasha had offered
them, the duke and the councilors instantly levied a heavy fine upon the
grand inquisitor; and the remainder of the money required to make up the
amount demanded, was furnished from the public treasury. Thus by the
hour of sunset the ransom was paid.

       *       *       *       *       *

At an early hour on the ensuing morning, Francisco di Riverola and his
beautiful, blushing bride quitted the chamber where they had passed the
night in each other's arms, and repaired to the apartment where so many
terrible mysteries had been revealed to them, and so many dreadful
incidents had occurred on the preceding day. Hand in hand they had
traversed the passages and the corridors leading to that room in which
they had left Christian Rosencrux with the dead Wagner and the dying
Nisida; hand in hand and silently they went--that fine young noble and
charming bride!

On reaching the door of the chamber, Francisco knocked gently; and the
glance of intelligence which passed between himself and Flora showed
that each was a prey to the same breathless suspense; the same mingled
feelings of bright hopes and vague fears. In a few moments the door was
slowly opened; and the venerable old man appeared, his countenance
wearing a solemn and mournful aspect. Then Francisco and the young
countess knew that all was over; and tears started into their eyes.

Christian Rosencrux beckoned them to advance toward the bed, around
which the curtains were drawn closer; and as they entered the room, the
rapid and simultaneous glances which they cast toward the spot where
Fernand Wagner fell down and surrendered up his breath, showed them that
the corpse had been removed. Approaching the bed with slow and measured
steps, Rosencrux drew aside the drapery; and for a moment Francisco and
Flora shrank back from the spectacle which met their view; but at the
next instant they advanced to the couch, and contemplated with mournful
attention the scene presented to them. For there--upon that couch--side
by side, lay Fernand Wagner and Nisida of Riverola--stiff, motionless,
cold.

"Grieve not for her loss, children," said Christian Rosencrux; "she has
gone to a happier realm--for the sincere repentance which she manifested
in her last hours has atoned for all the evil she wrought in her
lifetime. From the moment, young lady, when she banished from her soul
the rancor long harbored there against thee--from the instant that she
received thee in her arms, and called thee sister--the blessing of
Heaven was vouchsafed unto her. She was penitent, very penitent, while I
administered to her the consolations of religion, and a complete change
came over her mind. Grieve not, then, for her; happy on earth she never
could have been again--but happy in heaven she doubtless now is!"

Francisco and the young countess knelt by the side of the couch, and
prayed for a long time in silence, with their faces buried in their
hands. When they again raised their heads, and glanced around, the
venerable old man no longer met their eyes. Christian Rosencrux had
departed, leaving Francisco and Flora in complete ignorance of his name;
but they experienced a secret conviction that he was something more than
an ordinary mortal; and the remembrance of the blessing which he had
bestowed upon them the preceding day, shed a soothing and holy influence
over their minds.

Little now remains to be said; a few brief observations and a rapid
glance at the eventual fortunes and fates of the leading characters in
the tale, will acquit us of our task. Nisida and Wagner were entombed in
the same vault; and their names were inscribed upon the same mural
tablet. The funeral was conducted with the utmost privacy--and the
mourners were few, but their grief was sincere. And among them was Dr.
Duras, who had loved Nisida as if she had been his own child. On the
night following the one on which these obsequies took place, another
funeral procession departed from the Riverola Palace to the adjacent
church; and two coffins were on this occasion, as on the former,
consigned to the family tomb. But the ceremony was conducted with even
more privacy than the first; and one mourner alone was present. This was
Francisco himself; and thus did he perform the sad duty of interring in
sacred ground the remains of his ill-fated mother Vitangela and her
brother Eugenio. The manuscript of the late Count of Riverola was burnt;
the closet which so long contained such fearful mysteries was walled up;
the chamber where so many dreadful incidents had occurred was never used
during the lifetime of Francisco and Flora. The grand vizier remained
with his army a few days beneath the walls of Florence: and during that
time Isaachar ben Solomon so far recovered his health and strength,
under the skillful care of an Egyptian physician, as to be able to visit
his dwelling in the suburb of Alla Croce, and secure the immense wealth
which he had amassed during a long life of activity and financial
prosperity.

When the day of the grand vizier's departure arrived, he took a tender
farewell of his sister Flora and his aunt, both of whom he loaded with
the most costly presents; and in return, he received from Francisco a
gift of several horses of rare breed and immense value. Nor did this
species of interchange of proofs of attachment end here, for every year,
until Ibrahim's death, did that great minister and the Count of Riverola
forward to each other letters and rich presents--thus maintaining to the
end that friendship which had commenced in the Island of Rhodes, and
which was cemented by the marriage of Francisco and Flora. Isaachar ben
Solomon and Manuel d'Orsini accompanied the grand vizier to
Constantinople, and were treated by him with every mark of distinction.
But the Jew never completely recovered from the tortures which he had
endured in the prison of the inquisition; and in less than two years
from the date of his release, he died in the arms of the marquis, to
whom he left the whole of his immense fortune. Manuel d'Orsini abjured
Christianity, and entered the Ottoman service, in which his success was
brilliant and his rise rapid, thanks to the favor of the grand vizier.
The reader of Ottoman history will find the name of Mustapha Pasha
frequently mentioned with honor in the reign of Solyman the
Magnificent--and Mustapha Pasha, beglerbeg of the mighty province of
Anatolia, was once Manuel d'Orsini.

For nearly sixteen years did Ibrahim Pasha govern the Ottoman realms in
the name of the sultan: for nearly sixteen years did he hold the
imperial seals which had been intrusted to him at a period when the
colossal power of the empire seemed tottering to its fall. During that
interval he raised the Ottoman name to the highest pinnacle of
glory--extended the dominions of his master--and shook the proudest
thrones in Christendom to their foundation. Ferdinand, King of Hungary,
called him "brother," and the Emperor Charles the Fifth of Germany
styled him "cousin" in the epistolary communications which passed
between them. But a Greek who had long, long cherished a deadly hatred
against the puissant grand vizier, at last contrived to enter the
service of the sultan in the guise of a slave; and this man, succeeding
in gaining that monarch's ear, whispered mysterious warnings against the
ambition of Ibrahim. Solyman became alarmed; and, opening his eyes to
the real position of affairs, perceived that the vizier was indeed far
more powerful than himself. This was enough to insure the immediate
destruction of a Turkish minister.

Accordingly, one evening, Ibrahim was invited to dine with the sultan,
and to sleep at the imperial palace. Never had Solyman appeared more
attached to his favorite than on this occasion and Ibrahim retired to a
chamber prepared for him, with a heart elated by the caresses bestowed
upon him by his imperial master. But in the dead of night he was
awakened by the entrance of several persons into the room; and starting
up with terror, the grand vizier beheld _four black slaves_, headed by a
Greek, creep snake-like toward his couch. And that Greek's countenance,
sinister and menacing, was immediately recognized by the affrighted
Ibrahim--though more than fifteen years had elapsed since he had set
eyes upon those features. Short and ineffectual was the struggle against
the messengers of death; the accursed bowstring encircled the neck of
the unhappy Ibrahim, and at the moment when the vindictive Greek drew
tight the fatal noose, the last words which hissed in the ears of the
grand vizier, were--"The wrongs of Calanthe are avenged!"

Thus perished the most powerful minister that ever held the imperial
seals of Ottoman domination;--and the long-pent-up but never subdued
vindictive feelings of Demetrius were assuaged at length! Dame
Francatelli had long been numbered with those who were gone to their
eternal homes when the news of the death of Ibrahim Pasha reached
Florence. But the Count and Countess of Riverola shed many, many tears
at the sad and untimely fate of the grand vizier.

Time, however, smooths down all grief; and happiness again returned to
the Riverola Palace. For when Francisco and Flora looked around them and
beheld the smiling progeny which had blessed their union,--when they
experienced the sweet solace of each other's sympathy, the outpourings
of two hearts which beat as one, ever in unison, and filled with a
mutual love which time impaired not,--then they remembered that it was
useless and wrong to repine against the decrees of Providence; and, in
this trusting faith in Heaven and in the enjoyment of each other's
unwearying affection, they lived to a good old age--dying at length in
the arms of their children.




[THE END.]





End of Project Gutenberg's Wagner, the Wehr-Wolf, by George W. M. Reynolds

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WAGNER, THE WEHR-WOLF ***

***** This file should be named 27202.txt or 27202.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/2/0/27202/

Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
