The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lame Lover, by Samuel Foote

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: The Lame Lover
       A Comedy in Three Acts

Author: Samuel Foote

Release Date: August 4, 2015 [EBook #49602]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAME LOVER ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau, Paul Dring and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Canada Team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net









THE LAME LOVER,

  A COMEDY

  IN THREE ACTS.

  As it is Performed at the
  THEATRE-ROYAL in the HAY-MARKET.

  By SAMUEL FOOTE, Esq.

  LONDON,

  Printed for PAUL VAILLANT: and sold by P. ELMSLY,
  in the Strand; and ROBINSON and ROBERTS, No. 25,
  Pater-noster-Row. MDCCLXX.


  TO
  THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
  FRANCIS SEYMOUR CONWAY,
  EARL OF HERTFORD,
  LORD CHAMBERLAIN OF
  HIS MAJESTY'S HOUSEHOLD,
  TO WHOSE
  POLITENESS AND CANDOUR
  THE AUTHOR
  OWES EVERY ACKNOWLEDGMENT,
  THIS COMEDY IS
  GRATEFULLY DEDICATED
  BY
  HIS LORDSHIP'S
  MOST OBLIGED
  AND
  MOST OBEDIENT SERVANT,

  North End.

  SAM. FOOTE.




PROLOGUE.

Written and Spoken by Mr. GENTLEMAN.


  _Prologues, like cards of compliment, we find,
  Most as unmeaning as politely kind;
  To beg a favour, or to plead excuse,
  Of both appears to be the gen'ral use.
    Shall my words, tipt with flattery, prepare
  A kind exertion of your tend'rest care?
  Shall I present our Author to your sight,
  All pale and trembling for his fate this night?
  Shall I sollicit the most pow'rful arms
  To aid his cause--the force of beauty's charms?
  Or tell each critic, his approving taste
  Must give the sterling stamp, wherever plac'd?
  This might be done--but so to seek applause
  Argues a conscious weakness in the cause.
  No--let the Muse in simple truth appear,_
  Reason _and_ Nature _are the judges here:
  If by their strict and self-describing laws,
  The sev'ral characters to-night she draws;
  If from the whole a pleasing piece is made,
  On the true principles of light and shade;
  Struck with the harmony of just design,
  Your eyes--your ears--your hearts, will all combine
  To grant applause:--but if an erring hand
  Gross disproportion marks in motley band,
  If the group'd figures false connexions show,
  And glaring colours without meaning glow,
  Your wounded feelings, turn'd a diff'rent way,
  Will justly damn--th'_ abortion _of a play.
    As Farquhar has observ'd, our English law,
  Like a fair spreading oak, the Muse should draw,
  By Providence design'd, and wisdom made
  For honesty to thrive beneath its shade;
  Yet from its boughs some insects shelter find,
  Dead to each nobler feeling of the mind,
  Who thrive, alas! too well, and never cease
  To prey on justice, property, and peace.
      At such to-night, with other_ legal _game,
  Our vent'rous author takes satiric aim;
  And brings, he hopes, originals to view,
  Nor pilfers from th' Old Magpie, nor the New[1].
  But will to Candour chearfully submit;
  She reigns in boxes, galleries, and pit._

  1. Alluding to Mr. Garrick's Prologue to the Jubilee.




Dramatis Personæ.


MEN.

  Sir LUKE LIMP,        _Mr. Foote_.
  Serjeant CIRCUIT,     _Mr. Vandermere_.
  Colonel SECRET,       _Mr. Robson_.
  JACK,                 _Mr. Weston_.
  Mr. WOODFORD,         _Mr. Knowles_.
  Mr. FAIRPLAY,         _Mr. Wheeler_.
  First SERVANT,        _Mr. Dancer_.
  Second SERVANT,       _Mr. Griffiths_.


WOMEN.

  Mrs. CIRCUIT,         _Mrs. Gardner_.
  CHARLOT,              _Mrs. Jewell_.
  Mrs. SIMPER,          _Mrs. Saunders_.
  BETTY,                _Mrs. Read_.




THE LAME LOVER.




ACT I.

_Enter_ Serjeant CIRCUIT _and_ CHARLOT.


CHARLOT.

I tell you, Sir, his love to me is all a pretence: it is amazing that
you, who are so acute, so quick in discerning on other occasions,
should be so blind upon this.

SERJEANT.

But where are your proofs, Charlot? What signifies your opening matters
which your evidence cannot support?

CHARLOT.

Surely, Sir, strong circumstances in every court should have weight.

SERJEANT.

So they have collaterally, child, that is by way as it were of
corroboration, or where matters are doubtful; then indeed, as Plowden
wisely observes "Les circonstances ajout beaucoup depoids aux
faits."--You understand me?

CHARLOT.

Not perfectly well.

SERJEANT.

Then to explain by case in point; A, we will suppose, my dear, robs B
of a watch upon Hounslow heath--dy'e mind, child?

CHARLOT.

I do, Sir.

SERJEANT.

A, is taken up and indicted; B swears positively to the identity of
A.--Dy'e observe?

CHARLOT.

Attentively.

SERJEANT.

Then what does me A, but sets up the alibi C, to defeat the affidavit
of B.--You take me.

CHARLOT.

Clearly.

SERJEANT.

So far you see then the ballance is even.

CHARLOT.

True.

SERJEANT.

But then to turn the scale, child, against A, in favour of B, they
produce the circumstance D, viz. B's watch found in the pocket of
A; upon which, the testimony of C being contradicted by B,--no, by
D,--why then A, that is to say C,--no D,--joining B, they convict
C,--no, no, A,--against the affidavit of C.--So this being pretty
clear, child, I leave the application to you.

CHARLOT.

Very obliging, Sir. But suppose now, Sir, it should appear that the
attention of Sir Luke Limp is directed to some other object, would not
that induce you to--

SERJEANT.

Other object! Where?

CHARLOT.

In this very house.

SERJEANT.

Here! why the girl is non compos; there's nobody here, child, but a
parcel of Abigals.

CHARLOT.

No, Sir?

SERJEANT.

No.

CHARLOT.

Yes, Sir, one person else.

SERJEANT.

Who is that?

CHARLOT.

But remember, Sir, my accusation is confined to Sir Luke.

SERJEANT.

Well, well.

CHARLOT.

Suppose then, Sir, those powerful charms which made a conquest of you,
may have extended their empire over the heart of Sir Luke?

SERJEANT.

Why, hussy, you don't hint at your mother-in-law?

CHARLOT.

Indeed, Sir, but I do.

SERJEANT.

Ay; why this is point blank treason against my sovereign authority: but
can you, Charlot, bring proof of any overt acts?

CHARLOT.

Overt acts!

SERJEANT.

Ay; that is any declaration by writing, or even word of mouth is
sufficient; then let 'em demur if they dare.

CHARLOT.

I can't say that, Sir; but another organ has been pretty explicit.

SERJEANT.

Which?

CHARLOT.

In those cases a very infallible one--the eye.

SERJEANT.

Pshaw! nonsense and stuff.--The eye!--The eye has no authority in a
court of law.

CHARLOT.

Perhaps not, Sir, but it is a decisive evidence in a court of love.

SERJEANT.

Hark you, hussy, why you would not file an information against the
virtue of madam your mother; you would not insinuate that she has been
guilty of crim. con.?

CHARLOT.

Sir, you mistake me; it is not the lady, but the gentleman I am about
to impeach.

SERJEANT.

Have a care, Charlot! I see on what ground your action is
founded--jealousy.

CHARLOT.

You were never more deceiv'd in your life; for it is impossible, my
dear Sir, that jealousy can subsist without love.

SERJEANT.

Well.

CHARLOT.

And from that passion (thank heaven) I am pretty free at present.

SERJEANT.

Indeed!

CHARLOT.

A sweet object to excite tender desires!

SERJEANT.

And why not, hussy?

CHARLOT.

First as to his years.

SERJEANT.

What then?

CHARLOT.

I own, Sir, age procures honor, but I believe it is very rarely
productive of love.

SERJEANT.

Mighty well.

CHARLOT.

And tho' the loss of a leg can't be imputed to Sir Luke Limp as a
fault--

SERJEANT.

How!

CHARLOT.

I hope, Sir, at least you will allow it a misfortune.

SERJEANT.

Indeed!

CHARLOT.

A pretty thing truly, for a girl, at my time of life, to be ty'd to a
man with one foot in the grave.

SERJEANT.

One foot in the grave! the rest of his body is not a whit the nearer
for that.--There has been only an execution issued against part of
his personals, his real estate is unencumbered and free--besides, you
see he does not mind it a whit, but is as alert, and as merry, as a
defendant after non-suiting a plaintiff for omitting an S.

CHARLOT.

O! Sir! I know how proud Sir Luke is of his leg, and have often heard
him declare, that he would not change his bit of timber for the best
flesh and bone in the kingdom.

SERJEANT.

There's a hero for you!

CHARLOT.

To be sure, sustaining unavoidable evils with constancy is a certain
sign of greatness of mind.

SERJEANT.

Doubtless.

CHARLOT.

But then to derive a vanity from a misfortune, will not I'm afraid be
admitted as a vast instance of wisdom, and indeed looks as if the man
had nothing better to distinguish himself by.

SERJEANT.

How does that follow?

CHARLOT.

By inunendo.

SERJEANT.

Negatur.

CHARLOT.

Besides, Sir, I have other proofs of your hero's vanity, not inferior
to that I have mention'd.

SERJEANT.

Cite them.

CHARLOT.

The paltry ambition of levying and following titles.

SERJEANT.

Titles! I don't understand you?

CHARLOT.

I mean the poverty of fastening in public upon men of distinction, for
no other reason but because of their rank; adhering to Sir John till
the Baronet is superceded by my Lord; quitting the puny Peer for an
Earl; and sacrificing all three to a Duke.

SERJEANT.

Keeping good company! a laudable ambition!

CHARLOT.

True, Sir, if the virtues that procur'd the father a peerage, could
with that be entail'd on the son.

SERJEANT.

Have a care, hussy--there are severe laws against speaking evil of
dignities.--

CHARLOT.

Sir!

SERJEANT.

Scandalum magnatum is a statute must not be trifled with: why you are
not one of those vulgar sluts that think a man the worse for being a
Lord?

CHARLOT.

No, Sir; I am contented with only, not thinking him the better.

SERJEANT.

For all this, I believe, hussy, a right honourable proposal would soon
make you alter your mind.

CHARLOT.

Not unless the proposer had other qualities than what he possesses by
patent. Besides, Sir, you know Sir Luke is a devotee to the bottle.

SERJEANT.

Not a whit the less honest for that.

CHARLOT.

It occasions one evil at least; that when under its influence, he
generally reveals all, sometimes more than he knows.

SERJEANT.

Proofs of an open temper, you baggage: but, come, come, all these are
but trifling objections.

CHARLOT.

You mean, Sir, they prove the object a trifle.

SERJEANT.

Why you pert jade; do you play on my words? I say Sir Luke is--

CHARLOT.

Nobody.

SERJEANT.

Nobody! how the deuce do you make that out?--He is neither person
attained or outlaw'd, may in any of his majesty's courts sue or be
sued, appear by attorney, or in propria persona, can acquire, buy,
procure, purchase, possess, and inherit, not only personalities, such
as goods, and chattels, but even realities, as all lands, tenements,
and hereditaments, whatsoever, and wheresoever.

CHARLOT.

But, Sir--

SERJEANT.

Nay, further child, he may sell, give, bestow, bequeath, devise,
demise, lease, or to farm lett, ditto lands, to any person
whomsoever--and--

CHARLOT.

Without doubt, Sir; but there are notwithstanding in this town a great
number of nobodies, not described by lord Coke.

SERJEANT.

Hey!

CHARLOT.

There is your next-door neighbour, Sir Harry Hen, an absolute blank.

SERJEANT.

How so, Mrs. Pert?

CHARLOT.

What, Sir! a man who is not suffer'd to hear, see, smell, or in short
to enjoy the free use of any one of his senses; who, instead of having
a positive will of his own, is deny'd even a paltry negative; who can
neither resolve or reply, consent or deny, without first obtaining the
leave of his lady: an absolute monarch to sink into the sneaking state
of being a slave to one of his subjects--Oh fye!

SERJEANT.

Why, to be sure, Sir Harry Hen, is as I may say--

CHARLOT.

Nobody Sir, in the fullest sense of the word--Then your client Lord
Solo.

SERJEANT.

Heyday!--Why you would not annihilate a peer of the realm, with a
prodigious estate and an allow'd judge too of the elegant arts.

CHARLOT.

O yes, Sir, I am no stranger to that nobleman's attributes; but then,
Sir, please to consider, his power as a peer he gives up to a proxy;
the direction of his estate, to a rapacious, artful attorney: and as to
his skill in the elegant arts, I presume you confine them to painting
and music, he is directed in the first by Mynheer Van Eisel, a Dutch
dauber; and in the last is but the echo of Signora Florenza, his
lordship's mistress and an opera singer.

SERJEANT.

Mercy upon us! at what a rate the jade runs!

CHARLOT.

In short, Sir, I define every individual who, ceasing to act for
himself, becomes the tool, the mere engine of another man's will, to be
nothing more than a cypher.

SERJEANT.

At this rate the jade will half unpeople the world: but what is all
this to Sir Luke? to him, not one of your cases apply.

CHARLOT.

Every one--Sir Luke has not a first principle in his whole composition;
not only his pleasures, but even his passions are prompted by others;
and he is as much directed to the objects of his love and his hatred,
as in his eating, drinking, and dressing. Nay, though he is active,
and eternally busy, yet his own private affairs are neglected; and
he would not scruple to break an appointment that was to determine a
considerable part of his property, in order to exchange a couple of
hounds for a lord, or to buy a pad-nag for a lady. In a word--but he's
at hand, and will explain himself best; I hear his stump on the stairs.

SERJEANT.

I hope you will preserve a little decency before your lover at least.

CHARLOT.

Lover! ha, ha, ha!

     _Enter Sir_ LUKE LIMP.

Sir LUKE.

Mr. Serjeant, your slave--Ah! are you there my little--O Lord! Miss,
let me tell you something for fear of forgetting--Do you know that you
are new christen'd, and have had me for a gossip?

CHARLOT.

Christen'd! I don't understand you.

Sir LUKE.

Then lend me your ear--Why last night, as Colonel Kill'em, Sir William
Weezy, Lord Frederick Foretop, and I were carelessly sliding the
Ranelagh round, picking our teeth, after a damn'd muzzy dinner at
Boodle's, who should trip by but an abbess, well known about town, with
a smart little nun in her suite. Says Weezy (who, between ourselves,
is as husky as hell) Who is that? odds flesh, she's a delicate wench!
Zounds! cried Lord Frederick, where can Weezy have been, not to have
seen the Harietta before? for you must know Frederick is a bit of
Macaroni, and adores the soft Italian termination in _a_.

CHARLOT.

He does?

Sir LUKE.

Yes, a delitanti all over.--Before? replied Weezy; crush me if ever I
saw any thing half so handsome before!--No! replied I in an instant;
Colonel, what will Weezy say when he sees the Charlotta?--Hey! you
little----

CHARLOT.

Meaning me, I presume.

Sir LUKE.

Without doubt; and you have been toasted by that name ever since.

SERJEANT.

What a vast fund of spirits he has!

Sir LUKE.

And why not, my old splitter of causes?

SERJEANT.

I was just telling Charlot, that you was not a whit the worse for the
loss.

Sir LUKE.

The worse! much the better, my dear. Consider, I can have neither
strain, splint, spavin, or gout; have no fear of corns, kibes, or that
another man should kick my shins, or tread on my toes.

SERJEANT.

Right.

Sir LUKE.

What d'ye think I would change with Bill Spindle for one of his
drumsticks, or chop with Lord Lumber for both of his logs?

SERJEANT.

No!

Sir LUKE.

No, damn it, I am much better.--Look there--Ha!--What is there I am not
able to do? To be sure I am a little aukward at running; but then, to
make me amends, I'll hop with any man in town for his sum.

SERJEANT.

Ay, and I'll go his halves.

Sir LUKE.

Then as to your dancing, I am cut out at Madam Cornelly's, I grant,
because of the croud; but as far as a private set of six couple, or
moving a chair-minuet, match me who can.

CHARLOT.

A chair-minuet! I don't understand you.

Sir LUKE.

Why, child, all grace is confined to the motion of the head, arms, and
chest, which may sitting be as fully displayed, as if one had as many
legs as a polypus.--As thus--tol de rol--don't you see?

SERJEANT.

Very plain.

Sir LUKE.

A leg! a redundancy! a mere nothing at all. Man is from nature an
extravagant creature. In my opinion, we might all be full as well as we
are, with but half the things that we have.

CHARLOT.

Ay, Sir Luke; how do you prove that?

Sir LUKE.

By constant experience.--You must have seen the man who makes and uses
pens without hands.

SERJEANT.

I have.

Sir LUKE.

And not a twelvemonth agone, I lost my way in a fog, at Mile-End, and
was conducted to my house in May-Fair by a man as blind as a beetle.

SERJEANT.

Wonderful!

Sir LUKE.

And as to hearing and speaking, those organs are of no manner of use in
the world.

SERJEANT.

How!

Sir LUKE.

If you doubt it, I will introduce you to a whole family, dumb as
oysters, and deaf as the dead, who chatter from morning till night by
only the help of their fingers.

SERJEANT.

Why, Charlot, these are cases in point.

Sir LUKE.

Oh! clear as a trout-stream; and it is not only, my little Charlot,
that this piece of timber answers every purpose, but it has procured me
many a bit of fun in my time.

SERJEANT.

Ay!

Sir LUKE.

Why, it was but last summer, at Tunbridge, we were plagued the whole
season by a bullet-headed Swiss from the canton of Bern, who was always
boasting, what, and how much he dared do; and then, as to pain, no
Stoic, not Diogenes, held it more in contempt.--By gods, he vas no more
minds it dan notings at all--So, foregad, I gave my German a challenge.

SERJEANT.

As how!--Mind, Charlot.

Sir LUKE.

Why to drive a corkin pin into the calves of our legs.

SERJEANT.

Well, well.

Sir LUKE.

Mine, you may imagine, was easily done--but when it came to the Baron--

SERJEANT.

Ay, ay.

Sir LUKE.

Our modern Cato soon lost his coolness and courage, screw'd his nose up
to his foretop, rapp'd out a dozen oaths in high Dutch, limp'd away to
his lodgings, and was there laid up for a month--Ha, ha, ha!

     _Enter a Servant, and delivers a Card to_ Sir Luke.

Sir LUKE _reads_.

"Sir Gregory Goose desires the honour of Sir Luke Limp's company to
dine. An answer is desired." Gadso! a little unlucky; I have been
engag'd for these three weeks.

SERJEANT.

What, I find Sir Gregory is return'd for the corporation of _Fleesum_.

Sir LUKE.

Is he so? Oh ho!--That alters the case.--George, give my compliments to
Sir Gregory, and I'll certainly come and dine there. Order Joe to run
to alderman Inkle's, in Threadneedle-street; sorry can't wait upon him,
but confin'd to bed two days with _new influenza_.

CHARLOT.

You make light, Sir Luke, of these sort of engagements.

Sir LUKE.

What can a man do? These damn'd fellows (when one has the misfortune to
meet them) take scandalous advantage; teaze, When will you do me the
honour, pray, Sir Luke, to take a bit of mutton with me? Do you name
the day--They are as bad as a beggar, who attacks your coach at the
mounting of a hill; there is no getting rid of them, without a penny to
one, and a promise to t'other.

SERJEANT.

True; and then for such a time too--three weeks! I wonder they expect
folks to remember. It is like a retainer in Michaelmas term for the
summer assizes.

Sir LUKE.

Not but, upon these occasions, no man in England is more punctual
than----

     _Enter a Servant, who gives_ Sir Luke _a Letter_.

From whom?

SERVANT.

Earl of Brentford. The servant waits for an answer.

Sir LUKE.

Answer!--By your leave, Mr. Serjeant and Charlot. [_Reads._] "Taste for
music--Mons. Duport--fail--Dinner upon table at five"--Gadso! I hope
Sir Gregory's servant an't gone.

SERVANT.

Immediately upon receiving the answer.

Sir LUKE.

Run after him as fast as you can--tell him, quite in despair--recollect
an engagement that can't in nature be missed,--and return in an instant.

CHARLOT.

You see, Sir, the Knight must give way for my Lord.

Sir LUKE.

No, faith, it is not that, my dear Charlot; you saw that was quite an
extempore business.--No, hang it, no, it is not for the title; but to
tell you the truth, Brentford has more wit than any man in the world;
it is that makes me fond of his house.

CHARLOT.

By the choice of his company he gives an unanswerable instance of that.

Sir LUKE.

You are right, my dear girl. But now to give you a proof of his wit:
You know Brentford's finances are a little out of repair, which
procures him some visits that he would very gladly excuse.

SERJEANT.

What need he fear? His person is sacred; for by the tenth of William
and Mary--

Sir LUKE.

He knows that well enough; but for all that--

SERJEANT.

Indeed, by a late act of his own house, (which does them infinite
honour) his goods or chattels may be----

Sir LUKE.

Seiz'd upon when they can find them, but he lives in ready-furnish'd
lodgings, and hires his coach by the month.

SERJEANT.

Nay, if the sheriff return "non inventus"--

Sir LUKE.

A pox o' your law, you make me lose sight of my story. One morning,
a Welch coach-maker came with his bill to my Lord, whose name was
unluckily Loyd. My Lord had the man up. You are call'd, I think, Mr.
Loyd?--At your Lordship's service, my Lord.----What, Loyd with an
L?--It was with an L indeed, my Lord.--Because in your part of the
world I have heard that Loyd and Floyd were synonymous, the very same
names.--Very often indeed, my lord.--But you always spell your's with
an L?--Always.--That, Mr. Loyd, is a little unlucky; for you must know
I am now paying my debts alphabetically, and in four or five years you
might have come in with an F; but I am afraid I can give you no hopes
for your L.--Ha, ha, ha!

     _Enter a_ SERVANT.

SERVANT.

There was no overtaking the servant.

Sir LUKE.

That is unlucky: tell my Lord I'll attend him.--I'll call on Sir
Gregory myself.

SERJEANT.

Why, you won't leave us, Sir Luke?

Sir LUKE.

Pardon, dear Serjeant and Charlotta; have a thousand things to do for
half a million of people positively; promised to procure a husband for
Lady Cicely Sulky, and match a coach-horse for Brigadier Whip; after
that, must run into the city to borrow a thousand for young At-all at
Almack's; send a Cheshire cheese by the stage to Sir Timothy Tankard in
Suffolk; and get at the Herald's Office a coat of arms to clap on the
coach of Billy Bengal, a nabob newly arriv'd: so you see I have not a
moment to lose.

SERJEANT.

True, true.

Sir LUKE.

At your toilet to-morrow at ten you may--

     _Enter a_ SERVANT _abruptly, and runs against Sir_ LUKE.

Can't you see where you are running you, rascal!

SERVANT.

Sir, his grace the Duke of----

Sir LUKE.

Grace!--Where is he?--Where--

SERVANT.

In his coach at the door.--If you an't better engaged would be glad of
your company to go into the city, and take a dinner at Dolly's.

Sir LUKE.

In his own coach did you say?

SERVANT.

Yes, Sir.

Sir LUKE.

With the coronets--or--

SERVANT.

I believe so.

Sir LUKE.

There's no resisting of that.--Bid Joe run to Sir Gregory Goose's.

SERVANT.

He is already gone to alderman Inkle's.

Sir LUKE.

Then do you step to the Knight--hey!--no--you must go to my
Lord's--hold, hold, no--I have it--Step first to Sir Greg's, then pop
in at Lord Brentford's just as the company are going to dinner.

SERVANT.

What shall I say to Sir Gregory?

Sir LUKE.

Any thing--what I told you before.

SERVANT.

And what to my Lord?

Sir LUKE.

What!--Why tell him that my uncle from Epsom--no--that won't do, for
he knows I don't care a farthing for him--hey!--Why tell him--hold
I have it--Tell him, that as I was going into my chair to obey his
commands, I was arrested by a couple of bailiffs, forced into a hackney
coach, and carried to the Py'd Bull in the Borough; I beg ten thousand
pardons for making his grace wait, but his grace knows my misfor----
[_Exit Sir_ Luke.

CHARLOT.

Well, Sir, what dy'e think of the proofs? I flatter myself I have
pretty well established my case.

SERJEANT.

Why, hussy, you have hit upon points; but then they are but trifling
flaws, they don't vitiate the title, that stands unimpeach'd; and--But,
madam, your mother.

     _Enter Mrs._ CIRCUIT.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

What have you done with the Knight?--Why you have not let him depart?

CHARLOT.

It was not in my power to keep him.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

I don't wonder at that; but what took him away?

CHARLOT.

What will at any time take him away--a Duke at the door.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Are you certain of that?

SERJEANT.

Why truly, chuck, his retreat was rather precipitate for a man that is
just going to be marry'd.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

The prospect of marriage does not always prove the strongest attachment.

SERJEANT.

Pardon me, lovee; the law allows no higher consideration than marriage.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Pshaw!

SERJEANT.

Insomuch, that if duke A was to intermarry with chambermaid B,
difference of condition would prove no bar to the settlement.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Indeed!

SERJEANT.

Ay; and this was held to be law by Chief-baron Bind'em, on the famous
case of the Marquis of Cully, and Fanny Flip-flap the French dancer.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

The greater blockhead the Baron: but don't pester me with your odious
law cases.--Did not you tell me you was to go to Kingston to day to try
the crown causes?

SERJEANT.

I was begg'd to attend for fear his Lordship should not be able to sit;
but if it proves inconvenient to you--

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

To me! Oh, by no means in the world; I am too good a subject to desire
the least delay in the law's execution: and when d'ye set out?

SERJEANT.

Between one and two; I shall only just give a law lecture to Jack.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Lord! I wonder Mr. Circuit you would breed that boy up to the bar.

SERJEANT.

Why not, chuck? He has fine steady parts, and for his time moots a
point--

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Steady! stupid you mean: nothing sure cou'd add to his heaviness but
the being loaded with law. Why don't you put him into the army?

SERJEANT.

Nay, chuck, if you choose it, I believe I have interest to get Jack a
commission.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Why, Mr. Circuit, you know he is no son of mine; perhaps a cockade may
animate the lad with some fire.

SERJEANT.

True, lovee; and a knowledge of the law mayn't be amiss to restrain his
fire a little.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

I believe there is very little danger of his exceeding that way.

SERJEANT.

Charlot, send hither your brother. [_Exit_ Charlot.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

I'll not interrupt you.

SERJEANT.

Far from it, lovee; I should be glad to have you a witness of Jacky's
improvement.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Of that I am no judge; besides, I am full of business to day--There is
to be a ballot at one for the _Ladies' Club_ lately established, and
lady Bab Basto has proposed me for a member.--Pray, my dear, when will
you let me have that money to pay my Lord Loo?

SERJEANT.

The three hundred you mean?

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

And besides, there is my debt to Kitty Cribbidge; I protest I almost
blush whenever I meet them.

SERJEANT.

Why really, lovee, 'tis a large sum of money.--Now, were I worthy to
throw in a little advice, we might make a pretty good hand of this
business.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

I don't understand you.

SERJEANT.

Bring an action against them on the statute, in the name of my clerk;
and so not only rescue the _debt_ from their hands, but recover
likewise considerable _damages_.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

A pretty conceit, Mr. Serjeant! but does it not occur to your wisdom,
that as I have (by the help of Captain Cog) been oftener a winner than
loser, the tables may be turned upon _us_?

SERJEANT.

No, no, chuck, that did not escape me; I have provided for that.--Do
you know, by the law, both parties are equally culpable; so that,
lovee, we shall be able to fleece your friends not only of what they
have _won_ of poor dearee, but likewise for what they have _lost_.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Why, what a paltry, pettifogging puppy art thou!--And could you suppose
that I would submit to the scandalous office?

SERJEANT.

Scandalous! I don't understand this strange perversion of words. The
scandal lies in _breaking_ the _laws_, not in bringing the offenders to
_justice_.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Mean-spirited wretch!--What, do you suppose that those laws could be
levell'd against people of their high rank and condition? Can it be
thought that any set of men would submit to lay legal restraints on
_themselves_?--Absurd and preposterous!

SERJEANT.

Why, by their public practice, my love, one would suspect that they
thought themselves excepted by a particular clause.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Oh! to be sure; not the least doubt can be made.

SERJEANT.

True, chuck--But then your great friends should never complain of
highwaymen stopping their coaches, or thieves breaking into their
houses.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Why, what has that to do with the business?

SERJEANT.

Oh! the natural consequence, lovee; for whilst the superiors are
throwing away their fortunes, and consequently their independence
_above_--you can't think but their domestics are following their
examples _below_.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Well, and what then?

SERJEANT.

Then! the same distress that throws the master and mistress into the
power of any who are willing to purchase them, by a regular gradation,
reduces the servants to actions, though more _criminal_, perhaps not
more _atrocious_.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Pshaw! stuff!--I have no head to examine your dirty
distinctions--Don't teize me with your jargon.--I have told you the
sums I shall want, so take care they are ready at your returning from
Kingston.--Nay, don't hesitate; recollect your own state of the case,
and remember, my honour is in pawn, and must, some way or other, be
redeem'd by the end of the week. [_Exit._

SERJEANT _solus_.

My honour is in pawn!--Good Lord! how a century will alter the meaning
of words!--Formerly, _chastity_ was the honour of women, and _good
faith_ and _integrity_ the honour of men: but _now_, a lady who ruins
her family by punctually paying her losses at play, and a gentleman
who kills his best friend in some trifling frivolous quarrel, are your
only tip-top people of _honour_. Well, let them go on, it brings grist
to our mill: for whilst both the sexes stick firm to their _honour_,
we shall never want business, either at Doctor's Commons, or the Old
Bailey. [_Exit._




ACT II.

_Enter_ SERJEANT CIRCUIT _and_ JACK.


SERJEANT.

Jack, let Will bring the chaise to the door.

JACK.

Mr. Fairplay, Sir, the attorney, begs to speak a few words.

SERJEANT.

How often have I told you, that I will see none of these sort of folks
but at chambers; you know how angry your mother is at their rapping,
and littering the house.

JACK.

He says, Sir, he will not detain you five minutes.

SERJEANT.

Well, bid him walk in.

     _Enter_ FAIRPLAY.

Well, Mr. Fairplay, what's your will?

FAIRPLAY.

I just call'd, Mr. Serjeant, to know your opinion upon the case of
young Woodford, and if you like the proposal of being concern'd.

SERJEANT.

If it turns out as you state it, and that the father of the lad was
really a minor, the Essex estate may without doubt be recover'd; and so
may the lands in the North.

FAIRPLAY.

We have full proofs to that fact.

SERJEANT.

May be so; but really Mr. Fairplay, you know the length of time that
these kind of suits--

FAIRPLAY.

True Sir, but then your experience will shorten I appreh----

SERJEANT.

That's more than I know: and then not only my fees lying dormant, but,
perhaps, an expectation of money advanc'd.

FAIRPLAY.

The property, Sir, is of very great value, and, upon the recovery, any
acknowledgment shall be readily made.

SERJEANT.

There again, _any_! do you know that in law, that word _any_ has no
meaning at all? besides, when people are in distress, they are lavish
enough of their offers; but when their business is done, then we have
nothing but grumbling and grudging.

FAIRPLAY.

You have only to dictate your terms.

SERJEANT.

Does the lad live in town?

FAIRPLAY.

He has been under my care since the death of his father; I have given
him as good an education as my narrow fortune would let me; he is now
studying the law in the Temple, in hopes that should he fail of other
assistance, he may be able one day to do _himself_ justice.

SERJEANT.

In the Temple?

FAIRPLAY.

Yes, Sir, in those little chambers just over your head--I fancy the
young gentleman knows him.

JACK.

Who? Mr. Woodford! Lord as well as myself, he is a sweet sober youth,
and will one day make a vast figure, I am sure.

SERJEANT.

Indeed!

JACK.

I am positive, Sir, if you were to hear him speak at the Robinhood in
the Butcher-row, you would say so yourself: why he is now reckon'd the
third; except the breeches-maker from Barbican, and Sawny Sinclair the
snuffman, there is not a mortal can touch him.

SERJEANT.

Peace, puppy; well Mr. Fairplay, leave the papers a little longer with
me and--pray who is employ'd against you?

FAIRPLAY.

A city attorney, one Sheepskin.

SERJEANT.

A cunning fellow, I know him; well, Sir, if you will call at Pump-court
in a week.

FAIRPLAY.

I shall attend you.

SERJEANT.

Jack, open the door for Mr.--[_Exeunt_ Fairplay _and_ Jack.] Something
may be made of this matter: I'll see this Sheepskin myself. So much
in future for carrying on the suit, or so much in hand to make it
miscarry: a wise man should well weigh which party to take for.

     _Enter_ Jack.

So, Jack, any body at chambers to day?

JACK.

Fieri Facias from Fetter lane, about the bill to be filed by Kit Crape
against Will Vizard, this term.

SERJEANT.

Praying for an equal partition of plunder?

JACK.

Yes, Sir.

SERJEANT.

Strange world we live in, that even highwaymen can't be true to each
other! [_half aside to himself._] but we shall make master Vizard
refund, we'll shew him what long hands the law has.

JACK.

Facias says, that in all the books he can't hit on a precedent.

SERJEANT.

Then I'll make one myself; _aut inveniam, aut faciam_, has been
always my motto. The charge must be made for partnership-profit, by
bartering lead and gunpowder, against money, watches, and rings, on
Epping-forest, Hounslow-heath, and other parts of the kingdom.

JACK.

He says, if the court should get scent of the scheme, the parties would
all stand committed.

SERJEANT.

Cowardly rascal! but however, the caution mayn't prove amiss.
[_Aside._] I'll not put my own name to the bill.

JACK.

The declaration too is deliver'd in the cause of Roger Rapp'em against
Sir Solomon Simple.

SERJEANT.

What, the affair of the note?

JACK.

Yes.

SERJEANT.

Why he is clear that his client never gave such a note.

JACK.

Defendant never saw plaintiff since the hour he was born; but,
notwithstanding, they have three witnesses to prove a consideration,
and signing the note.

SERJEANT.

They have?

JACK.

He is puzzled what plea to put in.

SERJEANT.

_Three_ witnesses ready, you say?

JACK.

Yes.

SERJEANT.

Tell him Simple must acknowledge the note, [Jack _starts_] and bid him,
against the trial comes on, to procure _four_ persons at least to prove
the payment, at the Crown and Anchor, the 10th of December.

JACK.

But then how comes the note to remain in plaintiff's possession?

SERJEANT.

Well put, Jack; but we have a _salvo_ for that; plaintiff happen'd not
to have the note in his pocket, but promis'd to deliver it up, when
call'd thereunto by defendant.

JACK.

That will do rarely.

SERJEANT.

Let the defence be a secret, for I see we have able people to deal
with. But come, child, not to lose time, have you carefully conn'd
those instructions I gave you?

JACK.

Yes, Sir.

SERJEANT.

Well, that we shall see. How many points are the great object of
practice?

JACK.

Two.

SERJEANT.

Which are they?

JACK.

The first is to put a man into possession of what is his right.

SERJEANT.

The second?

JACK.

Either to deprive a man of what is _really_ his right, or to keep him
as long as possible _out_ of possession.

SERJEANT.

Good boy! To gain the last end, what are the best means to be us'd?

JACK.

Various and many are the legal modes of delay.

SERJEANT.

Name them.

JACK.

Injunctions, demurrers, sham-pleas, writs of error, rejoinders,
sur-rejoinders, rebutters, sur-rebutters, replications, exceptions,
essoigns, and imparlance.

SERJEANT.

[_To himself._] Fine instruments in the hands of a man, who knows how
to use them.--But now, Jack, we come to the point: if an able advocate
has his choice in a cause, (which if he is in reputation he may readily
have,) which side should he choose, the right, or the wrong?

JACK.

A great lawyer's business, is always to make choice of the wrong.

SERJEANT.

And prythee why so?

JACK.

Because a good cause can speak for itself, whilst a bad one demands an
able counsellor to give it a colour.

SERJEANT.

Very well. But in what respects will this answer to the lawyer himself?

JACK.

In a two-fold way; firstly, his fees will be large in proportion to the
dirty work he is to do.

SERJEANT.

Secondly?--

JACK.

His reputation will rise, by obtaining the victory in a desperate cause.

SERJEANT.

Right, boy.--Are you ready in the case of the cow?

JACK.

Pretty well, I believe.

SERJEANT.

Give it then.

JACK.

First of April, anno seventeen hundred and blank, John a Nokes was
indicted by blank, before blank, in the county of blank, for stealing a
cow, contra pacem etcet.--and against the statute in that case provided
and made, to prevent stealing of cattle.

SERJEANT.

Go on.

JACK.

Said Nokes was convicted upon the said statute.

SERJEANT.

What follow'd upon?--

JACK.

Motion in arrest of judgment, made by counsellor Puzzle. First, Because
the field from whence the cow was convey'd is laid in the indictment as
_round_, but turn'd out upon proof to be _square_.

SERJEANT.

That's well: a valid objection.

JACK.

Secondly, Because in said indictment the colour of the cow is called
red, there being no such things in rerum natura as red cows, no more
than black lions, spread eagles, flying griffins, or blue boars.

SERJEANT.

Well put.

JACK.

Thirdly, said Nokes has not offended against form of the statute;
because stealing of _cattle_ is there provided against: whereas we are
only convicted of stealing a _cow_. Now, though cattle may be cows, yet
it does by no means follow that cows must be cattle.

SERJEANT.

Bravo, bravo! buss me, you rogue, you are your father's own son! go on,
and prosper.--I am sorry, dear Jack, I must leave thee. If Providence
but sends thee life and health, I prophesy, thou wilt wrest as much
land from the owners, and save as many thieves from the gallows, as
any practitioner since the days of king Alfred.

JACK.

I'll do my endeavour. [_Exit_ Serjeant.] So!--father is set off. Now if
I can but lay eyes on our Charlot, just to deliver this letter, before
madam comes home. There she is.--Hist, sister Charlot!

     _Enter_ CHARLOT.

CHARLOT.

What have you got there, Jack?

JACK.

Something for you, sister.

CHARLOT.

For me! Prythee what is it?

JACK.

A thing.

CHARLOT.

What thing?

JACK.

A thing that will please you I'm sure.

CHARLOT.

Come, don't be a boy, let me have it. [Jack _gives the letter_.] How's
this! a letter! from whom?

JACK.

Can't you guess?

CHARLOT.

Not I; I don't know the hand.

JACK.

May be not; but you know the inditer.

CHARLOT.

Then tell me his name.

JACK.

Break open the seal, and you'll find it.

CHARLOT.

[_Opening the letter_] "Charles Woodford!"--I am sure I know nothing of
him.

JACK.

Ay, but sister you do.

CHARLOT.

How! when, and where?

JACK.

Don't you remember about three weeks ago, when you drank tea at our
chambers, there was a young gentleman in a blue sattin waist-coat, who
wore his own head of hair?

CHARLOT.

Well?

JACK.

That letter's from he.

CHARLOT.

What can be his business with me?

JACK.

Read that, and you'll know.

CHARLOT _reads_.

"Want words to apologize--hum, hum--very first moment I saw you--hum,
hum--smother'd long in my breast--hum, hum--happiest, or else the most
wretched of men."--So, Sir, you have undertaken a pretty commission!
and what do you think my father will--

JACK.

Why, I hope you won't go for to tell him.

CHARLOT.

Indeed, Sir, but I shall.

JACK.

No, sister, I'm sure you won't be so cross. Besides, what could I do?
The poor young lad begg'd so hard; and there for this fortnight he has
gone about sighing, and musing, and moping: I am satisfied it would
melt you to see him. Do, sister, let me bring him this evening, now
father is out.

CHARLOT.

Upon my word!--The young man has made no bad choice of an agent; you
are for pushing matters at once.--But harkee, Sir, who is this spark
you are so anxious about? And how long have you known him?

JACK.

Oh! a prodigious long while: above a month I am certain. Don't you
think him mighty genteel? I assure you he is vastly lik'd by the ladies.

CHARLOT.

He is.

JACK.

Yes, indeed. Mrs. Congo, at the Grecian coffee-house, says, he's
the soberest youth that comes to the house; and all Mrs. Mittens's
'prentices throw down their work, and run to the window every time he
goes by.

CHARLOT.

Upon my word!

JACK.

And moreover, besides that, he has several great estates in the
country; but only for the present, he is kept out of 'em all by the
owners.

CHARLOT.

Ah, Jack! that's the worst part of the story.

JACK.

Pshaw! that's nothing at all. His guardian, Mr. Fairplay, has been with
father to-day, and says, he is certain that he can set all to rights in
a trice.

CHARLOT.

Well, Jack, when that point is determin'd, it will be time enough to--

JACK.

Then! Lord of mercy! why, sister Charlot, it is my private opinion
that if you don't give him some crumbs of comfort, he won't live till
Midsummer term.

CHARLOT.

I warrant you. Either Cupid's darts were always but poetical engines,
or they have been lately depriv'd of their points. Love holds no place
in the modern bills of mortality. However, Jack, you may tell your
friend, that I have observ'd his frequent walks in our street.

JACK.

Walks! Why one should think he was appointed to relieve the old
watchman; for no sooner one is _off_, but the other comes _on_.

CHARLOT.

And that from his eyes being constantly fixed on my window (for the
information of which, I presume he is indebted to you.)----

JACK.

He! he! he!

CHARLOT.

I had a pretty shrewd guess at his business; but tell him that unless
my fa----Hush! our tyrant is return'd. Don't leave the house till I see
you.

     _Enter Mrs._ CIRCUIT _and_ BETTY.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

So, Sir, what makes you loitering from chambers? I thought I told you,
you should never be here but at meals? [_Exit_ Jack.] One spy is enough
in a family.--Miss, you may go to your room; and d'ye hear--I shall
have company, so you need not come down. [_Exit_ Charlot.]--Betty, no
message or letter?

BETTY.

None, Madam.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

That is amazing!--You know I expect Colonel Secret and Mrs. Simper
every instant.

BETTY.

Yes, Madam.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Put the fruit and the wine on the table in the next room.

BETTY.

Very well, Madam.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

And, Betty, order the fellow to let nobody in but Sir Luke.

BETTY.

Madam, I shall take care. [_Exit._

Mrs. CIRCUIT _sits down_.

The ballot must be over by this time. Sure there is nothing so dreadful
as a state of suspence: but should they black ball me!--No, there's
no danger of that; miss Mattadore has insur'd me success.--Well,
this is certainly one of the most useful institutions; it positively
supplies the only point of time one does not know how to employ.
From twelve, the hour of one's rising, to dinner, is a most horrible
chasm; for though teizing the mercers and milliners by tumbling their
wares, is now and then an entertaining amusement, yet upon repetition
it palls.--But every morning to be sure of a party, and then again at
night after a rout, to have a place to retire to; to be quite freed
from all pain of providing; not to be pester'd at table with the odious
company of clients, and country cousins; for I am determin'd to dine,
and sup at the club, every day. I can tell 'em, they'll have but very
few forfeits from me.

     _Enter_ BETTY, _in haste, with a Letter_.

BETTY.

By a chairman, Madam, from the Thatch'd House.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Give it me, Betty, this instant;--ay--this is Mattadore's hand. [_opens
and reads the letter._] "My dear Circuit--it is with the utmost
concern, and confusion, I find myself oblig'd to acquaint you, that
notwithstanding all the pains I have taken, the club have thought fit
to reject."--Oh! [_She faints._]

BETTY.

Bless my soul! my lady is gone!--John! Will! Kitty! run hither this
instant.--

     _Enter two_ MAIDS _and a Man_ SERVANT.

ALL.

What, what's the matter?

BETTY.

Quick! quick! some hartshorn and water [_pats her hand._] Madam!
madam--

SERVANT.

Here! here! here! [_bringing water._]

BETTY.

John, go for the _potter-carrier_ this instant--I _believes_ to my soul
she is dead--Kitty, fetch some feathers to burn under her nose;--there,
stand further off, and give her some air--

     _Enter Sir_ LUKE.

Sir LUKE.

Hey day! what the deuce is the matter? what's the meaning of all this,
Mrs. Betty?

BETTY.

Oh! Sir, is it you--my poor lady! [_cries_] clap the bottle hard to her
nose.

Sir LUKE.

But how came it about?

BETTY.

Some of the _continents_ of that curs'd letter, she has there in her
hand.

Sir LUKE.

Here, here, take some of my eau de luce. [_offering a bottle._]

BETTY.

There! she recovers a little--some water--I believe it is nothing but
a _satirical_ fit, I have had them myself--now she opens her eyes--so,
so--bend her forward a little.

Sir LUKE.

My sweet Mrs. Circuit.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Who is that?

BETTY.

Nobody at all madam, but only Sir Luke.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Oh! Sir Luke, such a stroke, so fatal, so sudden, it is not in nature I
should ever survive it.

Sir LUKE.

Marry heaven forbid! but what cause--what could--

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Leave the room. [_To the servants, who go out._] Only, look over that
letter.

Sir LUKE.

Hum, hum,--[_reads_] "fit to reject you--this--"

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

There! there! there!

Sir LUKE.

I own this is the utmost malice of fortune--but let me finish the
letter.--"This calamity, dear Circuit, is of such a nature as
baffles all advice, or interposition of friends, I shall therefore
leave you to time, and your own good understanding." [_pretty
and sensible._]--"yours," &c.--But let us see, what says the
postscript--[_reads._] "Perhaps it may give you some comfort to know
that you had sixteen almonds, and but two raisins against you."

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

But two!

Sir LUKE.

No more.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

This must be Kitty Cribbage's doing, she has been tattling about the
paltry trifle I owe her.

Sir LUKE.

Not unlikely: but come, bear up, my dear madam, and consider that
_two_--

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Is as bad as two thousand.

Sir LUKE.

Granted; but perhaps it mayn't be too late to repair.--Gadso! I have
thought of a scheme--I'll be elected myself, and then I warrant we
manage--

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

You, Sir Luke? that never can be.

Sir LUKE.

No, Madam, and why not?--why you don't suppose that they wou'd venture
to--

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

It would not only be against the spirit, but the very letter of their
constitution to chuse you a member.

Sir LUKE.

Ay, Madam, how so?

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

_Their_ statutes are selected from all the codes that ever existed from
the days of Lycurgus to the present Czarina.

Sir LUKE.

Well.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

The law that relates to your case they have borrow'd from the Roman
religion.

Sir LUKE.

As how?

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

As no man can be admitted a monk, who has the least corporal spot, or
defect; so, no candidate can be receiv'd as a member who is depriv'd of
the use of any one of his limbs.

Sir LUKE.

Nay, then indeed I am clearly cut out; that incapacity can never be got
over.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Indeed, the Serjeant says, if the club could be induc'd to _resolve_ in
your favour, then the _original law_ would signify nothing.

Sir LUKE.

Well, well, we'll see what can be done. [_A loud knocking._] But hush!
the company's come; collect yourself, sweet Mrs. Circuit; don't give
your enemies the malicious pleasure of seeing how this disappointment
affects you.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Never fear; I know a little too much of the world not to turn this
defeat to my credit.

     _Enter_ Colonel SECRET _and_ Mrs. SIMPER.

Mrs. SIMPER.

Your servant, Sir Luke; my dear Circuit, I am frighten'd to death--your
people tell me, you are but just recover'd from a--

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Oh! nothing at all! a faintness, a kind of swimming--but those people
are ever swelling that mole hills to mountains.

Mrs. SIMPER.

I protest I was afraid that you had suffer'd your late disappointment
to lay hold of your spirits.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

What disappointment, my dear?

COLONEL.

Mrs. Simper hints at the little mistake made this morning at the
Thatch'd House.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

That! ridiculous! I could have told you that a fortnight ago,
child--all my own doing.

Mrs. SIMPER.

How!

Sir LUKE.

Entirely.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Oh! I always detested the thoughts of the thing;--they would put me
up, let me say what I would, so I was reduc'd to the necessity of
prevailing upon two of my friends to _black ball_ me.

Mrs. SIMPER.

That, indeed, alters the case.

COLONEL.

I am vastly happy to hear it: your old acquaintance were afraid they
should lose you.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

It is a sign they know but little of me--but come, my good folks, I
have prepared a small collation in the next room, will you--[_Exeunt._

     _Enter_ JACK _and_ WOODFORD.

JACK.

I'll watch sister, to see that nobody comes; now Woodford make good use
of your time. [_Exit_ Woodford.] There, I have left 'em together; if
I had staid, I don't believe they would have open'd their mouths for
a month: I never saw such an alteration in a lad since the day I was
born.--Why, if I had not known him before, I should not have thought he
had a word to throw to a dog; but I remember the old proverb:

  True lovers are shy,
  When people are by.

I'll take a peep to see how they go on:--there they are, just in the
same posture I left them; she folding her fingers, and he twirling
his hat; why they don't even look at each other: was there ever
such a couple of--stay, stay, now he opens his mouth--pshaw!--lord!
there he shuts it again--hush! I hear somebody coming--no--nothing
at all:--mother is safe I am sure,--there is no danger from her--now
let us take t'other--[_peeps at the door._] hum!--gadso, matters are
mightily mended--there! there! very well--there he lays down the
law--now he claps his hand on his heart--vastly pretty, I vow--there he
swops with both his knees on the ground--charming!--and squeezes his
hat with both hands, like one of the actors--delightful! she wants him
to rise, and he won't--prodigious moving indeed!

     _Enter_ BETTY.

BETTY.

So Sir, what are you doing there?

JACK.

There! where?

BETTY.

With your eyes glew'd close to the keyhole.

JACK.

I wanted to speak a word to my sister.

BETTY.

Then why don't you open her door?

JACK.

I did not know but she might be saying her prayers.

BETTY.

Prayers! a likely story! Who says their prayers, at this time of the
day?--No, no, that won't pass upon me.--Let me look--very pretty! So,
so, I see there's somebody else at his prayers too--fine doings!--As
soon as the company goes, I shall take care to inform Madam your mother.

JACK.

Nay, but Mrs. Betty you won't be so--

BETTY.

Indeed. Mr. John, but I shall--I'll swallow none of your secrets,
believe me.

JACK.

What, perhaps your stomach is overloaded already.

BETTY.

No matter for that, I shall be even with Miss for telling Master about
and concerning my drums.

JACK.

Why, Mrs. Betty, surely sister could not--

BETTY.

When she very well knows that I have not sent cards but twice the whole
season.

JACK.

Lord! what signi--

BETTY.

What would she say, if she visited the great families I do? For tho' I
am as I may say but a commoner, no private gentlewoman's gentlewoman,
has a more prettier set of acquaintance.

JACK.

Well but--

BETTY.

My routs indeed!--There is Mrs. Allspice, who lives with lady Cicily
Sequence, has six tables every Sunday, besides looers, and braggers;
and moreover proposes giving a masquerade, the beginning of June, and I
intends being there.

JACK.

Well, but to talk calmly.

BETTY.

And as Miss is so fond of fetching and carrying, you may tell her
we are to have a private play among ourselves, as the quality have:
the _Distrustful_ Mother, 'tis call'd--Pylades, by Mr. Thomas,
Lord Catastrophe's butler--Hermione, Mrs. Allspice; and I shall do
Andromache myself.

JACK.

A play! lord, Mrs. Betty, will you give me a ticket?

BETTY.

All's one for that--and so you may tell Miss that--[_bell rings_]
coming, Madam, this minute--and that, Mr. John, is the long and the
short on't. [_Bell rings again._] Lord, I am coming--[_Exit._

     _Enter_ WOODFORD _to_ JACK.

WOODFORD.

What's the matter?

JACK.

Here, Betty, my mother's fac totum, has just discover'd your haunts;
and is gone to lay an information against you--so depend upon it, a
search warrant will issue directly.

WOODFORD.

Stay but a moment, till I take leave of your sister.

JACK.

Zooks! I tell you the constables will be here in a trice, so you have
not a moment to lose.

WOODFORD.

How unlucky this is!

JACK.

But I hope you have obtain'd a verdict however.

WOODFORD.

No.

JACK.

No!

WOODFORD.

It would not have been decent, to have press'd the judge too soon for a
sentence.

JACK.

Soon!--You are a ninny, I tell you so:--here you will suffer judgment
to go by default.--You are a pretty practitioner indeed!

WOODFORD.

This, you may know, my dear Jack, is an equity case; I have but just
fil'd my bill; one must give the parties time to put in an answer.

JACK.

Time!--How you may come off in court I can't tell, but you will turn
out but a poor chamber counsel I fear.--Well, come along, perhaps I
may be able to procure another hearing before it is--but lord o'mercy!
there is father crossing the hall--should he see us all's over--we have
nothing for't but taking shelter with sister. [_Exeunt._




ACT III.

_Sir_ LUKE LIMP, _Mrs._ CIRCUIT, _Colonel_ SECRET, _and Mrs._ SIMPER,
_discover'd at a table, with a collation before them_.


Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Oh! by the bye, Sir Luke--take some of these sweetmeats, my dear [_to
Mrs._ Simper]--did not you promise to introduce to me that little
agreeable piece of imperfection that belongs to the opera?--Colonel,
won't you taste the champaign?

Sir LUKE.

Who, Signior _Piano_?--Let me assist Mrs. Simper.--Why, Madam, I made
an attempt; but at present--shan't I send you a biscuit?--he is in the
possession of a certain lady, who never suffers him out of her sight
for a moment.

Mrs. SIMPER.

Oh! the curmudgeon!--I am vastly fond of these custards.

Sir LUKE.

Yes, they have a delicate flavour--but he promis'd, if possible, to
escape for an hour--won't you? [_to Mrs._ Circuit.]

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

No, it gives me the heart-burn.--Then let us leave him a cover.

COLONEL.

By all means in the world.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

But there is, likewise, another party, for whom a place ought to be
kept.

Mrs. SIMPER.

Another! Who can that be I wonder?

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

A small appendix of mine.

Sir LUKE.

How, Madam!

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

You need not be jealous, Sir Luke--taste that tart Mrs. Simper--it is
only my husband the Serjeant.--Ha! ha! ha!--Betty makes them herself.

Mrs. SIMPER.

Oh! you abominable creature! How could such a thought come into your
head?

Sir LUKE.

Ma'am--[_Offering sweetmeats to Mrs._ Simper.]

Mrs. SIMPER.

Not a bit more, I thank you.--I swear and vow I mould swoon at the
sight.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

And I should receive him with the polite indifference of an absolute
stranger.

Sir LUKE.

Well said, my good Lady Intrepid! But, notwithstanding, I would venture
a trifle that his appearance would give you such an electrical shock----

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

You are vastly deceiv'd.

Sir LUKE.

Dare you come to the proof? Will you give me leave to introduce Mr.
Serjeant? He is not far off.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

What, my husband?

Sir LUKE.

Even he! I saw him as I enter'd the hall.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Impossible!

Sir LUKE.

Nay, then I must fetch him. [_Exit_ Sir Luke.

COLONEL.

I can't conceive what the knight wou'd be at.

Mrs. SIMPER.

Why he is mad.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Or turn'd fool.

     _Enter Sir_ LUKE, _with the_ SERJEANT'S _peruke on a block_.

Sir LUKE.

Now, Madam, have I reason? Is this your husband or not?

Mrs. SIMPER.

It is he; not the least doubt can be made.

COLONEL.

Yes, yes, it is the Serjeant himself.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

I own it; I acknowledge the lord of my wishes. [_Kisses the block._]

Mrs. SIMPER.

All his features are there!

COLONEL.

The grave cast of his countenance!

Sir LUKE.

The vacant stare of his eye!

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

The livid hue of his lips!

Mrs. SIMPER.

The rubies with which his cheeks are enrich'd!

COLONEL.

The silent solemnity when he sits on the bench!

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

We must have him at table; but pray good folks let my husband appear
like himself.--I'll run for the gown. [_Exit._

Mrs. SIMPER.

By all means in the world.

Sir LUKE.

Dispatch, I beseech you.

     _Mrs._ CIRCUIT _returns with a gown and band_.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Sir Luke, lend your assistance.

COLONEL.

There, place him at the head of the table.

     [_They fix the head at the back of a chair, and place it at
     table; then all sit._

Mrs. SIMPER.

Madam, you'll take care of your husband.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

I don't want to be put in mind of my duty.

Mrs. SIMPER.

Oh, Madam! I know that very well.

Sir LUKE.

Come, Hob or Nob, Master Circuit--let us try if we can't fuddle the
Serjeant.

COLONEL.

O! fye! have a proper respect for the coif.

Mrs. SIMPER.

Don't be too facetious, Sir Luke: it is not quite so safe to sport with
the heads of the law; you don't know how soon you may have a little
business together.

Sir LUKE.

But come, the Serjeant is sulky.--I have thought of a way to divert
him:--You know he is never so happy as when he is hearing a cause;
suppose we were to plead one before him; Mrs. Circuit and I to be
counsel, the colonel the clerk, and Mrs. Simper the cryer.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

The finest thought in the world! And stay, to conduct the trial with
proper solemnity, let's rummage his wardrobe; we shall there be able to
equip ourselves with suitable dresses.

Sir LUKE.

Alons, alons!

Mrs. SIMPER.

There is no time to be lost. [_All rise._

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

[_Stopping short as they are going out._] But won't my husband be
angry, if we leave him alone? Bye, dearee--we shall soon return to thee
again. [_Exeunt._

     _Enter Serj._ CIRCUIT, _not perceiving the collation_.

SERJEANT.

So, my lord not being able to sit, there was no occasion for me.--I
can't put that girl's nonsense out of my head--My wife is young to
be sure, and loves pleasure I own; but as to the _main_ article,
I have not the least ground to suspect her in that--No, no!--And
then Sir Luke! my _prosien ami_, the dearest friend I have in
the--Heyday! [_seeing the collation_] What the deuce have we here?--A
collation!--So, so--I see madam knows how to divert herself during my
absence.--What's this? [_seeing the block_] Oh, ho! ha! ha! ha!--Well,
that's pretty enough I protest.--Poor girl, I see she could not be
happy without having something at table that resembled me.--How pleas'd
she will be to find me here in propriâ personâ.--By your leave, Mrs.
Circuit--[_sits down and eats_] Delicate eating, in troth--and the wine
[_drinks_]--Champaign as I live--must have t'other glass--They little
think how that gentleman there regales himself in their absence--Ha!
ha! ha!--quite convenient, I vow--the heat of the weather has made
me--Come, brother Coif, here's your health--[_drinks_]--I must pledge
myself I believe--[_drinks again_]--devilish strong--pshut!--Somebody's
coming--[_gets up and goes towards the wings_]--What do I see? Four
lawyers! What the devil can be the meaning of this? I should be glad
to get at the bottom of--Hey! By your leave, brother Serjeant--I
must crave the use of your robe--[_sits down, and gets under the
gown_]--Between ourselves, this is not the first time this gown has
cover'd a fraud.

     _Enter Sir_ LUKE, _Colonel, Mrs._ CIRCUIT, _and Mrs._
     SIMPER, _dressed as counsellors_.

Sir LUKE.

Come, come, gentlemen, dispatch, the court has been waiting some time.
Brother Circuit, you have look'd over your brief?

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

What, do you suppose, Sir, that like some of our brethren I defer that
till I come into court? No, no.

Sir LUKE.

This cause contains the whole marrow and pith of all modern practice.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

One should think, Sir Luke, you had been bred to the bar.

Sir LUKE.

Child, I was some years in the Temple; but the death of my brother
robb'd the robe of my labours.

Mrs. SIMPER.

What a loss to the public!

Sir LUKE.

You are smart, Mrs. Simper. I can tell you, Serjeant Snuffle, whose
manner I study'd, pronounc'd me a promising youth.

Mrs. SIMPER.

I don't doubt it.

Sir LUKE.

But let us to business. And first, for the state of the case: The
parties you know are Hobson and Nobson; the object of litigation is a
small parcel of land, which is to decide the fate of a borough.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

True; call'd Turnbury Mead.

Sir LUKE.

Very well. Then to bring matters to a short issue, it was agreed, that
Nobson should on the premises cut down a tree, and Hobson bring his
action of damage.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

True, true.

Sir LUKE.

The jury being sworn, and the counsellors feed, the court may
proceed.--Take your seats--But hold--I hope no gentleman has been
touch'd on both sides.

ALL.

Oh! fye!

Sir LUKE.

Let silence be call'd.

Mrs. SIMPER.

Silence in the court!

Sir LUKE.

But stop. To be regular, and provide for fresh causes, we must take no
notice of the borough and lands, the real objects in view, but stick
fast to the tree, which is of no importance at all.

ALL.

True, true.

Sir LUKE.

Brother Circuit, you may proceed.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Gentlemen of the Jury.--I am in this cause counsel for Hobson, the
plaintiff.--The action is brought against Nebuchadonezer Nobson, That
he the said Nobson did cut down a tree, value two-pence, and to his
own use said tree did convert.--Nobson justifies, and claims tree as
his tree. We will, gentlemen, first state the probable evidence, and
then come to the positive: and first as to the probable.--When was
this tree here belonging to Hobson, and claim'd by Nobson, cut down?
Was it cut down publicly in the day, in the face of the sun, men,
women, and children, all the world looking on?--No; it was cut down
privately, in the night, in a dark night, nobody _did_ see, nobody
_could_ see.--Hum--And then with respect and regard to this tree, I am
instructed to say, gentlemen, it was a beautiful, an ornamental tree to
the spot where it grew. Now can it be thought that any man would come
for to go in the middle of the night, nobody seeing, nobody _did_ see,
nobody _could_ see, and cut down a tree, which tree was an ornamental
tree, if tree had been his tree?--Certainly no.--And again, gentlemen,
we moreover insist, that this tree was not only ornamental to the
spot where it grew, but it was a useful tree to the owner; it was a
plumb-tree, and not only a plum-tree, but I am authored to say the best
of plum-trees, it was a damsin plum.--Now can it be thought, that any
man wou'd come for to go, in the middle of the night, nobody seeing,
nobody _did_ see, nobody _could_ see, and cut down a tree; which tree
was not only an ornamental tree, but a useful tree, and not only a
useful tree, but a plum-tree; and not only a plum-tree, but the best of
plum-trees, a damsin plum? Most assuredly no.--If so be then, that this
be so, and so it most certainly is, I apprehend no doubt will remain
with the court, but my client a verdict will have, with full costs
of suits, in such a manner and so forth, as may nevertheless appear
notwithstanding.

Sir LUKE.

Have you done, Mr. Serjeant?

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

You may proceed.

Sir LUKE.

Gentlemen of the jury--I am in this cause counsel for Hob--Zouns! I
think the head moves.

ALL.

Hey!

COLONEL.

No, no, Mrs. Simper, jogg'd the chair with her foot, that was all.

Sir LUKE.

For Hercules Hobson--(I cou'd have sworn it had stir'd)--I sha'nt
gentlemen upon this occasion, attempt to move your passions, by
flowing periods, and rhetorical flowers, as Mr. Serjeant has done;
no, gentlemen, if I get at your hearts, I will make my way thro' your
heads, however thick they may be--in order to which, I will pursue the
learned gentleman, thro' what he calls his probable proofs: and first,
as to this tree's being cut down in the night; in part we will grant
him that point, but, under favour, not a dark night, Mr. Serjeant;
no, quite the reverse, we can prove that the moon shone bright, with
uncommon lustre that night--So that if so be as how people did not see
that was none--[Serjeant _sneezes_.] nay, Mrs. Circuit, if you break
the thread of my--

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Me break!--I said nothing I'm sure.

Sir LUKE.

That's true, but you sneez'd.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Not I.

Sir LUKE.

I am sure somebody did; it could not be the head--consider the least
interruption puts one out of one's--None of our faults, they might
have look'd on and seen if they would. And then as to this beautiful
tree, with which Mr. Serjeant has ornamented his spot--No, gentlemen,
no such matter at all; I am instructed to say quite the reverse; a
stunted tree, a blighted, blasted tree; a tree not only limbless, and
leafless, but very near lifeless; that was the true state of the tree:
and then as to its use, we own it was a plum-tree indeed, but not of
the kind Mr. Serjeant sets forth, a damsin plum; our proofs say loudly
a bull plum; but if so be and it had been a damsin plum, will any man
go for to say, that a damsin plum is the best kind of plum; not a
whit, I take upon me to say it is not a noun substantive plum--with
plenty of sugar it does pretty well indeed in a tart, but to eat it by
itself, will Mr. Serjeant go to compare it with the queen mother, the
padrigons--

SERJEANT.

     [_Appearing suddenly from under the gown._]

The green gages, or the orlines.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

As I live 'tis my husband!

SERJEANT.

Nay, Sir Luke don't you run away too--give me a buss--since I was born,
I never heard a finer reply; I am sorry I did not hear your argument
out--but I cou'd not resist.

Sir LUKE.

This I own was a little surprise--had you been long here Mr. Serjeant?

SERJEANT.

But the instant you enter'd.

Sir LUKE.

So, then all is safe. [_Aside._]

SERJEANT.

But come, won't you refresh you, Sir Luke--you have had hard duty to
day.

Sir LUKE.

I drank very freely at table.

SERJEANT.

Nay, for the matter of that, I ha'n't been idle; [_both drink_.] But
come, throw off your gown, and let us finish the bottle: I ha'n't had
such a mind to be merry I can't tell the day when.

Sir LUKE.

Nay then, Mr. Serjeant, have at you--come, here's long life and health
to the law. [_Drinks._]

SERJEANT.

I'll pledge that toast in a bumper.--[_Drinks._]--I'll take Charlot's
hint, and see if I can't draw the truth out of the Knight by a bottle.
[_Aside._]

Sir LUKE.

I'll try if I can't fuddle the fool, and get rid of him that way.
[_Aside._]

SERJEANT.

I could not have thought it: why where the deuce did you pick up all
this? But by the bye, pray who was the cryer?

Sir LUKE.

Did not you know her? Mrs. Simper, your neighbour.

SERJEANT.

A pestilent jade! she's a good one I warrant.

Sir LUKE.

She is thought very pretty; what say you to a glass in her favor?

SERJEANT.

By all means in the world! [_they drink_] and that spark the clerk?

Sir LUKE.

Colonel Secret, a friend to the lady you toasted.

SERJEANT.

A friend! oh, ay--I understand you--come, let us join 'em together.

Sir LUKE.

Alons. [_drink._] Egad, I shall be caught in my own trap, I begin to
feel myself fluster'd already. [_Aside._]

SERJEANT.

Delicate white wine, indeed! I like it better every glass. [_Sings._]

  Drink and drive care away,
  Drink and be merry.

Sir LUKE.

True, my dear Serjeant--this is the searcher of secrets--the only key
to the heart.

SERJEANT.

Right boy, in veritas vino.

Sir LUKE.

No deceit in a bumper. [_Sings._] Drink and be merry.

SERJEANT.

Merry! dammee, what a sweet fellow you are; what would I give, to be
half so jolly and gay.

Sir LUKE.

[_Appearing very drunk._] Would you? and yet do you know, Serjeant,
that at this very juncture of time, there is a thing has popp'd into my
head, that distresses me very much.

SERJEANT.

Then drive it out with a bumper [_Drink._] Well, how is it now.

Sir LUKE.

Now!--the matter is not mended at all.

SERJEANT.

What the deuce is the business that so sticks in your stomach.

Sir LUKE.

You know, my dear Serjeant, I am your friend, your real, your
affectionate friend.

SERJEANT.

I believe, it Sir Luke.

Sir LUKE.

And yet, for these six months, I have conceal'd a secret, that touches
you near, very near--

SERJEANT.

Me near! That was wrong, very wrong; friends should have all things in
common.

Sir LUKE.

That's what I said to myself; Sir Luke, says I, open your heart to your
friend; but to tell you the truth, what sealed up my lips, was the fear
that this secret should make you sulky and sad.

SERJEANT.

Me sulky and sad! ha! ha! how little you know of me.

Sir LUKE.

Swear then that you won't be uneasy.

SERJEANT.

Well, I do.

Sir LUKE.

[_Rising._] Soft! let us see that all's safe;--well, Mr. Serjeant, do
you know that you are--a fine, honest fellow?

SERJEANT.

Is that such a secret?

Sir LUKE.

Be quiet; a damn'd honest fellow--but as to your wife--

SERJEANT.

Well?

Sir LUKE.

She is an infamous strum--

SERJEANT.

How! it is a falshood Sir Luke, my wife is as virtuous a wom--

Sir LUKE.

Oh! if you are angry, your servant--I thought that the news would have
pleas'd you--for after all, what is the business to me? What do I get
by the bargain?

SERJEANT.

That's true; but then would it not vex any man to hear his wife abus'd
in such a--

Sir LUKE.

Not if it's true, you old fool.

SERJEANT.

I say it is false: prove it; give me that satisfaction Sir Luke.

Sir LUKE.

Oh! you shall have that pleasure directly; and to come at once to the
point--you remember last New-year's day how severely it froze.

SERJEANT.

I do recollect.

Sir LUKE.

Very well; we are all invited to dine at Alderman Inkle's.

SERJEANT.

Very right.

Sir LUKE.

Well, and I did not go: Mrs. Circuit made me dine here, in this
house--was it my fault?

SERJEANT.

No, no, Sir Luke, no.

Sir LUKE.

At table says she--she said, I was the picture of you--was it my fault?

SERJEANT.

Well, and suppose you are; where's the mischief in that?

Sir LUKE.

Be quiet, I tell you;--then throwing her arms round my neck,--it is my
husband himself I embrace, it is my little old man that I kiss!--for
she has a prodigious affection for you at bottom--was it my fault?

SERJEANT.

But what is there serious in this, dost think I mind such trifles?

Sir LUKE.

Hold your tongue, you fool, for a moment--then throwing her Teresa
aside--upon my soul she is prodigious fine every where here--was it my
fault?

SERJEANT.

My fault! my fault! I see no fault in all this.

Sir LUKE.

[_Hatching a cry._] No! why then my dear friend, do you know that I was
so unworthy, so profligate, so abandon'd--as to--[_rises_] say no more,
the business is done.

SERJEANT.

Ay, indeed!

Sir LUKE.

Oh! fact! there is not the least doubt of the matter; this is no _hear
say_, dy'e see, I was by all the while.

SERJEANT.

Very pretty! very fine upon my word.

Sir LUKE.

Was it my fault? what could I do? put yourself in my place; I must have
been more, or less, than man to resist.

SERJEANT.

Your fault, Sir Luke, no, no--you did but your duty--but as to my wife--

Sir LUKE.

She's a diabolical fiend, I shall hate her as long as I live.

SERJEANT.

And I too.

Sir LUKE.

Only think of her forcing me, as it were with a sword at my breast, to
play such a trick; you, my dear Serjeant, the best, truest friend I
have in the world. [_Weeps._]

SERJEANT.

[_Weeping._] Dry your tears, dear Sir Luke; I shall ever gratefully
acknowledge your confidence in trusting _me_ with the secret--[_taking
him forward_.] But I think it might be as well kept from the rest of
the world.

Sir LUKE.

My dear soul, do you think I would tell it to any mortal but _you_? No,
no, not to my brother himself--You are the only man upon earth I wou'd
trust.

SERJEANT.

Ten thousand thanks, my dear friend! sure there is no comfort, no
balsam in life like a friend--but I shall make Madam Circuit remember--

Sir LUKE.

We neither of us ought to forgive her--were I you, I'd get a divorce.

SERJEANT.

So I will--provided you will promise not to marry her after.

Sir LUKE.

Me! I'll sooner be torn to pieces by wild horses--no, my dear friend,
we will retire to my house in the country together, and there, in
innocence and simplicity, feeding our pigs and pigeons, like Pyramus
and Thisbe, we will live the paragons of the age.

SERJEANT.

Agreed; we will be the whole earth to each other; for, as Mr.
_Shakespur_ says,

  "The friend thou hast and his adoption try'd
  Clasp to thy soul, and quit the world beside."--

Sir LUKE.

Zouns, here comes Madam Serjeant herself.

     _Enter Mrs._ CIRCUIT.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

So, Gentlemen! a sweet tête a tête you have been holding--but I know it
all, not a syllable you have said has been lost.

Sir LUKE.

Then, I hope you have been well entertained Mrs. Circuit?

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

And you, you mean spirited, dastardly wretch, to lend a patient ear to
his infamous, improbable tales, equally shameful both to you and me.

SERJEANT.

How Madam! have you the assurance--

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Yes, Sir, the assurance that innocence gives; there is not a soul,
I thank heaven, that can lay the least soil, the least spot, on my
virtue; nor is there a man on earth but yourself would have sat and
silently listen'd to the fictions and fables of this intemperate sot.

SERJEANT.

Why to be sure the knight is overtaken a little; very near drunk.

Sir LUKE.

I hope he believes it is a lie. [_Aside._]

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Do me instant justice on this defamer, this lyar, or never more expect
to see me in your house.

SERJEANT.

I begin to find out the fraud, this is all a flam of the knight's.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

I'll drive this instant to a friend of mine in the Commons, and see if
no satisfaction can be had, for blasting the reputation of a woman like
me--and hark you Sir, what inducement, what devil could prompt?--

SERJEANT.

Ay; what devil could prompt--

Sir LUKE.

Heyday!

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

But I guess at your motive; you flatter'd yourself, that by marrying
Charlot, and discarding of me you should engross all his affections
and--

SERJEANT.

True, true--stop, my life, let me come at him, a little: hark you, Mr.
Knight, I begin to discover that you are a very sad dog.

Sir LUKE.

Et tu Brute!

SERJEANT.

Brute!--you'll find I am not the brute you would have made me
believe--I have consider'd both sides of the question.

Sir LUKE.

Both sides of the question?

SERJEANT.

Both: if your story is true, you are a scoundrel to debauch the wife of
your friend; and if it is false, you are an infamous lyar.

Sir LUKE.

Well argued.

SERJEANT.

So in both cases, get out of my house.

Sir LUKE.

Nay, but Serjeant--

SERJEANT.

Troop I tell you, and never again enter these walls--you have libelled
my wife, and I will see you no more.

Sir LUKE.

Was there ever such a--

SERJEANT.

March! and as to my daughter, I would as soon marry her to a forma
pauperis client. [_Exit Sir Luke._

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Do you consider, Mr. Circuit, where you are pushing the fellow?--That
chamber is Charlot's.

     _Enter_ Sir LUKE, WOODFORD, CHARLOT, _and_ JACK.

Sir LUKE.

Heyday! who the deuce have we here?--Pray walk in, my good folks--your
servant Miss Charlot; your servant Mr. What-d'ye-call-um.--Mr.
Serjeant, you need not trouble yourself to cater for Miss; your family
you see can provide for themselves.

SERJEANT.

Heyday! What the deuce is all this! Who are you Sir, and how came you
here? [_To_ Woodford.]

JACK.

It was I, father, that brought him.

SERJEANT.

How, sirrah!

Sir LUKE.

Well said my young limb of the law.

JACK.

Come, let us have none o'your--tho' I brought Mr. Woodford, you could
not persuade me to do the same office for you--father, never stir if
he did not make me the proffer, if I would let him into the house the
night you was at Kingston, of a new pair of silk stockings, and to
learn me a minuet.

Sir LUKE.

Me! I should never have got you to turn out your toes.

JACK.

Ay, and moreover you made me push out my chest, and do so with my
fingers, as if I was taking two pinches of snuff.

Sir LUKE.

You see, Mr. Serjeant, what a fondness, I have for every twig of your
family.

SERJEANT.

I shall thank _you_ hereafter--but from you, Charlot, I expected other
guess--

CHARLOT.

When, Sir, you hear this whole matter explain'd, you will acquit I am
sure.

WOODFORD.

Indeed, Sir, _I_ am wholly to blame; my being here was as much a
surprize upon Miss Charlot as--

SERJEANT.

But now you are here, pray what's your business?

JACK.

O! father, I can acquaint you with that--he wanted me to bring a love
letter to Charlot, so I told him he might bring it himself, for that I
would not do any such thing for never so much, for fear of offending of
you.

SERJEANT.

You mended the matter indeed--but after all, who, and what are you?

JACK.

It's the young gentleman that lives over our heads, to whom Mr.
Fairplay is guardian.

SERJEANT.

Who, Woodford?

JACK.

The same.

SERJEANT.

And are you, young man in a situation to think of a wife?

WOODFORD.

I am flattered, Sir, that as _justice_ is with me, I shall one day have
no contemptible fortune to throw at her feet.

SERJEANT.

_Justice_ is! What signifies justice?--Is the _law_ with you, you fool?

WOODFORD.

With your help, Sir, I should hope for their _union_, upon this
occasion at least.

SERJEANT.

Well, Sir, I shall re-consider your papers, and, if there are probable
grounds, I may be induc'd to hear your proposals.

WOODFORD.

Nay then, Sir, the recovering my paternal possessions makes me anxious
indeed.--Could I hope that the young lady's good wish would attend me?

CHARLOT.

I have a father, and can have no will of my own.

Sir LUKE.

So then it seems poor Pil Garlick here is discarded at once.

SERJEANT.

Why, could you have the impudence, after what has happen'd, to hope
that----

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

He has given wonderful proofs of his modesty.

Sir LUKE.

Be quiet, Mrs. Circuit.--Come, good folks, I will set all matters to
rights in a minute; and first, Mr. Serjeant, it becomes me to tell you,
that I never intended to marry your daughter.

SERJEANT.

How! never!

Sir LUKE.

Never. She is a fine girl I allow; but would it now, Mr. Serjeant,
have been honest in me, to have robb'd the whole sex of my person, and
confin'd my favors to her?

SERJEANT.

How!

Sir LUKE.

No! I was struck with the immorality of the thing; and therefore to
make it impossible that you should ever give me your daughter, I
invented the story I told you concerning Mrs. Circuit and me.

SERJEANT.

How!

Sir LUKE.

Truth, upon my honour.--Your wife there will tell you the whole was a
lye.

SERJEANT.

Nay, then indeed.--But with what face can I look up to my dear? I have
injur'd her beyond the hopes of forgiveness.--Wou'd you, lovee, but
pass an act of oblivion--

Sir LUKE.

See me here prostrate to implore your clemency in behalf of my friend.

Mrs. CIRCUIT.

Of that I can't determine directly.--But as you seem to have some sense
of your guilt, I shall grant you a reprieve for the present, which
contrition and amendment may, perhaps, in time swell into a pardon.

  But if again offending you are caught,

SERJEANT.

  Then let me suffer, dearee, as I ought.


FINIS.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE


Contemporary spelling has been retained, even where inconsistent,
although a very few obvious typographical errors have been corrected
(e.g. identity replaced idenity). Missing punctuation has been added.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lame Lover, by Samuel Foote

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAME LOVER ***

***** This file should be named 49602-8.txt or 49602-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/6/0/49602/

Produced by Delphine Lettau, Paul Dring and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Canada Team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
