The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Translation of the New Testament from the
original Greek, by T. Haweis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Translation of the New Testament from the original Greek

Author: T. Haweis

Release Date: March 30, 2010 [EBook #31829]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRANSLATION OF NEW TESTAMENT ***




Produced by Keith G Richardson




A TRANSLATION

OF THE

NEW TESTAMENT

FROM THE

ORIGINAL GREEK.

HUMBLY ATTEMPTED

WITH A VIEW TO ASSIST

THE UNLEARNED

WITH CLEARER AND MORE EXPLICIT VIEWS OF THE

_MIND OF THE SPIRIT_

IN THE

SCRIPTURES OF TRUTH.

BY T. HAWEIS, L.L. B.

RECTOR OF ALL-SAINTS, ALDWINCKLE, NORTHAMPTONSHIRE; AND CHAPLAIN TO THE
LATE COUNTESS OF HUNTINGDON.

London:

PRINTED FOR T. CHAPMAN,

NO. 151, FLEET-STREET.

1795.



PREFACE.

APPEARING before the Public as a translator of the Oracles of God, it
would ill become me to deprecate the severity of criticism, when I most
cordially desire the intelligent and learned of my brethren to point
out my mistakes for correction, and, in love and in the spirit of
meekness, to smite me friendly. Should, however, the shafts of
malignity, and the weapons not of our warfare, be employed against this
humble, yet well-meant, attempt to make the Scriptures better
understood, I shall endeavour to pluck the honey-comb from the lion's
carcase, and be thankful for real information, in whatever mode it may
be communicated.

Respecting highly, as I do, the translation of our Reformers, whose
language has dignity, and whose soundness in the faith I hope, living
and dying, to maintain, it must be acknowledged--that there are in our
present version, obscurities which may be avoided--words become in the
lapse of ages obsolete--expressions feeble and inexact--for which
others more accurate and energetic may be substituted--and in some
passages the sense embarrassed, and probably mistaken. To make
therefore the Scriptures as intelligible as I can to men of common
capacity, who are destitute of the knowledge of the Original, and
sometimes perhaps to suggest a sense not unworthy the adoption of the
judicious scholar, I have endeavoured to render every passage with the
most literal exactness--to use the most forcible and clear expressions
corresponding with the Original--not to omit a particle--preserving the
participles--and following, as much as the genius of our tongue will
permit, the exact order of the Greek words, persuaded that, thus
placed, the sense often receives clearness and energy.

To transfuse the spirit of the Original into a Translation must be
admitted to be very difficult in any language, peculiarly so where the
matters treated of are so weighty, and the words so significant, and
where holy men of God are speaking as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, without whose continual light and teaching I humbly conceive no
man ever did or can understand and receive the things which are of the
Spirit of God, so as to know them as he ought to know.

As the words of the Spirit contain one precise meaning, and to
communicate his mind is the intention of Revelation, it must be our
endeavour not to leave them equivocal, but to fix a clear and
determinate idea to each, in exact conformity to the Original, that the
true sense may be understood, which can be but one.

That I have endeavoured to obtain this knowledge it is no presumption
to affirm. During forty years and upwards this blessed book of God hath
been continually in my hands--never a day hath passed in which it hath
not been matter of my meditation; I may venture to say I have read it
over more than an hundred times, and many of the passages much oftener.
I have consulted the works of the most godly and ingenious of the dead,
and often conversed with some of the ablest and most experienced
ministers of Christ among the living. I have at two different times of
my life translated and transcribed the whole of the New Testament, and
considered every word, and phrase, and passage, with attention: indeed
the leading object and employment of my whole life hath been to
discover and communicate to mankind the truth as it is in Jesus; and
every day have I bowed my knees to the Divine Interpreter, who giveth
wisdom and understanding to the simple, that he would lighten my
darkness, and shine into my heart, to give the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God, as it is manifested in the face of Jesus Christ.

I recommend to my readers to tread in the same path, looking up to the
Fountain of wisdom and knowledge. I am not ashamed to own my
conviction, that an unlearned person thus seriously attentive to the
Scriptures, and crying to God for the spirit of wisdom and revelation
in the knowledge of Him, will be led into all saving truth; and gain
greater and clearer discoveries of the mind of the Spirit in the
Scriptures than any mere natural man, however ingenious and learned. A
word, a phrase, an allusion, may indeed exercise critical acumen, and
afford a display for erudition; but the scope and tendency of the
Sacred Oracles, the doctrines therein revealed, the principles
inculcated, and the practice enjoined, never were, and never will be
truly known, but by those who are taught of God.

As the division of the Scripture into verses interrupts the subject,
and often embarrasses the sense, I have preferred paragraphs, placing
the verses of the old Version in the margin, for the sake of reference
and comparison; and though I have admitted the same division of
chapters, in a few instances they might be more judiciously arranged:
Matt. ii. 1. belongs to the former chapter, as also Acts, viii. 1.
Coloss. iv. 1.

I have only now to commend this labour of love to the divine
benediction. The Translation itself, and the necessary attentive
consideration of every passage, hath not, I trust, been without
instruction to myself, and some sweet savour of the truth: so far I
have already my reward. It will be highly enhanced if God my Saviour
deigns to make this service acceptable and profitable to his people,
and the means of communicating clearer and more explicit views of his
revealed will to the poor and unlearned of the flock. To them I have
long dedicated my life and my labours, believing that of such is the
kingdom of heaven.

Every attempt to make the Scriptures more read, and better understood,
must be acknowledged laudable. Should the present effort fail to answer
this end, it may yet provoke men of more wisdom and spiritual gifts, to
produce a translation more exact, and suited to general edification.
Then I shall be content to be forgotten.



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW.

CHAP. I.

THE book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of
Abraham.

(2)Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Judas
and his brethren, (3)and Judas begat Phares, and Zara of Thamar, and
Phares begat Esrom, and Esrom begat Aram; (4)and Aram begat Amminadab,
and Amminadab begat Naasson, and Naasson begat Salmon, (5)and Salmon
begat Boaz of Rachab, and Boaz begat Obed of Ruth, and Obed begat
Jesse, (6)and Jesse begat David the king, and David the king begat
Solomon of her _that had been the wife_ of Urias, (7)and Solomon begat
Roboam, and Roboam begat Abia, and Abia begat Asa, (8)and Asa begat
Josaphat, and Josaphat begat Joram, and Joram begat Ozias, (9)and Ozias
begat Joatham, and Joatham begat Ahaz, and Ahaz begat Hezekias, (10)and
Hezekias begat Manasses, and Manasses begat Amon, and Amon begat
Josias, (11)and Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren, about the time
they were carried away to Babylon, (12)and after they were brought to
Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel, and Salathiel begat Zorobabel,
(13)and Zorobabel begat Abiud, and Abiud begat Eliakim, and Eliakim
begat Azor, (14)and Azor begat Sadoc, and Sadoc begat Achim, and Achim
begat Eliud, (15)and Eliud begat Eleazar, and Eleazar begat Matthan,
and Matthan begat Jacob, (16)and Jacob begat Joseph, the husband of
Mary, of whom is born Jesus, who is called Christ. (17)So all the
generations from Abraham to David _are_ fourteen generations, and from
David to the carrying away into Babylon fourteen generations, and from
the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ fourteen generations.

(18)Now the generation of Jesus Christ was attended with these
circumstances: His mother Mary being betrothed to Joseph, before they
cohabited together, she was found with child from the Holy Spirit.
(19)Then Joseph her husband being a just man, and not willing to expose
her publicly, designed to put her away privately. (20)And as he was
revolving the matter in his mind, behold, an angel of the Lord in a
dream appeared unto him, saying, Joseph, son of David, fear not to take
Mary for thy wife, for that which is conceived in her is from the Holy
Spirit. (21)And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his
name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins. (22)Now the
whole of this was done, that what was spoken of the Lord, by the
prophet, might be fulfilled, saying[1], (23)"A virgin shall be with
child and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name
Immanuel," which is being interpreted, God with us.

(24)Then Joseph when arisen from sleep, did as the angel of the Lord
commanded him, and took his wife; (25)and he knew her not, until she
had brought forth her son, the first begotten, and he called his name
Jesus.

CHAP. II.

NOW when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the
king, lo! Magians from the East came to Jerusalem, (2)saying, Where is
he that is born king of the Jews? for we have seen his star in the
East, and are come to pay him homage.

(3)Now when Herod the king heard this, he was much agitated, and all
Jerusalem with him. (4)And assembling all the chief priests and scribes
of the people, he enquired of them, where the Messiah should be born.

(5)Then they answered him, In Bethlehem of Judea, for so it is written
by the prophet[2], (6)"And thou Bethlehem, land of Judah, art in no
respect the least amongst the princes of Judah, for from thee shall go
forth the Ruler, who shall conduct my people Israel."

(7)Thereupon Herod secretly calling to him the Magians, enquired very
particularly of them the time of the star's appearing, (8)and sending
them to Bethlehem said, Go, and procure the most exact information
respecting this child; and when you have found him, bring me
intelligence, that I may come, and pay him homage also.

(9)So having heard the king, they went on; and lo, the star, which they
had seen in the East, had gone before them, till it came and stood over
the place where the infant was. (10)And when they saw the star, they
were exceedingly transported with joy. (11)And coming into the house,
they found the infant with Mary his mother, and falling prostrate, they
paid their homage to him. And opening their treasures, they made their
offerings to him, gold, and frankincense, and myrrh. (12)And having
received warning in a dream not to go back to Herod, they departed into
their own country by another road.

(13)Now when they were gone, behold an angel of the Lord appeared unto
Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the infant and his mother by
night, and flee into Egypt, and stay there, till I speak to thee, for
Herod will search for the infant to destroy it. (14)So rising up, he
took the babe and his mother by night, and retired into Egypt, (15)and
was there till the death of Herod; that what was spoken of the Lord by
the prophet, might be fulfilled, saying[3], "Out of Egypt have I called
my son."

(16)Then Herod, perceiving that he was treated delusively by the
Magians, was greatly exasperated, and he sent and slew all the male
infants, that were in Bethlehem, and in all its territories, from their
entering their second year and all under it, according to the time,
which he had accurately enquired from the Magians. (17)Then was
fulfilled what was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet, saying[4], (18)"A
cry was heard at Ramah, lamentation, and wailing, and bitter moaning,
Rachel weeping for her children, and will not be comforted, because
they are no more."

(19)Now when Herod was dead, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared in
a dream to Joseph in Egypt, (20)saying, Arise, and take the little boy
and his mother, and go into the land of Israel: for they who sought the
life of the infant are dead. (21)So he arose, and took the child and
his mother, and came unto the land of Israel. (22)But hearing that
Archelaus reigned in Judea in the stead of Herod his father, he was
afraid to go thither. And being divinely warned in a dream, he retired
into the country of Galilee, (23)and came and dwelt in a city called
Nazareth: that what was said by the prophets might be fulfilled, that
he shall be called a Nazarean.

CHAP. III.

THEN in those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the desert
country of Judea, (2)and saying, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is
nigh. (3)For this is the person spoken of by Isaiah the prophet,
saying[5], "The voice of one crying aloud in the wilderness, Prepare
the way of the Lord, make his paths strait." (4)Now this John had his
garment made of camel's hair, and a girdle of leather about his loins,
and his food was locusts and wild honey.

(5)Then went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the regions
about Jordan, (6)and were baptized by him in Jordan, on making
confession of their sins. (7)But when he saw many of the Pharisees and
of the Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them, O ye broods of
vipers! who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? (8)Produce
then worthy fruits of repentance: (9)and think not to say in
yourselves, We have Abraham for our father: for I say unto you, that
God is able out of these stones to raise up children to Abraham.
(10)And now also the ax is laid to the root of the trees: every tree
therefore which produceth not good fruit, is hewing down, and casting
into the fire. (11)I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance: but
he that is coming after me is mightier than I, whose sandals I am not
worthy to carry: he shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit, and with
fire: (12)whose winnowing fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly
cleanse his threshing floor, and will collect the wheat into his
granary; but the chaff will he burn up with fire unquenchable.

(13)Then came Jesus from Galilee unto Jordan to John, that he might be
baptized by him. (14)But John earnestly withheld him, saying, I have
need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me? (15)But Jesus
answering said unto him, Permit it to be so now, for thus it becometh
us to fulfil all righteousness. Then he permitted him. (16)And Jesus,
after his baptism, came straight from the water: and lo! the heavens
were opened for him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending as it were
a dove, and coming upon him: (17)and lo! a voice from the heavens,
saying, This is my Son, the beloved, in whom is my delight.

CHAP. IV.

THEN was Jesus led away by the spirit into the wilderness, to be
tempted by the devil. (2)And when he had fasted forty days and forty
nights, afterwards he became hungry. (3)And the tempter coming to him
said, If thou art the Son of God, command that these stones be made
loaves. (4)But he answering said, It is written[6], "Man shall not live
by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of
God."

(5)Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city, and placed him on a
wing of the temple, (6)and saith to him, If thou be the Son of God,
cast thyself down: for it is written[7], "that he shall give his angels
a charge concerning thee: and in their hands shall they hold thee up,
lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone." (7)Jesus said
unto him, It is written again[8], "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy
God."

(8)Again the devil taketh him unto an exceeding high mountain, and
sheweth him all the kingdoms of the world, and their glory; (9)and
saith unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall
prostrate and worship me. (10)Then saith Jesus unto him, Avaunt Satan!
for it is written[9], "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and to him
only thou pay divine adoration." (11)Then the devil leaveth him, and
lo! angels came and ministered unto him.

(12)But when Jesus heard that John was cast into prison, he retired
into Galilee; (13)and leaving Nazareth, he came and resided at
Capernaum, a maritime city, on the confines of Zebulun and Nephthali:
(14)that what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled,
saying[10], (15)"The land of Zabulun, and the land of Naphthali, the
road to the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles; (16)the people
who sat in darkness saw a great light; and on those who sat in the
region and shadow of death, even on them hath the light arisen."

(17)From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent, for the
kingdom of heaven is approaching.

(18)And as Jesus was walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw two
brothers, Simon who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a
net into the sea, for they were fishermen. (19)And he saith to them,
Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men. (20)Then immediately
quitting their nets they followed him.

(21)And going on from thence, he saw two other brothers, James son of
Zebedee, and John his brother, in a boat with Zebedee their father,
mending their nets; and he called them. (22)Then they instantly
quitting the ship and their father, followed him.

(23)And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and
preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every disease and
every malady among the people. (24)And there went out a report of him
into all Syria: and they brought unto him all who had illness, the
afflicted with various diseases and painful complaints, and the
demoniacs, and lunatics, and paralytics; and he healed them. (25)And
great multitudes followed him from Galilee, and Decapolis, and
Jerusalem, and Judea, and from beyond Jordan.

CHAP. V.

THEN seeing the multitudes, he went up into the mountain: and seating
himself, his disciples came to him: (2)and opening his mouth, he taught
them, saying,

(3)Blessed are the poor in spirit, for their's is the kingdom of
heaven. (4)Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.
(5)Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. (6)Blessed
are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be
fed to the full. (7)Blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain
mercy. (8)Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.
(9)Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children
of God. (10)Blessed are they who are persecuted for righteousness sake:
for their's is the kingdom in heaven. (11)Blessed are ye, when they
shall revile and persecute you, and lying, speak every thing evil
against you for my sake. (12)Rejoice and exult; for plenteous is your
reward in the heavens: for just so they persecuted the prophets who
went before you.

(13)Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt become insipid, with
what can it be salted? it is of no farther use for any purpose, but to
be cast out, and trodden under foot of men.

(14)Ye are the light of the world. A city cannot be hid that is
situated on an eminence. (15)Neither do men burn a lamp, and set it
under a bushel, but on its stand; and it sheds light on all that are in
the house. (16)Just so let your light shine before men, that they may
see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in the heavens.

(17)Think not that I am come to destroy the law and the prophets: I
came not to destroy, but to fulfil. (18)For I tell you assuredly, that
till heaven and earth pass away, not one iota, or the smallest stroke
of a letter, shall pass from the law, until all things shall be
accomplished. (19)Whosoever therefore shall break one of the least of
these commandments, and teach men so, he shall be accounted the least
in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall practise, and teach them,
he shall be reckoned great in the kingdom of heaven. (20)For I say unto
you, That except your righteousness abounds more than that of the
scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

(21)Ye have heard that it was said to the men of antient times, "Thou
shalt do no murder;" and whosoever shall commit murder, shall be liable
to the judgment: (22)but I say unto you, That every man who is angry
with his brother without cause, shall be liable to the judgment: and
whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be liable to the
sanhedrim: but whosever shall say, Thou fool, shall be liable to be
cast into hell fire. (23)If therefore thou bring thy gift to the altar,
and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee;
(24)leave there thy gift before the altar, and go: first be reconciled
to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. (25)Be disposed to
agree with thy prosecutor speedily, whilst thou art in the way with him
_to the bar_; lest the prosecutor deliver thee up to the judge, and the
judge commit thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.
(26)Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt in no wise come out from thence,
till thou hast paid the last farthing.

(27)Ye have heard that it was said to those of old, "Thou shalt not
commit adultery:" (28)but I say unto you, That every one who looketh
upon a woman to lust after her, hath already committed adultery with
her in his heart. (29)If then thine eye, the right, leads thee to
offend, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for it is highly for thy
advantage, that one of thy members be destroyed, and not that thy whole
body should be cast into hell. (30)And if thy right hand leads thee to
offend, cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it is highly thy
interest that one of thy members should be destroyed, and not that thy
whole body should be cast into hell.

(31)It hath been said indeed, That whosoever will put away his wife,
let him give her a bill of divorce: (32)But I say unto you, Whosoever
shall put away his wife, except on account of whoredom, causeth her to
commit adultery: and whosoever shall marry her that is put away,
committeth adultery.

(33)Again ye have heard that it was said to those of old, "Thou shalt
not perjure thyself, but shalt perform to the Lord thine oaths:"
(34)But I say to thee, Swear not at all; neither by the heaven; for it
is the throne of God: (35)nor by the earth; for it is the footstool of
his feet: nor by Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great King:
(36)neither shalt thou swear by thy head, for thou canst not make one
hair white or black. (37)But let your discourse be, Yea, yea; No, no:
for all addition to these is from the wicked one.

(38)Ye have heard that it was said, "Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth:"
(39)but I say unto you, Resist not an injurious act; but whosoever
shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him also the other.
(40)And if a man will prosecute thee, and take thy coat, let him have
thy cloak also. (41)And whosoever shall press thee for one mile, go
with him two. (42)Give to him that asketh thee; and from him who wants
to borrow of thee, turn not away.

(43)Ye have heard that it hath been said, "Thou shalt love thy
neighbour, and hate thine enemy." (44)But I say unto you, Love your
enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you, and
pray for those who treat you insolently, and persecute you; (45)that ye
may be the children of your Father who is in heaven: for he causeth his
sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and tendeth rain on the just
and on the unjust. (46)For if ye love those who love you, what reward
have you? do not even the publicans the same thing? (47)And if ye
embrace your brethren only, what do ye extraordinary? do not even the
publicans so? (48)Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father who is in
heaven is perfect.

CHAP. VI.

TAKE heed that ye do not your alms before men, in order to catch their
eye: for otherwise ye have no reward from your Father who is in heaven.
(2)Therefore when thou givest alms, sound not a trumpet before thee, as
the hypocrites do, in the synagogues, and in the streets, that they may
have glory from men. Verily I say unto you, They receive their reward.
(3)But when thou givest alms, let not thy right hand know what thy left
is doing: (4)that thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father who seeth
in secret, will himself reward thee openly.

(5)And when thou prayest, be not as the hypocrites: for they love
standing in the synagogues and at the corners of the streets, to pray,
that they may make a shew to men. Verily I say unto you, That they have
their reward. (6)But when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and shut
thy door, to pray to thy Father who is in secret; and thy Father who
seeth in secret shall reward thee openly. (7)And when thou art at
prayer, use not vain repetitions, like the heathen: for they imagine
that they shall be heard for their much speaking. (8)Be not ye
therefore like them: for your Father knoweth of what things ye have
need, before you ask him. (9)Thus then pray ye: Our Father, which art
in heaven, hallowed be thy name. (10)Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done
in earth, as it is in heaven. (11)Give us this day our daily bread.
(12)And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. (13)And lead
us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil: for thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen! (14)For
if ye forgive men their offences, your heavenly Father will also
forgive you: (15)but if ye forgive not to men their offences, neither
will your Father forgive your offences.

(16)And when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, affecting a gloomy
look: for they disfigure their visages, that they may make a shew of
fasting to men. Verily I say unto you, That they have their reward.
(17)But when thou keepest a fast, anoint thine head, and wash thy face;
(18)that thou mayest not make a shew of fasting to men, but to thy
Father who is in secret: and thy Father who seeth in secret shall
reward thee openly.

(19)Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where the rust and
canker spoil, and where thieves dig through and steal: (20)but lay up
for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither rust nor canker
spoil, and where thieves do not dig through and steal; (21)for where
your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

(22)The lamp of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be
transparent, thy whole body shall be enlightened. (23)But if thine eye
be vitiated, thy whole body will be darkened. If therefore the light
which is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!

(24)No man can serve two masters: for he will either hate the one, and
love the other; or he will adhere to the one, and disregard the other.
Ye cannot serve God and mammon. (25)For this cause I tell you, Be not
anxious about your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor
for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life of more value than
meat, and the body than raiment? (26)Look on the birds of the air: for
they neither sow, nor reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly
Father feedeth them. Are you not of more value than they? (27)But which
of you, by his cares, can add one cubit to his stature? (28)And why are
ye anxious about clothing? Contemplate the lilies of the field, how
they grow; they toil not, nor spin: (29)yet I tell you, Not even
Solomon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these. (30)If God then
so clothe a vegetable of the field, which to-day is, _in beauty_, and
tomorrow is cast into the furnace, shall he not much more clothe you, O
ye of little faith? (31)Wherefore be under no anxiety, saying, What
shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, With what shall we be
clothed? (32)(for after all these things the heathen seek:) and your
heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of them all. (33)But seek ye,
in the first place, the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all
these things shall be given you over. (34)Be not therefore anxious
about to-morrow: for tomorrow will provide for its own wants.
Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.

CHAP. VII.

JUDGE not, that ye be not judged. (2)For with the same judgment ye
judge others, shall ye be judged: and with the measure ye mete, shall
it be measured to you again. (3)And why spiest thou out the mote which
is in thy brother's eye, yet payest no attention to the beam which is
in thine own eye? (4)Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Suffer me to
take the mote off from thine eye: and behold there is a beam in thine
own eye? (5)Thou hypocrite, take first the beam out of thine own eye
and then shalt thou see clearly to take off the mote from thy brother's
eye.

(6)Give not that which is holy to dogs, nor cast pearls before swine;
lest they tread them under foot, and turning round tear you.

(7)Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and
it shall be opened unto you: (8)for every one that asketh receiveth;
and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be
opened. (9)What man is there of you, of whom if his son ask a loaf,
will he give him a stone? (10)or if he ask a fish, will he give him a
serpent? (11)If ye then, evil as ye are, know how to bestow good gifts
on your children; how much more will your Father who is in heaven,
bestow good things on those who ask him? (12)All things therefore
whatsoever ye would be willing that men should do to you, just so do ye
to them: for this is the law and the prophets.

(13)Enter in through the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and
spacious the road, which leadeth to perdition, and they are many who
enter that way: (14)because strait is the gate, and narrow the road,
which leadeth to life, and they are but a few who find it.

(15)Take heed then of false prophets, who come to you in the garb of
sheep, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. (16)By their fruits ye
shall know them. Do men gather a bunch of grapes from thorns, or figs
from thistles? (17)So every good tree beareth good fruits; but every
bad tree in kind, produceth bad fruits. (18)A good tree cannot produce
bad fruits, neither can a tree bad in kind produce good fruits.
(19)Every tree that beareth not good fruit, is cut down, and cast into
the fire. (20)Well then! by their fruits ye shall know them. (21)Not
every one who saith to me, Lord, Lord! shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father who is in heaven.
(22)Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have we not cast out devils?
and in thy name done many miracles? (23)And then will I profess unto
them, that I never knew you: depart from me, ye workers of iniquity.

(24)Every man therefore who is hearing from me these words, and puts
them in practice, I will compare him to the intelligent man, who
erected his house upon a rock: (25)and the rain descended, and the
rivers rushed, and the winds blew, and they beat against that house,
and it fell not; for it was founded on a rock. (26)And every man who is
hearing these sayings of mine, and doth not practise them, he will
resemble the foolish man, who built his house upon the sand: (27)and
the rain descended, and the rivers rushed, and the winds blew, and set
against that house, and it fell; and the fall of it was great.

(28)And it was so, that when Jesus had concluded all these sayings, the
multitudes were exceedingly struck with his teaching: (29)for he taught
them as having authority, and not as the scribes.

CHAP. VIII.

NOW when he descended from the mount, great multitudes followed him.
(2)And lo! a leper came and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt,
thou canst make me clean. (3)And stretching out his hand, Jesus touched
him, saying, I will; be thou clean. And instantly the leprosy was
cleansed. (4)And Jesus said to him, See thou tell no man; but go, shew
thyself to the priest, and offer the gift which Moses commanded for a
testimony unto them.

(5)Then as Jesus was entering into Capernaum, there met him a
centurion, intreating him, (6)and saying, My servant is lying in the
house paralytic, terribly tormented with pain. (7)And Jesus said unto
him, I will come and heal him. (8)And the centurion said, I am not a
fit person, that thou shouldest come under my roof: but only speak a
word, and my servant be cured. (9)For I also am a man under authority,
having under my command soldiers and I say to this soldier, Go, and he
goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this,
and he doeth it. (10)And Jesus hearing him, marvelled, and said to
those who were following, Verily I say unto you, not even in Israel
have I found so great faith. (11)And I say unto you, That many shall
come from the east and from the west, and shall sit down with Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. (12)But the children of
the kingdom shall be cast into the outer darkness: there shall be
wailing and gnashing of teeth. (13)And Jesus said to the centurion, Go;
and as thou hast believed, be it to thee. And his servant was cured at
that very hour.

(14)And when Jesus was come into the house of Peter, he saw his
mother-in-law laid on a bed, and in a fever. (15)And he touched her
hand, and the fever left her: and she arose, and waited upon them.

(16)And when evening was come, they brought him many possessed by
devils: and he cast out the spirits by a word, and all who had
illnesses he cured: (17)that it might be fulfilled what was spoken by
the prophet, "Himself he took our infirmities, and bore our diseases."

(18)Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave orders to
pass to the other side. (19)And a certain scribe came, and said unto
him, Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest. (20)And Jesus
said unto him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have
nests; but the Son of man hath not where he can lay his head. (21)And
another of his disciples said unto him, Permit me first to go and bury
my father. (22)And Jesus said unto him, Follow me; and let the dead
bury their own dead.

(23)And going on board a vessel, his disciples followed him. (24)And,
behold, there was a great tempest in the sea, so that the vessel was
hid by the waves; but he was asleep. (25)And his disciples coming,
awoke him, saying, Lord, save us: we are perishing! (26)And he said
unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then arising, he
issued his mandate to the winds, and to the sea; and there was a great
calm. (27)And the men marvelled, saying, What a wondrous man is this,
that even the winds and the sea obey him! (28)And when he came to the
other side, into the region of the Girgasenes, there met him two
demoniacs, coming from the sepulchres; exceeding fierce, so that no
person was able to pass by that road. (29)And lo! they cried out,
saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou
come hither before the time to torment us? (30)And at a considerable
distance, there was a great herd of swine feeding. (31)Then the devils
besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, permit us to go into the
herd of swine. (32)And he said to them, Go. Then they going forth out
_of him_, entered into the herd of swine: and lo! the whole herd of the
swine rushed down a precipice into the sea, and perished in the waters.
(33)But they who fed them fled, and going away into the city, reported
all things, and what had happened to the demoniacs. (34)And, behold,
all the city came out to meet him: and when they saw him, they besought
him to depart from their territories.

CHAP. IX.

AND going on board the vessel, he passed over, and came to his own
city. (2)And lo! they brought him a paralytic stretched on a bed: and
Jesus seeing their faith said to the paralytic, Be of good cheer, son;
thy sins are forgiven thee. (3)And lo! some of the scribes said within
themselves, This man blasphemeth. (4)And Jesus, seeing their thoughts,
said, wherefore do ye imagine evil things in your hearts? (5)For which
is the easier, to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee; or to say, Arise,
and walk? (6)But that ye may know that the Son of man hath authority
upon earth to forgive sins, (then he saith to the paralytic,) Arise,
take up thy bed, and go into thy house. (7)And he arose, and went to
his house. (8)But when the multitude saw it, they were astonished, and
glorified God, who had given such power unto men.

(9)And Jesus passing from thence, saw a man sitting at the custom
house, called Matthew: and saith unto him, Follow me. And he arose and
followed him. (10)And it came to pass, as he sat in his house, many
tax-gatherers and sinners came, and sat down at table with Jesus and
his disciples. (11)And the Pharisees observing it, said to his
disciples, How is this, that your Master eateth with publicans and
sinners? (12)But Jesus hearing it, said unto them, They who are in the
vigour of health have no need of the physician, but they who have
illness. (13)Go then, and learn what is said, "I require mercy and not
sacrifice:" for I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance.

(14)Then came unto him disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the
Pharisees keep many fasts, but thy disciples fast not? (15)And Jesus
said unto them, Can the children of the bridechamber weep, whilst the
bridegroom is with them? but the days will come, when the bridegroom
shall be taken away from them, and then will they fast. (16)But no man
ingrafts a patch of undressed cloth into an old garment, for the piece
supplied taketh from the garment, and the rent becomes worse. (17)Nor
do they put new wine into old bottles: but if they do, the bottles
burst, and the wine is spilt, and the bottles are destroyed: but they
put new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved.

(18)As he was speaking these things to them, behold, there came a
ruler, and prostrated himself before him, saying, My daughter hath just
now died: but come and lay thine hand upon her, and she shall live.
(19)And Jesus arose, and followed him, and his disciples also. (20)And,
behold, a woman, who had an haemorrage twelve years, came behind, and
touched the fringe of his garment: (21)for she said within herself, If
I only touch his garment, I shall be cured. (22)Then Jesus, turning
about and beholding her, said, Be encouraged, daughter; thy faith hath
saved thee. And the woman was cured from that hour. (23)And when Jesus
was come into the ruler's house, and saw the flute-players, and a
multitude confusedly lamenting, (24)he saith to them, Retire; for the
little girl is not dead, but sleeping. And they derided him. (25)So
when the multitude was put out, he went in, and took her by the hand,
and the little girl arose. (26)And the fame of it went forth into all
that country.

(27)And as Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying
out, and saying, Have mercy on us, son of David! (28)So when he came
into the house, the blind men came to him: and Jesus said to them,
Believe ye that I am able to do this? They said unto him, Yes, Lord.
(29)Then he touched their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it
unto you. (30)And their eyes were opened; and Jesus strictly charged
them, saying, Take care that no person know it. (31)But they going
forth, blazoned his fame through all that country.

(32)And when they were coming out, behold, they brought unto him a man,
dumb, a demoniac. (33)And when the devil was cast out, the dumb man
spoke: and the multitudes marvelled, saying, Never at any time was the
like to this seen in Israel. (34)But the Pharisees said, By the prince
of the devils doth he cast the devils out.

(35)And Jesus took a circuit through all the cities and villages,
teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom,
and healing all manner of disease, and every malady among the people.
(36)And beholding the multitudes, he was moved with compassion for
them, because they were fainting, and lying here and there, as sheep
that had no shepherd. (37)Then said he to his disciples, The harvest
indeed is abundant, but the labourers are few; (38)entreat therefore
the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth workmen for his
harvest.

CHAP. X.

AND having called unto him his twelve disciples, he gave them authority
over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to cure every disease, and
every malady. (2)Now these are the names of the twelve apostles; The
first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James son of
Zebedee, and John his brother; (3)Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and
Matthew the tax-gatherer; James son of Alpheus, and Lebbeus, whose
surname is Thaddeus; (4)Simon the Cananite, and Judas Iscariot, who
also betrayed him.

(5)These twelve did Jesus send forth, commanding them, saying, Go not
into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter
not: (6)but go rather to the sheep that are lost of the house of
Israel. (7)And as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is
approaching. (8)Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast
out devils: freely ye have received, freely give. (9)Provide neither
gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses, (10)nor a scrip for the
journey, nor two coats, nor sandals, nor stick: for the workman is
worthy of his food. (11)And into whatsoever city or village ye enter,
enquire who in it is worthy; and there abide till ye depart. (12)And
when ye come into a family, salute it: (13)and if the family shall be
deserving, your peace shall come upon it: and if it be not deserving,
your peace shall return to you. (14)And whosoever shall not receive
you, nor attend to your discourses, go out of that house, or city, and
shake off the dust of your feet. (15)Verily I say unto you, It shall be
more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of
judgment than for that city.

(16)Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye
therefore prudent as serpents, and harmless as doves. (17)But be on
your guard against men: for they will deliver you up to the sanhedrim,
and scourge you in their synagogues. (18)And ye shall be brought before
rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the
heathen. (19)But when they shall deliver you up, be under no anxiety
what ye shall say; for it shall be given you in that very hour what ye
should speak: (20)for it is not you who are speaking, but the Spirit of
your Father which is speaking in you. (21)Then brother shall surrender
brother to death, and the father the son; and children shall rise up
against parents, and cause them to be put to death. (22)And ye shall be
hated of all men for my name's sake: but he that endureth to the end,
that man shall be saved.

(23)But when they shall persecute you in one city, flee unto another:
for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not complete your circuit through
the cities of Israel before the Son of man comes. (24)The disciple is
not superior to his teacher, nor the servant above his master. (25)It
is sufficient if the disciple be as his teacher, and the servant as his
master. If they have called the master of the family Beelzebub, how
much more his domestics? (26)However, fear them not: for there is
nothing concealed, which shall not be discovered; nor hid, which shall
not be known. (27)What I say unto you in the dark, publish in the
light: and what ye hear whispered into the ear, proclaim upon the
roofs.

(28)And be not afraid of those who kill the body, and cannot kill the
soul: but fear him rather who is able to destroy both soul and body in
hell. (29)Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them
shall not fall to the ground without your Father. (30)But even the
hairs of your head are all numbered. (31)Fear not, therefore, ye are of
more value than many sparrows.

(32)Every one therefore who shall make confession of me before men, of
him will I also make confession before my Father who is in heaven.
(33)But whosoever shall disown me before men, him will I also disown
before my Father who is in heaven.

(34)Think not that I am come to bring peace to the earth: I came not to
bring peace, but a sword. (35)For I came to set a man at variance
against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. (36)And the enemies of a man
shall be those of his own house. (37)He that loveth father or mother
more than me, is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter
more than me, is not worthy of me. (38)And he that taketh not up his
cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me.

(39)He that preserveth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his
life for my sake shall preserve it. (40)He that receiveth you receiveth
me, and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me. (41)He that
receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive the reward
of a prophet; and he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a
righteous man, shall receive the reward of a righteous man. (42)And
whosoever shall give to one of these little ones, if but a cup of cold
water to drink, in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he
shall in no wise lose his reward.

CHAP. XI.

AND it came to pass, when Jesus had finished his injunctions to his
twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and preach in their
cities.

(2)Then John, having heard in prison the works of Christ, sent two of
his disciples, (3)and said unto him, Art thou he that cometh, or should
we expect another? (4)And Jesus answering said unto them, Go, and tell
John what things ye hear and see. (5)The blind receive sight, and the
lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are
raised, and the poor have the gospel preached to them. (6)And blessed
is he whosoever shall not be offended at me.

(7)And when they were gone, Jesus began to speak to the multitudes
concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed
shaken with the wind? (8)But what went ye out to see? A man clothed in
delicate garments? Lo! they who wear delicate garments are in the
houses of kings. (9)Yet what went ye out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell
you, and abundantly more than a prophet. (10)For this is he of whom it
is written, "Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, who shall
prepare thy way before thee." (11)Verily I say unto you, There hath not
arisen, from those born of women, a greater than John the Baptist: yet
he that is the least in the kingdom of God is greater than he. (12)But
from the days of John the Baptist unto the present, the kingdom of
heaven is assaulted by violence, and the invaders forcibly seize upon
it. (13)For all the prophets and the law until John, foretold _this_.
(14)And if ye will receive it, this is Elias who was to come. (15)He
that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

(16)But to whom shall I resemble this generation? it is like little
boys sitting in the places of concourse, and calling to their
companions, (17)and saying, We have piped to you, and ye have not
danced; we have sung mournful ditties to you, and ye have not beat your
breasts. (18)For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say,
He hath a devil: (19)the Son of man is come eating and drinking, and
they say, Behold, what a man! a glutton and a wine-bibber, a friend of
publicans and sinners: though wisdom hath been justified by her
children.

(20)Then began he to upbraid the cities in which the chief of his
miracles had been wrought, because they repented not: (21)Wo unto thee,
Chorazin! wo unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the miracles which had been
wrought in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, long since would they
have repented in sack-cloth and ashes. (22)Wherefore I say unto you, It
shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day of judgment than
for you. (23)And thou, Capernaum, who hast been exalted unto heaven,
shalt be cast down to hell: for if the miracles which have been wrought
in thee had been done in Sodom, it had remained unto this day.
(24)Wherefore I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the
land of Sodom in the day of judgment than for thee.

(25)At that time Jesus spake and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and the
intelligent, and hast revealed them to babes: (26)yes, Father! since
such is thy good pleasure. (27)All things are delivered up to me by my
Father: and no person knoweth the Son but the Father; neither knoweth
any person the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son is pleased to
reveal him.

(28)Come to me, all who labour hard, and sustain heavy burdens, and I
will give you relief. (29)Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I
am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest to your souls.
(30)For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

CHAP. XII.

AT that time Jesus walked through corn-fields on a sabbath-day; and his
disciples were hungry, and began to pluck the ears of corn, and to eat.
(2)But when the Pharisees saw it, they said to him, Behold, thy
disciples do a thing that it is not lawful to do on the sabbath. (3)And
he said unto them, Have ye not read what David did, when he was hungry,
and they who were with him? (4)how they went into the house of God, and
did eat the loaves of shew-bread, of which it was not lawful for him or
those who were with him to eat, but for the priests alone? (5)Or have
ye not read in the law, that on the sabbaths the priests in the temple
profane the sabbath, and are not culpable? (6)Now I tell you, That one
greater than the temple is here. (7)But if ye had known what that
meant, I desire mercy and not sacrifice; ye would not have condemned
the innocent. (8)For the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.

(9)And going on from thence, he came into their synagogue; (10)and,
behold a man was there who had a withered hand. And they asked him,
saying, Is it lawful to heal on sabbath days? that they might accuse
him. (11)Then he said to them; What man of you is there who hath one
sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath, doth he not lay hold
on him, and lift him out? (12)Of how much more value then is a man than
a sheep? Wherefore it is lawful to do good on the sabbath days.
(13)Then saith he to the man, Stretch out thy hand; and he stretched it
out, and it was restored, sound as the other.

(14)Then the Pharisees went out, and held a consultation against him,
how they might make away with him. (15)But Jesus knew it, and retired
from thence, and great multitudes followed him, and he healed them all,
(16)and charged them that they should not make him known. (17)That what
was spoken by Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, saying,
(18)"Behold, my servant, whom I have chosen, my beloved, in whom my
soul delighteth: I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall proclaim
judgment for the heathen. (19)He shall not contend, nor be clamorous;
neither shall any man in the streets hear his voice. (20)A bruised reed
shall he not break down, and smoking flax shall he not quench, until he
break forth in judgment for victory. (21)And in his name shall the
Gentiles hope."

(22)Then was brought to him a demoniac, blind and dumb; and he cured
him, so as to enable the blind and dumb both to speak and see. (23)And
all the multitudes were lost in amazement, and they said, Is not this
the son of David? (24)But the Pharisees hearing them, said, This fellow
casteth not out devils, but by Beelzebub, the prince of the devils.
(25)But Jesus knowing their thoughts, said unto them, Every kingdom
divided against itself will be desolated; and every city, or family,
divided against itself cannot subsist: (26)so if Satan cast out Satan;
he is divided against himself; how then can his kingdom subsist?
(27)And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your sons cast
them out? therefore shall they be your judges. (28)But if I by the
Spirit of God cast out the devils, then truly the kingdom of God is
come unto you. (29)Else how can one enter into a strong man's house and
plunder his goods, except he first bind the strong man, and then will
he plunder his goods? (30)He that is not with me, is against me; and he
that associates not with me, scattereth abroad. (31)Therefore I say
unto you, All sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven to men; but the
blasphemy against the Spirit shall not be forgiven to men. (32)And
whosoever may speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven
him: but whosoever shall speak against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come.
(33)Either make the tree good, and its fruit good; or make the tree
corrupt, and its fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by the fruit.
(34)Ye broods of vipers, how can ye speak good things, yourselves being
wicked? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. (35)A
good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth good
things: and a wicked man out of the evil treasure of his heart bringeth
forth evil things. (36)But I tell you, That every idle word which men
speak, for it shall they give an account in the day of judgment.
(37)For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou
shalt be condemned.

(38)Then certain of the scribes and Pharisees addressed him, saying,
Master, we desire to see a sign from thee. (39)But he answered and said
unto them, A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh a sign; and no
sign shall be given it, but the sign of Jonah the prophet: (40)for as
Jonah was in the belly of the whale three days and three nights; so
shall the Son of man be in the heart of the earth three days and three
nights. (41)The men of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment against this
generation, and condemn it: for they repented on the preaching of
Jonah; and behold, a greater than Jonah is here. (42)The queen of the
South shall rise up in judgment against the men of this generation, and
condemn it: for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom
of Solomon; and behold, a greater than Solomon is here.

(43)When the unclean spirit is indeed gone out of a man, he traverses
through places destitute of water, in search of rest, but cannot find
it. (44)Then he saith, I will return to my mansion, whence I came; and
on his arrival, he findeth it unoccupied, swept, and furnished.
(45)Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven other spirits more
wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the last
state of that man is worse than the first. So shall it also be with
this wicked generation.

(46)And while he was yet speaking to the multitudes, behold, his mother
and his brethren stood without, desiring to speak to him. (47)And a
person said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand
without, desiring to speak to thee. (48)But he answered and said to him
that told him, Who is my mother? and who are my brethren? (49)And
stretching out his hand towards his disciples, he said, Behold my
mother and my brethren. (50)For whosoever shall do the will of my
Father who is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and
mother.

CHAP. XIII.  THEN the same day Jesus going out from the house, sat
down near the sea. (2)And vast multitudes were gathered together unto
him, insomuch that he entered into a vessel to be seated; and all the
multitude stood on the beach. (3)And he spake unto them many things in
parables, saying, Behold, a sower went out to sow: (4)and as he was
sowing, some seeds fell indeed by the road-side; and the birds came and
ate them up: (5)and other seed fell on a rocky soil, where it had not
much earth; and immediately it sprang up, because it had no depth of
earth: (6)and when the sun arose, it was scorched up; and because it
had no root, it withered away. (7)And other seeds fell among the
thorns; and the thorns sprang up and choked them: (8)but others fell on
good ground, and produced fruit, some an hundred, some sixty, and some
thirty. (9)He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. (10)And when his
disciples came, they said to him, Why speakest thou to them in
parables? (11)And he answered and said unto them, Because to you it is
given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is
not given. (12)For whosoever hath, more shall be given to him, and he
shall have abundance: but whosoever hath not, even that he hath shall
be taken from him. (13)Therefore I speak to them in parables: that
seeing, they may not see; and hearing, they may not hear nor
understand. (14)And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, which
saith, With the hearing ye shall hear, and not understand; and seeing
ye shall see, and in no wise perceive: (15)for the heart of this people
is waxed gross, and with their ears they have heard heavily, and their
eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should see with the eves,
and hear with the ears, and understand with the heart, and be
converted, and I should heal them. (16)But blessed are your eyes; for
ye see: and your ears; for ye hear. (17)For verily I tell you, That
many prophets and righteous men have greatly desired to see the things
which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear the things which ye
hear, and have not heard them. (18)Hear ye therefore the parable of the
sower.

(19)When any person heareth the word of the kingdom, and doth not
understand it, the wicked one cometh, and snatcheth away what was sown
on his heart: such is he who is the sown by the road-side. (20)But the
sown on the rocky soil, is he who having heard the word, and instantly
with joy receiving it, (21)hath not really root in himself, but is
merely temporary: and when tribulation or persecution ariseth for the
word's sake, immediately he is stumbled. (22)But the sown among the
thorns, is he who heareth the word, and the anxiety about this world
and the deceitfulness of riches, choketh the word, and it becometh
unfruitful. (23)But the sown upon the good ground, is he who heareth
the word, and understandeth it; who truly beareth fruit, and produceth,
one an hundred fold, and another sixty, and another thirty.

(24)Another parable proposed he to them, saying, The kingdom of heaven
is like unto a man who sowed good seed in his field: (25)and while the
men were asleep, his enemy came and sowed zizane among the wheat, and
departed. (26)But when the blade was shot up, and produced fruit, then
appeared also the zizane. (27)The servants of the proprietor came, and
said to him, Master, didst thou not sow good seed in thy field? whence
then hath it the zizane? (28)He saith unto them, Some man, an enemy,
hath done this. Then the servants said to him, Wilt thou that we go and
weed them out? (29)he replied, No; lest perhaps in weeding out the
zizane, we root up the wheat with them. (30)Let them both grow together
till the harvest: and at the harvest-time I will say to the reapers,
Gather out first the zizane, and bind them in bundles to burn them: but
gather the wheat into my barn.

(31)Another parable he proposed to them, saying, The kingdom of heaven
is like a grain of mustard, which a man took and sowed in his field:
(32)which indeed is among the smallest of all seeds; but when it is
grown, it is among the greatest of herbs, and becomes a tree, so that
the birds of the air come and make their nests in the branches of it.

(33)Another parable spake he to them: The kingdom of heaven is like
leaven, which a woman took and covered up in three measures of flour,
until the whole was leavened. (34)All these things spake Jesus in
parables to the multitudes; and without a parable he spake not to them:
(35)that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying,
I will open my mouth in parables, I will bring forth things hid from
the foundation of the world.

(36)Then Jesus dismissing the multitudes, went into a house; and his
disciples came unto him, saying, Explain to us the parable of the
zizane of the field. (37)And he replying said to them, He that sowed
the good seed, is the Son of man; (38)the field is the world: and the
good seed are those who are the children of the kingdom; but the zizane
are the children of the wicked one; (39)the enemy who sowed them is the
devil; the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the
angels. (40)As therefore the zizane are gathered, and burned in the
fire; just so shall it be at the end of this world. (41)The Son of man
shall send out his angels, and shall gather together out of his kingdom
all things offensive, and those who practise iniquity; (42)and will
cast them into a furnace of fire; there shall be wailing and gnashing
of teeth. (43)Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun, in the
kingdom of their Father. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

(44)Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hid in a field:
which when a man findeth, he hideth, and for joy thereof, goeth away
and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.

(45)Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchantman in search of
beautiful pearls: (46)who, having discovered one of vast price, went
away and sold all that he possessed, and bought it.

(47)Again, the kingdom of heaven is like to a net cast into the sea,
and colleting fish of every kind: (48)which, when it was full, they
drew to the beach, and sitting down, selected the good into baskets,
but cast those of a bad kind away. (49)Just so shall it be at the end
of this world: the angels shall go forth, and shall separate the wicked
from amidst the just, (50)and shall cast them into a furnace of fire:
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. (51)Jesus saith unto
them, Have ye understood all these things? (52)They say unto him, Yes,
Lord. Then said he unto them, Therefore every scribe instructed unto
the kingdom of heaven, is like unto a man, the master of a family, who
bringeth out of his storehouse things new and old.

(53)And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished there parables, he
departed thence. (54)And coming into his own country, taught them in
their synagogues, so that they were exceedingly struck, and said,
Whence hath this man this wisdom, and these miracles? (55)Is not this
the carpenter's son? is not his mother called Mary? his brethren,
James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? (56)and his sisters, are they
not all among us? whence then hath he all these things? (57)And they
were offended at him. But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not
disrespected, except in his own country, and in his own family. (58)And
he did not there many miracles because of their unbelief.

CHAP. XIV.

AT that time Herod the tetrarch heard the report of Jesus, (2)and said
unto his servants, This is John the Baptist; he is risen from the dead,
and therefore miracles are wrought by him. (3)For Herod having seized
John, had bound him, and put him in prison, for the sake of Herodias,
the wife of Philip his brother. (4)For John said unto him, It is
unlawful for thee to have her. (5)And though he wished to kill him, he
was afraid of the multitude, for they held him as a prophet. (6)But
when Herod's birth-day was kept, the daughter of Herodias danced in the
circle, and pleased Herod: (7)so that with an oath he promised to give
her whatever she should ask. (8)And she, being previously urged on by
her mother, said, Give me here, in a spacious dish, the head of John
the Baptist. (9)And the king was grieved: but for his oath's sake, and
on account of those who were with him, he commanded it to be given her.
(10)And he sent, and beheaded John in the prison. (11)And his head was
brought on a large dish, and was given to the young lady: and she
brought it to her mother. (12)And his disciples came and took the body,
and buried it, and they came and told Jesus. (13)And when Jesus heard
it, he withdrew from thence in a vessel into a desert place apart: and
when the multitudes heard it, they followed him on foot from the
cities.

(14)And when Jesus was come forth, he saw a great multitude, and was
moved with compassion towards them, and healed their sick. (15)But when
evening was come, his disciples came unto him, saying, The place is
desert, and the day is far advanced; send the multitude away, that they
may go into the villages, and buy themselves provisions. (16)But Jesus
said unto them, They need not depart: give ye them to eat. (17)And they
said unto him, We have nothing here except five loaves and two fishes.
(18)Then he said, Bring them hither to me. (19)And he commanded the
multitude to sit down on the grass, and taking the five loaves and the
two fishes, looking up to heaven, he blessed them, and brake, and gave
the loaves to the disciples, and the disciples to the multitude.
(20)And they did all eat, and were filled: and they took up the
superabundance of the fragments, twelve baskets full. (21)And they who
had eaten, were about five thousand men, besides women and children.
(22)And immediately Jesus compelled his disciples to go on board the
vessel, and pass before him to the other side, while he dismissed the
people.

(23)And when he had sent away the multitude, he went up into a mountain
apart to pray: and when evening came, he was there alone. (24)But the
vessel was already in the midst of the sea, tossed with the waves: for
the wind was contrary. (25)Then at the fourth watch of the night came
Jesus unto them, walking on the sea. (26)And when the disciples saw him
walking on the sea, they were greatly agitated, saying, It is his
apparition. And they cried out with terror. (27)And immediately Jesus
spake to them, saying, Be of good courage: it is I; be not terrified.
(28)Then Peter answering, said, Lord, if it be thou, command me to come
unto thee upon the waters. (29)And he said, Come. And descending from
the vessel, Peter walked upon the waters to come to Jesus. (30)But
seeing the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and beginning to sink in the
deep, he cried out, saying, Lord save me. (31)Then immediately Jesus
stretching out his hand, laid hold on him, and said to him, O thou of
little faith, wherefore dost thou doubt? (32)And when they came aboard
the vessel, the wind ceased. (33)And they who were in the vessel, came
and worshipped him, saying, Truly thou art the Son of God.

(34)And passing over, they came to the land of Gennesareth. (35)And
when the men of that place knew him, they sent into all that
neighbourhood, and brought to him all that had illnesses: (36)and they
besought him that they might only touch the fringe of his garment: and
as many as touched it were cured.

CHAP. XV.

THEN came to Jesus scribes and Pharisees from Jerusalem, saying, (2)Why
do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for they wash
not their hands when they eat bread? (3)And he answering said to them,
And why do you transgress the command of God, by your tradition? (4)For
God commanded, saying "Honour thy father and thy mother:" and, He that
curseth father or mother, let him surely die. (5)But ye say, If any man
declare to his father or mother, This is a _devoted_ gift, which else
might have been employed by me for thy advantage; (6)then he shall not
with it honour his father and mother: so have ye vacated the command of
God by your tradition. (7)Ye hypocrites, well hath Isaiah prophesied
concerning you, saying, (8)This people draweth nigh to me with their
mouths, and honoureth me with the lips, but their heart is far distant
from me. (9)But in vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines the
commandments of men. (10)And he called to him the multitude, and said
unto them, Hear, and understand: (11)not that which goeth into the
mouth defileth a man; but what cometh out of the mouth, that defileth
the man.

(12)Then his disciples approaching, said to him, Knowest thou how
offended the Pharisees were at hearing that speech? (13)Then he
answered and said, Every plant which my heavenly Father hath not
planted shall be rooted up. (14)Leave them to themselves: they are
blind leaders of the blind. But if the blind lead the blind, they will
both fall into the pit. (15)Then Peter answering said unto him, Explain
to us this parable. (16)And Jesus said, Are ye also to this time
destitute of intelligence? (17)Do ye not observe, that every thing
which entereth into the mouth passeth into the belly, and is ejected
into the vault? (18)But the things which go forth out of the mouth,
come out of the heart, and they are the things which defile a man:
(19)for out of the heart proceed wicked reasonings, murders,
adulteries, whoredoms, thefts, false testimonies, blasphemies:
(20)these are the things which defile a man: but to eat with unwashed
hands doth not defile a man.

(21)And going forth thence, Jesus retired into the coasts of Tyre and
Sidon. (22)And lo! a woman of Canaan coming out of these coasts, cried
aloud, saying to him, Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David: my daughter
is a grievous demoniac. (23)But he replied not a word to her. Then his
disciples came and intreated him, saying, Send her away; for she is
crying aloud after us. (24)But he said in reply, I am not sent, save
only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. (25)Then she came, and
worshiped him, saying, Lord, help me! (26)But he answering said, It is
not proper to take the children's bread and throw it to the dogs.
(27)And she said, True, Lord: yet even the dogs eat of the crumbs which
fall from their master's table. (28)Then Jesus answering said unto her,
O woman, great is thy faith! be it unto thee even as thou desirest. And
her daughter was cured from that hour.

(29)And departing thence, Jesus went to the sea-side of Galilee; and
ascending a mountain, he sat down there. (30)And great multitudes came
to him, bringing with them the lame, blind, dumb, cripples, and many
others, and cast them down at the feet of Jesus; and he cured them all:
(31)insomuch that the multitude marvelled when they saw the dumb
speaking, the cripples sound, the lame walking, and the blind restored
to sight: and they glorified the God of Israel.

(32)Then Jesus calling his disciples, said, I have compassion on the
multitude, for they have now continued with me three days, and have not
any thing to eat: and send them away fasting I will not, lest they
faint on the road. (33)And his disciples said unto him, Whence can we
in the wilderness have loaves enough to satisfy the cravings of so
great a multitude? (34)And Jesus said unto them, How many loaves have
ye? And they said, Seven, and a few small fishes. (35)And he commanded
the multitude to sit down on the ground. (36)And taking the seven
loaves and the fishes, he gave thanks, and brake, and gave to his
disciples, and the disciples to the multitude. (37)And they did all
eat, and were filled: and took up a superabundance of fragments seven
baskets full. (38)And they that had eaten were four thousand men,
besides women and children. (39)And dismissing the multitudes he went
on board a vessel, and came into the coasts of Magdala.

CHAP. XVI.

AND the Pharisees and the Sadducees came to him, and, to make trial of
him, desired him to shew them a sign from heaven. (2)And he answering,
said unto them, When evening comes, ye say, Fair weather, for the sky
is red. (3)And in the morning, It will be tempestuous to-day, for the
sky is gloomy and fiery red. Ye hypocrites, do ye know how to discern
the appearance of the sky, and are ye unable to discern the signs of
the times? (4)A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh a sign; and no
sign shall be given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonah. And he
left them, and departed.

(5)And when his disciples were come to the other side, they had
forgotten to take bread. (6)Then Jesus said to them, Beware and abstain
from the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees. (7)So they
reasoned among themselves, saying, It is because we have not taken
bread. (8)But when Jesus knew it, he said unto them, Why are ye
reasoning among yourselves, O ye of little faith, because ye have not
taken bread? (9)Do you not consider, nor remember the five loaves among
the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up? (10)Nor the seven
loaves among the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?
(11)How is it that ye do not understand, that I spake not to you of
bread, to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees?
(12)Then understood they, that he spake about abstaining not from the
leaven in the bread, but from the doctrine of the Pharisees and the
Sadducees.

(13)Then Jesus coming into the parts of Caesarea Philippi, questioned
his disciples, saying, Who do men say that I am? The Son of Man?
(14)But they replied, Some, that thou art John the Baptist; but others,
Elias; and others again, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets. (15)He saith
unto them, But who do ye say that I am? (16)Then Simon Peter answering
said, Thou art the Messiah, the Son of the living God. (17)And Jesus
replying, said to him, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona; for flesh and
blood hath not revealed this to thee, but my Father, who is in heaven.
(18)And I tell thee, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I
build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
(19)And I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and
whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and
whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.
(20)Then he commanded his disciples, that they should tell no man that
he was Jesus the Messiah.

(21)From that time Jesus began to shew his disciples, that he must go
to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders, and of the
chief-priests, and of the scribes, and be put to death, and the third
day rise again. (22)And Peter taking him aside, began to chide him,
saying, Mercy on thee, Lord! this shall never be thy case. (23)Then
turning from him, he said unto Peter, Get thee behind me Satan! thou
art an offence to me: for thou dost not relish the things of God, but
those of men.

(24)Then said Jesus to his disciples, If any man will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. (25)For
whosoever is desirous to preserve his life, shall lose it; but
whosoever would lose his life for my sake, shall find it. (26)For what
would a man be advantaged, though he could gain the whole world, if he
should suffer the loss of his soul? or what will a man give as the
ransom for his soul? (27)For the Son of man shall hereafter come in the
glory of his Father, with his angels, and then shall he recompense
every man according to his practice. (28)Verily I say unto you, There
are some of those standing here, who shall in no wise taste of death,
until they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.

CHAP. XVII.

THEN six days after, Jesus taketh Peter, and James, and John his
brother, and bringeth them into an exceeding high mountain apart.
(2)And he was transformed before them; and his face shone as the sun,
and his garments were white as the light. (3)And behold, there appeared
to them, Moses and Elias talking with him. (4)Then Peter addressing
him, said to Jesus, Lord, It is well that we are here; if it please
thee, we will make here three tents; one for thee, and one for Moses,
and one for Elias. (5)And while he was yet speaking, behold, a luminous
cloud overshadowed them; and lo! a voice out of the cloud, saying, This
is my beloved Son, in whom is my delight; hear him! (6)And the
disciples hearing it, fell on their face, and were exceedingly
affrighted. (7)And Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, be not
affrighted. (8)Then lifting up their eyes, they saw no person, but
Jesus only. (9)And when they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus
commanded them, saying, Tell no man the vision, until the Son of man is
risen from the dead. (10)And his disciples asked him, saying, Why then
do the scribes affirm, that Elias must come first? (11)Then Jesus
answering said unto them, Elias indeed cometh first, and will reform
all things. (12)But I say unto you, That Elias is already come, and
they knew him not, but have done by him whatsoever they chose: even so
also must the Son of man suffer by them. (13)Then understood the
disciples that he spake to them of John the Baptist.

(14)And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a man,
kneeling down to him, and saying, (15)Lord, have compassion on my son,
for he is a lunatic, and suffers grievously; for oftentimes he falleth
into the fire, and often into the water. (16)And I brought him to thy
disciples, and they have not been able to cure him. (17)Then Jesus
answering, said, O generation, faithless, and perverse! how long shall
I be with you? how long shall I bear with you? bring him hither to me.
(18)And Jesus rebuked him, and the devil came out of him; and the child
was cured from that hour. (19)Then the disciples of Jesus coming
privately, said, Why could not we cast it out? (20)Then said Jesus unto
them, Because of your unbelief: for verily I say unto you, If ye have
faith as a grain of mustard, ye shall say to this mountain, Remove from
hence, thither, and it will remove; and nothing will be impossible for
you. (21)But this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting.

(22)And as they were returning into Galilee, Jesus said unto them, The
Son of man must be delivered into the hands of men: (23)and they shall
kill him, and the third day he shall rise again. And they were grieved
exceedingly.

(24)And when they came to Capernaum, they who receive the tax of two
drachmas came to Peter, and said, Doth not your master pay tribute?
(25)He saith, Yes. And when he came into the house, Jesus prevented
him, saying, What thinkest thou, Simon? of whom do the kings of the
earth receive customs and tax? from their own children, or from aliens?
(26)Peter saith to him, From aliens. Jesus saith unto him, In that case
then the children are free. (27)But that we give them no offence, go
unto the sea, and cast in a hook, and take the first fish which cometh
up; and on opening his mouth, thou wilt find a stater, that take and
give them for me and thee.

CHAP. XVIII.

AT that time came the disciples to Jesus, saying, Who is indeed the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven? (2)And Jesus calling a little boy,
set him in the midst of them, (3)and said, Verily I say unto you,
Except ye be changed and be as little children, ye shall in no wise
enter into the kingdom of heaven. (4)Whosoever therefore shall humble
himself, as this little child, he shall be greatest in the kingdom of
heaven. (5)And whosoever shall receive one such little child in my
name, receiveth me. (6)And whosoever shall cause one of these little
ones, who believe in me, to stumble, it were better for him that a
millstone was hung at his neck, and that he was sunk in the depth of
the sea.

(7)Wo to the world because of offences! for there is a necessity that
offences come: nevertheless, wo to that man by whom the offence cometh!
(8)If then thy hand, or thy foot, lead thee to offend, cut them off,
and cast them from thee: for it were better for thee to enter into
life, halting or maimed, than having two hands or two feet to be cast
into the fire, which is eternal. (9)And if thine eye lead thee to
offend, pluck it out and cast it from thee, for it were better for thee
to enter into life with one eye only, than having two eyes to be cast
into hell-fire.

(10)See that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto
you, That their angels in heaven continually behold the face of my
Father who is in heaven. (11)For the Son of man is come to save that
which was lost.

(12)What think you? If a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them
stray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine in the mountains, and go
and seek that which had strayed? (13)And if he happen to find it,
verily I say unto you, that he rejoiceth over it more than over the
ninety and nine which never went astray. (14)Even so it is not the will
of your Father who is in heaven, that one of these little ones perish.

(15)Now if thy brother sin against thee, go and reprove him between
thyself and him alone; if he hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.
(16)But if he will not hear thee, take with thee one or two more, that
by the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be confirmed.
(17)But if he disregard them, inform the church: and if he disregard
the church, let him be to thee as a heathen, or a publican. (18)Verily
I say unto you, Whatsoever things ye shall bind on earth, shall be
bound in heaven: and whatsoever things ye shall loose on earth shall be
loosed in heaven. (19)Again I say unto you, That if two of you are
concurring upon earth, respecting any matter, which ye shall ask, it
shall be done for them by my Father who is in heaven. (20)For where two
or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them.

(21)Then Peter coming to him, said, Lord, how often shall my brother
sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven times? (22)Jesus saith to
him, I tell thee not until seven times, but unto seventy times seven.

(23)Therefore is the kingdom of heaven like unto a certain king who
purposed to settle his account with his servants. (24)And when he began
to make up the account, there was brought to him one debtor, ten
thousand talents in arrear: (25)but not having wherewithal to pay, his
lord ordered him to be sold, and his wife and his children, and all
things whatsoever he possessed, and payment to be made. (26)Then that
servant falling prostrate, paid him the most profound homage, saying,
Lord, have forbearance with me, and I will pay thee all. (27)Then his
lord, moved with compassion towards that servant, discharged him, and
forgave him the debt. (28)But that servant going out, found one of his
fellow-servants, who owed him a hundred denarii, and seizing, throttled
him, saying, Pay me what thou owest. (29)Then his fellow-servant fell
at his feet, and besought him, saying, Have forbearance with me, and I
will pay thee all. (30)And he would not: but went and cast him into
prison, till he should pay what he owed. (31)Then his fellow-servants,
when they saw what was done, were exceedingly sorry, and came to their
lord, and gave him an explicit account of all things that had passed.
(32)Then his lord, calling him before him, said to him, Thou vile
slave! all that debt I forgave thee, because thou besoughtest me:
(33)and oughtest thou not to have had compassion on thy fellow-servant,
even as I had pity on thee? (34)And his lord, incensed, delivered him
up to the torturers, till he should pay all that he owed him. (35)Even
so also will my heavenly Father do to you, except ye forgive every one
of you his brother, from your hearts, their trespasses.

CHAP. XIX.

AND it came to pass when Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed
from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judea beyond Jordan. (2)And
great multitudes followed him; and he healed them there. (3)And the
Pharisees came to him, tempting him, and saying, Is it lawful for a man
to put away his wife for every cause? (4)But he replying, said unto
them, Have ye not read, that he who created them from the beginning,
created them male and female? (5)And he said, for this reason shall a
man forsake father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they
two shall be one flesh. (6)Wherefore they are no longer two, but one
flesh. What therefore God hath yoked together, let no man separate.
(7)They say unto him, Why then did Moses command to give her a bill of
divorce, and to put her away? (8)He saith unto them, It was on account
of the hardness of your hearts that Moses gave you permission to put
away your wives: but from the beginning it was not thus. (9)And I tell
you, that whosoever shall put away his wife, except for whoredom, and
shall marry another, committeth adultery: and he that marrieth the
divorced woman, committeth adultery. (10)His disciples said unto him,
If the case of a man with his wife be thus, it is not expedient to
marry. (11)Then he said to them, All men are not capable of receiving
this saying, but they to whom it is given. (12)For there are eunuchs,
who were so from their mothers' womb; and there are eunuchs, who have
been made eunuchs by men; and there are eunuchs, who have made
themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven. He that is capable of
receiving, let him receive it.

(13)Then were brought to him little children, that he should lay his
hands upon them, and pray _for them_: but the disciples rebuked them.
(14)Then said Jesus, Permit little children, and hinder them not from
coming to me; for of such is the kingdom of heaven. (15)And when he had
laid his hands upon them, he departed thence.

(16)And lo! a person coming to him, said, Good Master, what good thing
shall I do, in order to attain eternal life? (17)Then he said to him,
Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, even God: but if
thou art desirous of entering into life, keep the commandments. (18)He
saith unto him, Which? Then said Jesus, these, Thou shalt do no murder,
Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not
bear false witness, (19)Honour thy father and thy mother; and, Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. (20)The young man saith to him,
All these things have I observed from my youth: in what am I still
deficient? (21)Jesus said to him, If thou art desirous to be perfect,
go, sell all thy substance, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have
treasure in heaven; and come, follow me. (22)Now when the young man
heard this speech, he went away sorrowful: for he had great
possessions.

(23)Then Jesus said to his disciples, Verily I say unto you, That very
difficultly shall a rich man enter into the kingdom of heaven. (24)And
again I repeat it to you, It is easier for a camel to pass through the
eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
(25)But when his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed,
saying, Who then can be saved? (26)And Jesus looking upon them, said
unto them, With men this is impossible; but with God all things are
possible.

(27)Then Peter addressing him, said unto him, Lo! we have left all and
followed thee; what, I pray thee, shall we receive? (28)Then said Jesus
unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye who have followed me in the
regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit on the throne of his glory,
ye also shall sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel. (29)And every one who hath left family, or brethren, or
sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my
name sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit life
eternal. (30)But many, now first, will be the last; and last, who will
be the first.

CHAP. XX.

FOR the kingdom of heaven is like a man, the master of a family, who
went out at break of day, to hire labourers into his vineyard. (2)And
when he had agreed with the labourers at a denarius a day, he sent them
into the vineyard. (3)And going out about the third hour, he saw others
standing in the market place unemployed. (4)And he said to them, Go ye
also into the vineyard, and whatever is equitable, I will give it you.
So they went. (5)Again going out, about the sixth and ninth hour, he
did after the same manner. (6)But about the eleventh hour, going out,
he found others standing unemployed, and saith unto them, Why stand ye
here all the day idle? (7)They say unto him, Because no man hath hired
us. He saith to them, Go ye also into the vineyard; and whatever is
equitable, ye shall receive. (8)Now when the evening came, the master
of the vineyard said to his overseer, Call the labourers, and give them
their wages, beginning from the last to the first. (9)And when they
came, who began about the eleventh hour, they received each a denarius.
(10)But when the first came, they expected that they should receive
more; and they also received every man a denarius. (11)But when they
received it, they murmured against the master of the family:
(12)saying, These last have wrought only a single hour, and thou hast
put them on an equality with us, who have borne the burden and heat of
the day. (13)But he answering, said to one of them, Friend, I do thee
no injustice; did I not agree with thee for a denarius? (14)Take then
thine own, and begone: I chuse to give to this last even as to thee.
(15)Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with my own? Is thine eye
evil, because I am good? (16)Thus shall the last be first, and the
first last; for many are called, but the elect are few.

(17)And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took his twelve disciples aside on
the road, and said to them; (18)Lo! we are going up to Jerusalem, and
the Son of man will be betrayed to the chief priests and scribes, and
they shall condemn him to death, (19)and shall deliver him to the
Gentiles, to insult, and to scourge, and to crucify: and the third day
he shall rise again.

(20)Then came to him the mother of Zebedee's children, with her sons,
paying him obeisance, and petitioning a favour of him. (21)Then he said
to her, What is thy wish? She saith unto him, Tell me that these my two
sons shall sit, the one at thy right hand, and the other at thy left,
in thy kingdom. (22)Then Jesus answering said, Ye know not what ye ask.
Can ye drink of the cup that I am going to drink, and be baptised with
the baptism with which I am baptised? They say unto him, We are able.
(23)And he saith unto them, Ye shall indeed drink of my cup, and with
the baptism with which I am baptised, shall ye be baptised; but to sit
on my right hand, and on my left, it is not in my power to bestow, but
on those, for whom it was prepared by my Father.

(24)And the twelve, on hearing this, were filled with indignation
against the two brethren. (25)But Jesus, calling them to him, said, Ye
know that the princes of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their
great men exercise authority among them. (26)But thus shall it not be
with you. But whosoever will be a great man among you, let him be your
servant; (27)and whosoever will be first, let him be your slave.
(28)Even as the Son of man came not to be waited upon, but to serve,
and to give his life a ransom for many.

(29)And as they were going out of Jericho, a great multitude followed
him. (30)And, behold, two blind men sat by the road side, who hearing
that Jesus was passing by, cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord,
son of David! (31)And the multitude checked them, that they should be
silent; but they cried out the more, Have mercy on us, Lord, son of
David. (32)And Jesus standing called them, and said, What desire ye,
that I should do for you? (33)They say unto him, Lord, that our eyes
may be opened. (34)Then Jesus, moved with compassion, touched their
eyes; and immediately their eyes recovered sight, and they followed
him.

CHAP. XXI.

AND when they drew nigh to Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage to the
mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples, (2)saying to them, Go
into the village, which is opposite you, and immediately you will find
an ass tied, and a foal with her; loose and bring them to me. (3)And if
any man say aught to you, ye shall tell them, That the Lord hath need
of them, and immediately he will send them. (4)Now this was entirely
done, that what was spoken by the prophet might be fulfilled, saying,
(5)"Tell the daughter of Sion, Lo! thy King cometh to thee, meek, and
sitting on an ass, even on a foal the ass's colt." (6)Then the
disciples going, and doing as Jesus had commanded them, (7)brought the
ass and her foal, and they spread over them their garments, and seated
him upon them. (8)And a vast multitude spread their garments on the
road, and others cut down branches from the trees, and strewed them on
the road: (9)and the multitudes who went before, and who followed
after, cried, saying, Hosanna, to the son of David; blessed is he who
cometh in the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest.

(10)And when he was entered into Jerusalem, the whole city was in
commotion, saying, Who is this? (11)Then the multitudes said, This is
Jesus, the prophet, who is from Nazareth of Galilee.

(12)And Jesus entered into the temple of God, and cast out all those
who sold and bought in the temple, and overturned the tables of the
money-changers, and the seats of those who sold doves (13)and said unto
them, It is written, "My house shall be called a house of prayer," but
ye have made it a den of robbers.

(14)Then the blind and the lame came unto him, into the temple, and he
cured them. (15)But when the chief priests and scribes saw the
marvellous acts which he did, and the children crying out in the
temple, and saying, Hosanna to the son of David; they were filled with
indignation; (16)and said to him, Hearest thou what these say? Jesus
replied to them, Yes; but have ye never read, "That out of the mouths
of infants and sucklings thou hast perfected praise?" (17)And turning
his back upon them, he went out of the city to Bethany, and lodged
there.

(18)Now in the morning, when returning into the city, he was hungry:
(19)and seeing a fig-tree at the road side, he went up to it, and found
nothing on it but leaves only: and saith unto it, Let no fruit spring
from thee henceforth for ever: and immediately the fig-tree withered
entirely away. (20)And when his disciples saw it, they marvelled,
saying, How suddenly is the fig-tree withered away! (21)But Jesus
addressing them, said, Verily I tell you, if ye have faith, and
entertain no doubt, not only shall ye do what is done to the fig-tree,
but if ye should even say to this mountain, Be lifted up, and be cast
into the sea, it be done. (22)And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in
prayer, believing, ye shall receive.

(23)And when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the
elders of the people came to him, as he was teaching, demanding, By
what authority doest thou these things? And who gave thee this
authority? (24)Then Jesus answering, said to them, I also will ask you
one question, which if ye answer me, then will I tell you by what
authority I do these things. (25)The baptism of John whence was it?
from heaven, or from men? Hereupon they reasoned among themselves,
saying, If we reply, From heaven, he will say to us, Why then did ye
not believe him? (26)But if we say, From men, we are afraid of the
populace, for they all hold John as a prophet. (27)So they answered
Jesus, and said, We cannot tell. Then said he also to them, Neither
tell I you by what authority I do these things.

(28)But what think ye? A man had two sons; and coming to the first he
said, Son, go work to-day in my vineyard. (29)But he answering said, I
will not: yet repenting afterwards, he went. (30)And coming to the
other, he spake after the same manner, and he replying, said, I go,
sir; yet went not. (31)Which of the two did the will of his father?
They say to him, The first. Jesus saith to them, Verily I say unto you,
That tax-gatherers and harlots shall go before you into the kingdom of
God. (32)For John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye
believed him not: but the tax-gatherers and harlots believed on him.
But ye, when ye saw it, repented not afterwards, that ye should believe
on him.

(33)Hear another parable: There was a certain man, the master of a
family, who planted a vineyard, and set a hedge about it, and digged in
it a wine-press, and built a tower, and hired it out to husbandmen, and
went into a distant country. (34)But when the season for fruits drew
near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen to receive his fruits.
(35)And the husbandmen took his servants, one they beat, and another
they killed, and a third they stoned. (36)Again he sent other servants
more than the first, and they treated them in the same manner. (37)Then
at last he sent unto them his son, saying, They will reverence my son.
(38)But the husbandmen, when they saw the son, said among themselves,
This is the heir, come let us kill him, and let us seize on the
inheritance. (39)And they took him, and cast him out of the vineyard,
and slew him. (40)When therefore the master of the vineyard cometh,
what will he do with these husbandmen? (41)They say unto him, He will
dreadfully destroy those wicked wretches, and will let out his vineyard
to other husbandmen, who will render him the fruits in their seasons.
(42)Jesus saith unto them, Have ye not read in the Scriptures, "The
stone, which the builders rejected; the same is become the head of the
corner; this is done by the Lord, and it is wonderful in our eyes."
(43)Therefore I tell you, That the kingdom of God shall be taken away
from you, and given to a nation, producing the fruits thereof. (44)And
whosoever shall fall on this stone, shall be broken in pieces, but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to powder. (45)And when
the chief priests and Pharisees heard his parables, they knew that he
was speaking concerning them. (46)And they sought to apprehend him; but
were afraid of the people, for they held him as a prophet.

CHAP. XXII.

AND Jesus continuing his discourse, spake again to them in parables,
saying, (2)The kingdom of heaven is like to a certain king, who made a
marriage-feast for his son: (3)and sent his servants to call those who
were invited to the entertainment: and they would not come. (4)Again he
sent other servants, saying, Tell those who have been invited, Behold,
I have prepared my dinner; my oxen and the fatlings are killed, and all
things are ready; come unto the marriage-feast. (5)But they gave
themselves no concern about it, and went their several ways, one to his
own farm, and another to his traffick: (6)And the rest seizing his
servants, insulted and slew them. (7)Then the king, when he heard it,
was incensed: and sending out his armies, destroyed these murderers,
and burnt down their city. (8)Then he said to his servants, The wedding
entertainment indeed is ready, but those who were invited were not
worthy: (9)go therefore into the thoroughfares of the roads, and as
many as ye find, invite to the banquet. (10)So these servants going out
into the roads, collected all, as many as they found, both bad and
good; and the wedding feast was fully furnished with guests. (11)Then
the king coming in to look around on the guests, saw there a man who
had not put on the wedding garment: (12)and he saith to him, Friend,
how came thou in here, not having the garment provided for the marriage
feast? And he was speechless. (13)Then said the king to the servants,
Bind his feet and hands, and take him away, and cast him into the
darkness, which is without; there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. (14)For many are called, but few elect.

(15)Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel together how they might
lay a snare to entrap him in his discourse. (16)And they sent to him
their disciples, with the Herodians, saying, Master, we know that thou
art true, and teachest the way of God with veracity; and carest for no
man, for thou regardest not the person of men: (17)tell us therefore,
What thinkest thou? Is it lawful to pay tribute to Caesar, or not?
(18)But Jesus knew their wicked design, and said, Why tempt ye me, ye
hypocrites? (19)Shew me the money for the tribute; and they brought him
a denarius. (20)And he saith unto them, Whose figure is this and
inscription? (21)They say unto him, Caesar's. Then saith he to them,
Render therefore to Caesar, the things which are Caesar's; and to God,
the things which are God's. (22)And when they heard him, they
marvelled, and leaving him, went away.

(23)On the same day the Sadducees came to him, who say, that there is
no resurrection, and they put a question to him, (24)saying, Master,
Moses said, "If a man die having no children, his brother in right of
affinity shall marry his wife, and raise up seed for his brother."
(25)Now there were with us seven brothers; and the first marrying,
died, and had no offspring, and left his wife to his brother;
(26)likewise the second also; then the third; so on to the seven.
(27)Last of all the woman died also. (28)In the resurrection therefore,
whose wife shall she be of the seven? for they all had her. (29)Jesus
then answering, said unto them, Ye are in an error, from not knowing
the Scriptures, and the power of God. (30)For at the resurrection, they
neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God
in heaven. (31)But with respect to the resurrection of the dead, have
ye not read what was spoken to you of God, saying, (32)"I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?" God is not the
God of the dead, but of the living. (33)And when the multitude heard
it, they were amazingly struck with his doctrine.

(34)But the Pharisees hearing that he had stopped the Sadducees'
mouths, they assembled together: (35)and one of them, a teacher of the
law, put a question to him, to make trial of him, and said, (36)Master,
which is the great commandment in the law? (37)Then Jesus said to him,
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy mind." (38)This is the first and great
commandment. (39)And the second is like to it, "Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself." (40)On these two commandments, the whole law and
the prophets depend.

(41)The Pharisees being then assembled, Jesus put a question to them,
(42)saying, What think ye of the Messiah, whose son is he? They say
unto him, David's. (43)He saith unto them, How then doth David by the
Spirit call him Lord? saying, (44)"The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit at
my right hand, till I put thine enemies as a footstool for thy feet."
(45)If then David calleth him Lord, how is he his son? (46)And no man
could answer him a word, neither durst any man, from that day,
interrogate him any more.

CHAP. XXIII.

THEN Jesus spake to the multitudes and to his disciples, (2)saying, The
scribes and Pharisees are seated on the chair of Moses; (3)all things
therefore which they prescribe for you to observe, observe and
practise; but do not according to their works, for they say, yet do not
practise. (4)For they bind burdens grievous, and difficultly borne, and
lay them on men's shoulders; but they will not move them with a finger
of their own. (5)And all their works they do to be seen of men: they
make their phylacteries broad, and deepen the fringes of their
garments, (6)and love the principal couch at suppers, and the chief
seats in the synagogues, (7)and salutations in the places of public
concourse, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi. (8)But be not ye
called Rabbi, for one is your leader, the Messiah; and ye all are
brethren. (9)And call no man your father upon earth; for one is your
father, who is in heaven. (10)And be not called leaders; for one is
your leader, the Messiah. (11)But he who is greatest among you shall be
your servant. (12)For whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased; and
whosoever abaseth himself shall be exalted.

(13)Wo unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye shut up
the kingdom of heaven from men; for ye yourselves enter not in, and
those who were coming in, ye suffer not to enter. (14)Wo unto you,
scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour widows' houses, and
for a pretence make long prayers: wherefore ye shall receive greater
condemnation. (15)Wo unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for
ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte; and when he is gained,
ye make him doubly more the child of hell than yourselves. (16)Wo unto
you ye blind guides! who say, Whosoever shall swear by the temple, it
is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, it is
binding. (17)Ye fools and blind! for which is the greater, the gold, or
the temple which consecrates the gold? (18)And again, Whosoever shall
swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the
gift that is upon it, it is binding. (19)Ye fools and blind! which is
the greater, the gift, or the altar which consecrates the gift?
(20)Whosoever therefore sweareth by the altar, sweareth by it, and by
all things that are upon it. (21)And whosoever sweareth by the temple,
sweareth by it, and by him also who dwelleth in it. (22)So he that
sweareth by heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, and by him who is
seated upon it.

(23)Wo unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithes
of mint, and anise, and cummin, and have neglected the weightier
precepts of the law, judgment, and mercy, and fidelity: these thing
ought ye to have done, and not to leave the others undone. (24)Ye blind
guides! who strain out a gnat, but gulp down a camel. (25)Wo unto you,
scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye cleanse the outside of the
cup, and of the dish, but within they are full of rapacity and
intemperance. (26)Thou blind Pharisee! cleanse first the inside of the
cup and dish, that their outside may become clean also. (27)Wo unto
you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye resemble tombs
whitewashed, which outwardly indeed appear specious, but within are
full of dead men's bones, and all manner of impurity. (28)And just so,
ye without indeed appear to men righteous, but within ye are full of
hypocrisy and iniquity. (29)Wo unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye build the tombs of the prophets, and adorn the
sepulchres of the just, (30)and say, If we had been in the days of our
fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the
prophets. (31)Wherefore ye bear a testimony to yourselves, that ye are
the children of those who killed the prophets. (32)Fill ye up then the
measure of your fathers. (33)Ye serpents, ye broods of vipers! how can
ye escape from the damnation of hell? (34)Therefore, behold, I am
sending to you prophets, and wise men, and scribes; and some of them ye
shall kill, and crucify; and some of them ye shall scourge in your
synagogues, and persecute from city to city: (35)that upon you may come
all the righteous blood which hath been poured out upon the earth, from
the blood of the righteous Abel, to the blood of Zachariah, son of
Barachiah, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. (36)Verily I
say unto you, All these things shall come on this generation.

(37)O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the prophets, and stonest
those who were sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children to me, as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye
would not? (38)Behold, your habitation is left unto you desolate.
(39)For I tell you, Ye shall henceforth no more see me, until ye say,
Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord.

CHAP. XXIV.

AND Jesus departing was going his way from the temple: and his
disciples came to him, to point out to his observation the buildings of
the temple. (2)But Jesus said unto them, Do you not see all these
things? I tell you of a certainty, There shall not be left here one
stone upon another, which shall not be utterly thrown down.

(3)Then as he was sitting upon the mount of Olives, his disciples came
to him privately, saying, Tell us, when shall there things be? and what
is the sign of thy coming, and of the consummation of the age? (4)And
Jesus answering said unto them, Beware that no man deceive you. (5)For
many will come in my name, saying, I am the Messiah; and shall deceive
multitudes. (6)And ye shall hear of wars, and rumours of wars: see that
ye be not terrified: for these things must first be, but the end is not
yet. (7)For nation shall be roused up against nation, and kingdom
against kingdom: and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and
earthquakes, in diverse places. (8)Now all these things are the
beginning of the travailing pangs. (9)Then shall they deliver you up to
affliction, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated of all nations
for my name's sake. (10)And then shall many be offended, and shall
betray one another, and hate one another. (11)And many false prophets
shall arise, and shall deceive many. (12)And because iniquity shall
abound, the love of many will grow cool. (13)But he that endureth to
the end, that man will be saved. (14)And this gospel of the kingdom
shall be preached through the whole world for a testimony to all the
nations: and then shall come the final close. (15)When therefore ye see
the abomination of desolation, spoken of by the prophet Daniel, erected
in the holy place, (let him that readeth, mark this,) (16)then let such
as are in Judea flee into the mountains. (17)Let not him who is upon
the roof go down to take any thing out of his house. (18)And he that is
in the field, let him not turn back to take his garment. (19)But wo to
those who are with child, and have an infant at their breasts in those
days! (20)And pray that your flight be not in winter, nor on the
sabbath. (21)For then the tribulation will be great, such as never was
from the beginning of the world, and never more shall be. (22)And
except those days were shortened, there would be no flesh saved: but
for the elect's sake these days shall be shortened. (23)Then if any man
say unto you, Lo! here is the Messiah, or there; believe it not:
(24)for false Messiahs and false prophets shall arise, and give out
great signs and wonders; so as to deceive, if it were possible, even
the elect. (25)Behold, I have forewarned you. (26)Therefore if they say
to you, He is in the wilderness; go not out: lo! he is in the secret
closets; believe it not. (27)For as the lightning cometh out from the
east, and flashes to the west; so shall be the coming of the Son of
man. (28)For wheresoever the carcase is, there will the eagles be
gathered together. (29)Then, immediately after the tribulation of those
days, shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light,
and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens
shall be shaken. (30)And then shall the sign of the Son of man appear
in the heaven: and then shall all the tribes of the earth lament
bitterly, and they shall see the Son of man coming on the clouds of
heaven with power and great glory. (31)And he shall send forth his
angels with a trumpet, and a great shout, and they shall gather
together his elect from the four winds, from the extremities of the
heavens to the extremities of the same.

(32)Learn then a parable from the fig-tree; when its branch is now
tender, and the leaves shoot forth, ye know that summer is nigh:
(33)just so ye, when ye behold these things, know that it is near, even
at the gates. (34)Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass
away until all these things shall be done. (35)Heaven and earth shall
pass away, but my words shall in no wise pass away. (36)But of that day
and hour no man knoweth, not even the angels of heaven, but my Father
alone. (37)But as the days of Noah were, so also shall the coming of
the Son of man be. (38)For as they were in the days preceding the
deluge, eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the
day that Noah entered into the ark, (39)and they knew it not till the
deluge came, and swept them all away; such also shall the coming of the
Son of man be. (40)Then two shall be in the field; the one shall be
taken, and the other dismissed. (41)Two women grinding at the mill; the
one taken, the other dismissed. (42)Watch therefore: for ye know not at
what hour your Master cometh. (43)And this observe, that if the master
of the family had known in which watch of the night the thief would
have come, he would have watched, and not have suffered him to break
into his house. (44)Therefore be ye also prepared: for in an hour that
ye think not, the Son of man cometh.

(45)Who then is the faithful and provident servant, whom his Lord hath
appointed over his household, to give them meat in the proper time?
(46)Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he cometh shall find
thus occupied. (47)Verily I say unto you, that he will place him over
all his substance. (48)But if that wicked servant say in his heart, My
master will be a long while ere he comes; (49)and shall begin to beat
his fellow-servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; (50)the
master of that servant will come in a day that he doth not expect him,
and at an hour which he knoweth not. (51)And will cut him asunder, and
give him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

CHAP. XXV.

THEN shall the kingdom of heaven be like to ten virgins, who taking
their lamps, went forth to meet the bridegroom. (2)But five of them
were provident, and five foolish. (3)Those who were taking their lamps,
took no oil with them: (4)but the provident took oil in their vessels
with their lamps. (5)But as the bridegroom stayed long, they all
slumbered and slept. (6)Then at midnight the cry came, Behold, the
bridegroom is coming; go forth to meet him. (7)Then all these virgins
arose, and set about trimming their lamps. (8)And the foolish said to
the provident, Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out. (9)But
the provident replied, saying, No; lest there be not a sufficiency for
us and you: but go rather to those who sell, and buy for yourselves.
(10)But while they were gone away to buy, the bridegroom came; and they
who were prepared went in with him to the marriage-feast: and the door
was shut. (11)Then came afterwards the other virgins, saying, Lord,
Lord, open unto us. (12)But he answering said, Verily, I know you not.
(13)Watch therefore, for ye know not the day nor the hour in which the
Son of man cometh.

(14)For the case is like that of a man, who travelling abroad, called
his own servants, and delivered to them his goods. (15)And to one he
gave five talents, to another two, and to another one, to each
according to his several capacity; and immediately went abroad. (16)He
then who had received the five talents, went and traded with them, and
acquired five other talents. (17)In the same manner also he that had
the two, gained also himself two others. (18)But he that had received
the one talent, went and digged a hole in the ground, and hid the
silver of his master. (19)Then after a long absence the master of these
servants cometh, and maketh a reckoning with them. (20)And he who had
received the five talents, coming to him, brought five other talents,
saying, Sir, thou deliveredst to me five talents: I have gained to them
five other talents. (21)His master said to him, Well done, good and
faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will
place thee over many: enter into the joy of thy master. (22)Then came
also he that had received the two talents: and said, Sir, thou
deliveredst to me two talents: lo! I have gained to them two other
talents. (23)His master said to him, Well done, good and faithful
servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will place thee
over many: enter thou into thy master's joy. (24)Then came also he that
had received the one talent, and said, Sir, knowing thee, that thou art
a severe man, reaping where thou hast not sowed, and gathering from
whence thou hast not scattered: (25)and being afraid, I went and hid
thy talent in the ground: see here, thou hast thine own. (26)Then his
master answering said to him, Thou wicked and idle slave, thou knewest
that I reap whence I had not sown, and gather where I had not
scattered: (27)thou oughtest then to have placed my money with the
bankers, so when I came I should have received my own with interest.
(28)Take therefore from him the talent, and give it to him that hath
the ten talents. (29)For to every one that hath shall be given, and he
shall abound: but from him that hath not, even that he hath shall be
taken away from him. (30)And cast the unprofitable servant into the
outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

(31)But when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy
angels with him, then shall he sit on the throne of his glory: (32)and
before him shall all the nations be gathered together; and he shall
separate them one from another, as a shepherd separates the sheep from
the goats: (33)and he shall place the sheep at his right hand, but the
goats at the left. (34)Then shall the King say to those on his
right-hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world; (35)for I was hungry, and ye
gave me to eat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me to drink: I was a
stranger, and ye received me hospitably: (36)naked, and ye clothed me:
I was sick, and ye took care of me: I was in prison, and ye came to me.
(37)Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee
hungry, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? (38)When indeed
saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee?
(39)When indeed saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?
(40)And the king answering shall say to them, Verily I tell you, for as
much as ye have done it to one of these my brethren, the very least of
them, ye have done it unto me.

(41)Then shall he say also to those on the left hand, Depart from me,
ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
angels: (42)for I was hungry, and ye gave me nothing to eat: I was
thirsty, and ye gave me nothing to drink: (43)I was a stranger, and ye
took me not in: naked, and ye did not clothe me: sick, and in prison,
and ye took no care of me. (44)Then shall they also answer him, saying,
Lord, when saw we thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or
sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? (45)Then shall he
reply to them, saying, For as much as ye have not done it to one of the
least of these, neither have ye done it to me. (46)And these shall go
away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternal.

CHAP. XXVI.

AND it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he
said to his disciples, (2)Ye know that after two days is the passover,
and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified. (3)Then were the chief
priests and scribes, and the elders of the people gathered together in
the palace of the high-priest, called Caiaphas. (4)And they consulted
together, how they might seize Jesus by guile, and put him to death.
(5)But they said, Not on the feast-day, lest there be a tumult among
the people.

(6)Now when Jesus was at Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
(7)there came to him a woman having an alabaster-box of very precious
aromatic ointment, and poured it upon his head as he sat at table.
(8)But when the disciples saw it, they had indignation, saying, For
what end is this waste? (9)For this ointment might have been sold for a
considerable sum, and given to the poor. (10)Then Jesus knowing it,
said unto them, Why trouble ye the woman? for she hath performed a good
act upon me: (11)for the poor ye have always with you, but me ye have
not always: (12)for in pouring this odoriferous ointment on my body,
she hath done it for my burial. (13)Verily I say unto you, Wherever
this Gospel is preached through the whole world, what she hath done
shall be also spoken of for a memorial of her.

(14)Then went one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, to the chief
priests, (15)and said, What will ye give me, and I will deliver him
unto you? Then they placed before him thirty pieces of silver. (16)And
from that time he sought an opportunity to deliver him up to them.

(17)Then on the first day of unleavened bread the disciples came to
Jesus, saying to him, Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat
the passover? (18)And he said, Go into the city, unto such a man, and
say unto him, The Master saith, My time is at hand: I will keep the
passover with my disciples at thy house. (19)And his disciples did as
Jesus commanded them; and they made ready the passover. (20)And when
the evening was come, he sat down at table with the twelve. (21)And as
they were eating, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall
betray me. (22)And exceedingly grieved, they began to say to him every
one of them, Lord, am I the person? (23)But he answering said, He that
dippeth his hand with me into the dish, that man shall betray me.
(24)The Son of man indeed is departing, as it is written of him: but wo
to that man, by whom the Son of man is betrayed! well had it been for
that man if he had never had a being. (25)Then Judas, who betrayed him,
addressing him said, Master, is it I? He saith to him, Thou hast named
the person.

(26)Then as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessing, brake,
and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat: this is my body.
(27)And taking the cup, and giving thanks, he gave it to them, saying,
Drink ye all of this: (28)for this is my blood, that _blood_ of the new
testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins. (29)And I
tell you, That I will no more henceforth drink of this produce of the
vine, until that day when I drink it with you, new, in the kingdom of
my Father. (30)And when they had sung an hymn, they went out to the
mount of Olives.

(31)Then saith Jesus unto them, Ye all will be offended at me this
night: for it is written, "I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of
the flock shall be scattered abroad." (32)But after I am risen, I will
go before you into Galilee. (33)Then Peter, taking up the word, said to
him, Though all should be offended at thee, yet will I never be
offended. (34)Jesus saith to him, I tell thee of a certainty, that this
night, before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. (35)Peter said
to him, Though I should die with thee, never will I deny thee. In like
manner also said all the disciples. (36)Then cometh Jesus with them to
a place called Gethsemane, and saith to his disciples, Sit ye here,
while I go and pray yonder. (37)And taking Peter and the two sons of
Zebedee, he began to be deeply sorrowful, and to be overwhelmed with
dejection. (38)Then saith he to them. My soul is exceeding sorrowful
even to death: abide here, and watch with me. (39)And going a little
farther, he fell on his face, praying, and saying, My Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but
as thou wilt. (40)And he cometh to the disciples, and findeth them
sleeping, and he saith to Peter, Is it so, that ye have not strength to
watch with me one hour? (41)Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh weak. (42)Again
the second time he went away, and prayed, saying, O my Father, If it be
not possible, that this cup pass from me, but that I should drink it,
thy will be done. (43)And coming, he found them asleep again, for their
eyes were weighed down. (44)And leaving them, he went away again, and
prayed the third time, repeating the same sentence. (45)Then cometh he
to his disciples, and saith unto them, Do ye still sleep on, and repose
yourselves? lo! the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed
into the hands of sinners. (46)Arise, let us go: lo! he that betrayeth
me approaches.

(47)And while he was yet speaking, behold, Judas one of the twelve
came, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the
chief priests and elders of the people. (48)Now he that betrayed him
had given them a signal, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he:
seize him. (49)And immediately approaching to Jesus, he said, Hail,
master; and kissed him. (50)Then spake Jesus to him, Friend, for what
purpose art thou here? Then approaching they laid hands on Jesus, and
seized him.

(51)And behold, one of those who were with Jesus stretching out his
hand, drew his sword, and striking at a servant of the high-priest, cut
off his ear. (52)Then saith Jesus unto him, Return thy sword into its
sheath: for all who take the sword, shall perish by the sword.
(53)Thinkest thou, that I cannot now entreat my Father, and he will
give me more than twelve legions of angels? (54)But how then would the
scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?

(55)In that hour said Jesus to the multitudes, Are ye come out as
against a robber, with swords and staves to apprehend me? I sat daily
with you teaching in the temple, and ye laid not hold upon me. (56)But
all this is come to pass, that the scriptures of the prophets should be
fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled.

(57)Then they who had apprehended Jesus, brought him to Caiaphas the
high-priest, where the scribes and elders were assembled. (58)But Peter
followed him at a great distance unto the palace of the high-priest,
and entering in, sat down with the servants, to see the issue. (59)Now
the chief priests and elders and the whole sanhedrim, sought false
witness against Jesus, that they might put him to death; (60)and found
none: and though many false witnesses came, they found it not
_sufficient_. But at the last two false witnesses stepping forth,
(61)said, This fellow said, I am able to pull down the temple of God,
and to build it up in three days. (62)And the high-priest rising up,
said to him, Answerest thou nothing? what do these men witness against
thee? (63)But Jesus was silent. And the high-priest addressing him,
said, I adjure thee, by the living God, that thou tell us, if thou art
the Messiah, the Son of God. (64)Jesus saith to him, Thou hast spoken
_the fact_. Moreover I tell you, hereafter ye shall see the Son of man
sitting at the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.
(65)Then the high-priest rent his garments, saying, he hath blasphemed:
what farther need have we of witnesses? lo! now ye have heard his
blasphemy: (66)what think ye? They answered and said, He is deserving
of death. (67)Then they spit in his face, and buffeted him about; and
some slapt his face with their hands, (68)saying, Prophesy to us, you
Messiah, who it is that struck thee!

(69)Now Peter sat without in the hall: and there came to him a single
maid-servant, saying, Thou also wert with Jesus of Galilee. (70)But he
denied it before them all, asserting, I know not what thou art saying.
(71)Then as he was going out at the gate, another maid-servant saw him,
and saith to those who were there, This fellow also was with Jesus of
Nazareth. (72)Then again he denied with an oath, I know not the man.
(73)But after a little while they who stood by, came up and said to
Peter, Assuredly thou also art one of them: for even thy speech maketh
thee manifest. (74)Then began he to utter the bitterest curses, and to
swear, I know not the man. And immediately the cock crew. (75)And Peter
remembered the word of Jesus, who had said unto him, Before the cock
shall crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. And going out, he wept bitterly.

CHAP. XXVII.

NOW when the morning came, all the chief priests and the elders of the
people took counsel against Jesus how they might put him to death.
(2)And having bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to
Pontius Pilate the governor. (3)Then Judas who betrayed him, seeing
that he was condemned, repenting, carried back the thirty silver pieces
to the chief priests and the elders, (4)saying, I have sinned, in
betraying innocent blood. But they said, What is that to us? see thou
to that. (5)And throwing down the silver pieces in the temple, he
departed; and going out, hanged himself. (6)Then the chief priests
taking up the silver pieces, said, It is not lawful to put them to the
treasure destined for sacred uses, because it is the price of blood.
(7)So taking counsel, they bought with them a potter's field, as a
burial-place for strangers. (8)Therefore is that field called, The
field of blood unto this day. (9)Then was fulfilled what was spoken by
Jeremiah the prophet, saying, And they took the thirty silver pieces,
the price of him who had been estimated at that rate, whom they of the
children of Israel did value: (10)and gave them for the potter's field,
as the Lord had ordered me.

(11)Then was Jesus placed before the governor, and the governor
interrogated him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? Then Jesus
replied to him, Thou sayest _true_. (12)And when he was accused of the
chief priests and elders, he made no reply. (13)Then saith Pilate to
him, Hearest thou not how many things they testify against thee?
(14)And he made him no reply, no not to a single word: so that the
governor marvelled exceedingly. (15)Now at the feast, the governor had
been accustomed to release one prisoner to the people, whomsoever they
chose. (16)And they had at that time a notorious prisoner, called
Barabbas. (17)Being therefore gathered around him, Pilate said to them,
Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus called
Messiah? (18)For he knew that out of envy they had delivered him up.

(19)Then, as he was sitting on the tribunal, his wife sent a message to
him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that righteous person; for I
have suffered much to-day in a dream on his account. (20)But the chief
priests and elders persuaded the populace that they should ask for
Barabbas, and destroy Jesus. (21)The governor repeating the question,
said to them, Which of the two will ye that I release unto you? They
said Barabbas. (22)Pilate saith unto them, What then shall I do with
Jesus, who is called the Messiah? They all say to him, Let him be
crucified. (23)The governor replied, But what evil hath he done? They
cried out with greater vehemence, saying, Let him be crucified.
(24)When Pilate saw that it was of no use to contend, but that rather a
tumult was rising, he took water, and washed his hands before the
people, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this righteous man: ye
must answer for it. (25)Then all the people answering said, His blood
be on us, and on our children.

(26)Then he released unto them Barabbas: but having scourged Jesus, he
delivered him up to be crucified. (27)Thereupon the soldiers of the
governor taking Jesus away to the Praetorium, gathered around him the
whole band: (28)and stripping him, put about him a scarlet cloak.
(29)And platting a crown of thorns, they placed it on his head, and a
cane in his right hand: and bowing the knee before him, mocked him,
saying, Hail, king of the Jews! (30)And spitting upon him, they took
the cane, and struck him upon his head. (31)And when they had insulted
him, they took off from him the cloak, and put his own garments on him,
and led him away to crucify him. (32)And as they were going out, they
found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name; him they compelled to carry his
cross.

(33)And when they were come to a place called Golgotha (which is called
the place of a skull), (34)they gave him vinegar to drink mingled with
gall: and having tasted it, he refused to drink. (35)Then having
crucified him, they parted his garments, casting the lot: that it might
be fulfilled, what was spoken by the prophet, They parted my garments
among them, and for my vesture they threw the lot. (36)And sitting
down, they guarded him there. (37)And they placed over his head his
accusation in writing, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS. (38)Then
were crucified with him two robbers, one on his right hand, and the
other on his left.

(39)And they who were passing by reviled him, shaking their heads,
(40)and saying, Thou that canst pull down the temple, and build it in
three days, save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, descend from the
cross. (41)And with similar language also did the chief priests,
insulting him, with the scribes and elders, and Pharisees, (42)say, He
saved others, himself he is unable to save. If he be the King of
Israel, let him come down now from the cross, and we will believe him.
(43)He trusted in God; let him now deliver him, if he will have him:
for he said, I am the Son of God. (44)And in the same manner also, did
the robbers who were crucified with him, revile him.

(45)Now from the fifth hour darkness fell upon all the land, unto the
ninth hour. (46)But about the ninth hour Jesus cried out with an
exceeding loud cry, saying, Eli! Eli! lama, sabacthani? that is, My
God! my God! why hast thou forsaken me? (47)Then some of those who
stood there, hearing him, said, This man is calling out for Elias.
(48)And immediately one of them, running, and taking a sponge, and
filling it with vinegar, and fastening it to a pole, put it to him to
drink. (49)The others said, Let him alone, let us see whether Elias
will come to save him.

(50)Then Jesus crying again with a loud voice gave up the ghost.
(51)And, lo! the vail of the temple was rent in two, from the upper
part to the bottom; and the earth was shaken; and the rocks were rent;
(52)and the sepulchres were opened; and many bodies of saints, who
slept, arose; (53)and coming out of the sepulchres after his
resurrection, entered into the holy city, and appeared unto many.

(54)Then the centurion, and they who were with him, guarding Jesus,
when they saw the earthquake, and the things which were done, were
exceedingly terrified, saying, Assuredly this was the Son of God.

(55)Now there were many women on the spot, looking on at a distance,
who had followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him: (56)among
whom was Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the
mother of Zebedee's children.

(57)But when the evening was come, there came a rich man of Arimathea,
whose name was Joseph, who himself also was a disciple of Jesus: (58)he
going in to Pilate, begged for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate ordered
the body to be given him. (59)And Joseph receiving the body, wrapped it
in clean linen; (60)and laid it in his own new sepulchre, which he had
hewn out in a rock: and rolling a vast stone against the door of the
sepulchre, departed. (61)And Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary, were
there sitting opposite the sepulchre.

(62)Now on the morrow, which is the day after the preparation, the
chief priests and Pharisees came in a body to Pilate, (63)saying, Sir,
we have reflected, that this deceiver, when yet alive, said, After
three days I will rise again. (64)Command therefore that the sepulchre
be made perfectly secure until the third day, lest his disciples coming
by night, steal him, and say to the people, He is risen from the dead,
so the last delusion would be worse than the first. (65)Then said
Pilate unto them, Ye have a guard, go and make it as secure as ye think
fit. (66)So they went and made the sepulchre secure, putting a seal
upon the stone, after placing the guard.

CHAP. XXVIII.

NOW after the eve of the sabbath, as the light was dawning, towards the
first day of the week, Mary Magdalen had come, and the other Mary, to
view the sepulchre. (2)And, lo! there was a great earthquake; for an
angel of the Lord descending from heaven, came and rolled back the
stone from the door, and sat upon it. (3)His aspect was as lightning,
and his raiment white as snow. (4)And for fear of him the guards shook,
and became as dead men. (5)Then the angel addressing them, said to the
women, Fear not ye; for I know that ye are seeking Jesus who was
crucified. (6)He is not here: he is risen, as he said. Come hither,
behold the place where the Lord lay. (7)And go quickly, tell his
disciples that he is risen from the dead: and, lo! he goeth before you
into Galilee; there shall ye see him, as he said unto you. (8)And they
went out quickly from the sepulchre with fear, and great joy; and ran
to carry the tidings to his disciples. (9)And as they were going to
tell the disciples, then behold Jesus met them saying, Hail! And they
came and held him by the feet, and worshipped him. (10)Then saith Jesus
to them, Be not affrighted: go, tell my disciples that they go into
Galilee, there shall they see me.

(11)And as they were going, some of the guards who were come into the
city, had told the chief priests all things which had happened. (12)And
being assembled with the elders, and having held a council, they gave a
large sum of money to the soldiers, (13)saying, Report, that his
disciples coming by night stole him away, while you were asleep.
(14)And if this comes to the governor's ears, we will persuade him, and
preserve you harmless. (15)So they took the money, and did as they were
instructed. And this account is circulated among the Jews to this day.

(16)Then the eleven disciples went into Galilee, to the mountain, where
Jesus had ordered them. (17)And when they saw him, they worshipped him.
Still some doubted. (18)Then Jesus approaching, spake to them, saying,
All power is given me in heaven and upon earth. (19)Go therefore, make
disciples among all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: (20)teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo! I am with you at all
times even to the end of the world. Amen.



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK.

CHAP. I.

THE beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God; (2)as it
is written in the prophets[11]; "Behold, I send my messenger before thy
face, he shall prepare thy way before thee. (3)The voice of one crying
in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths strait."
(4)John was baptising in the wilderness, and preaching the baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins. (5)And all the country of Judea
went out to him, and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptised by him in
the river Jordan, confessing their sins.

(6)Now John was clothed with a camel's hair garment, and a girdle of
leather about his loins; and his meat was locusts and wild honey.
(7)And he preached, saying, One mightier than I is coming after me, the
string of whose shoes I am not worthy, stooping down, to unloose. (8)I
indeed baptise you with water; but he shall baptise you with the Holy
Ghost.

(9)And it came to pass in those days, Jesus came from Nazareth in
Galilee, and was baptised of John in Jordan. (10)And immediately on
going up from the water, he saw the heavens divided by a chasm, and the
Spirit as a dove descending upon him: (11)and a voice came from heaven,
Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am well pleased. (12)And immediately
the Spirit impelled him to go into the wilderness. (13)And he was in
the wilderness forty days, tempted by Satan; and was with the wild
beasts; and the angels ministred unto him.

(14)But after John was delivered up, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching
the gospel of the kingdom of God: (15)and saying, The time is
fulfilled, and the kingdom of God draweth nigh: repent, and believe the
gospel.

(16)And as he walked near the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew
his brother casting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen.
(17)And Jesus said to them, Come after me, and I will appoint you to be
fishers of men: (18)and immediately leaving their nets, they followed
him. (19)And going from thence a little farther, he saw James the son
of Zebedee, and John his brother, and others in the vessel mending the
nets. (20)And immediately he called them: and leaving their father
Zebedee in the vessel with the hirelings, they went after him.

(21)And they entered into Capernaum; and immediately on the sabbath
going into the synagogue, he taught. (22)And they were struck with
astonishment at his doctrine; for he taught them as one having
authority, and not as the scribes. (23)And there was in their synagogue
a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out, (24)saying, Let us
alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou
come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God.
(25)And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Be silent, and come out of him.
(26)And the unclean spirit threw him into convulsions, and crying with
a loud voice, came out of him. (27)And they were all in astonishment,
so that they questioned one another, saying, What is this? what is this
new doctrine? that with authority he commands even the unclean spirits,
and they obey him? (28)And there went out a report of him immediately
into all the region of Galilee round about.

(29)Then straitway going out of the synagogue, they came into the house
of Simon and Andrew, with James and John. (30)But Simon's wife's mother
lay in a fever, and immediately they informed him of her. (31)And he
came and raised her up, and the fever left her immediately, and she
waited upon them.

(32)But when the evening was come, after the sun was set, they brought
unto him all that had illnesses, and the demoniacs. (33)And the whole
city was gathered together about the door; (34)and he healed many who
were grievously afflicted with a variety of diseases; and he cast out
many devils; and suffered not the devils to speak for they knew him.

(35)And very early (the night being far advanced towards morning)
rising up, he went forth, and retired into a desert place, and there
prayed. (36)And Simon, and those who were with him, eagerly pursued
him; (37)and when they had found him, they say unto him, All men are
inquiring after thee. (38)And he said unto them, Let us go into the
neighbouring towns, that I may preach there also; for unto this purpose
came I forth. (39)And he was preaching in their synagogues, through all
Galilee, and casting out devils.

(40)And there came to him a leper, beseeching him, and kneeling down to
him, and saying unto him, If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.
(41)Then Jesus, moved with compassion, stretching out his hand, touched
him, and said to him, I will; be thou cleansed. (42)And as he spake,
the leprosy instantly departed from him, and he was cleansed. (43)And
giving him a strict charge, he immediately sent him away; (44)and said
to him, Take care, that thou speak not a word to any man: but go, shew
thyself to the priest, and offer for thy purification, what Moses
commanded, for a testimony unto them. (45)But he going out, began to
proclaim it much, and to publish abroad an account of it, so that he
could no more openly come into the city; but was without in desert
places; and they came to him from all parts of the country.

CHAP. II.

AND again he entered into Capernaum after some days: and it was heard,
that he was in the house; (2)and immediately many collected round him,
so that there was no room, not even at the door; and he spake the word
to them. (3)And they come to him, carrying a paralytic, borne of four:
(4)and not being able to come nigh him because of the crowd, they
stripped off the roofing of the house where he was; and having broken a
way through, they let down with ropes the couch, on which the paralytic
lay. (5)Then Jesus beholding their faith, saith to the paralytic, Son,
thy sins are forgiven thee. (6)Now there were certain of the scribes
sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts, (7)Why doth this man thus
speak blasphemies? who can forgive sins but the one God? (8)And
instantly Jesus knowing by his spirit, that they reasoned thus among
each other, said to them, Why reason ye about these things in your
hearts? (9)Which is the easier thing, to say to a paralytic, Thy sins
are forgiven thee; or to say, Arise and take up thy couch, and walk
away? (10)But that ye may know that the Son of man hath authority upon
earth to forgive sins, he saith to the paralytic, (11)I say unto thee,
Arise, and take up thy couch, and go into thy house. (12)And he arose
instantly, and taking up his couch, went out before them all; so that
they were all astonished, and glorified God, saying, We never before
saw any thing like this.

(13)And he went forth again to the sea side; and all the people came
unto him; and he taught them. (14)And passing by, he saw Levi the son
of Alpheus sitting at the custom-house, and he saith to him, Follow me.
And he arose and followed him (15)And it came to pass, as he sat at
table in his house, many publicans also, and sinners, sat down with
Jesus and his disciples; for they were numerous, and they followed him.
(16)And the scribes and the Pharisees seeing him eat with publicans and
sinners, said to his disciples, How is it that he eateth and drinketh
with publicans and sinners? (17)And when Jesus heard it, he said unto
them, They who are in strong health have no need of a physician, but
they who have illness: I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance.

(18)And the disciples of John and of the Pharisees kept fasts; and they
came and said to him, Wherefore do the disciples of John, and of the
Pharisees, fast? but thy disciples keep no fast. (19)And Jesus said to
them, Can the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom
is with them? as long as they have the bridegroom with them, they
cannot fast. (20)But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be
taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those days. (21)And
no man seweth on a patch of cloth undressed upon an old garment: but if
otherwise, the new piece supplied taketh away from the old, and the
rent is made worse. (22)And no man putteth new wine into old bottles;
but if otherwise, the new wine will burst the bottles, and the wine
will be spilt, and the bottles destroyed: but new wine must be put into
new bottles.

(23)And he was walking through the cornfields on the sabbath; and his
disciples as they went on the road plucked the ears of corn. (24)And
the Pharisees said to him, See, why are they doing on the sabbath, what
is not lawful? (25)And he said unto them, Have ye never read what David
did, when he was under necessity, and was hungry, himself and they who
were with him? (26)How he entered into the house of God to Abiathar the
high-priest; and did eat the shewbread, which it was not lawful for any
to eat except the priests, and he gave also to those who were with him?
(27)And he said unto them, The sabbath was made for man, not man for
the sabbath. (28)Wherefore the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath.

CHAP. III.

AND he entered again into the synagogue; and a man was there who had a
withered hand. (2)And they watched him if he would cure him on the
sabbath; that they might accuse him. (3)And he saith to the man who had
the withered hand, Rise up in the midst. (4)And he saith to them, Is it
lawful on the sabbath day to do good, or to do evil, to preserve life,
or to kill? but they were silent. (5)Then looking round about on them
with indignation, exceedingly grieved for the hardness of their hearts,
he saith to the man, Stretch out thine hand; and he stretched it out:
and his hand was restored sound as the other. (6)And the Pharisees
instantly going out, held a council with the Herodians against him, how
they might destroy him.

(7)And Jesus retired with his disciples to the sea side; and a great
multitude from Galilee followed him, and from Judea, (8)and from
Jerusalem, and from Idumea, and from the farther side of Jordan; and
they around Tyre and Sidon, a vast multitude, when they heard what
wonders he did, came unto him. (9)And he spoke to his disciples that a
little boat should be ready for him, because of the crowd, lest they
should press upon him: (10)for he healed many; insomuch, that they
thronged in upon him, that they might touch him, as many as had
afflictive diseases. (11)And the unclean spirits, when they beheld him,
fell down before him, and cried out saying, Thou art the Son of God.
(12)And he repeatedly charged them, that they should not make him
known.

(13)And he went up into a mountain, and called to him those whom he
chose; and they came to him. (14)And he appointed twelve to be with
him, and to send them out to preach: (15)and to have authority to cure
diseases, and to cast out devils: (16)and Simon he surnamed Peter;
(17)and James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and
surnamed them Boanerges, that is, sons of thunder: (18)and Andrew and
Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the son of
Alpheus, and Thaddeus, and Simon the Canaanite, (19)and Judas Iscariot,
who also betrayed him: and they came into an house.

(20)And the multitude came together again, so that they were not able
even to eat bread. (21)And when his relations heard it, they went out
to restrain him, for they said, He is transported beyond all bounds.

(22)And the scribes who came down from Jerusalem, said, He hath
Beelzebub, and by this prince of the devils doth he cast out devils.
(23)So calling them to him, he spake to them in parables, How can Satan
cast out Satan? (24)Even if a kingdom be divided against itself, that
kingdom cannot stand: (25)and if a family be divided against itself,
that family cannot be established. (26)So if Satan rise up against
himself, and is divided, he cannot subsist, but cometh to an end.
(27)No man entering into his house, can plunder a strong man's goods,
unless he first bind the strong man, then indeed he spoileth his house.
(28)Verily I say unto you, That all sins shall be forgiven to the sons
of men, and the blasphemies, whatsoever they may blaspheme: (29)but
whosoever shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, hath no forgiveness
to eternity, but is adjudged to everlasting damnation. (30)Because they
said, he hath an unclean spirit.

(31)Then came his brethren and his mother, and standing without sent
unto him, calling aloud for him. (32)And the multitude sat around him,
and they said to him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren without are
asking for thee. (33)And he answered them, saying, Who is my mother or
my brethren? (34)And looking about on those who were sitting in a
circle round him, he saith, Behold my mother and my brethren! (35)For
whosoever shall do the will of God, that person is my brother, and my
sister, and mother.

CHAP. IV.

AND again he began to teach by the sea side: and a vast multitude was
assembled about him, so that he went into a vessel to sit down on the
sea, and all the multitude was on the land close by the sea. (2)And he
taught them in parables many things, and said unto them in the course
of his teaching, (3)Hear me! Behold, a sower went out to sow; (4)and it
came to pass as he sowed, some fell by the road side, and the birds of
the air came and ate it up. (5)And some fell on a rocky soil, where it
had not much mold, and immediately it sprung up, because it had no
depth of earth: (6)and when the sun arose it was scorched up; and
because it had not root, it withered away. (7)And some fell among
thorns, and the thorns sprang up with it and choked it, and it produced
no fruit. (8)And some fell on good ground, and produced fruit, growing
up, and increasing, and yielded one part thirty fold, and another
sixty, and another an hundred. (9)And he said unto them, He that hath
ears to hear, let him hear. (10)But when they were alone, those who
were about him with the twelve, asked him the meaning of the parable.
(11)And he said to them, To you it is given to know the mystery of the
kingdom of God; but to those who are without, all things are in
parables: (12)That seeing they may see, yet not perceive; and hearing
may hear, yet not understand; lest at any time they should be
converted, and their sins be forgiven them. (13)And he saith to them,
Know ye not this parable? and how will ye know all parables? (14)The
sower soweth the word. (15)Now these are they by the road side; where
the word is sown; and when they have heard, immediately Satan cometh,
and taketh away the word sown on their hearts: (16)and these in like
manner are they who were sown on the rocky soil; who when they have
heard the word, instantly with joy receive it; (17)and have no root in
themselves, but are temporary _professors_: afterwards, when
tribulation cometh or persecution for the word's sake, immediately they
are offended. (18)And those are the sown among the thorns; such as are
hearers of the word; (19)but the anxious cares of this world, and the
seducing nature of wealth, and inordinate desires after other things
entering in, choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful. (20)And these
are they who are sown on the good ground, such as hear the word, and
receive it, and bring forth fruit, some thirty fold, and some sixty,
and some an hundred.

(21)And he said unto them, Is a lamp brought out to be put under a
bushel, or under a bed, and not to be placed on a stand? (22)For there
is nothing hid, but that it should be brought to light, nor is any
thing concealed, but that it should come into open day. (23)If any man
hath ears to hear, let him hear. (24)And he said unto them, Take heed
what ye hear: with the measure ye mete, shall it be measured back to
you; and something over shall be given to you that hear. (25)For to him
that hath, there shall more be given to him; but he that hath not, even
that which he hath shall be taken away from him.

(26)And he said, The kingdom of heaven is of that kind, as if a man
should cast seed into his field; (27)and sleep and rise, night and day,
and the sown corn should sprout, and grow into length, he knoweth not
how: (28)for the earth, naturally prolific, beareth fruit; first the
blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear. (29)But when the
grain is ready, immediately he putteth in the sickle, because harvest
is come.

(30)And he said, To what shall I liken the kingdom of God, and under
what parabolic figure shall I represent it? (31)It is like a grain of
mustard, which when it is sown in the earth, is among the least of all
the seeds which are upon the earth: (32)but when it is sown, it groweth
up and becomes greater than all herbaceous plants, and produceth vast
branches; so that the birds of the air may roost under the shadow of
it. (33)And with many such like parables spake he to them the word.
(34)And without a parable spake he not unto them; but in private he
explained them all to his disciples.

(35)And the same day he saith unto them, as the evening shut in, Let us
pass over to the other side. (36)And sending the multitude away, they
took him just as he was in the vessel; and there were also some other
little vessels with him. (37)And a great hurricane arose, and the waves
broke into the vessel, so that it was now full of water: (38)and he was
in the stern, sleeping on a pillow: and they awoke him, and say unto
him, Master, is it no concern to thee that we are perishing? (39)And
rising, he with authority charged the wind, and said to the sea,
Silence! be still! And the wind subsided, and there was a great calm.
(40)And he said to them, Why are ye so timorous? How is it that ye have
not confidence? (41)And they were filled with the most reverential awe,
and said one to another, What manner of man is this, that even the wind
and the sea obey him?

CHAP. V.

AND they came to the other side of the sea, into the country of the
Gadarenes. (2)And as he was going out of the vessel, immediately there
met him a man with an unclean spirit, (3)coming out of the tombs; who
had his abode among the tombs; and no man could secure him, not even
with chains; (4)for he had been often bound with fetters and chains,
and the chains were burst asunder by him, and the fetters broken in
pieces, and no man was able to master him: (5)and continually night and
day he was in the mountains, and in the tombs, screaming, and cutting
himself with stones. (6)But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and
worshipped him, (7)and crying with a loud voice, said, What have I to
do with thee, Jesus thou Son of God most high? I adjure thee by God,
that thou dost not send me to torment. (8)(For he had said unto him,
Come out, unclean spirit, from the man.) (9)And he interrogated him,
What is thy name? and he replied, saying, Legion is my name; for we are
many. (10)And he entreated him much that he would not send them out of
the country. (11)And a great herd of swine was there feeding on the
mountain: (12)and all the devils besought him, saying, Send us into the
swine, that we may enter into them. (13)And immediately Jesus permitted
them. And the unclean spirits going forth, entered into the swine; and
the herd rushed violently down a precipice into the sea (they were
about two thousand), and were suffocated in the sea. (14)Then the
swineherds fled, and carried the tidings into the city and into the
country. And they went out to see what was done. (15)And they came to
Jesus, and saw the demoniac that had the legion, seated and clothed,
and in his sound mind: and they were afraid. (16)And they who saw the
transaction, told them how it had been with the demoniac, and
concerning the swine. (17)And they began to entreat him to depart out
of their coasts.

(18)And when he embarked on board the vessel, the demoniac besought
him, that he might go with him. (19)But Jesus did not permit him, but
said to him, Go to thine house, and to thy friends, and tell them how
great things the Lord hath done for thee, and hath had compassion on
thee. (20)And he went out, and began to publish in Decapolis, what
great things Jesus had done for him: and all men marvelled.

(21)And when Jesus had passed over again in the vessel to the other
side, a vast multitude came together unto him; and he was by the sea
side. (22)And, behold, there cometh to him one of the rulers of the
synagogue, named Jairus; and seeing him, fell at his feet, (23)and
entreated him importunately, saying, My little daughter is at the last
gasp; wilt thou come, and lay thy hands upon her, that she may recover,
and she shall live. (24)And he went with him: and there followed him a
great crowd, and they thronged him. (25)And a certain woman, having a
flux of blood twelve years, (26)and had suffered much from many
physicians; and had expended all she had, and was nothing better, but
rather growing worse and worse; (27)when she heard of Jesus, came in
the crowd behind him, and touched his garment: (28)for she said, If I
but touch his clothes, I shall recover. (29)And instantly the fountain
of her blood was dried up, and she felt in her body that she was cured
of her afflictive disease. (30)And Jesus immediately perceiving in
himself that miraculous power had gone forth from him, turning about in
the crowd, said, Who touched my garments? (31)And his disciples said to
him, Thou seest the crowd thronging thee, and sayest thou, Who touched
me? (32)And he looked round to see her who had done this. (33)Then the
woman, fearful and trembling, knowing what had been done in her, came
and fell down before him, and told him all the truth. (34)And he said
unto her, Daughter, thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace, and be
whole from thy distressing disease.

(35)And while he was yet speaking, they came from the ruler of the
synagogue's house, saying, Thy daughter is dead; why dost thou trouble
the master any further? (36)But Jesus, instantly hearing the account
given, said to the ruler of the synagogue, Fear not, only believe.
(37)And he permitted no person to follow him, but Peter, and James, and
John a brother of James. (38)And he cometh to the house of the ruler of
the synagogue, and seeth the confusion, as they were greatly lamenting
and making loud moanings. (39)And entering in he saith, Why make ye
this uproar, and weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth. (40)And
they derided him; but he thrusting them all out, took the father and
the mother of the maiden, and those who were with him, and went in
where the damsel was laid out. (41)And taking the hand of the damsel,
he saith unto her, Talitha cumi! which is, being interpreted, Damsel, I
say unto thee, arise! (42)And immediately the damsel arose and walked
about, for she was twelve years old. And they were astonished with vast
astonishment. (43)And he very strongly charged them that no person
should know it; and ordered something to be given her to eat.

CHAP. VI.

AND he went out thence, and came into his native country; and his
disciples followed him. (2)And when the sabbath came, he began to teach
in the synagogue: and many when they heard him were amazed, saying,
Whence hath this man these things? and what is the wisdom given to him,
that even such miracles are done by his hands? (3)Is not this the
carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James and Joses, and Judah
and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us? And they were offended
at him. (4)Then said Jesus unto them, A prophet is not without honour,
save in his native place, and among his relations, and in his own
family. (5)And he could not do there any miracle, except that laying
his hands on a few sick persons he cured them. (6)And he marvelled at
their infidelity.

And he went about the villages around, teaching. (7)And called the
twelve, and began to send them two and two, and gave them authority
over unclean spirits. (8)And he commanded them, that they should take
nothing for the journey, except a staff only; neither scrip, nor bread,
nor even brass money in their purse: (9)wearing sandals, and not to be
clothed with two coats. (10)And he said unto them, Wheresoever ye enter
into a family, there abide until ye depart thence. (11)And as many as
shall not receive you, neither hearken to you, when ye go from thence,
shake off the dust from beneath your feet, for a testimony against
them. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city. (12)And going
forth, they preached, that men should repent. (13)And they cast out
many devils, and anointed with oil many sick persons, and cured them.

(14)And king Herod heard it (for his name was celebrated), and he said,
This is John the Baptist, he is risen from the dead, and therefore
miracles are wrought by him. (15)Others said, That it is Elias; and
others said, He is a prophet, or as one of the prophets. (16)But when
Herod heard it, he said, This is John whom I beheaded; he is risen from
the dead. (17)For Herod himself had sent and seized upon John, and
bound him in prison, for Herodias' sake, his brother Philip's wife;
because he had married her. (18)For John said to Herod, It is not
lawful for thee to have thy brother's wife. (19)Therefore Herodias bore
him a rooted resentment, and would have slain him; yet could not:
(20)for Herod feared John, knowing him to be a righteous and holy man;
and paid great attention to him and when he heard him, did many things,
and heard him with delight. (21)And a favourable day being come for her
purpose, when Herod on his birth-day made a supper for his nobles, and
military commanders, and the principal personages of Galilee; (22)and
the daughter of this Herodias coming in, and dancing, and delighting
Herod, and his company, the king said to the damsel, Ask me whatsoever
thou wilt, and I will give it thee. (23)And he swore unto her, That
whatsoever thou shalt ask, I will give thee, even to the half of my
kingdom. (24)Then she went out and said to her mother, What shall I
ask? and she said, The head of John the Baptist. (25)And she came in
immediately with eagerness to the king, and asked, saying, I desire
that thou wilt give me on the spot, in a charger, the head of John the
Baptist. (26)And the king was exceedingly sorry; yet on account of his
oath, and those who sat with him, he would not refuse her. (27)And the
king immediately sending a centinel, commanded his head to be brought
thither: and he went, and beheaded him in the prison, (28)and brought
his head in a charger, and gave it to the damsel, and the damsel gave
it to her mother. (29)And when his disciples heard it, they came and
took up his corpse, and laid it in a sepulchre.

(30)And the disciples came together unto Jesus, and told him all
things, both what they had done, and what they had taught. (31)And he
said unto them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and
repose a little while: for there were multitudes coming and going, so
that they had not even time to eat. (32)And they went into a desert
place in a vessel privately. (33)And the multitudes observed them going
off, and many knew him, and ran thither on foot out of all the cities,
and got before them, and came together unto him. (34)And Jesus, when he
landed, saw a vast multitude, and was moved with companion towards
them, for they were as sheep having no shepherd: and he began to teach
them many things. (35)And when great part of the day was already gone,
his disciples coming to him said, This is a desert place, and much of
the day is already gone: (36)send them away, that they may go into the
country places and villages around, and buy themselves bread; for they
have nothing to eat. (37)But he answering said unto them, Give ye them
to eat. And they say unto him, Shall we go and buy the value of two
hundred denarii, in loaves, and give them to eat? (38)But he said to
them, How many loaves have ye? go and see. And when they knew, they
said, Five, and two fishes. (39)And he commanded them to seat them all
by companies on the green grass: (40)and they lay along row against
row, a hundred deep, and fifty wide. (41)And taking the five loaves and
the two fishes, he looked up to heaven, and blessed, and brake the
loaves, and gave them to the disciples, that they should set them
before them, and the two fishes he divided among them all. (42)And they
did all eat, and were filled: (43)and they took up twelve baskets full
of the fragments, and of the fishes. (44)And they who did eat of the
loaves, were about five thousand men.

(45)And immediately he compelled his disciples to go on board the
vessel, and to go before him to the other side, to Bethsaida, while he
sent the multitude away. (46)And having bid them farewell, he went into
a mountain to pray. (47)And when the evening was come, the vessel was
in the midst of the sea, and himself alone on the land. (48)And he saw
them greatly fatigued with rowing, for the wind was contrary to them:
and about the fourth watch of the night he cometh to them, walking upon
the sea, and seemed intending to pass by them. (49)But when they saw
him walking upon the sea, they thought it was an apparition, and
screamed out: (50)for they all saw him, and were greatly agitated: and
straitway he spoke to them, and said, Take courage, it is I, be not
terrified. (51)And he went up to them into the vessel, and the wind
ceased and they were beyond all imagination amazed in themselves, and
lost in wonder. (52)For they reflected not upon the loaves, for their
heart was hardened.

(53)And when they had passed over, they came to the land of
Gennesareth, and went on shore. (54)And when they came out of the
vessel, immediately perceiving him, (55)running through all parts of
that country, they began to carry about on couches those who were
afflicted with diseases, wherever they heard that he was. (56)And
wherever they entered into villages or cities, or country places, they
laid the sick in the streets, and besought him that they might touch,
if but the fringe on his garment; and as many as touched it, were
cured.

CHAP. VII.

AND the Pharisees, and some of the scribes, who came from Jerusalem,
collected together around him. (2)And seeing some of his disciples
eating bread with hands unclean, that is, unwashed, they found fault.
(3)For the Pharisees and all the Jews, unless they wash their hands to
the wrist, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders. (4)And coming
from the market, unless they have washed, they never eat. And there are
many other things which they have by tradition received to observe, as
the washings of cups, and pots, and vessels of brass, and couches.
(5)Then the Pharisees and the scribes asked him, Why do not thy
disciples walk conformable to the tradition of the elders, but eat
bread with unwashed hands? (6)Then he answering said to them, Well did
Isaiah prophesy concerning you hypocrites, as it is written[12], "This
people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
(7)Now vainly do they worship me, while teaching doctrines the
commandments of men." (8)For leaving the command of God, ye adhere to
the tradition of men, the washings of pots and cups; and many other
such like things ye practise. (9)And he said to them, Strangely do ye
make void the command of God, that ye may observe your tradition.
(10)For Moses said[13], "Honour thy father and thy mother:" and "he
that curseth father or mother, let him assuredly be put to death[14]."
(11)But ye affirm, If a man say to his father or mother, it is Corban
(that is, a gift), which otherwise might have been advantageous to thee
from me; (12)then ye permit him no more to do any thing for his father,
or his mother; (13)abrogating the word of God by the tradition, which
ye have transmitted down; and many such like things ye do.

(14)And he called to him all the multitude, and said unto them, hear me
all of you, and understand. (15)There is nothing from without a man,
that entering into him, can make him unclean: but the things which come
out from him, these are the things which make a man unclean. (16)If any
man hath ears to hear, let him hear. (17)And when he was come into the
house from the multitude, his disciples asked him concerning the
parable. (18)And he saith to them, Are ye also so defective of
intelligence? Do you not consider, that every thing from without that
entereth into a man, cannot make him unclean? (19)because it entereth
not into his heart, but into his belly, and goeth out into the vault,
carrying off all the impurities of the food. (20)But, said he, what
cometh out of a man, that makes a man unclean. (21)For from within out
of the heart of men proceed wicked reasonings, adulteries, whoredoms,
murders, (22)thefts, inordinate cravings, mischievous actions, knavery,
lewdness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, folly: (23)all these wicked
things come from within, and render a person unclean.

(24)And rising, he departed thence into the confines of Tyre and Sidon;
and entering into a house, desired that no man should know it: yet he
could not be hid. (25)For a woman hearing of him, whose daughter had an
unclean spirit, came and fell at his feet. (26)The woman was a Greek, a
Syrophenician by birth, and she entreated him that the devil might be
cast out of her daughter. (27)And Jesus said unto her, Let the children
first be fed, for it is not proper to take the children's bread, and
throw it to the dogs. (28)But she replied, and said to him, True, Lord,
yet the dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs. (29)And he
said unto her, For this speech, go home, the devil is gone out of thy
daughter. (30)And going to her house, she found the devil gone out, and
her daughter laid on a couch.

(31)And again departing from the coasts of Tyre and Sidon, he came to
the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis.
(32)And they bring him a deaf man, who could scarcely articulate; and
they entreat him to put his hand upon him. (33)And he took him aside
out of the crowd, and put his fingers into his ears, and spitting, he
touched his tongue; (34)and looking up to heaven, he heaved a deep
sigh, and saith unto him, Ephphatha! that is, Be opened. (35)And
instantly his ears were opened, and the tie of his tongue loosed, and
he spake distinctly. (36)And he charged them that they should tell no
man: but the more he charged, the more abundantly they published it
abroad. (37)And they were astonished beyond all imagination, saying, He
hath done all things admirably; he maketh even the deaf to hear, and
the dumb to speak.

CHAP. VIII.

IN those days the multitude being exceedingly great, and having nothing
to eat, Jesus calling his disciples to him, said unto them, (2)I have
compassion on the multitude, for they have stayed with me already three
days, and have nothing to eat: (3)and if I send them away fasting to
their houses, they will faint on the road; for many of them came from a
great distance. (4)His disciples answered him, Whence can a man here in
the desert satisfy these with bread? (5)And he asked them, How many
loaves have ye? And they said, Seven. (6)And he commanded the multitude
to recline in order on the ground: and taking the seven loaves, having
given thanks he brake them, and gave to his disciples, that they should
set before the people; and they distributed them to the multitude.
(7)And they had a few small fishes; and blessing, he commanded to set
these also before them. (8)And they did eat and were filled and they
took up what remained of the fragments, seven baskets. (9)And the
persons who had eaten were about four thousand: and he sent them away.
(10)And immediately going into the vessel with his disciples, he came
into the coasts of Dalmanutha.

(11)Then the Pharisees came out, and began to question him, seeking of
him a sign from heaven, tempting him. (12)And fetching a deep sigh from
his very soul, he saith, Why seeketh this generation a sign? verily I
tell you, no sign shall be given to this generation. (13)And leaving
them, going again on board the vessel, he departed to the other side.

(14)And they had forgotten to take bread, and had not with them in the
vessel but a single loaf. (15)And he earnestly charged them, saying,
Beware, take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of
Herod. (16)And they talked the matter over among themselves, saying,
This is because we have no loaves of bread. (17)And Jesus knowing it
said unto them, Why reason ye together, because ye have no loaves? Do
ye not yet consider, nor understand? Have ye your heart yet hardened?
(18)Having eyes, do ye not see? and having ears, do ye not hear? and do
ye not remember? (19)When I broke the five loaves among the five
thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up? They say unto
him, Twelve. (20)And when the seven loaves among the four thousand, how
many baskets full of fragments took ye up? They said, Seven. (21)And he
said unto them, How is it that ye do not understand?

(22)And he cometh to Bethsaida; and they bring him a blind man, and
entreat him that he would touch him. (23)And he took the blind man by
the hand, and led him without the city; and spitting on his eyes, he
laid his hands upon him, and asked him if he saw aught. (24)And looking
up, he said, I see men walking, as trees. (25)Then again he put his
hands upon his eyes, and made him look up again: and he was entirely
restored, and saw all men distinctly. (26)And he sent him away unto his
own house, saying, Neither enter thou into the city, nor speak to any
in the city.

(27)And Jesus and his disciples went out into the towns of Caesarea
Philippi: and on the road he asked his disciples, saying unto them, Who
do men say that I am? (28)And they answered, John the Baptist: others
say, Elias; and others, One of the prophets. (29)And he said unto them,
But who do ye say that I am? Then Peter answering, said unto him, Thou
art the Messiah. (30)And he strictly enjoined them, that they should
tell no man of this.

(31)And he began to teach them, that the Son of man must suffer many
things, and be rejected by the elders, and chief priests, and scribes,
and be slain, and after three days rise again. (32)And he spake this
saying openly. And Peter taking him aside, began to remonstrate with
him. (33)But he turned himself around, and seeing his disciples, he
rebuked Peter, saying, Get thee behind me, Satan: for thou dost not
relish the things which are of God, but those that are of men.

(34)Then calling to him the multitude, with his disciples, he said to
them, Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross, and follow me. (35)For whosoever would preserve his life
shall lose it; but whosoever would lose his life for my sake and the
Gospel, he shall preserve it. (36)For what would it profit a man,
though he should gain the whole world, if he be punished with the loss
of his own soul? (37)Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
(38)For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, before this
adulterous and sinful generation; of him will the Son of man also be
ashamed, when he shall come in the glory of his Father, with the holy
angels.

CHAP. IX.

AND he said unto them, I tell you of a certainty, that there are some
standing here who shall not taste of death, until they see the kingdom
of God come with power.

(2)And six days after Jesus taketh with him Peter and James and John,
only, and carrieth them up with him into an exceeding high mountain in
great privacy; and was transfigured before them. (3)His garments became
glistering, exceeding white, like snow; such as no fuller upon earth
can whiten. (4)And there appeared to him Elias with Moses: and they
were conversing with Jesus. (5)Then Peter addressing him, said unto
him, Master, it is desirable for us to be here: and let us erect three
tents, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. (6)For he
knew not what he should say: for they were very much affrighted. (7)And
there came a cloud overshadowing them: and there came a voice out of
the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him. (8)And instantly
looking round, they saw no man any longer with them, but Jesus only.
(9)And as they were coming down from the mountain, he strictly charged
them, that they should tell no man what they had seen, till after the
Son of man should have arisen from the dead. (10)And they caught at
that word, considering among themselves what this rising from the dead
could mean.

(11)And they asked him, saying, Why say the scribes, that Elias must
come first? (12)Then he answering said unto them, Elias indeed cometh
first, and will reform all things; and how speaks the scripture of the
Son of man? That he must suffer many things, and be treated with
contempt. (13)But I say unto you, that Elias is come, and they have
done to him whatsoever they chose, as it is written of him.

(14)And when he came to his disciples, he saw a great crowd around
them, and the scribes disputing with them. (15)And immediately all the
multitude, when they beheld him, were struck with amazement, and coming
to him, saluted him. (16)And he asked the scribes, What are ye
disputing about among yourselves? (17)And one of the people addressing
him, said, Master, I have brought my son to thee, who hath a dumb
spirit; (18)and wherever he seizeth him, he throws him into strong
convulsions: and he foams at the mouth, and grinds his teeth, and pines
away. And I spoke to thy disciples, that they should cast him out; and
they were unable. (19)Then addressing him, he said, O faithless
generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I bear with
you? bring him to me. (20)And they brought him unto him. And seeing
him, instantly the spirit threw him into convulsions; and falling to
the ground, he rolled about, foaming at the mouth. (21)And he asked his
father, For how long a time hath this been the case with him? And he
replied, From his infancy. (22)And often it hath cast him into the
fire, and into water, to destroy him: but if thou art able, have
compassion upon us, and help us. (23)Then said Jesus unto him, This _is
the point_: if thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that
believeth. (24)And immediately the father of the child said with tears,
I believe, Lord! help my unbelief! (25)Then Jesus, seeing that the
multitude were running up to him, rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to
him, Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I command thee, come out of him, and
enter into him no more. (26)And screaming, and convulsing him
violently, it came out: and the child lay as if dead; insomuch that
many said, He is dead. (27)But Jesus taking him by the hand, raised him
up; and he arose. (28)And when he was come into the house, the
disciples asked him privately, Why could not we cast it out? (29)And he
said to them, this kind can be driven out by nothing but prayer and
fasting.

(30)And going from thence, they passed through Galilee: and he would
not have any person know it. (31)For he taught his disciples, and said
unto them, The Son of man is delivered into the hands of men, and they
shall kill him: and after being killed, the third day he shall rise
again. (32)But they understood not the meaning of that declaration, and
were afraid to ask him.

(33)And he came to Capernaum: and when he was in the house, he asked
them, What was the subject of your dispute among yourselves on the
road? (34)But they held their peace. For they had been disputing with
each other on the road, which was the greatest. (35)And when he was
seated, he called the twelve, and saith to them, If any man desires to
be the first, let him be last of all, and servant of all. (36)And
taking a little boy, he set him in the midst of them: and taking him in
his arms, he said unto them, (37)Whosoever shall receive one of such
little children in my name, receiveth me: and whosoever receiveth me,
receiveth not me merely, but him that sent me.

(38)Then John addressed him, saying, Master, we saw a person in thy
name casting out devils, who followeth us not: and we forbad him,
because he did not follow us. (39)Then said Jesus, Forbid him not: for
there is no man who shall perform a miracle in my name, who will be
able presently after to speak evil of me. (40)For he that is not
against us, is for us. (41)For whosoever shall give you even a cup of
water to drink in my name, because ye belong to the Messiah, verily I
say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward. (42)And whosoever
shall give occasion of offence to one of these little ones who believe
in me, it were desirable for him rather that a milestone were hanged
about his neck, and that he were cast into the sea. (43)And if thy hand
cause thee to offend, cut it off: it were better for thee to enter into
life maimed, than having both hands to go into hell, into the fire that
never will be quenched: (44)where their worm dieth not, and the fire is
not quenched. (45)And if thy foot cause thee to offend, cut it off: it
is better for thee to enter into life halting, than having both feet to
be cast into hell, into the fire which never can be quenched: (46)where
the worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched. (47)And if thine eye
cause thee to offend, pluck it out: it is better for thee to enter into
the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into
the fire of hell: (48)where the worm dieth not, and the fire is not
quenched. (49)For every one shall be salted with fire, and every victim
shall be sprinkled with salt. (50)Salt is good: but if the salt become
insipid, with what will you season it? have salt in yourselves, and
live in peace with each other.

CHAP. X.

AND arising, he went from thence into the coasts of Judea, through the
country on the other side of the Jordan; and again the multitudes came
together unto him; and as his custom was, he again taught them. (2)And
the Pharisees coming to him, put a question to him, Is it lawful for a
husband to put away his wife? tempting him. (3)He answered and said
unto them, What did Moses command you? (4)They said, Moses permitted to
write a bill of divorce, and to put her away. (5)Then Jesus answering
said unto them, For the hardness of your hearts he wrote you that
ordinance. (6)But from the beginning of the creation, God made them
male and female; (7)and said, For this cause shall a man forsake father
and mother, and shall adhere to his wife; (8)and they two shall be one
flesh: so that they are no more two, but one flesh. (9)What therefore
God hath yoked together, let no man separate. (10)And in the house the
disciples again asked him of this matter. (11)And he said unto them,
Whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry another, committeth
adultery against her: (12)and if a wife put away her husband, and
marrieth another, she committeth adultery.

(13)And they brought unto him little children, that he should touch
them: but his disciples rebuked those who brought them. (14)But when
Jesus saw it, he felt indignation, and said to them, Permit little
children to come to me, and hinder them not; for of such is the kingdom
of heaven. (15)Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the
kingdom of God as a little child, he shall in nowise enter into it.
(16)And he took them in his arms, and laying his hand upon them, gave
them his benediction.

(17)And as he went out to the road, a person ran to him, and kneeling
down, asked him, Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit
eternal life? (18)Then said Jesus unto him, Why callest thou me good?
there is none good but one, even God. (19)Thou knowest the
commandments, Do not commit adultery; Do not murder; Do not steal; Do
not bear false witness; Honour thy father and mother. (20)Then he
replying, said, Master, all these things have I observed from my youth.
(21)Then Jesus looking upon him, loved him, and said to him, In one
thing thou art defective: go, sell all that thou hast, and give to the
poor; and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up thy
cross, and follow me. (22)And groaning over this speech, he went away
sorrowful: for he had many estates. (23)And Jesus looking round, said
to his disciples, How difficultly shall they who have riches enter into
the kingdom of God! (24)Then his disciples were astonished at these
words. But Jesus again addressing them, said unto them, Children, how
difficult is it for those who trust in riches to enter into the kingdom
of God! (25)It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a
needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. (26)And
they were exceedingly amazed, saying among themselves, Who then can be
saved? (27)And Jesus looking upon them, said, With men it is
impossible, but not with God: for with God all things are possible.

(28)And Peter began to say unto him, Lo, we have left all, and followed
thee. (29)Then Jesus in reply said, Verily I say unto you, there is no
man who hath left house, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother,
or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and the Gospel's, (30)who
shall not receive an hundred-fold more now, at this very time, houses,
and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with
persecution, and in the world to come life everlasting. (31)But many
first, will be last; and the last, first.

(32)And they were on the road going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus was
advancing before them: and they were astonished; and followed him full
of fear. And again taking the twelve aside, he began to tell them what
things were about to befall him: (33)For, lo! said he, we are going up
to Jerusalem; and the Son of man will be betrayed to the chief priests,
and to the scribes; and they will condemn him to death, and will
deliver him to the Gentiles: (34)and they will insult him, and scourge
him, and spit upon him, and kill him: and the third day he shall rise
again.

(35)And James and John the sons of Zebedee came to him, saying, Master,
we desire that thou shouldst do for us whatsoever we request. (36)He
said unto them, What will ye that I should do for you? (37)They say
unto him, Grant us to sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on
thy left, in thy glory. (38)Then Jesus said unto them, Ye know not what
ye ask: can ye drink of the cup which I drink? and be baptised with the
baptism with which I am baptised? (39)And they said unto him, We are
able. Then said Jesus unto them, Ye shall indeed drink of the cup of
which I drink; and be baptised with the baptism with which I am
baptised: (40)but to sit on my right-hand, and on my left, is not mine
to give; but to those for whom it is prepared. (41)And when the ten
heard it, they began to be indignant against James and John. (42)But
Jesus called them, and said to them, Ye know that they who appear to
rule over the Gentiles, lord it over them; and their great men exercise
dominion over them. (43)But it shall not be so with you: but whosoever
will be great among you let him be your servant: (44)and whosoever will
be first, let him be the servant of all. (45)For the Son of man came
not to be waited upon, but to be a servant, and to give his life a
ransom for many.

(46)And they came to Jericho. And as he was going out of Jericho with
his disciples, and a great multitude, Bartimeus, the blind, the son of
Timeus, sat by the road-side begging: (47)and hearing that Jesus of
Nazareth was passing by, he began to cry out, and say, O Son of David,
Jesus, have mercy on me! (48)And many chid him, that he should be
silent: but he cried out so much the more, Son of David, have mercy on
me! (49)And Jesus stood still, and ordered him to be called: and they
call the blind man, saying to him, Cheer up, arise; he calleth thee.
(50)Then casting off his cloak, he arose, and came to Jesus. (51)And
Jesus addressing him, said, What dost thou wish that I should do for
thee? And the blind man said to him, Rabboni, that I may receive my
sight! (52)Then said Jesus unto him, Go thy way: thy faith hath saved
thee. And immediately he received sight, and followed Jesus in the
road.

CHAP. XI.

AND when he drew nigh to Jerusalem, unto Bethphage and Bethany, to the
mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples, (2)and saith unto them,
Go into the village opposite to you: and immediately as you enter it,
you will find a foal tied, on which no man yet hath rode; loose him,
and bring him hither. (3)And if any man say to you, Why do ye this?
say, That the Lord hath need of it; and immediately he will send it
hither. (4)And they went, and found the foal tied to a gate without,
where two ways met; and they untie him. (5)Then some of those who stood
by, said unto them, What are ye about, untying the colt? (6)Then they
said unto them, as Jesus commanded them: and they permitted them to do
it. (7)And they brought the colt to Jesus, and put on him their
garments; and he rode upon it. (8)And multitudes spread their garments
on the road: and others cut off boughs from the trees, and strewed them
on the road. (9)And they who went before, and who followed after,
cried, saying, Hosanna: blessed is he that cometh in the name of the
Lord. (10)Blessed be the kingdom of our father David, that is coming in
the name of the Lord: hosanna in the highest. (11)And Jesus entered
into Jerusalem, and into the temple: and looking round about upon all
things, it being now even-tide, he departed to Bethany with the twelve.
(12)And on the morrow, as they were coming out of Bethany, he was
hungry: (13)and seeing a fig-tree at a distance, full of leaves, he
went to it, expecting probably that he might find some fruit upon it:
and when he came to it, he found none, only leaves: for it was not a
_good_ season for figs. (14)And Jesus spake and said to it, Let no man
eat fruit from thee henceforth for ever. And his disciples heard him.

(15)And they came to Jerusalem and Jesus entered into the temple, and
began to cast out those who sold and bought in the temple, and
overturned the tables of the money-changers, and the seats of those who
sold doves; (16)and would not suffer that any person should carry a
vessel through the temple. (17)And he taught them, saying, Is it not
written, that "My house shall be called a house of prayer for all
nations?" but ye have made it a den of thieves. (18)And the scribes and
chief priests heard him, and sought how they might destroy him: for
they were afraid of him, because all the people were exceedingly struck
with his teaching, (19)And when the evening came, he went away out of
the city.

(20)And in the morning, as they were passing by, they saw the fig-tree
withered from the roots. (21)And Peter reminding him said, Rabbi,
behold, the fig-tree which thou cursedst is withered away. (22)And
Jesus answering said to them, Have faith in God. (23)For verily I say
to you, That whosoever shall say to this mountain, Be thou lifted up,
and be thou cast into the sea; and shall harbour no doubt in his heart,
but believe that what he saith shall come to pass; whatsoever he may
speak shall be done for him. (24)Therefore I say unto you, That all
things whatever ye ask in prayer, believe that ye shall receive them,
and they shall be given you. (25)And when ye stand praying, forgive, if
ye have a matter against any man: that your Father also who is in
heaven may forgive you your trespasses. (26)But if ye forgive not,
neither will your Father which is in heaven forgive your trespasses.

(27)And they come again to Jerusalem: and as he was walking in the
temple, the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders, come to
him, (28)and say to him, By what authority doest thou these things? and
who gave thee this authority, that thou shouldest do these things?
(29)Then Jesus answering said unto them, I also will ask you one
question; and answer me; and I will tell you by what authority I do
these things. (30)The baptism of John, was it of heaven, or of men?
answer me. (31)And they reasoned among themselves, saying, If we reply,
From heaven; he will say, Why then did ye not believe him? (32)but if
we say of men--they feared the people: for all men held John to be in
truth a prophet. (33)And they answering said to Jesus, We do not know.
And Jesus in reply said to them, Neither do I tell you by what
authority I do these things.

CHAP. XII.

AND he began to speak to them in parables. A man planted a vineyard,
and set a hedge around it, and digged a wine-press, and built a tower,
and let it out to husbandmen, and went abroad. (2)And in the season he
sent a servant to the husbandmen, that he might receive from the
husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard. (3)But they took him, and beat
him, and sent him away empty. (4)And again he sent unto them another
servant; and they cut the account short with him, by stoning him, and
sent him away shamefully treated. (5)And again he sent another; and
him, they slew; and many others, some of whom they beat, and others
they killed. (6)Now he had yet one son, his beloved, and he sent him
unto them last, saying, They will reverence my son. (7)But these
husbandmen said to each other, This is the heir; come, let us kill him,
and the inheritance will be our own. (8)And they took him, and killed
him, and cast him out of the vineyard. (9)What then will the lord of
the vineyard do? He will come and destroy these husbandmen, and give
his vineyard to others. (10)Have ye never read this scripture? "The
stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the
corner: (11)this was the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our
eyes." (12)And they sought to seize him, and were afraid of the people:
for they knew that he had spoken this parable against them: and leaving
him, they departed.

(13)And they sent unto him certain of the Pharisees and of the
Herodians, that they might entrap him in discourse. (14)And they come
and say to him, Master, we know that thou art true, and carest not for
any man: for thou regardest not the person of men, but teachest the way
of God in truth: Is it lawful to pay tribute to Caesar, or not?
(15)shall we pay, or shall we not pay it? but he, perceiving their
hypocrisy, said unto them, Why tempt ye me? bring me a denarius, that I
may see it. (16)And they brought it. And he said unto them, Whose
figure and inscription is this? they say unto him, Caesar's. (17)And
Jesus addressing them, said, Render the things which are Caesar's, to
Caesar; and what belongs to God, to God. And they marvelled at him.

(18)And the Sadducees come to him, who say that there is no
resurrection; and they put a question to him, saying, (19)Master, Moses
left it in writing for us, that if a man's brother die, and leave a
wife, and leave no children; that his brother should take his wife, and
raise up seed for his brother. (20)Now there were seven brothers; and
the first took a wife, and dying left no issue: (21)and the second took
her, and died, and neither did he leave issue; and the third in like
manner. (22)And the seven had her, and left no issue. Last of all died
also the wife. (23)In the resurrection therefore, when they shall rise,
whose wife of them shall she be? for the seven had the very same wife.
(24)And Jesus answering said unto them, Do ye not therefore err, from
not knowing the scriptures, and the power of God? (25)For when they
rise from the dead, they will neither marry, nor be given in marriage;
but they are as the angels which are in heaven. (26)But concerning the
dead, that they do rise; have ye not read in the book of Moses, how God
spake to him at the bush, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? (27)He is not the God of the dead, but
the God of the living. Ye are therefore vastly erroneous.

(28)And one of the scribes coming, and hearing them questioning him,
perceiving that he had answered them admirably, asked him, Which is the
first commandment of all? (29)Then Jesus replied to him, The first of
all the commandments is, Hear O Israel; the Lord thy God is one Lord:
(30)and thou shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength. This is
the first commandment. (31)And the second, like it, is this; Thou shalt
love thy neighbour as thyself: there is no greater commandment than
these. (32)And the scribe said unto him, Admirably, Master! thou hast
spoken the very truth: for there is one God; and there is no other
besides him: (33)and to love him with all the heart, and with all the
understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the strength; and to
love his neighbour as himself, is better than all burnt offerings, and
sacrifices. (34)And Jesus perceiving that he had answered as a man of
intelligence, said to him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God.
And no man thenceforth presumed to question him.

(35)And Jesus addressing them said, as he taught in the temple, How say
the scribes that the Messiah is the Son of David? (36)for David himself
saith by the Spirit, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou at my right
hand, until I make thy enemies the foot-stool for thy feet. (37)David
himself therefore calleth him Lord; and whence then is he his son? And
a vast multitude heard him with delight.

(38)And he spake to them in the course of his teaching, Beware of the
scribes, who love to go about in trailing robes, and like salutations
in the places of concourse, (39)and the principal seats in the
synagogues, and the first couch at suppers: (40)who devour widows'
houses, and in pretence make long prayers: such shall receive greater
damnation.

(41)And as Jesus was sitting opposite the treasury, he saw a multitude
casting money into the treasury: and many who were rich cast in many
_pieces_. (42)And one poor widow coming, cast in two mites, which is a
farthing. (43)And having called his disciples, he said unto them, I
tell you truly, that this poor widow hath cast in more than all who
have cast into the treasury: (44)for all they have cast in of their
superfluities; but she from her indigence hath cast in all that she
had, even her whole substance.

CHAP. XIII.

AND as he was going out of the temple, one of his disciples said unto
him, Master, behold what vast stones, and what structures! (2)And Jesus
answering said to him, Beholdest thou these magnificent structures?
there shall not be left one stone upon another which shall not be
thrown down. (3)And as he was sitting on the mount of Olives, opposite
the temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him privately,
(4)Tell us, when shall these things be? and what is the sign when all
these things shall come to pass? (5)Then Jesus answering them, began to
say, Beware that no man deceive you: (6)for many will come in my name,
saying, I am the Messiah; and shall deceive many. (7)But when ye hear
of wars, and rumours of wars, be not troubled: for these things must
be; but the end is not yet. (8)And nation shall rise up against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom: and there shall be earthquakes in divers
places, and there shall be famines and commotions: these are the
beginnings of sorrows. (9)But take ye heed to yourselves: for they
shall deliver you up to their sanhedrims, and to the synagogues; ye
shall be beaten with rods, and be set before kings and governors for my
name's sake, for a testimony unto them. (10)And the Gospel must first
be preached to all nations. (11)But when delivering you up, they shall
bring you to the bar, be not previously anxious what ye shall say,
neither premeditate: for it shall be given to you at that very hour,
what ye shall speak: for it is not you, who are speaking, but the Holy
Ghost. (12)And brother shall deliver up brother unto death, and the
father the son: and children shall rise up against their parents, and
cause them to be put to death. (13)And ye shall be hated of all men for
my name's sake. But he that endureth to the end, the same shall be
saved. (14)But when ye see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by
the prophet Daniel, standing where it ought not (let him that readeth
observe), then let those who are in Judea fly to the mountains: (15)and
let not him who is on the roof go down into the house, nor enter into
it, to carry away any thing out of the house: (16)and he that is in the
field, let him not return back to take his garment. (17)But wo to those
who are big with child, and who have infants at their breasts in those
days! (18)And pray that your flight be not in winter. (19)For these
days shall bring tribulation, such as the like hath never been from the
beginning of the creation which God created unto this time, and never
shall be more. (20)And except the Lord had shortened the days, no flesh
would have been preserved: but for the sake of those elect, whom he
hath elected, he hath shortened the days. (21)And then, if any man say
to you, Lo, here is the Messiah! or, lo there! believe it not. (22)For
many false Messiahs and false prophets shall arise, and shall propose
signs and wonders to deceive, if it were possible, even the elect.
(23)But be ye on your guard: lo! I have told you all things: (24)but in
those days, after that distressing season, the sun shall be darkened,
and the moon shall not emit her light; (25)and the stars of the heaven
will be falling, and the powers that are in heaven will be shaken.
(26)And then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds of
heaven with vast power and glory. (27)And then shall he send his
angels, and shall gather to him his elect from the four winds, from the
extremity of the earth to the utmost bound of heaven. (28)Now learn
from the fig-tree, a parable; When her branch is now become tender, and
putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh; (29)so also you,
when ye see these things come to pass, know that it is nigh, even at
the doors. (30)Verily I say unto you, That this generation shall not
pass away, until all these things are fulfilled. (31)Heaven and earth
shall pass away; but my words shall never pass away.

(32)But of that day and hour knoweth no man, nor the angels which are
in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father. (33)Take ye heed, watch, and
pray; for ye know not when the time is. (34)As a man going abroad, when
he left his abode, and gave his servants authority, and to each his
work, commanded also the porter to watch. (35)Watch ye therefore; for
ye know not at what time the master of the house cometh, at evening, or
midnight, or cock-crowing, or in the morning: (36)lest coming suddenly
he find you asleep. (37)Now what I say to you, I say to all, Watch.

CHAP. XIV.

NOW the passover and the feast of unleavened bread were but two days
distant; and the chief priests, and the scribes, sought how they might
seize him by craft, and kill him. (2)But they said, Not on the feast
day, lest there be a commotion among the people. (3)And when he was at
Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at table, a woman
came, having an alabaster vase of ointment, of genuine spikenard, of
vast value: and breaking the vase, she let it flow down upon his head.
(4)And there were some who felt indignation within themselves, saying,
Wherefore is this waste of the ointment made? (5)For it might have been
sold for more than three hundred denarii, and given to the poor. And
they bitterly murmured against her. (6)Then said Jesus, Let her alone;
why give ye her uneasiness? she hath performed a laudable act towards
me. (7)For the poor ye have always with you, and when ye will ye may do
them good: but me ye have not always. (8)What was in her power she hath
done; she has seized the opportunity to anoint my body beforehand for
burial. (9)Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be
preached through the whole world, there shall, what she hath done, be
told for a memorial of her.

(10)Then Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went unto the chief
priests, that he might betray him unto them. (11)When they heard it,
they rejoiced, and promised to give him a sum in silver. And he watched
how opportunely he might deliver him up.

(12)And on the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the
passover, his disciples said unto him, Where wilt thou that we go and
prepare for thee to eat the passover? (13)And he sent two of his
disciples, and saith unto them, Go into the city, and a man will meet
you carrying a pitcher of water, follow him. (14)And where he enters,
say to the master of the family. That the teacher saith, Where is the
dining-room, where I may eat the passover with my disciples? (15)And he
will shew you a large upper room ready furnished: there make
preparation for us. (16)And his disciples went out, and came into the
city, and found as he had spoken to them; and they made ready the
passover.

(17)And when it was evening he came with the twelve. (18)And as they
sat at table, and were eating, Jesus said, Verily I tell you, That one
of you, who is eating with me, shall betray me. (19)And they began to
be very sorry, and to say to him, one by one, Is it I? and another
said, Is it I? (20)But he answering said to them, It is one of the
twelve, who is dipping his hand with me into the dish. (21)The Son of
man indeed goeth, as it is written of him; but wo to that man by whom
the Son of man is betrayed! it had been desirable for that man if he
had never been born.

(22)And as they were eating, Jesus taking a loaf, when he had blessed,
brake it, and gave to them, and said, Take, eat; this is my body.
(23)And taking the cup, when he had given thanks, he gave it to them;
and they all drank out of it. (24)And he said unto them, This is my
blood of the new testament, which is shed for many. (25)Verily I say
unto you, That I will henceforth no more drink of the produce of the
vine, until that day when I shall drink it new in the kingdom of God.

(26)And when they had sung a hymn, they went out to the mount of
Olives. (27)And Jesus saith to them, All ye will be offended at me this
night; for it is written, "I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep
shall be dispersed:" (28)but after I am risen, I will go before you
into Galilee. (29)Then said Peter unto him, Though all should be
offended, yet will not I. (30)And Jesus saith to him, Verily I tell
thee, That to-day, in the course of this very night, before the cock
crow twice, thou shalt thrice deny me. (31)But he said with more
vehement assertion, Though I should die with thee, yet would I in no
wise deny thee. And they all spake also in the same manner.

(32)And they come to a place called Gethsemane, and he saith to his
disciples, Sit ye here whilst I shall pray. (33)And he taketh Peter,
and James, and John, with him; and he began to be filled with horrible
dread, and to be sunk under dejection of spirit: (34)and he saith to
them, My soul is deeply afflicted even to death: abide here, and watch.
(35)And he went a little farther forward, and fell on the earth, and
prayed, that if it were possible the hour might pass from him. (36)And
he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible to thee; remove this cup
from me, nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt. (37)And he came
and found them asleep: and saith unto Peter, Sleepest thou? hast thou
not strength to watch with me a single hour? (38)Watch ye and pray,
that ye enter not into temptation; the spirit indeed is willing, but
the flesh is weak. (39)And again he went away, and prayed, speaking the
same sentence. (40)And when he returned, he found them again sleeping;
for their eyes were weighed down: and they knew not what to answer him.
(41)Then the third time he cometh, and saith unto them, Sleep on now,
and repose: it is enough, the hour is come; lo! the Son of man is
betrayed into the hands of sinners; (42)arise, let us go; behold, the
traitor approaches me. (43)And immediately, while he was yet speaking,
Judas, one of the twelve, came up, and a great multitude with him, with
swords and staves, from the chief priests, and scribes, and elders.
(44)Now he that betrayed him, had given them a countersign, saying,
Whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he, seize him, and lead him off
safely. (45)And coming, he immediately drew up to him and said, Rabbi,
Rabbi, and kissed him. (46)Then they laid their hands on him, and
seized him. (47)And one particular person of those who stood by drew
his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest, and cut off his
ear. (48)And Jesus addressing them said, Are ye come out as against a
robber, with swords and staves, to apprehend me? (49)Daily was I with
you in the temple teaching, and ye laid no hold upon me: but _this is
done_ that the scriptures might be fulfilled.

(50)Then they all deserting him, fled. (51)And a certain youth followed
him, having a linen cloth wrapped round his naked body; and the young
men laid hold of him; (52)and leaving the linen cloth behind, he fled
naked from them.

(53)And they led Jesus unto the high-priest; and with him were
assembled all the chief priests, and the elders, and the scribes.
(54)And Peter followed him at a distance, until he came into the palace
of the high-priest: and was seated with the servants, and warming
himself at the fire.

(55)Then the chief priests, and the whole sanhedrim, sought for witness
against Jesus, that they might put him to death; yet found none.
(56)For many bore false witness against him, and their attestations did
not correspond. (57)And certain persons rising up, bore false witness
against him, saying, (58)We have heard him affirm, I will destroy this
temple made with hands, and after three days I will build another not
made with hands. (59)But even then their testimony was not
correspondent. (60)So the high-priest rising up in the midst
interrogated Jesus, Answerest thou nothing? What is it that these
witness against thee? (61)But he kept silence, and made them not a word
of reply. Again the high-priest questioned him, and said to him, Art
thou the Messiah, the Son of the blessed? (62)Then said Jesus, I am.
And ye shall see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of power, and
coming with the clouds of heaven. (63)Then the high-priest rent his
clothes, and said, What farther need have we of witnesses? (64)Ye have
heard his blasphemy. What think ye? And they all adjudged him to be
deserving of death. (65)And some began to spit upon him, and to cover
his face, and to buffet him, and to say to him, Prophesy: and the
servants slapped him on the face with their hands.

(66)And as Peter was in the hall, at the lower end, there came to him
one of the high-priest's maid-servants: (67)and seeing Peter warming
himself, stedfastly looking at him, she said, Thou also wast with Jesus
of Nazareth. (68)Then he denied it, saying, I do not so much as know
him, nor understand what thou art saying. And he went out into the
vestibule; and the cock crew. (69)And a maid-servant observing him
again; began to say to those who stood by, This man is one of them.
(70)Then he denied it again. And after a little while, they who stood
by said to Peter, Of a certainty thou art one of them; for thou art a
Galilean, and thy speech is correspondent. (71)Then began he to make
the most dreadful imprecations, and to swear, I know not the man of
whom ye speak. (72)And the second time the cock crew. And Peter
remembered the word which Jesus spake unto him, That before the cock
crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice. And casting his mantle over his
face, he wept.

CHAP. XV.

AND immediately the chief priests having held a council in the morning,
with the elders, and scribes, and the whole sanhedrim, after binding
Jesus, led him away, and delivered him up to Pilate. (2)And Pilate
asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews? He answering said to him,
Thou sayest true. (3)And the chief priests laid many accusations
against him. (4)Then Pilate again interrogated him, saying, Answerest
thou nothing? behold how many things they testify against thee. (5)But
Jesus notwithstanding made not a word of reply; so that Pilate
marvelled.

(6)Now at the feast, he released one prisoner to them, whomsoever they
petitioned for. (7)And there was one called Barabbas, bound with those
who had made an insurrection with him, and had committed murder in the
insurrection. (8)And the multitude, clamorous, began to petition him to
do, as he had always done to them. (9)Then Pilate answered them,
saying, Will ye that I release unto you the king of the Jews? (10)(For
he knew that out of envy the chief priests had delivered him up.)
(11)Then the chief priests stirred up the people, that he should rather
release Barabbas unto them. (12)Then Pilate addressing them, said unto
them again, What therefore do you wish that I should do with him whom
ye call the king of the Jews? (13)And they cried out again, Crucify
him. (14)Then Pilate said unto them, But what criminal act hath he
done? And they cried the more vociferously, Crucify him. (15)So Pilate,
willing to do what would be satisfactory to the people, released to
them Barabbas, and delivered Jesus to be scourged, in order to be
crucified.

(16)Then the soldiers led him to the hall, which is the Praetorium, and
called together the whole band. (17)And they invested him with a robe
of purple, and platting a crown of thorns, put it about his head,
(18)and began to pay their salutations to him, Hail, King of the Jews!
(19)And they struck him on the head with a cane, and spat upon him, and
bowing their knees payed him homage. (20)And when they had treated him
with mockery, they took off the purple robe from him, and clothed him
with his own garments, and led him out to crucify him. (21)And they
compel one Simon, a Cyrenian, who was passing by, coming out of the
field, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to carry his cross.

(22)And they convey him to a place called Golgotha, which is being
interpreted, The place of a skull. (23)And they gave him to drink wine
medicated with myrrh: but he received it not. (24)And having crucified
him, they divided his garments, casting the lot upon them, what each
should take. (25)Now it was the third hour, and they crucified him.
(26)And there was an inscription of his crime written over him, THE
KING OF THE JEWS. (27)And with him they crucified two robbers, one on
his right hand, and the other on his left. (28)And the scripture was
fulfilled, which saith, "And he was reckoned among the transgressors."
(29)And they who passed along, blasphemed him, shaking their heads, and
saying, Aha! thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three
days, (30)save thyself, and come down from the cross. (31)And in the
same manner also, the chief priests mocking him, among each other, with
the scribes, said, He saved others, himself he cannot save. (32)Thou
Messiah, King of Israel, come now down from the cross, that we may see,
and believe. Even those who were crucified with him railed on him.

(33)Now when the sixth hour came, there was darkness over all the land
until the ninth hour. (34)And at the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a
loud voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabacthani? which is, being
interpreted, My God, my God, for what cause hast thou abandoned me?
(35)And some of those who stood by, hearing him, said, Behold, he
crieth for Elias. (36)Then one ran, and filling a sponge with vinegar,
fixed it round a cane, and gave him to drink, saying, Let alone, let us
see if Elias comes to take him down. (37)Then Jesus, uttering a loud
cry, gave up the ghost.

(38)And the vail of the temple was rent in two from the top to the
bottom. (39)And the centurion, who stood opposite to him, observing,
that with such a cry he gave up the ghost, said, Assuredly this was the
Son of God.

(40)Now there were also women looking on at a distance; among whom also
was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the small, and the
mother of Joses, and Salome. (41)These women followed him when he was
in Galilee, and supplied his wants; and many other women who went up
with him to Jerusalem.

(42)And when the evening was now come (since it was the preparation,
that is the day preceding the sabbath), (43)Joseph, who was from
Arimathea, came, a respectable person, a counsellor, and who himself
also was expecting the kingdom of God; taking courage, he went in to
Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus. (44)Then Pilate marvelled that he
should be already dead: and calling for the centurion, he asked him, If
he had been dead any time. (45)And when he knew it from the centurion,
he gave the body to Joseph. (46)And having bought a wrapper of fine
linen, and taken him down, he wrapped him in the linen cloth, and laid
him in a sepulchre, which was hewn out of a rock; and rolled a stone to
the door of the sepulchre. (47)Now Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother
of Joses, saw where he was laid.

CHAP. XVI.

AND when the sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of
James, and Salome, purchased aromatics, that they might come, and
anoint him. (2)And very early on the first day of the week, they come
to the sepulchre, as the sun was rising. (3)And said among themselves,
Who will roll away for us the stone from the door of the sepulchre?
(4)And looking again, they saw that the stone was rolled away, for it
was vastly large. (5)And entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young
man sitting at the right hand, clothed in a white robe; and they were
greatly terrified. (6)But he saith unto them, Be not affrighted, ye
seek Jesus the Nazarean, who was crucified; he is risen, he is not
here: behold the place where they laid him. (7)But go, tell his
disciples, and Peter, that he goeth before you into Galilee; there
shall ye see him, as he told you. (8)And they going out hastily, fled
from the sepulchre, for trembling and astonishment had seized them: and
they said not a word to any person, for they were affrighted.

(9)Now being arisen early, on the first day of the week, he appeared
first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven devils. (10)She
going, told it to those who had been with him, as they were wailing and
weeping. (11)And they, when they heard that he was alive, and had been
seen by her, gave no credit to her.

(12)Then after this, he was manifested under another form, to two of
them as they were walking, and going into the country. (13)And they
came back and told the news to the rest; neither did they believe them.
(14)Afterwards he shewed himself to the eleven, as they were sitting at
table, and upbraided them for their infidelity and hardness of heart,
because they did not believe those who had seen him after he was risen.
(15)And he said unto them, Go into all the world, and preach the gospel
to every creature. (16)He that believeth and is baptised shall be
saved; and he that believeth not shall be damned. (17)And these signs
shall follow those that believe: in my name shall they cast out devils;
they shall speak with new tongues; (18)they shall take up serpents; and
if they drink any deadly potion, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay
hands on the sick, and they shall recover health.

(19)Then the Lord, after having thus spoken to them, was taken up into
heaven, and sat down at the right hand of God. (20)But they going forth
preached every where, the Lord working mightily with them, and
confirming the word, by attendant miracles.



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE.

CHAP. I.

SINCE many have attempted to compose a narrative of facts, confirmed to
us by the fullest evidence: (2)exactly as they delivered them to us,
who were eve witnesses from the first, and ministers of the word; (3)it
seemed right to me also, having obtained accurate knowledge of all
things from above, to write to thee in regular order, most excellent
Theophilus, (4)to the intent that thou mayest clearly know the
certainty of those matters, concerning which thou hast been instructed.

(5)There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a certain priest
named Zacharias, of the course of Abiah: and his wife of the daughters
of Aaron, and her name Elisabeth. (6)And they were both righteous
before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord
blameless. (7)And they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and
both were far advanced in years. (8)And it came to pass, as he
discharged his priestly office in the order of his periodical
ministration before God, (9)according to the custom of the priesthood,
it fell to his lot to burn the incense when he went into the temple of
the Lord. (10)And all the multitude of people was praying without, at
the time of the burning the incense. (11)And an angel of the Lord
appeared to him standing on the right side of the altar of incense.
(12)And Zacharias was agitated greatly at the sight, and fear fell upon
him. (13)But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias: for thy
prayer is heard; and thy wife Elisabeth shall bring thee a son, and
thou shalt call his name John. (14)And it shall give thee joy and
exultation; and many shall rejoice at his birth: (15)for he shall be
great in the sight of the Lord; and he shall never drink wine, nor any
intoxicating liquor; and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even
from his mother's womb. (16)And many of the children of Israel shall he
turn unto the Lord, their God. (17)And he shall go forth before him in
the spirit and power of Elias, to convert the hearts of fathers with
their children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to
prepare a people ready for the Lord.

(18)And Zacharias said to the angel, By what shall I know this? for I
am old, and my wife far advanced in her age. (19)And the angel
answering said to him, I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God;
and I have been sent to speak to thee, and to proclaim these glad
tidings to thee. (20)And behold, thou shalt be dumb, and unable to
speak, until that day when these things shall come to pass, because
thou hast not believed my words, which shall be fulfilled at their
exact time.

(21)And the people were waiting for Zacharias, and marvelled that he
tarried so long in the temple. (22)And when he came out, he could not
speak to them: and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the
temple: for he himself made signs to them, and continued deaf and dumb.
(23)And it came to pass, when the days of his ministry were fulfilled,
he went to his own house. (24)And after those days Elisabeth his wife
conceived, and kept herself in retirement five months, saying, (25)Thus
hath the Lord dealt with me in the days in which he looked upon me to
take away my reproach among men.

(26)Now in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God into a
city of Galilee, the name of which was Nazareth, (27)to a virgin of the
house of David, betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph; and the
virgin's name was Mary. (28)And the angel coming in to her said, All
hail! O thou highly favoured one! the Lord is with thee: blessed art
thou among women. (29)And when she saw him, she was greatly agitated at
his address: and reasoned in herself what kind of salutation this could
be. (30)And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary, for thou hast
found favour with God. (31)And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy
womb, and bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name JESUS. (32)He
shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the
Lord God will give him the throne of David his father; (33)and he shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall
be no end. (34)And Mary said, How shall this be, seeing I know not man?
(35)And the angel answering said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee;
wherefore also the Holy One that shall be born of thee, shall be called
the Son of God. (36)And, behold, Elisabeth thy cousin, she also hath
conceived in her old age: and this is the fifth month _of pregnancy_
with her who was called barren. (37)For there is nothing impossible
with God. (38)Then said Mary, Behold a servant of the Lord, be it to me
according to thy declaration. And the angel departed from her.

(39)Then Mary arose in those days, and went with haste into the hill
country, to a city of Judah, (40)and entered into the house of
Zachariah, and saluted Elisabeth. (41)And it came to pass, when
Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped for joy in her
womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost: (42)and she
exclaimed with a loud voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women,
and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. (43)And whence is this favour
shewn me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? (44)For, lo! as
the voice of thy salutation reached my ears, the babe leaped for joy in
my womb. (45)And blessed is she that hath believed; for there shall be
a fulfilment of the things told her from the Lord.

(46)And Mary said, My soul doth magnify the Lord, (47)and my spirit
hath exulted in God my Saviour: (48)for he hath looked upon the lowly
state of his maid-servant: for, lo! henceforth shall all generations
pronounce me blessed. (49)For the Mighty One hath done great things for
me; and holy is his name. (50)And his mercy is upon those who fear him,
from generation to generation. (51)He hath displayed strength from his
arm; he hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts.
(52)He hath cast down potentates from the throne, and hath exalted the
lowly. (53)He hath filled the hungry with good things; and the rich he
hath sent empty away. (54)He hath succoured Israel his servant, that he
might be mindful of mercy for ever; (55)as he had spoken to our
fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed. (56)And Mary abode with her about
three months, and returned unto her home.

(57)Now Elisabeth's time was up that she should be delivered; and she
brought a son. (58)And her neighbours and her relations heard, that the
Lord had magnified his mercy upon her; and they congratulated her.
(59)And it came to pass, on the eighth day they came to circumcise the
child; and they called him after the name of his father, Zacharias.
(60)And his mother spake and said, No; but he shall be called John.
(61)And they said to her, There is not one among thy relations, who is
called by this name. (62)And they made signs to his father, what he
would have him called. (63)And desiring a writing tablet, he wrote,
saying, John is his name. And they were all surprised. (64)Instantly
then his mouth was opened, and his tongue loosed, and he burst out in
praises to God. (65)And great awe fell on all those who dwelt around
them: and in all the mountainous country of Judea, all these
circumstances were the subject of conversation. (66)And all who heard
them laid them up in their hearts, saying, Well! what a child will this
be! And the hand of the Lord was with him.

(67)And Zacharias his father was filled with the Holy Ghost, and
prophesied, saying, (68)Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel; for he
hath visited and wrought redemption for his people; (69)and hath raised
up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David: (70)as
he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been from the
beginning: (71)even preservation from our enemies, and from the hand of
all that hate us; (72)to perform mercy towards our fathers, and to
remember his own holy covenant: (73)the oath which he sware to Abraham
our father, (74)to give us, that we, secure from fear, rescued from the
hands of our enemies, should serve him, (75)in righteousness and
holiness before him, all the days of our life. (76)And thou, child,
shalt be called the prophet of the Most High; for thou shalt go before
the face of the Lord to prepare his ways; (77)to give the knowledge of
salvation to his people, by the remission of their sins, (78)through
the bowels of mercy of our God; with which he hath visited us, as the
dawn of the morning from on high, (79)to illumine those who sat in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, to direct our feet into the way
of peace. (80)And the child grew, and became mighty in spirit, and was
in the deserts until the days of his public exhibition to Israel.

CHAP. II.

NOW it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree from
Caesar Augustus, that the whole land should be registered. (2)(And this
first enrolment was made by Cyrenius, _afterwards_ governor of Syria)
(3)And all went to be registered, every one to his own city. (4)Then
Joseph also went up from Galilee, from the city of Nazareth, to Judea,
to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem; because he was of the
house and family of David; (5)to be enregistered with Mary, the wife
espoused to him, who was big with child. (6)And it came to pass, while
they were there, that her time was up, that she should be delivered.
(7)And she brought forth a son, her first-born, and wrapped him in
swaddling-clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there was no room
for them in the inn.

(8)And there were shepherds in that country abiding in the open air,
and keeping guard over their flock by night. (9)And, behold, the angel
of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone around
them; and they were exceedingly affrighted. (10)And the angel said unto
them, Be not affrighted: for, behold, I bring you tidings of great joy,
which shall be for all the people. (11)Because this day there is born
for you a Saviour, which is Messiah, the Lord, in the city of David.
(12)And this shall be a sign for you; Ye shall find the babe in
swaddling-clothes, lying in a manger. (13)And suddenly there appeared
with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, and
saying, (14)Glory in the highest heavens to God! and upon earth, peace!
towards men complacence. (15)And it came to pass, as the angels went
from them into heaven, the men, the shepherds, said also to each other,
Let us now go to Bethlehem, and see this thing which hath happened,
which the Lord hath made known to us. (16)And they came with haste, and
found Mary, and Joseph, and the babe, lying in the manger: (17)and when
they saw it, they made a public report of the declaration delivered to
them respecting this child. (18)And all who heard it, marvelled at the
things told them by the shepherds. (19)But Mary carefully preserved all
these declarations, laying them together in her heart, in order to
apprehend their meaning. (20)And the shepherds returned, glorifying and
praising God for all the things which they had heard and seen, exactly
as had been told them.

(21)And when eight days were fulfilled for circumcising the child, his
name also was called JESUS, the name imposed by the angel before he was
conceived in the womb.

(22)And when the days of her purification were accomplished according
to the law of Moses, they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to
the Lord; (23)as it is written in the law of the Lord, Every male
child, that openeth the womb, shall be called holy to the Lord; (24)and
to offer a sacrifice, according to what is prescribed in the law of the
Lord, A pair of turtle doves, or two young pigeons.

(25)And, behold, there was a man at Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon;
and this man was righteous and devout, waiting for the consolation of
Israel: and the Holy Ghost was upon him. (26)And it had been divinely
communicated to him by the Holy Spirit, that he should not see death,
till he had seen the Lord's Messiah. (27)And he came by the spirit into
the temple; just as the parents were bringing in the child Jesus, that
they might do according to what was the custom of the law concerning
him; (28)and he took him into his arms, and blessed God, and said,
(29)Now dismiss thy servant, Lord, according to thy word, in peace;
(30)for my eyes have seen thy salvation, (31)which thou hast prepared
before the face of all people. (32)A light to give revelation to the
Gentiles, and glory to thy people Israel.

(33)And Joseph and his mother were amazed at the things spoken
concerning him. (34)And Simeon blessed them, and said to Mary his
mother, Behold, this child is appointed for the fall, and rising again
of many in Israel; and for a marked object to be spoken against;
(35)(so shall a dart pierce through thy own soul) that the reasonings
of many hearts may be laid open,

(36)And there was Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the
tribe of Asser: she was far advanced in old age, having lived but seven
years with a husband, from her virgin state: (37)though she was now a
widow, of about eighty-four years, who departed not from the temple,
attending the divine service, with fastings and prayers night and day:
(38)and at the very same moment coming up, she also in turn confessed
the Lord, and spake of him to all who were expecting redemption in
Jerusalem.

(39)And when they had finished all things according to the law of the
Lord, they returned into Galilee, into their own city Nazareth. (40)And
the child grew, and became endued with great powers of spirit, filled
with wisdom; and the grace of God was upon him.

(41)And his parents went annually to Jerusalem at the feast of the
passover. (42)And when he was twelve years old, they went up to
Jerusalem, according to the custom of the feast. (43)And when they had
concluded the days, as they were returning, the child Jesus remained at
Jerusalem, and Joseph and his mother knew it not: (44)but supposing him
to be in the company, they went a day's journey; and they sought him
among their relations and acquaintances; (45)and not finding him, they
returned to Jerusalem in search of him. (46)And it came to pass after
three days, they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the
doctors, both hearing them and asking them questions. (47)And all who
heard him, were in a transport of admiration, at his understanding and
answers. (48)And when they saw him, they were struck with surprise; and
his mother said to him, Son, why hast thou behaved to us in this
manner? lo! thy father and I have been seeking thee in anguish of
heart. (49)And he said unto them, Wherefore did ye seek me? did you not
know, that I must be occupied with my Father's affairs? (50)And they
understood not the meaning of what he spake to them. (51)And he went
down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was in subjection to them:
though his mother preserved all these sayings in her heart. (52)And
Jesus advanced in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and men.

CHAP. III.

NOW in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius
Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod tetrarch of Galilee, and
Philip his brother tetrarch of Iturea and the region of Trachonitis,
and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene: (2)when Annas and Caiaphas were
high-priests, the word of God came to John the son of Zacharias in the
wilderness; (3)and he came into all the country on the confines of
Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins;
(4)as it is written in the book of the words of the prophet Isaiah,
saying, "The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way
of the Lord, make his paths strait: (5)every valley shall be filled up,
and every mountain and hill shall be levelled, and the crooked ways
made strait, and the rough roads smooth: (6)and all flesh shall see the
salvation of God." (7)He said, therefore, to the multitudes who came
out to be baptised by him, Ye broods of vipers, who hath warned you to
fly from the approaching wrath? (8)Produce then fruits worthy of
repentance, and begin not to say in yourselves, We have a father, even
Abraham; for I say unto you, That God is able out of these stones to
raise up children to Abraham. (9)But now is the ax laid even to the
root of the trees; every tree therefore that produceth not good fruit,
is cut down and cast into the fire.

(10)And the multitudes asked him, saying, What then shall we do?
(11)And he answering said to them, He that hath two coats, let him give
to him that hath none; and he that hath provisions, let him do in like
manner. (12)Then came also the farmers of the taxes to be baptised, and
they said unto him, Master, what shall we do? (13)He said unto them,
Exact nothing more than is appointed for you. (14)And the military men
also asked him, And what shall we do? And he said unto them, Extort
nothing by force; nor turn informers; and be content with your pay.

(15)Now when the people were in expectation, and many reasoned in their
hearts respecting John, whether he were the Messiah, (16)John addressed
himself to them all, saying, I indeed baptise you with water; but one
mightier than I is coming, the thong of whose sandals I am not worthy
to untie: he shall baptise you with the Holy Ghost and with fire;
(17)whose winnowing fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse
his threshing-floor, and collect the wheat into his granary; but the
chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable. (18)Thus in many and various
discourses exhorting them, he preached the glad tidings of the gospel
to the people.

(19)Now Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him, on account of
Herodias his brother Philip's wife, and for all the other wicked
actions which he had done, (20)added this also to all the rest, and
shut up John in prison.

(21)Now it came to pass, at the time when John was baptising all the
people, that Jesus also was baptised, and as he prayed, the heaven was
opened, (22)and the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily form, like a dove,
upon him, and a voice came from heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved
Son, in thee I am well pleased.

(23)And Jesus himself was about thirty years of age when he began his
ministry, being (as was supposed the son of Joseph) of Heli, (24)of
Matthat, of Levi, of Melchi, of Janna, of Joseph, (25)of Mattathias, of
Amos, of Naum, of Esli, of Nagge, (26)of Maath, of Mattathias, of
Semei, of Joseph, of Juda, (27)of Joanna, of Rhesa, of Zerubbabel, of
Salathiel, of Neri, (28)of Melchi, of Addi, of Cosam, of Elmodam, of
Er, (29)of Jose, of Eliezer, of Jorim, of Matthat, of Levi, (30)of
Simeon, of Judah, of Joseph, of Jonan, of Eliakim, (31)of Melea, of
Menan, of Mattatha, of Nathan, of David, (32)of Jesse, of Obed, of
Booz, of Salmon, of Naasson, (33)of Aminadab, of Aram, of Esrom, of
Phares, of Judah, (34)of Jacob, of Isaac, of Abraham, of Terah, of
Nachor, (35)of Saruch, of Ragau, of Phalec, of Heber, of Sala, (36)of
Cainan, of Arphaxad, of Sem, of Noe, of Lamech, (37)of Methusaleh, of
Enoch, of Jared, of Maleleel, of Cainan, (38)of Enos, of Seth, of Adam,
_the son_ of God.

CHAP. IV.

THEN Jesus full of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan, and was led by
the spirit into the wilderness, (2)being tempted forty days by the
devil; and did eat nothing during those days: and when they were ended,
afterwards he was hungry. (3)And the devil said to him, If thou art the
Son of God, command this stone that it become a loaf. (4)And Jesus
answered him, saying, It is written, "Man shall not live by bread
alone, but by every word of God."

(5)And the devil taking him up into an exceeding high mountain,
displayed before him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time:
(6)and the devil said unto him, I will give thee all this authority,
and the glory of these; for to me it is delivered, and to whomsoever I
will, I give it. (7)If therefore thou wilt worship before me, all shall
be thine. (8)And Jesus answering him, said, Get thee behind me, Satan,
for it is written, "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and to him
alone shalt thou pay divine honour."

(9)And he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on a wing of the
temple, and said to him, If thou art the Son of God, cast thy self down
from hence: (10)for it is written, "He shall give his angels a charge
over thee, to guard thee safely; (11)and that in their hands they shall
bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone."
(12)And Jesus answering said unto him, It is said, "Thou shalt not
tempt the Lord thy God." (13)And when the devil had closed all the
temptation, he departed from him for a season.

(14)And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee: and a
report went out into all the region round about concerning him. (15)And
he taught in their synagogues, being universally admired. (16)And he
came to Nazareth, where he was brought up; and he went, according to
his usual custom, into the synagogue on the sabbath-day, and rose up to
read. (17)And there was given to him the book of the prophet Isaiah:
and unrolling the volume, he found the passage where it is written,
(18)"The spirit of the Lord is upon me, for the work whereunto he hath
anointed me; he hath sent me to preach glad tidings to the poor; to
heal the contrite in heart; to proclaim liberty to the captives; and
restore sight to the blind; to send forth the bruised free from bonds;
(19)to publish the acceptable year of the Lord." (20)And rolling up the
volume, he gave it to the attendant officer, and sat down. And the eyes
of all who were in the synagogue were attentively fixed on him. (21)And
he began to say to them, To day this scripture is fulfilled in your
ears. (22)And all concurred in their testimony to him, and marvelled at
the gracious words which proceeded from his mouth. And they said, Is
not this the son of Joseph? (23)And he said unto them, Ye will probably
say to me this parable, Physician, heal thyself! the works which we
have heard to have been performed by thee at Capernaum, do the like
here in thy own country. (24)But he said, Verily, I say unto you, that
no prophet is acceptable in his own country. (25)Now I tell you of a
certainty, that there were many widows in the days of Elias, in Israel,
when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, so that a
grievous famine was upon all the land. (26)And unto none of them was
Elias sent, but unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, to a widow woman.
(27)And many lepers were in Israel in the days of the prophet Elisha,
and no one of them was cleansed, but Naaman the Syrian. (28)And they
were all filled with rage in the synagogue, when they heard these
observations: (29)and rising up, dragged him out of the city, and led
him to the brow of the hill, on which their city was built, in order to
cast him down headlong: (30)but he passing through the midst of them,
went away.

(31)And he came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and was teaching
them on the sabbath. (32)And they were struck with astonishment at his
teaching; for his discourse was with authority. (33)And there was in
the synagogue a man, who had a spirit of an unclean devil, and he
roared out with a great cry, (34)saying, Let us alone; what have we to
do with thee, Jesus the Nazarean? art thou come to destroy us? I know
thee who thou art; the Holy One of God. (35)And Jesus rebuked him,
saying, Stop thy mouth, and come out of him. And the devil throwing him
down into the midst, came out of him, doing him no injury. (36)And
amazement seized on all present, and they spake one to another, saying,
What a word is this? for with authority and power he commandeth the
unclean spirits, and they come out. (37)And the fame of him went forth
into all the adjacent region.

(38)Then rising up out of the synagogue, he came into the house of
Simon: and Simon's mother-in-law was seized with a violent fever, and
they besought him on her behalf. (39)And standing over her, he charged
the fever _to depart_; and it left her: and immediately she arose, and
waited upon them.

(40)So when the sun was set, all who had any indisposed with various
diseases, brought them to him; and laying his hands severally on each
of them, he cured them. (41)And devils also went out of many, crying
out, and saying, Thou art the Messiah the Son of God. And rebuking
them, he suffered them not to speak: for they knew that he was the
Messiah.

(42)And as the day was coming on, he went forth and departed into a
desert place: and the multitude sought him out, and came to him, and
would have detained him that he should not leave them. (43)But he said
unto them, I must preach the glad tidings of the kingdom of heaven in
other cities also: for on this service am I sent. (44)And he continued
preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.

CHAP. V.

AND it came to pass, as the multitude were thronging upon him, in order
to hear the word of God, that he was standing by the lake of
Gennesaret: (2)and he saw two vessels a-ground near the lake: but the
fishermen were gone out of them, and washing their nets. (3)Then he
went on board one of the vessels, which was Simon's, and desired him to
put off a little from the land: and sitting down, he taught the
multitudes out of the vessel. (4)And when he ceased speaking, he said
to Simon, Go off into deep water, and shoot your nets for a draught.
(5)And Simon answering, said unto him, Sir, we have been toiling all
night, and have taken nothing: but at thy command I will shoot the net.
(6)And having done so, they inclosed a prodigious multitude of fishes;
and their net was broken. (7)And they made signals to their partners in
the other vessels, that they should come to their assistance. And they
came, and filled both the vessels, so that they were ready to founder.
(8)Then Simon Peter seeing it, fell down on his knees before Jesus,
saying, Go from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord! (9)For amazement had
seized on him, and on all who were with him, at the draught of fishes
which they had taken: (10)as also on James and John the sons of
Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. And Jesus said to Simon, Fear
not: henceforward thou shalt catch men. (11)And when they had brought
their vessels on shore, they left all, and followed him.

(12)And it came to pass as he was just at one of the cities, behold, a
man full of leprosy! and seeing Jesus, he fell on his face, and
besought him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.
(13)And he stretching out his hand touched him, saying, I will: be thou
cleansed. And instantly the leprosy departed from him. (14)And he
commanded him to tell no man: but go shew thyself to the priest, and
offer for thy purification, as Moses enjoined, for a testimony unto
them. (15)Now the discourse concerning him more and more spread through
the country: and vast multitudes came together to hear him, and to be
cured by him of their disorders. (16)But he himself was in the desert
for retirement and prayer.

(17)And on a certain day it happened that he was teaching, and there
were sitting Pharisees, and doctors of the law, who had come from every
town of Galilee, and Judea, and Jerusalem: and the power of the Lord
for healing them was exercised. (18)And behold, men carried on a couch
a man who was a paralytic; and sought to bring him into the house, and
to place him before him. (19)And not discovering by what means they
could introduce him, because of the crowd, they went up to the roof,
and through the tiling let him down with his little couch into the
midst, before Jesus. (20)And seeing their faith, he saith to him, Man,
thy sins are forgiven thee. (21)And the scribes and Pharisees began to
reason, saying, Who is this that speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive
sins but God alone? (22)And Jesus knowing their reasoning, in reply
said to them, Why do ye reason in your hearts? (23)for which is the
easier? to say, Thy sins are forgiven; or to say, Arise and walk?
(24)But that ye may know that the Son of man hath authority upon earth
to forgive sins, (he saith to the paralytic,) I say to thee, Arise, and
take up thy couch, and go into thy house. (25)And instantly he rose up
before them, took up that on which he had lain, and went away to his
house, giving glory to God. (26)And an extacy of admiration seized upon
them all, and they glorified God; and they were filled with awe,
saying, We have seen wondrously strange things to-day.

(27)And after these things he went out, and saw a farmer of the taxes,
named Levi, sitting at the custom-house: and he said unto him, Follow
me. (28)And leaving all behind, he rose, and followed him. (29)And Levi
made him a great entertainment at his house and there was a great
number of publicans and others, sitting at table with them. (30)And
their scribes and Pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying, Why
do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners? (31)And Jesus answering
said unto them, They who are well, have no need of a physician: but
they who have illness. (32)I came not to call righteous men, but
sinners, to repentance.

(33)Then said they unto him, Why do the disciples of John observe
frequent fasts, and make prayers; but thine are eating and drinking?
(34)And he said unto them, Can you make the children of the
bridechamber fast, as long as the bridegroom is with them? (35)But the
days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, then
shall they fast in those days. (36)Then he spake a parable unto them,
No man putteth a patch of new cloth on an old garment; but if
otherwise, both the new makes a rent, and the patch from the new is not
of a piece with the old. (37)And no man putteth new wine into old
bottles; for if he doth, the new wine will burst the bottles, and it
will itself be spilled, and the bottles be destroyed. (38)But new wine
should be put into new bottles; then both are preserved. (39)And no man
drinking old wine, immediately desires new: for he saith, The old is
better.

CHAP. VI.

AND it came to pass on the sabbath after the second day of the
passover, that he was passing through the cornfields; and the disciples
plucked the ears of corn, and did eat, rubbing them out in their hands.
(2)Then said some of the Pharisees unto them, Why do ye that which is
not lawful on the sabbath-day? (3)And Jesus answering said to them;
Have ye never read what David did, when he was hungry, and those who
were with him? (4)how he entered into the house of God, and took the
loaves of shew-bread, and did eat, and gave also to those who were with
him; which it was not lawful for any to eat, but the priests alone?
(5)And he said, The Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath-day.

(6)And it came to pass on another sabbath, that he entered into the
synagogue and taught: and a man was there, and his right hand was
shrunk. (7)Then the scribes and Pharisees watched him, if he would heal
on the sabbath-day, that they might find an accusation against him.
(8)Now he knew their thoughts, and said to the man who had the withered
hand, Rise, and stand in the midst. And he arose, and stood up. (9)Then
said Jesus unto them, I will ask you a question; Is it lawful to do
good on the sabbath-day, or to do evil? to preserve life or to destroy
it? (10)And looking round upon them all, he said to the man, Stretch
out thine hand; and he did so: and his hand was restored sound as the
other. (11)But they were filled with madness, and talked earnestly to
each other what they could do to Jesus.

(12)Now it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a mountain
to pray and continued all night in an oratory of God. (13)And when it
was day, he called his disciples to him; and elected from them twelve,
whom he named Apostles: (14)Simon, whom he also called Peter, and
Andrew his brother, James and John, Philip and Bartholomew, (15)Matthew
and Thomas, James son of Alpheus, and Simon called the Zealous,
(16)Jude the brother of James, and Judas Iscariot, who also was the
traitor. (17)And coming down with them, he stood on a level spot: and
the crowd of his disciples, and a vast multitude of people from all
Judea and Jerusalem, and the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to
hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; (18)and they who were
disturbed with unclean spirits: and they were cured. (19)And all the
multitude strove to touch him, for there went virtue out of him, and
healed them all.

(20)And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, Blessed are
ye poor, for yours is the kingdom of God. (21)Blessed are ye who hunger
now, for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall
laugh. (22)Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall
separate you from them, and shall revile you, and shall cast out your
name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. (23)Rejoice in that day, and
leap for joy; for, lo! your reward is great in heaven: for after the
same manner did your fathers to the prophets. (24)But wo unto you who
are rich! for ye have received your consolation. (25)Wo unto you who
are full! for ye shall hunger. Wo unto you who laugh now! for ye shall
mourn and weep. (26)Wo unto you, when men shall speak well of you! for
just so did their fathers of the false prophets. (27)But I say to you
who hear, Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you; (28)bless
those who curse you, and pray for those who wantonly insult you. (29)To
him that smiteth thee on the cheek, offer the other also; and from him
who would take from thee thy cloak, withhold not thy coat also. (30)And
give to every one that asketh thee; and from him who would take thy
goods, demand them not again. (31)And as ye would that men should do
unto you, do ye also to them in like manner.

(32)And if ye love them that love you, what thanks are due to you? for
even sinners love those who love them. (33)And if ye do good to them
who do good to you, what thanks have ye? do not even sinners the same
thing? (34)And if ye lend to those, from whom ye hope to receive back
again, what thanks are due to you? for sinners lend to sinners, that
they may receive an equivalent. (35)But love your enemies, and do good
and lend, hoping for nothing in return: and your reward shall be great,
and ye shall be the children of the Most High; for he is kind unto the
unthankful and to the wicked. (36)Be ye therefore compassionate, as
also your Father is compassionate. (37)And judge not, that ye be not
judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned: (38)give, and there
shall be given unto you; good measure pressed down, and shook, and
running over, shall they give into your lap. For with what measure ye
mete, it shall be measured back to you again.

(39)And he spake a parable unto them, Can the blind lead the blind?
will they not both fall into the pit? (40)The disciple is not above his
teacher; but every one who is completely taught shall be as his master.

(41)But why beholdest thou the mote which is in thy brother's eye, but
observest not the beam which is in thine own eye? (42)Or how canst thou
say to thy brother, Brother, permit me to take off the mote which is on
thine eye, not seeing thyself the beam in thine own eye? Thou
hypocrite! cast out the beam which is in thine eye, and then shalt thou
see distinctly to take off the mote which is in thy brother's eye.
(43)For there is no good tree which produceth fruit of a bad quality;
neither doth a tree of a bad sort produce good fruit. (44)Every tree is
known by its own peculiar fruit. For men do not gather figs from off
thorns, nor do they gather from the bramble a bunch of grapes. (45)A
good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, produceth what is
good; and a wicked man, from the evil treasure in his heart, produceth
that which is evil: for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaketh. (46)And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things
which I say? (47)Every one who cometh to me, and heareth my words, and
puts them in practice, I will shew you to whom he is like: (48)he is
like to a man, building a house, who digged, and sunk deep, and laid
the foundation on a rock; and when there was a flood, the river rushed
violently against that house, and was not of force to shake it, for it
was founded on a rock. (49)But he that heareth, and doth not practice,
is like a man who built his house on the earth without a foundation;
against which the river rushed violently, and immediately it fell; and
the crash of the fall of that house was great.

CHAP. VII.

NOW after he had finished all these sayings in the ears of the people,
he entered into Capernaum. (2)And the servant of a certain centurion,
who was very valuable to him, being seized with an illness, was ready
to die. (3)But when he heard of Jesus, he sent unto him the elders of
the Jews, entreating him that he would come and preserve the life of
his servant. (4)And when they came to Jesus, they entreated him
importunately, saying, He is a worthy man on whom thou wilt confer this
favour: (5)for he loveth our nation, and hath himself built us a
synagogue. (6)Then Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far
from the house, the centurion dispatched towards him friends, saying to
him, Lord, trouble not thyself: for I am not deserving that thou
shouldest enter beneath my roof. (7)Therefore neither did I think
myself worthy to come unto thee, but speak in a word, and my servant
will be cured. (8)For I also am a man under authority, and have under
my command soldiers; and I say to this man, Go, and he goeth; and to
another, Come hither, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he
doeth it. (9)Then Jesus, on hearing these things, respected him highly,
and turning to the multitude which was following him, he said, I tell
you, I have not found such faith, even in Israel. (10)And they who were
sent, on their return to the house, found the servant who was sick in
perfect health.

(11)And it came to pass the next day, that he went into a city called
Nain; and a considerable number of his disciples went with him, and a
vast multitude. (12)And as he drew near the gate of the city, behold, a
dead man was carrying out, an only son to his mother, and she a widow;
and a great concourse of the city was with her. (13)And when Jesus saw
her, he was moved with compassion for her, and said unto her, Weep not.
(14)And approaching, he touched the bier: and the bearers stood still;
and he said, Young man, I say to thee, Arise. (15)And the dead man sat
up, and began to speak: and he delivered him to his mother. (16)And
fear fell on all, and they glorified God, saying, That a great prophet
is risen up among us, and that God hath looked down with mercy on his
people. (17)And this account respecting him went abroad through all
Judea, and all the region adjacent.

(18)And his disciples informed John of all these things. (19)And John
calling two certain persons of his disciples, sent them to Jesus,
saying, Art thou he that cometh, or are we to expect another? (20)Then
the men came to him, saying, John Baptist hath sent us unto thee,
saying, Art thou he that cometh, or are we to expect another? (21)And
in that very hour he cured many of diseases and acute complaints, and
evil spirits; and to many blind persons he gave sight. (22)And Jesus
addressing them, said, Go, tell John what things ye have seen and
heard: that the blind recover sight, the deaf hear, the dead are
raised, the poor have the gospel preached unto them. (23)And blessed is
he, whosoever shall not be offended at me.

(24)Now when John's messengers were departed, he began to speak to the
people concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A
reed shaken with the wind? (25)But what went ye out to see? A man
clothed in delicate garments? Behold, they who indulge in soft raiment,
and delicate food, are in king's palaces. (26)But what went ye out to
see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophet. (27)For
this is he of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before
thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee. (28)For I tell you, of
those born from woman, there is not a greater prophet than John the
Baptist: but he that is least in the kingdom of heaven, is greater than
he. (29)And all the people when they heard it, and the publicans,
glorified God, being baptised with the baptism of John. (30)But the
Pharisees and teachers of the law rejected the counsel of God towards
themselves, not being baptised by him.

(31)And the Lord said, To what then shall I compare the men of this
generation? and to what are they like? (32)They are like to children
sitting in the markets, and calling to each other, and saying, We have
played the flute to you, and ye have not danced; we have raised the cry
of mourning, and ye have not wept. (33)For John the Baptist came
neither eating bread, nor drinking wine; and ye say, He hath a devil.
(34)The Son of man is come eating and drinking, and ye say, A
gluttonous man, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners!
(35)though wisdom hath been justified by her children.

(36)Then one of the Pharisees invited him to eat with him. And he went
into the Pharisee's house, and sat down to table. (37)And, behold, a
certain woman in the city, who was a notorious offender, when she knew
that Jesus was sitting at table in the Pharisee's house, brought an
alabaster vessel of odoriferous balm, (38)and standing at his feet
behind him, began to water his feet with her tears, and to wipe them
with the hair of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with
the perfumed balm. (39)And when the Pharisee who had invited him saw
it, he said within himself, If this man were a prophet, he would know
who and what kind of a woman this is that toucheth him; for she is a
notorious sinner. (40)And Jesus addressing himself to him said, Simon,
I have somewhat to say to thee. And he said, Master, speak freely.

(41)A certain creditor had two debtors, the one owed five hundred
denarii, and the other fifty. (42)But having nothing to pay, he forgave
them both. Tell me, which of these, then, will love him most? (43)And
Simon answering said, I suppose, he to whom he forgave most. And he
said unto him, Thou hast judged rightly. (44)So turning to the woman,
he said to Simon, Thou seest this woman? I came into thine house, even
water for my feet thou gavest not; but she hath washed my feet with her
tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head. (45)One kiss hast
thou not given me, but she from the time she hath come in, hath not
ceased tenderly to kiss my feet. (46)My head with oil thou hast not
anointed; but she hath anointed my feet with odoriferous balm. (47)For
which cause, I tell thee, her many sins are forgiven, for she hath
loved much: but to whom a little is forgiven, he loveth little. (48)And
he said to her, Thy sins are forgiven. (49)And they who sat at table
with him began to say in themselves, Who is this, who even forgives
sins? (50)But he said unto the woman, Thy faith hath saved thee; go in
peace.

CHAP. VIII.

AND it came to pass afterwards, that he went through every city and
village, preaching and publishing the glad tidings of the kingdom of
God, and the twelve with him. (2)And certain women who had been cured
of evil spirits and sicknesses, Mary called Magdalene, from whom seven
devils had gone out. (3)And Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herod's
lieutenant-governor, and Susanna, and many others, who ministred to his
support out of their possessions.

(4)Now when a vast multitude was collected, even those who came to him
out of every city, he spake by a parable. (5)A sower went out to sow
his seed; and as he sowed, some fell by the road side, and was trodden
under foot, and the birds of the air devoured it up. (6)And other seed
fell on a rock, and vegetating, withered because it had no moisture.
(7)And other seed fell amidst thorns, and the thorns springing up with
it, choked it. (8)And some fell on good ground, and shooting up,
produced fruit an hundred fold. So saying, he cried, He that hath ears
to hear, let him hear.

(9)Then his disciples asked him, saying. What might this parable mean?
(10)And he said, To you it is given to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of God; but to the rest in parables: that seeing they may not
perceive, and hearing may not comprehend. (11)Now this is the parable:
The seed is the word of God. (12)They by the road side, are such as
hear; then cometh the devil, and taketh the word from their heart, that
they should not be saved in believing. (13)And they on the rock, are
such as when they have heard, with joy embrace the word; and these have
not root, who for a time believe, and in a season of trial apostasize.
(14)And that which fell among thorns, are they having heard, and going
away, are choked by the cares, and wealth, and pleasures of life, and
bring forth no perfect fruit. (15)But that on the good ground are they
who having heard the word, retain it in a heart excellent and good, and
bring forth fruit with patience.

(16)No man lighting a lamp hides it with a cover, or putteth it under a
bed, but on a stand, that they who are coming in, may see the light.
(17)For there is nothing hid which shall not be made manifest, nor
concealed, which shall not be known and brought to light. (18)Take heed
therefore how ye hear: for whosoever hath, to him shall be given; and
whosoever hath not, even what he seemeth to have shall be taken away
from.

(19)Then came to him his mother and his brethren, and could not come
near him because of the crowd. (20)And it was told him, saying, Thy
mother and thy brethren are standing without, desirous of seeing thee.
(21)Then he answered and said to them, My mother and my brethren are
they, who hear the word of God, and practise it.

(22)And it came to pass on one of the days, that he went himself into a
ship, and his disciples, and said unto them, Let us pass over to the
farther side of the lake. And they set fail. (23)And while they were on
the passage, he went to sleep: and a hurricane of wind rushed down on
the lake; and they were filled with water, and imminent danger.
(24)Then they came and awoke him, saying, Master, Master, we are
perishing. Then arising, he issued his command to the wind, and the
billows of water, and they subsided, and there was a calm. (25)And he
said to them, Where is your faith? And they feared and were astonished,
saying one to another, Well! what a man is this! that he commands even
the winds and the sea, and they obey him.

(26)And they sailed over unto the region of the Gadarenes, which is
opposite Galilee. (27)And as he landed, there met him a certain man
from the city, who had devils for a long while, and kept no clothes on
him, and never abode in a house, but in the tombs. (28)But when he saw
Jesus, roaring out, he fell down before him, and said with a loud
voice, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God Most High? I
pray thee, torment me not. (29)For he had commanded the unclean spirit
to come out of the man; for many times it had seized on him; and though
under a guard, and bound with chains and fetters; yet bursting the
bonds, he was driven by the devil into the desert places. (30)Then
Jesus asked him, saying, What is thy name? and he said, Legion: for
many devils were entered into him. (31)And he besought him that he
would not order them to go into the abyss. (32)Now a herd of many swine
was there feeding on the mountain; and they besought him that he would
permit them to enter into them. And he permitted them. (33)Then the
devils going out of the man, entered into the swine; and the herd
rushed down a precipice into the lake, and was suffocated. (34)But when
those who fed them saw what was done they fled, and went and told it in
the city and in the country places. (35)And they came out to see what
had happened; and they came to Jesus, and found the man sitting, from
whom the devils were gone out, clothed, and in his sound mind, at the
feet of Jesus; and they were afraid. (36)Then they also who had seen
how the demoniac was recovered, told them. (37)And the whole multitude
of the country around the Gadarenes, entreated him to depart from them;
for they were seized with great terror: and he embarked on the vessel,
and returned. (38)And the man out of whom the devils had gone, besought
him to be with him; but Jesus sent him away, saying, (39)Return to thy
house, and declare what things God hath done for thee. And he went
away, and published through the whole city what things Jesus had done
for him.

(40)And it came to pass, when Jesus returned, the people welcomed him,
for they were all waiting for him. (41)And, behold, there came a man
whose name was Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue: and falling
at the feet of Jesus, he entreated him to come to his house; (42)for he
had an only daughter, about twelve years old, and she was dying: and as
he was going, the multitude thronged him. (43)And a woman, who had a
flux of blood, for twelve years, who had spent all her substance on
physicians, and could not get a cure from any; (44)coming behind him,
touched the fringe of his garment; and instantly the flux of her blood
stopped. (45)And Jesus said, Who touched me? And when all denied,
Peter, and those who were with him, said, Master, the multitudes throng
and press thee, and sayest thou, Who hath touched me? (46)Then said
Jesus, Some person hath touched me, for I know that miraculous power is
gone out from me. (47)Then the woman seeing she was not hid, came
trembling, and falling down before him, declared to him before all the
people, for what cause she had touched him; and how she was cured
instantaneously. (48)Then he said unto her, Be of good cheer, daughter,
thy faith hath made thee well; go in peace.

(49)And while he was yet speaking, a person came to the ruler of the
synagogue, saying to him, Thy daughter is dead, give the master no
further trouble. (50)Then Jesus hearing it, addressed him, saying, Fear
not, only believe, and she shall be saved. (51)And entering into the
house, he suffered no person to come in, but Peter, and James, and
John, and the father and mother of the child. (52)Now all were weeping
and lamenting her: and he said, Weep not, she is not dead, but asleep.
(53)And they derided him, for they knew that she was dead. (54)And he
put them all without, and taking her by the hand, cried, saying, Maid,
arise! (55)And her spirit returned, and she immediately arose; and he
commanded to give her something to eat. (56)And her parents were struck
with amazement. But he enjoined them to tell no man what was done.

CHAP. IX.

THEN calling his twelve disciples, he gave them power and authority
over all devils, and to cure diseases. (2)And he sent them to preach
the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick. (3)And he said to them, Take
nothing for the journey, neither staffs, nor satchel, nor bread, nor
money, nor have two coats each. (4)And into whatsoever house ye enter,
there abide, and thence go out. (5)And whosoever shall not receive you,
when ye go out of that city, shake off the dust from your feet, for a
testimony against them. (6)And they went forth, and passed through the
villages, preaching the gospel, and performing cures everywhere.

(7)Then Herod the tetrarch heard of all things that were done by him;
and he was in much distraction of mind, because it was said by some,
that John was risen from the dead: (8)and of some that Elias had
appeared; and of others, that one of the ancient prophets was risen
again. (9)And Herod said, John I beheaded; but who is this, of whom I
hear such things? And he sought to see him.

(10)And when the apostles returned, they told him what they had done.
And taking them, he withdrew privately into a desert place belonging to
the city called Bethsaida. (11)But when the multitudes knew it, they
followed him and receiving them, he spake to them concerning the
kingdom of God, and healed those who had need of a cure. (12)Now the
day began to decline: and the twelve coming to him, said, Dismiss the
multitude, that going away into the villages and farms round about,
they may lodge and find provision; for here we are in a desert place.
(13)Then he said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they said, We have
no more than five loaves, and two fishes; unless we go somewhere and
buy provisions for all this multitude: (14)for there were about five
thousand men. Then said he to his disciples, Make them sit down by
fifties each in companies. (15)And they did so: and they made them all
sit down. (16)And taking the five loaves, and the two fishes, looking
up to heaven, he blessed them, and brake, and gave to the disciples to
set before the multitude. (17)And they did all eat, and were filled;
and there were taken up of the fragments which were more than enough
for them, twelve baskets.

(18)And it came to pass, as he had been praying in retirement, his
disciples were with him, and he asked them, Who do the multitudes say
that I am? (19)And they answering said, John the Baptist; but some
Elias; and others, that one of the old prophets is risen again. (20)And
he said to them, But who do ye say that I am? Then Peter answering
said, The Messiah of God. (21)And strictly charging them, he commanded,
that they should tell no man this: (22)saying, The Son of man must
suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, and chief priests,
and scribes, and be put to death, and on the third day rise again.

(23)And he said unto them, If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me. (24)For whosoever
would preserve his life shall lose it; but whosoever would lose his
life for my sake, shall preserve it. (25)For what advantage hath a man
in gaining all the would, if he destroy himself, or be punished with
the loss of life? (26)For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my
words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in his
own glory, and his father's, and of the holy angels. (27)And I tell you
of a certainty, there are some of those who stand here, who shall not
taste death, till they see the kingdom of God.

(28)And it was about eight days after these discourses, that taking
Peter, and John, and James, he went up into a mountain to pray. (29)And
it came to pass, as he was at prayer, that the appearance of his
countenance was altered, and his raiment white and refulgent. (30)And,
lo! two men conversed with him, who were Moses and Elias: (31)who
appeared in glory, and mentioned his departure, which he was ready to
accomplish at Jerusalem. (32)But Peter and they who were with him were
weighed down with sleep: but when they awoke, they beheld his glory,
and the two men who were standing with them. (33)And it came to pass,
as they were departing from him, Peter said unto Jesus, it is well that
we are here, and we will make three tents, one for thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias; not knowing what he said. (34)And as he was
thus speaking, a cloud came and overshadowed them: and they were afraid
as they were entering into the cloud. (35)And a voice came out of the
cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son; hear him. (36)And when the voice
ceased, Jesus was found alone. And they held their peace, and told no
man in those days a word of the things which they had seen.

(37)And it came to pass, on the next day, when they came down from the
mountain, a great multitude met him. (38)And, behold, a man from among
the multitude cried out aloud, saying, Master, I pray thee, look upon
my son; for he is my only begotten. (39)And, behold! a spirit taketh
him, and suddenly he crieth out, and convulseth him, with foaming; and
bruising him, with difficulty retires from him. (40)And I besought thy
disciples that they would cast him out, and they could not. (41)Then
Jesus answering, said, O faithless and perverse generation! how long
shall I be with you, how long shall I bear with you? bring hither thy
son. (42)And while he was yet approaching the devil threw him down, and
violently convulsed him. Then Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and
cured the child; and restored him to his father. (43)And they were all
struck with amazement at the mighty power of God. And while they were
all wondering at the things which Jesus did, he said to his disciples,
(44)Keep ye these sayings in your ears; for the Son of man shall be
betrayed into the hands of men. (45)And they understood not that
declaration, and it was hid from them, that they should not comprehend
its meaning: and they were afraid to ask him concerning that saying.

(46)Then a dispute sprang up among them, which of them should be the
greatest. (47)But Jesus knowing the reasoning of their hearts, took a
little boy, and set him by his side, (48)and said unto them, Whosoever
shall receive this little child in my name, receiveth me; and whosoever
receiveth me, receiveth Him that sent me: for he who is the least among
you all, he shall be great.

(49)Then John addressing him said, Master, we saw one casting out
devils in thy name, and we forbad him, because he followed not with us.
(50)And Jesus said to him, Forbid him not; for he that is not against
us, is for us.

(51)And it came to pass, as the days hastened to their period when he
should be received up _to glory_, that he resolutely set his face to go
to Jerusalem; (52)and sent messengers before his face; and they
advancing entered into a Samaritan village, to make preparation for
him. (53)And they would not admit him, because his face was directed to
Jerusalem. (54)And when the disciples James and John saw it, they said,
Lord, wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven and
destroy them, just as Elias did? (55)And turning to them, he reproved
them, and said, Ye know not what spirit ye are of: (56)for the Son of
man came not to destroy men's lives, but to preserve them. And he
proceeded to another village.  (57)And it came to pass, as they were
walking on the road, a certain person said to him, Lord, I will follow
thee whithersoever thou goest. (58)And Jesus Said to him, The foxes
have holts, and the birds of the air, nests, but the Son of man hath
not where to lay his head.

(59)And he said to another, Follow me. And he said, Lord, permit me
first to return home, and put my father in his grave. (60)And Jesus
said unto him, Leave the dead to bury their own dead, but go thou,
preach the kingdom of God.

(61)Then said another, I will follow thee, Lord, but give me leave
first to bid adieu to those at my house. (62)But Jesus said unto him,
No man laying his hand on the plough, and looking to the things left
behind, is fit for the kingdom of God.

CHAP. X.

THEN after these things the Lord appointed other seventy persons also,
and sent them, two and two before his face, into every city and place,
whither he himself designed to go. (2)He said therefore unto them, The
harvest indeed is plenteous, but the labourers few: pray ye therefore
to the Lord of the harvest, that he would send out labourers into his
harvest. (3)Go forth! behold, I send you out as lambs in the midst of
wolves. (4)Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor sandals: and stay to
salute no man on the road. (5)And into whatever house ye enter, first
say, Peace be to this house. (6)And if the Son of peace be there, your
peace shall rest upon it; but if not, it shall return back to you
again. (7)And in the same family abide, eating and drinking such as
they have: for the labourer is worthy of his hire. Go not about from
house to house. (8)And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they welcome
you, eat whatever is set before you: (9)and heal the sick that are
therein, and say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.
(10)And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go out
into the streets of it, and say, (11)Even the dust of your city, which
sticks to us, we shake off against you: nevertheless this know, that
the kingdom of God is come near to you. (12)Now I tell you, that it
shall be more tolerable for Sodom in that day, than for that city.
(13)Wo to thee Chorazin! wo to thee Bethsaida! for if the miracles
which have been done in thee, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, long ago
sitting in sackcloth and ashes, would they have repented. (14)But it
shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the judgment than for
you. (15)And thou Capernaum, which hast been lifted up to heaven, shalt
be cast down to hell. (16)He that heareth you, heareth me; and he that
despiseth you, despiseth me; and he that despiseth me, despiseth Him
that sent me.

(17)Then the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils
are subject to us through thy name. (18)And he said unto them, I beheld
Satan falling as lightning from heaven. (19)Behold, I give you power to
tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy;
and nothing shalt in any wise hurt you. (20)Nevertheless, in this
rejoice not, that the spirits are made subject to you; but rejoice
rather, that your names are inscribed in the heavens.

(21)In the same hour Jesus exulted in spirit, and said, I ascribe glory
to thee, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these
things from the wise and intelligent, and hast revealed them to babes:
be it so, O Father! since such is thy good pleasure. (22)All things are
given up to me by my Father: and no man knoweth who is the Son, but the
Father; and who is the Father, but the Son, and he to whomsoever the
Son is pleased to reveal him. (23)Then turning to the disciples, he
said privately, Blessed are the eyes which see the things which ye see:
(24)for I tell you, that many prophets and kings have desired to see
the things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear the things
which ye hear, and have not heard them.

(25)And, behold, a certain doctor of the law arose, to make trial of
him, saying, Master, by doing what shall I inherit eternal life?
(26)And he said unto him, What is written in the law? How readest thou?
(27)And he answering said, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might, and with all
thy understanding, and thy neighbour as thyself." (28)And he said unto
him, Thou hast answered rightly: this do, and thou shalt live. (29)Then
he, desirous to make himself appear a righteous person, said unto
Jesus, And who is my neighbour? (30)Then Jesus answering said, A
certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among
robbers, who, when they had both stripped him, and covered him with
wounds, got off, leaving him half dead. (31)And it so fell out, that a
certain priest went down that way, and seeing him, he kept the opposite
side of the road. (32)And a Levite also, in the same way, being near
the place, came, and seeing him, kept the opposite side of the road.
(33)But a certain Samaritan travelling, came by him, and seeing him,
was moved with compassion, (34)and coming up to him, bound up his
wounds, after pouring on them oil and wine; then setting him on his own
beast, he led him to an inn, and took particular care of him. (35)And
on the morrow, as he was departing, he took out of his purse two
denarii, and gave them to the innkeeper, and said to him, Take great
care of him; and whatever farther expence may be incurred, when I
return, I will repay thee. (36)Which then of these three do you suppose
to be the neighbour of him who fell into the robbers' hands? (37)And he
said, He that shewed mercy towards him. Then said Jesus to him, Go, and
do thou exactly the same.

(38)And it came to pass, as they were travelling, that he entered into
a certain village; and a woman, named Martha, received him into her
house. (39)And she had a sister called Mary, who sitting down also at
the feet of Jesus, hearkened to his discourse. (40)But Martha was
hurrying about to provide a large entertainment, and coming up to him,
she said, Lord, is it no concern to thee, that my sister hath left me
to make the whole provision by myself? bid her therefore to assist me.
(41)But Jesus answering said to her, Martha, Martha, thou art anxious
and disturbing thyself about many things. (42)But of one thing there is
need: and Mary hath made her election of that good portion, which shall
not be taken away from her.

CHAP. XI.

AND it came to pass, as he was in a certain place praying, when he had
done, one of his disciples said to him, Lord, teach us to pray, even as
John also taught his disciples. (2)And he said unto them, When ye pray
say, Our Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name: thy kingdom
come: thy will be done as in heaven so upon earth. (3)Give us our
necessary food, day by day: (4)and forgive us our sins, for we also
forgive every one who is indebted to us. And bring us not into
temptation; but deliver us from the wicked one.

(5)And he said unto them, Which of you shall have a friend, and he
shall go to him at midnight, and say to him, Friend, lend me three
loaves; (6)for a friend of mine is come to me off a journey, and I have
nothing to set before him. (7)And he from within answering, shall say,
Give me no farther trouble: my door is already locked, and my children
are with me in bed; I am unable to rise and give thee. (8)I tell you,
though even he would not rise and give him because he is his friend;
yet because of his importunity, roused up, he will give him as many as
he needeth. (9)And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you;
seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.
(10)For every one who asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, findeth;
and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. (11)For what father of
you, if his son ask a loaf, will he give him a stone? or if a fish,
will he for a fish give him a serpent? (12)or if he ask also an egg,
will he give him a scorpion? (13)If ye then, evil as ye are, know how
to give good gifts to your children; how much more shall your Father,
who is in heaven, give his Holy Spirit to those who ask him?

(14)And he was casting out a devil, and it was dumb. And it came to
pass, when the devil was gone out, the dumb person spake, and the
people marvelled. (15)But some of them said, He casteth out devils by
Beelzebub the prince of the devils. (16)But others, tempting him,
sought of him a sign from heaven. (17)But he, knowing their thoughts,
said to them, Every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste; and a
house against a house, falleth. (18)And if Satan also be divided
against himself, how shall his kingdom be established? because ye say,
that I cast out devils by Beelzebub. (19)But if I by Beelzebub cast out
devils, by whom do your sons cast them out? therefore they shall be
your judges. (20)But if with the finger of God I cast out devils, then,
verily the kingdom of God is come unto you. (21)When a strong man, in
complete armour, guards his palace, his goods are in peace. (22)But
when a stronger person than he coming, vanquisheth him, he takes away
his suit of armour in which he confided, and distributes the spoils.
(23)He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not
with me, scattereth abroad.

(24)When the unclean spirit goeth out of a man, he passes through
places destitute of water, seeking repose; and not finding it, saith, I
will go back to my habitation from whence I came out: (25)and coming,
he findeth it swept and furnished. (26)Then goeth he, and taketh seven
other spirits, more wicked than himself; and they entering in, take up
their abode there: and the last state of that man is worse than the
first.

(27)And it came to pass as he was speaking these words, a certain woman
from among the multitude lift up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed
is the womb that bare thee, and the breasts which thou hast sucked.
(28)But he said, Yea rather, blessed are they who hear the word of God
and observe it.

(29)Then the multitudes thronging around him, he began to say, This is
a wicked generation: it seeketh a sign, and no sign shall be given it,
but the sign of Jonah the prophet. (30)For as Jonas was a sign to the
Ninevites, so shall the Son of man also be to this generation. (31)The
queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment against the men of
this generation, and shall condemn them: for she came from the ends of
the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and, behold, a greater than
Solomon is here. (32)The men of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment
against this generation, and shall condemn it, for they repented on the
preaching of Jonah, and, behold, a greater than Jonah is here.

(33)But no man lighting a lamp putteth it in a concealed place, or
under a bushel, but on a stand, that they who are coming in, may see
the light. (34)The lamp of the body is the eye: when therefore thine
eye is clear, thy whole body will be luminous, but if it be vitiated,
thy whole body will be darkened. (35)Let it be thy aim then, that the
light which is in thee do not become darkness. (36)If then thy whole
body be illuminated, not having any dark part, it will be wholly
luminous, as a lamp by its brightness diffuseth light.

(37)Now as he was speaking, a certain Pharisee invited him to dine with
him; and going in with him, he sat down. (38)But the Pharisee seeing
it, marvelled, that he had not washed before dinner. (39)Then said the
Lord unto him, Now ye Pharisees make the outside of the cup and of the
dish clean, but your inward parts are full of extortion and wickedness.
(40)Ye senseless men! did not he who made that which is without, make
also that which is within? (41)But give what is within them for alms;
and, lo! all will be pure unto you. (42)But wo to you, Pharisees,
because ye tithe mint, and rue, and every herb, and pass by judgment
and the love of God. These ought ye to have done, and not to have
omitted the other. (43)Wo unto you, Pharisees, for ye love the first
seats in the synagogues, and salutations in the places of public
concourse. (44)Wo unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye
are as graves concealed, which men, while walking over them, see not.

(45)Then one of the doctors of the law addressing him, said, Master,
thus speaking, thou reproachest us also. (46)And he said, Wo also to
you, teachers of the law! for ye load men with burdens hardly bearable,
and ye yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers.
(47)Wo unto you! for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and your
fathers killed them. (48)Ye do indeed bear witness to, and with
pleasure concur in your fathers' deeds; for they truly killed them, and
ye build their sepulchres. (49)Therefore also the wisdom of God hath
said, I will send them prophets and apostles, and some of them they
shall kill, and shall persecute: (50)that the blood of all the
prophets, which hath been shed since the foundation of the world, may
be required of this generation: (51)from the blood of Abel to the blood
of Zachariah, who was slain between the altar and the temple: verily I
tell you, It shall be required of this generation. (52)Wo unto you,
teachers of the law! for ye have taken away the key of knowledge; ye
yourselves enter not in, and those who were entering ye have hindered.

(53)And as he was saying these things unto them, the scribes and
Pharisees began to urge him vehemently, and to extort answers from him
respecting many things; (54)laying snares for him, and seeking to catch
hold of something from his mouth, that they might accuse him.

CHAP. XII.

MEANTIME myriads of people collecting, so that they trod on one
another, he began to speak to his disciples, Take heed principally of
the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. (2)For there is
nothing concealed, that shall not be laid open; nor hid, which shall
not be known. (3)Wherefore whatsoever things ye have spoken in
darkness, they shall be reported in the light; and what ye have
whispered into the ear in the closets, shall be proclaimed on the
house-tops. (4)But I say to you my friends, Be not afraid of those who
may kill the body, but after that, have nothing farther which they can
do. (5)But I will point out to you, whom ye should fear: Fear him, who,
after he hath killed, hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto
you, Fear him! (6)Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, yet not
one of them is forgotten before God? (7)But even the hairs of your head
are all numbered: fear not then, ye are of more value than many
sparrows. (8)But I tell you, Every one who shall confess me before men,
him will the Son of man also confess before the angels of God: (9)but
he that disowns me before men, shall be disowned before the angels of
God. (10)And every one who shall utter a word against the Son of man,
it shall be forgiven him; but for him who hath blasphemed against the
Holy Ghost, there shall be no forgiveness.

(11)And when they shall bring you before the synagogues, and
magistrates, and the ruling powers, be under no anxiety how or what
defence ye shall make, or what ye shall say: (12)for the Holy Ghost
will teach you at that very hour what ye ought to say.

(13)Then spake one of the multitude to him, Master, order my brother to
divide the inheritance with me. (14)But he said to him, Man, who made
me a judge and a divider among you? (15)Then said he to them, Beware,
and be on your guard against covetousness; for a man's life doth not
depend on the abundance of his possessions. (16)And he spake a parable
unto them, saying,

The estate of a certain rich man bore plentifully: (17)and he thought
within himself, saying, What shall I do? for I have not room where I
may house my crops. (18)And he said, I will do this; I will take down
my barns, and build them larger, and collect there all my crops, and my
good things! (19)And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast a multitude
of good things in store for many years, be at ease, eat, drink, and be
merry! (20)But God said to him, Thou fool! this night shall they demand
thy life from thee; and the things which thou hast prepared, whose
shall they be? (21)Just such is every one who heapeth up treasure for
self, and is not rich towards God.

(22)Then said he to his disciples, For this reason I tell you, Be under
no anxiety about your life, what ye shall eat, nor for your body, how
ye shall be clothed. (23)The life is more than food, and the body than
raiment. (24)Consider the ravens, for they neither sow nor reap; they
have neither storehouse nor barn; yet God feedeth them: how much are ye
more excellent than the birds? (25)Which of you, with all his anxiety,
can add one moment to his life? (26)If therefore ye are unable to do
the least thing, why are ye anxious about the others? (27)Observe the
lillies how they grow up, they toil not, nor spin; but I tell you, that
Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of these. (28)If God
then so clothe the grass in the field, which to-day is, and to-morrow
is thrown into the furnace; how much more you, O ye of little faith?
(29)So then be not ye inquisitive what ye shall eat, or what ye shall
drink, nor be agitated with restless anxiety. (30)For after all these
things are the nations of the world seeking; and your Father knoweth
that ye have need of these things. (31)But seek ye the kingdom of God,
and all these things shall be given you over.

(32)Fear not, little flock! for your Father takes delight in giving you
the kingdom. (33)Sell all your possessions, and give in charity; make
yourselves purses that wax not old, a treasure never failing in the
heavens, where no thief approaches, nor doth the moth destroy. (34)For
where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

(35)Let your loins be firmly girded round, and your lamps burning:
(36)and ye like men, expecting their master, when he shall return from
the marriage; that when he comes and knocks, they may instantly open
the door for him. (37)Blessed are those servants, whom the Master, when
he cometh, shall find watchful: verily I say unto you, that he will
gird up himself, and make them sit down at table, and come and wait
upon them. (38)And if he come in the second watch, or in the third
watch, and find them so watchful, blessed are those servants. (39)Now
this be assured of, that if the master of the family had known at what
hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have
suffered his house to be broken through. (40)Therefore be ye also
ready, for at an hour that ye think not of, the Son of man cometh.

(41)Then said Peter unto him, Lord, speakest thou this parable to us,
or also for all? (42)And the Lord said, Who indeed is a faithful
steward, and prudent, whom the lord will place over his household, to
give them their proportion of provision at the proper season?
(43)Blessed is that servant, whom his lord, when he cometh, shall find
so employed. (44)Verily I say unto you, that he will place him over all
his property. (45)But if that servant say in his heart, My master will
be a long while ere he comes; and shall begin to beat the men and
maid-servants, and to eat and to drink, and to get drunk; (46)the
master of that servant will come in a day when he doth not expect him,
and at an hour which he knoweth not, and shall cut him asunder, and
give him his portion with the unfaithful. (47)And that servant, who
knew his master's will, and made no preparation for him, nor did
according to his pleasure, shall be beaten with many stripes. (48)But
he that knew it not, yet did things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten
with few. For of every one to whom much is given, much shall be
required from him: and to whom men commit much, they will of him demand
abundantly more.

(49)I am come to cast fire on the earth, and what is my wish? that it
may be now kindled. (50)But I have a baptism to be baptised with; and
how am I distressed in spirit till it is finished! (51)Think ye that I
came to bring peace upon earth? No, I tell you; but rather division:
(52)for henceforth five shall be in one house, divided, three against
two, and two against three. (53)The father shall take part against the
son, and the son against the father; the mother against the daughter,
and the daughter against the mother; the step-mother against her
daughter-in-law, and the son's wife against her mother-in-law.

(54)Then said he to the multitudes, When ye see a cloud rising from the
west, ye say immediately, There cometh a shower; and it is so. (55)And
when the south wind gently blows, ye say, It will be sultry hot; and so
it is. (56)Ye hypocrites! ye know how to discern by experience from the
appearance of the earth and of the sky; but how is it that ye do not
discern this particular time? (57)And why even of yourselves do ye not
decide what is just? (58)For as thou art going with thy prosecutor to
the magistrate, on the way endeavour to make up the matter with him;
lest he drag thee before the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the
officer, and the officer cast thee into prison. (59)I tell thee, thou
mayest in no wise come out from thence, until thou hast paid the very
last mite.

CHAP. XIII.

NOW there were some present at that time who informed him of the
Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. (2)And
Jesus in reply said to them, Think ye that these Galileans were sinners
above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things? (3)I tell
you, No: for except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. (4)Or
those eighteen, on whom the tower in Siloam fell, and killed them,
think ye that they were debtors to divine justice above all the men who
dwell at Jerusalem? (5)I tell you, No: but except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish.

(6)Then he spake this parable: A certain man had a fig-tree planted in
his vineyard; and he came, expecting fruit on it, and found none.
(7)Then said he to the vine-dresser, Lo! for three years have I come,
expecting fruit on this fig-tree, and find none: cut it down; why doth
it render the ground thus useless? (8)He answering said to him, Sir,
let it e'en remain this year, until that I dig around it, and spread
some manure: (9)perhaps it may then produce fruit: but if it does not,
afterwards thou shalt cut it down.

(10)And he was teaching in one of the synagogues, on the sabbath.
(11)And, behold, there was a woman who had a spirit of infirmity
eighteen years, and was bowed together, and unable to raise herself at
all up. (12)But when Jesus saw her, he called out aloud, and said to
her, Woman, thou art delivered from thine infirmity. (13)And he laid
his hands upon her: and instantly she became erect, and glorified God.
(14)Then the ruler of the synagogue, indignant, that on the sabbath
Jesus had performed the cure, addressing himself to the multitude,
said, There are six days in which work is to be done: on these
therefore come and be cured, and not on the sabbath-day. (15)Then the
Lord answered him, and said, Thou hypocrite, doth not every one of you
on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the manger, and lead him to
water? (16)And ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom
Satan hath bound, lo, these eighteen years, to be loosed from this bond
on the sabbath-day? (17)And when he had made this speech, all his
opposers were covered with shame: and all the multitude rejoiced in all
the glorious things which were done by him. (18)Then said he, To what
is the kingdom of God like? and whereunto shall I compare it? (19)It is
like a grain of mustard, which a man took and put into his garden; and
it grew, and became a great tree; and the fowls of the air lodged on
its branches.

(20)And again he said, To what shall I liken the kingdom of God? (21)It
is like leaven, which a woman taking, covered up in three measures of
meal, till the whole was leavened.

(22)And he passed through the cities and villages, teaching, and making
his way towards Jerusalem. (23)And a person said to him, Lord, are the
saved few? And he said unto them, (24)Exert all your powers to enter
through the strait gate: for many, I tell you, will seek to enter, but
will not be able. (25)When the master of the family shall have arisen,
and shut the door, and ye shall begin to stand without, and to knock at
the door, saying, Master, master, open it for us! and he answering will
tell you, I know you not whence ye are: (26)then shall ye begin to say,
We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our
streets. (27)And he will say, I tell you, I know you not whence ye are;
depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity. (28)There shall be wailing
and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
and all the prophets, in the kingdom, and yourselves cast out. (29)And
they shall come from the east, and west, and from north, and south, and
shall sit down in the kingdom of God. (30)And, behold, there are last
who shall be first, and there are first who shall be last.

(31)The same day came certain Pharisees, saying to him, Depart, and
begone from hence: for Herod will kill thee. (32)And he said to them,
Go tell that fox, Behold, I cast out devils, and perform cures today
and to-morrow, and on the third day I shall be perfected. (33)But I
must go on to-day and to-morrow, and the day following: for it is
impossible that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem.

(34)O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! thou that killest the prophets, and stonest
those who are sent unto thee; how often would I have collected thy
children unto me, just as a hen gathereth her brood under her wings,
and ye would not! (35)Behold, your house is left unto you desolate:
verily I say unto you, That ye shall see me no more, till the day come
when ye shall say, Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord.

CHAP. XIV.

AND it came to pass, as he went into the house of one of the principal
Pharisees, to eat bread on the sabbath, that they were watchfully
observant of him. (2)And, behold, there was a certain man who had a
dropsy, before him. (3)And Jesus addressing himself to the teachers of
the law and the Pharisees, spake, saying, Is it lawful to perform cures
on the sabbath? (4)And they said nothing. And he took him, and healed
him, and sent him away; (5)and addressing them, said, Whose ass or ox
is fallen into a pit, and doth he not immediately pull him out on the
sabbath-day? (6)And they were unable to answer him in opposition to
these things.

(7)Then he spake to those who were invited, a parable, when he observed
how they chose the principal seats; saying unto them, (8)When thou art
invited of any person to a marriage entertainment, recline not on the
principal couch; lest a more honourable personage than thyself be
invited by him; (9)and he that invited thee and him, coming say to
thee, Yield this person the place; and so thou shalt begin with shame
to go down to the lowest place. (10)But when thou art invited, go and
sit down in the lowest place; that when he who invited thee comes, he
may say to thee, Friend, go up higher; then shalt thou have respect in
the presence of those who are seated with thee. (11)For every one who
exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be
exalted.

(12)Then said he also to the person who had invited him, When thou
makest a dinner or a supper, invite not thy friends, nor thy brethren,
nor thy relations, nor thy rich neighbours; lest they also invite thee
again, and a recompence be made to thee. (13)But when thou makest an
entertainment, invite the poor, the maimed, the halt, the blind:
(14)and thou shalt be blessed; because they cannot recompense thee: for
a recompence shall be made thee at the resurrection of the just.

(15)Then one of those who sat at table hearing these things, said to
him, Blessed is he who shall eat bread in the kingdom of God. (16)And
he said unto him, A certain man made a great supper, and invited many:
(17)and sent his servants at supper-time to say to the invited, Come;
for all things are now ready. (18)And they all began with one voice to
frame excuses. The first said to him, I have bought a field, and I must
of necessity go and survey it: I pray thee hold me excused. (19)And
another said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and am going to make a
trial of them: I pray thee accept my excuse. (20)And another said, I
have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come. (21)And that servant
returning, informed his master of these things. Then the master of the
family, being highly incensed, said to his servant, Go out instantly
into the streets and alleys of the city, and bring in hither the poor,
and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind. (22)And the servant said,
Sir, it is done as thou orderedst, and yet there is room. (23)And the
master said to the servant, Go out into the highways and hedges, and
urge them to come in, that my house may be filled. (24)For I say unto
you, That not one man of those who were invited shall taste of my
supper.

(25)And great multitudes followed him about: and he turned, and spoke
to them, (26)If any man cometh after me, and hateth not father, and
mother, and wife and children, and brothers, and sisters, yea, and his
own life also, he cannot be my disciple. (27)And whosoever doth not
bear his cross, and come after me, he cannot be my disciple. (28)For
what man of you designing to erect a tower, doth not first sitting down
calculate the expence, if he have sufficient to complete the work?
(29)lest haply, after having laid the foundation, and being unable to
finish it, all who look upon it begin to ridicule him, (30)saying, This
man began to build, and was not able to finish. (31)Or what king, going
forth to encounter another king in battle, doth not sit down first, and
consult if he is able with ten thousand men to meet him who is coming
against him with twenty thousand? (32)and if he be not, whilst he is
still at a distance, he sendeth an embassy, and desires terms of peace.
(33)So then, every one of you who will not part with all his
possessions, cannot be my disciple.

(34)Salt is good: but if the salt become insipid, by what shall it be
seasoned? (35)It is neither fit for the land, nor for manure; but they
cast it out. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

CHAP. XV.

THEN drew nigh unto him all the tax-farmers and the sinners to hear
him. (2)And the Pharisees and scribes murmured, saying, This man
entertains sinners, and eateth with them. (3)Then spake he unto them
this parable, saying, (4)What man is there of you, possessing an
hundred sheep, though he lose but one of them, will he not leave the
ninety-nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until
he find it? (5)and when he hath found it, he layeth it on his
shoulders, rejoicing. (6)And coming home, he calleth together his
friends and neighbours, saying unto them, Congratulate me; for I have
found that sheep of mine which was lost. (7)I tell you, that just so
will there be joy in heaven over one repentant sinner, more than over
ninety-nine righteous persons, who hold not their need of repentance.
(8)Or what woman having ten pieces of silver coin, if she lose one of
them, doth she not light a lamp, and sweep the house, and make diligent
search until she find it? (9)And having found it, she calleth her
female friends and neighbours together, saying, Congratulate me; for I
have found the silver piece I had lost. (10)Even so, I tell you, there
is joy among the angels of God, over one repentant sinner.

(11)Then he said, A certain man had two sons: (12)and the younger of
them said to his father, Father, give me the portion of substance which
falls to my share. And he divided with them his fortune. (13)And not
many days after, the younger son, collecting his all, travelled into a
far distant country, and there dissipated his substance in a life of
debauchery. (14)But when he had spent all, there came a terrible famine
in that region; and he began to know want. (15)And he went and
connected himself with one of the citizens of that country; and he sent
him into his fields to feed swine. (16)And he eagerly longed to fill
his belly with the charob berries which the swine did eat: and no
person gave him _a morsel_. (17)Then coming to himself, he said, How
many hirelings of my father abound with loaves of bread, and I am
pining away with famine! (18)I will arise and go to my father, and will
say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee,
(19)and I am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy
hirelings. (20)And he arose and came to his father. But when he was yet
at a considerable distance, his father discovered him, and was moved
with compassion, and running, fell on his neck, and kissed him again
and again. (21)Then said the son unto him, Father, I have sinned
against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
son. (22)But the father said to his servants, Bring out the best robe,
and clothe him; and put a ring on his hand, and sandals on his feet:
(23)and bring hither the stall-fed steer, and kill it; and let us eat,
and be joyous. (24)For this my son was dead, and is alive again; and
was lost, and is found. And they began to be joyous. (25)Now his elder
brother had been in the field: and when coming home he drew near the
house, he heard a concert of music, and the chorus. (26)And calling one
of the servants, he inquired what these things meant. (27)And he said,
Thy brother is come; and thy father hath killed for him the stall-fed
steer, because he hath received him in health. (28)Then he was in great
wrath, and would not enter the doors: therefore his father came out,
and entreated him. (29)But he answering said to his father, Lo, these
many years I am serving thee, and never have transgressed thy command:
yet to me thou hast never once given a kid, that I might make merry
with my friends: (30)but no sooner is this son of thine come, who hath
devoured thy substance with whores, than thou hast killed for him the
stall-fed steer. (31)And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever with me,
and all my possessions are thine. (32)But it was right that we should
rejoice, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive
again; and was lost, and is found.

CHAP. XVI.

THEN said he also to his disciples, There was a certain rich man, who
had a steward; and he received an information against him, as having
dissipated his treasures. (2)And calling him, he said to him, What is
this report I hear of thee? give up the account of thy stewardship; for
thou mayest be no longer in that office. (3)Then the steward said
within himself, What shall I do? because my master is taking away the
stewardship from me: to dig, I have not the strength; to beg, I am
ashamed. (4)I know what I will do, that, when I am removed from the
stewardship, they may entertain me at their houses. (5)So calling upon
every one of his master's debtors, he said to the first, How much owest
thou to my master? (6)And he said, A hundred baths of oil. And he said,
Take thy account, and sit down directly, and write fifty. (7)Then said
he to another, And how much owest thou? And he said, An hundred core of
wheat. And he saith to him, Take thy account, and write fourscore.
(8)And the master praised the unjust steward, because he had acted
providently: for the children of this world are more provident among
their own generation of men, than the children of light. (9)And I say
unto you, Make yourselves friends with the unrighteous mammon that when
ye fail, they may receive you into the eternal mansions.

(10)He that is faithful in the least thing, is faithful also in much:
and he who is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. (11)If
therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will
entrust you with the true? (12)and if ye have not been faithful in that
which belongs to another, who will give up to you that which is your
own? (13)No domestic can serve two masters: for either he will hate the
one, and love the other; or he will cleave to the one, and neglect the
other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.

(14)Then the Pharisees also, who were dear lovers of money, heard all
these things, and they sneered at him. (15)And he said unto them, Ye
are they who affect to be righteous persons before men; but God knoweth
your hearts: for that which is highly esteemed among men, is an
abomination in the sight of God. (16)The law and the prophets were
until John: since that the kingdom of God is preached, and every man
presseth into it. (17)But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass
away, than for one tittle of the law to fail. (18)Every one who putteth
away his wife and marrieth another, committeth adultery: and every one
who marrieth a woman divorced from her husband, committeth adultery.

(19)Now there was a certain rich man, and he was clothed in purple and
fine linen, making splendid entertainments every day: (20)and there was
a certain pauper, named Lazarus, who was laid at his gate covered with
ulcers, (21)and importunately desiring to be fed with the crumbs which
fell from the rich man's table: yea even the dogs came and licked his
ulcers. (22)Now it came to pass that the poor man died, and was carried
up by angels into the bosom of Abraham. Then the rich man also died,
and was buried: (23)and in hell, lifting up his eyes, being in
torments, he seeth Abraham at a vast distance, and Lazarus in his
bosom. (24)And crying out, he said, Father Abraham, have compassion on
me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water,
and cool my tongue; for I am tormented with this flame. (25)But Abraham
said, Son, remember that thou hast received thy good things during thy
life, and Lazarus, in like manner, what was afflictive: but now he is
comforted, and thou art tormented. (26)And besides all these
considerations, between us and you there is a vast chasm fixed: so that
they who might be willing to pass from hence to you, cannot; neither
can they pass through to us, from thence. (27)And he said, I entreat
thee then, father, that thou wouldest send him to my paternal mansion:
(28)for I have five brothers: that he may testify to them, that they
also come not into this place of torment. (29)Abraham saith to him,
They have Moses and the prophets; let them hearken to them. (30)But he
said, Ah no, father Abraham! but if one came to them from the dead,
they will repent. (31)Then he said to him, If they hearken not to Moses
and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from
the dead.

CHAP. XVII.

THEN he said to his disciples, It is impossible that offences should
not come; but wo to him through whom they come! (2)It would be
advantageous for him, if a milstone were hanged about his neck, and he
were cast into the sea, rather than offend one of these little ones.
(3)Take heed to yourselves: if thy brother sin against thee, reprove
him; and if he repent, forgive him. (4)And if seven times in the day he
sin against thee, and seven times in the day return to thee, saying, I
repent; thou shalt forgive him.

(5)And the disciples said unto the Lord, increase our faith. (6)And the
Lord said, If ye had faith as a grain of mustard, ye might say to that
sycamore-tree, Be rooted up, and be planted in the sea; and it would
obey you.

(7)But which of you, having a servant plowing or keeping sheep, when he
cometh from the field, will say immediately, Come, sit down at table?
(8)And will he not rather say, Prepare for me to sup, and gird thyself,
and wait upon me, till I eat and drink; and after that, thou shalt eat
and drink thyself? (9)Doth he hold it as a favour from that servant,
that he did the things which were ordered him? I think not. (10)So also
ye, when ye have done all things commanded you, say, We are
unprofitable servants: for we have but done what was our duty to do.

(11)And it came to pass, as he was going towards Jerusalem, he passed
also through the midst of Samaria and Galilee. (12)And as he was
entering a certain village, ten leprous men met him, who stood at a
distance: (13)and they lift up their voice, saying, Jesus, Master, have
mercy on us! (14)And looking towards them, he said, Go, shew yourselves
to the priests. And it came to pass, that as they were on the road,
they were made clean. (15)Then one of them, seeing that he was cured,
returned, and with a loud voice gave glory to God, (16)and fell
prostrate at his feet giving him thanks: and he was a Samaritan.
(17)Then Jesus spake and said, were there not ten cleansed? but where
are the nine? (18)There are none found returning to give glory to God,
but this alien. (19)And he said to him, Arise, go thy way: thy faith
hath saved thee.

(20)And being asked by one of the Pharisees, When cometh the kingdom of
God? he answered them and said, The kingdom of God cometh not with
observation: (21)neither shall they say, Lo here! or, lo there! for,
behold, the kingdom of God is within you. (22)Then said he to the
disciples, The days will come when ye shall eagerly desire to see one
of the days of the Son of man, and shall not see it. (23)And they will
say to you, Lo here! and lo there! go not after them, nor follow them.
(24)For as the lightning flashing from one quarter under heaven,
shineth to another quarter under heaven; so shall the Son of man also
be at his day. (25)But he must first suffer many things, and be
rejected by this generation. (26)And as it was in the days of Noah, so
shall it also be in the days of the coming of the Son of man. (27)They
did eat, they drank, they married, they were given in marriage, until
the day that Noah entered into the ark, and the deluge came, and
destroyed them all.

(28)Even so, likewise, it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they
drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; (29)but the
day Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from heaven,
and destroyed them all. (30)Just so will it be in the day when the Son
of man shall be revealed. (31)In that day, let not the man who is upon
the roof, and his goods in the house, go down to carry them away: and
he that is in the field, in like manner, let him not return for any
things behind him. (32)Remember Lot's wife. (33)Whosoever seeketh to
preserve his life shall lose it; and whosoever would lose it, shall
preserve it. (34)I tell you, in that night two shall be in the same
bed; the one shall be seized, and the other dismissed. Two women shall
be grinding together: the one shall be seized, and the other dismissed.
(35)Two shall be in the field; the one shall be seized, and the other
dismissed. (36)TEXT OMITTED (37)And they answering, said to him, Where,
Lord? And he said, Wherever the carcase is, there will the eagles be
gathered together.

CHAP. XVIII.

THEN he spake also to them a parable, to shew that we ought to pray
always, and not faint; (2)saying, There was a certain judge in a
particular city, having no fear of God, nor respect for man: (3)and
there was a certain widow in that city; and she came to him, saying, Do
me justice against my adversary. (4)And he would not for a long while:
but after this he said, Though I fear not God, nor respect man; (5)yet
because this woman is so troublesome to me, I will do her justice, lest
by her perpetual coming she stun me with her importunity, (6)Then said
the Lord, Hear what the unjust judge saith. (7)And shall not God
execute vengeance for his own elect, who cry out to him day and night,
though he bear long with them? (8)Yes, I tell you, that he will avenge
them quickly. Nevertheless when the Son of man cometh, ah! shall he
find faith on the earth?

(9)Then he spake also this parable to certain persons, who had
confidence in themselves, that they were righteous, and despised
others: (10)Two men went up to the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee,
the other a tax-farmer. (11)The Pharisee, standing by himself, made
this prayer: God, I thank thee, that I am not as the rest of mankind,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or as this tax-gatherer. (12)I keep a
fast twice a week, I pay the tenth of all things I possess. (13)And the
tax-gatherer standing at a distance, would not even so much as lift his
eyes heaven-ward, but smote on his breast, saying, May God accept the
atonement for me a sinner! (14)I say to you, Went this man down to his
house justified, or the other? for every one who exalteth himself shall
be humbled; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

(15)Then they brought him infants also, that he should touch them: but
the disciples, when they saw it, rebuked them. (16)But Jesus calling
them to him, said, Permit little children to come to me, and hinder
them not for of such is the kingdom of God. (17)Verily I say unto you,
Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he
shall not enter therein.

(18)And a certain ruler asked him, saying, Good Master, by doing what
shall I inherit eternal life? (19)Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou
me good? there is none good, but one, even God.

(20)Thou knowest the commandments, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou
shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false
witness, Honour thy father and thy mother. (21)Then he said, All these
things have I observed from my youth. (22)Then Jesus hearing this, said
to him, Yet one thing thou lackest: sell all whatsoever thou hast, and
distribute to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and
come, follow me. (23)But he, on hearing these things, was exceeding
sorrowful: for he was very rich. (24)Then Jesus, observing that he was
very sorrowful, said, How difficultly shall they who have riches, enter
into the kingdom of God! (25)It is easier for a camel to go through the
eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
(26)And those who heard it said, Who then can be saved? (27)And he
said, The things impossible with men, are possible with God. (28)Then
said Peter, Lo, we have left all, and followed thee. (29)And he said
unto them, Verily I say unto you, that there is no man who hath left
family, or parents, or brothers, or wife, or children, for the sake of
the kingdom of God, (30)who shall not receive back manifold more in
this present time, and in the world to come life everlasting.

(31)Then taking aside the twelve, he said to them, Lo, we are going up
to Jerusalem, and all things written by the prophets concerning the Son
of man will be fulfilled. (32)For he shall be delivered up to the
Gentiles, and they shall insult him, and treat him with indignity, and
spit upon him: (33)and after scourging, shall slay him: and the third
day he shall rise again. (34)And they understood none of these things:
and the saying was concealed from them, and they knew not the things
which were spoken.

(35)And it came to pass, as he drew nigh to Jerusalem, a certain blind
man sat by the road-side begging: (36)and hearing the multitude passing
by, he inquired what was the cause. (37)And they told him, that Jesus
the Nazarean is going by. (38)And he cried, saying, Jesus, thou son of
David, have mercy on me! (39)And they who were going before rebuked
him, that he should hold his peace: but he cried so much the more, Son
of David, have mercy on me! (40)Then Jesus stood still, and commanded
him to be brought to him: and when he was come near, he asked him,
(41)saying, What wist thou that I should do for thee? Then he said,
Lord, that I may receive my sight. (42)And Jesus said unto him, Receive
thy sight: thy faith hath saved thee. (43)And instantly he received
sight, and followed him, glorifying God: and all the people, when they
saw it, gave praise to God.

CHAP. XIX.

AND entering into Jericho, he passed through. (2)And there was a person
whose name was Zaccheus, and he was a principal farmer of the taxes,
and the man was rich. (3)And he was desirous to have a sight of Jesus,
what sort of person he was; and he could not, because of the crowd, for
he was short of stature. (4)So running before, he climbed up a
sycamore-tree, in order to get a sight of him: for he was about to pass
that way. (5)And when he was come to the spot, Jesus looking up, saw
him, and said to him, Zaccheus, come down speedily; for to-day I must
abide at thy house. (6)And he hastened to come down, and entertained
him gladly. (7)And when they all saw it, they murmured, saying, That he
is gone to lodge with a man, a notorious sinner. (8)Then Zaccheus
standing up, said unto the Lord, Behold, the half of my goods, Lord, I
give unto the poor; and if I have got any thing from any man, by laying
false informations, I am ready to restore fourfold. (9)Then said Jesus
unto him, To-day is salvation come to this house, because that he also
is a son of Abraham. (10)For the Son of man is come to seek and to save
that which was lost.

(11)And as they were hearkening to these things, he proceeded on, and
spake a parable, because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and they supposed
that immediately the kingdom of God would openly appear. (12)He said
therefore, A certain man of noble family went into a distant region, to
receive for himself a kingdom, and to return. (13)And calling his ten
servants, he gave them ten manehs[15], and said unto them, Employ
yourselves in traffic, till I come back. (14)But his citizens hated
him, and sent an embassy after him, saying, We will not have this man
to rule over us. (15)And it came to pass, at his return, after
receiving the kingdom, that he ordered the servants to be called, to
whom he had given the money, that he might know what every one had
gained by his traffic. (16)Then came the first, and said, Sir, thy
maneh has gained ten manehs. (17)And he said unto him, Well done, good
servant: because thou hast been faithful in the least matter, hold thou
dominion over ten cities. (18)And the second came, saying, Lord, thy
maneh hath gained five manehs. (19)Then said he also to this man, Be
thou also over five cities. (20)And another came, saying, Master, there
is thy maneh, which I have kept wrapt up in a napkin: (21)for I was
afraid of thee, because thou art an austere man: thou takest up where
thou hadst laid nothing down, and reapest where thou didst not sow.
(22)And he said to him, Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou
wicked servant. Thou knewest that I am an austere man, taking up what I
laid not down, and reaping what I did not sow; (23)why then gavest thou
not my money to the bank, so when I came I might have required it with
interest? (24)And he said to those who stood by, Take from him the
maneh, and give it to him who hath the ten manehs. (25)(And they say
unto him, Sir, he hath ten manehs.) (26)For I say unto you, That to
every one who hath, shall more be given; but from him that hath not,
even that which he hath shall be taken away from him. (27)But as for
these enemies of mine, who would not that I should reign over them,
bring them hither, and slay them before me.

(28)And having thus spoken, he proceeded forward, going up to
Jerusalem. (29)And it came to pass, as he drew near to Bethphage and
Bethany, to the mount called the mount of Olives, he sent two of his
disciples, (30)saying, Go into the opposite village; in which, as ye
are at the entrance, ye will find a foal tied, on which no man hath
ever yet sat: loose, and bring him. (31)And if any man ask you, Why ye
loose it? thus shall ye say to him, That the Lord hath need of him.
(32)Then they who were sent, going, found it just as he had described
to them. (33)And as they were untying the foal, the owners of it said
to them, Why loose ye the foal? (34)And they said, The Lord hath need
of him. (35)And they brought him to Jesus: and throwing their cloaks on
the foal, they set Jesus thereon. (36)And as he went, they spread under
him their garments on the road. (37)And when he was now approaching, at
the descent of the mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the
disciples rejoicing began to praise God with a loud voice for all the
miracles which they had seen; (38)saying, Blessed is the King, who
cometh in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the
highest.

(39)And some of the Pharisees from the crowd said unto him, Master,
reprove thy disciples. (40)And he replying said to them. I tell you
that, should these be silent, the very stones would cry out.

(41)And as he drew near, beholding the city, he wept over it,
(42)saying, Oh that thou hadst known, even in this thy day, the things
that are for thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. (43)For
the days will come upon thee, when thy enemies shall cast up a trench
around thee, and encircle thee about, and straiten thee on every side,
(44)and will dash thee on the ground, and thy children within thee; and
will not leave in thee one stone upon another: because thou knewest not
the season of thy visitation.

(45)And entering into the temple, he began to cast out those who sold
and bought in the temple; (46)saying unto them, It is written, My house
is the house of prayer[16]: but ye have made it a den of robbers.

(47)And he continued daily teaching in the temple. Then the chief
priests and the scribes sought to destroy him, with the heads of the
people, (48)but did not discover how they could do any thing: for all
the people attentively hung on his lips.

CHAP. XX.

AND it came to pass, on one of those days, as he was teaching the
people in the temple, and preaching the gospel, the chief priests and
scribes with the elders came upon him, (2)and spake to him, saying,
Tell us by what authority thou doest these things or who is he that
giveth thee this authority? (3)Then he answering said to them, I also
will ask you one question; and resolve me: (4)The baptism of John, was
it from heaven, or of men? (5)And they reasoned among themselves,
saying, If we reply, From heaven; he will say, Wherefore then did ye
not believe him? (6)But if we say, Of men; all the people will stone
us: for they are persuaded that John was a prophet. (7)And they
answered, We know not from whence. (8)And Jesus said to them, Neither
tell I you by what authority I do these things.

(9)Then he began to speak to the people this parable: A certain man
planted a vineyard, and delivered it to husbandmen, and went abroad for
a long while. (10)And at the season he sent to the husbandmen a
servant, that they might give him of the fruit of the vineyard: but the
husbandmen beat, and sent him away empty. (11)And he again sent another
servant: and him also they beat, and treating him with indignity, sent
him away empty. (12)And he sent yet a third: and him they also wounded,
and cast out. (13)Then said the master of the vineyard, What shall I
do? I will send my beloved son: probably when they see him, they will
shew him respect. (14)But when the husbandmen saw him, they reasoned
among themselves, saying, This is the heir: come, let us kill him, that
the inheritance may be our own. (15)So casting him out of the vineyard,
they slew him. What then will the master of the vineyard do with these
men? (16)He will come and destroy these husbandmen, and give the
vineyard to others. And when they heard it, they said God forbid.
(17)Then he looked on them, and said, What is this then which is
written[17], The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become
the head of the corner? (18)Every one who falleth upon this stone shall
be broken to pieces; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him
to powder. (19)And the chief priests and the scribes sought to lay
hands on him at that time; and were afraid of the people: for they knew
that he had spoken this parable against them.

(20)And watching him, they sent men they had suborned, who pretended
that they were righteous persons, in order to lay hold of some word of
his, that they might deliver him to the power and authority of the
governor. (21)And they asked him, saying, Master, we know that thou
speakest and teachest rightly, and respectest no man's person, but
teachest the way of God in truth: (22)Is it lawful for us to pay
tribute to Caesar, or not? (23)Then he, aware of their crafty design,
said unto them, Why tempt ye me? (24)Shew me a denarius. Whose image
and inscription hath it? And they answering said, Caesar's. (25)Then
said he to them, Pay therefore to Caesar the things which are Caesar's,
and to God the things which are God's. (26)And they were unable to lay
hold of a single expression of his before the people: and marvelling at
his answer, they were silenced.

(27)Then certain of the Sadducees, who contend that there is no
resurrection, asked him, (28)saying, Master, Moses wrote for us[18], If
a man's brother die, having a wife, and he die childless, that his
brother should take the wife, and raise up seed for his brother.
(29)Now there were seven brothers: and the first taking a wife, died
childless. (30)And the second taking the wife, he also died childless.
(31)Then the third took her; and also all the seven in like manner: and
left no children, and died. (32)And last of all died also the woman.
(33)In the resurrection therefore whose wife of them shall she be? for
the seven had her to wife. (34)And Jesus in reply said to them, The
children of this world marry, and are given in marriage: (35)but they
who are counted worthy to attain to that world, and the resurrection of
the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage: (36)neither can
they die any more: for they are like the angels; and are the children
of God, being the children of the resurrection. (37)Now that the dead
are raised, even Moses intimated at the bush[19], when he called the
Lord, "the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob."
(38)Now God is not the God of the dead, but of the living: for all live
with him. (39)Then some of the scribes addressing him said, Master,
admirably hast thou spoken! (40)And after that they durst not put
another question to him.

(41)Then he spake to them: How say they that the Messiah is the son of
David? (42)Yet David himself, in the book of Psalms, saith, "The Lord
said unto my Lord, Sit down at my right hand, (43)until I put thine
enemies for a footstool of thy feet[20]." (44)David then calleth him
Lord, and how then is he his son?

(45)And whilst all the people were hearkening, he said to his
disciples, (46)Beware of the scribes, who desire to walk about in
trailing robes, and love salutations in the public places, and the
principal seats in the synagogues, and the most honourable couch at
suppers; (47)who devour the houses of widows, and for a pretext make
long prayers: these shall receive a more abundant punishment.

CHAP. XXI.

AND as he looked up, he saw some casting their gifts into the treasury
who were rich. (2)And he observed also a certain widow, miserably poor,
put in there two mites. (3)And he said, Of a truth I tell you that this
poor widow hath put in more than all they: (4)for all they have of
their superfluity cast into the oblations for God: but she out of her
indigence hath cast in all the substance which she possessed.

(5)And some of them talking of the temple, how adorned it was with the
beautiful stone-work and the dedicated offerings, he said, (6)As for
these things which ye are gazing upon, the days will come, in which one
stone will not be left upon another, that shall not be utterly thrown
down. (7)And they asked him, saying, Master, but when shall these
things be? and what is the sign, when these things are ready to come to
pass? (8)Then he said, Take heed that ye be not deluded: for many will
come in my name, saying, I am he; and the period approaches: go not
therefore after them. (9)But when ye shall hear of wars and commotions,
be not terrified: for these things must first come to pass; but the
conclusion is not immediately. (10)Then saith he unto them, Nation
shall rise up against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: (11)and
great earthquakes shall be in different places, and famines, and
pestilences; and in the heaven shall be frightful appearances, and
mighty signs. (12)But before all these things, they will lay hands on
you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and to
prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for my name's sake.
(13)And it shall afford you an opportunity to bear your testimony.
(14)Therefore rest satisfied in your hearts, not to premeditate what
apology to make: (15)for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all
your adversaries shall be utterly unable to contradict or resist.
(16)But ye shall be betrayed even by parents, and brethren, and
relations, and friends; and some of you they shall put to death.
(17)And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake. (18)Though a
hair of your head shall in nowise perish. (19)In your patience possess
ye your souls. (20)But when ye see Jerusalem, encircled with armies,
then know that the desolation of it approaches. (21)Then let those who
are in Judea fly unto the mountains; and let those who are in the midst
of her get far away: and they who are in the countries, let them not
enter into her. (22)For these are the days of vengeance, when all
things which are written shall be fulfilled. (23)But wo to those who
are big with child, and have infants at their breasts, in those days!
for there shall be great distress on the earth, and wrath upon this
people. (24)And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be
led away captive into all nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden under
foot of the Gentiles, until the times appointed for the Gentiles shall
come to their period. (25)And there shall be signs in the sun, and in
the moon, and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations,
with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring; (26)men terrified to
death with fear, and expectation of the calamities coming on the earth:
for the powers of heaven shall be shaken. (27)And then shall they see
the Son of man coming in a cloud, with power and great glory. (28)And
when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your
heads; for your redemption draweth nigh.

(29)And he spake a parable unto them, Behold the fig-tree, and all the
trees, (30)when they now put forth, as soon as ye see it ye know in
yourselves that the summer is now near: (31)so ye also, when ye see
these things come to pass, know that the kingdom of God is at hand.
(32)Verily I say unto you, That this generation shall in nowise pass
away, until all these things come to pass. (33)Heaven and earth shall
pass away: but my words shall never pass away. (34)But take heed to
yourselves, lest at any time your hearts should be overloaded with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and the anxious cares of life, and that day
should come upon you unawares. (35)For as a snare shall it come upon
all that are settled on the face of the whole earth. (36)Watch
therefore, praying at every proper opportunity, that ye may be
accounted worthy to escape all these things which are ready to come to
pass, and to stand before the Son of man.

(37)And during the day he continued teaching in the temple; but at
night he went out, and lodged in the mountain called the mount of
Olives. (38)And all the people came to him early in the morning at the
temple, to hear him.

CHAP. XXII.

AND the feast of unleavened bread, which is called the Passover, was at
hand. (2)And the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might
destroy him; for they were afraid of the people. (3)Then entered Satan
into Judas called Iscariot, though he was of the number of the twelve.
(4)And he went and conversed with the chief priests and the captains,
by what means he could betray him unto them. (5)And they were glad, and
agreed with him to give him a sum of money. (6)And he gave them his
promise, and sought the favourable opportunity to betray him to them,
in the absence of the multitude.

(7)Then came the day of unleavened bread, on which the passover must be
killed. (8)And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go, prepare for us the
passover, that we may eat it. (9)And they said unto him, Where wilt
thou that we prepare it? (10)And he said unto them, Lo! as you are at
the entrance of the city, there will a man meet you, carrying a pitcher
of water; follow him into the house whither he is going. (11)And say to
the master of that family, The teacher saith to thee, Where is the
dining-room, in which I can eat the passover with my disciples? (12)And
he will shew you a large upper room furnished: there make ready.
(13)And they going away, found it just as he had told them: and they
made ready the passover. (14)And when the hour was come, he sat down,
and the twelve apostles with him. (15)And he said unto them, With
earnest desire have I longed to eat this passover with you before I
suffer: (16)for I tell you, that I will no more ever eat of it, until
it shall be fulfilled in the kingdom of God. (17)And taking the cup,
after having given thanks, he said, Take this, and divide among
yourselves: (18)for I say unto you, that I shall no more drink of the
fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God come. (19)And taking a
loaf, he gave thanks, and brake, and gave it to them, saying, This is
my body which is given for you: do this in remembrance of me. (20)And
the cup in like manner, after supper, saying, This cup is the new
testament in my blood, which is shed for you. (21)But lo! the hand of
him that betrayeth me is with me at the table. (22)And the Son of man
indeed goeth, as is decreed: but wo to that man by whom he is betrayed!
(23)And they began to question among themselves, who it could possibly
be of them who should do this thing.

(24)Now it came to pass, that there was also a contention among them,
even which of them should be accounted to be the greatest. (25)And he
said to them, The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them; and they who
exercise authority over them are called benefactors. (26)But ye shall
not act thus: but the superior among you, let him be as the junior; and
he that presideth, as he that serveth. (27)For which is the greater, he
that sitteth at table, or he that waits? is not he that sitteth at
table? but I am in the midst of you as he that serveth. (28)Ye are they
who have continued with me during my trials. (29)And I appoint you, as
my Father hath appointed me, a kingdom; (30)that ye may eat and drink
at my table in my kingdom, and be seated on thrones, judging the twelve
tribes of Israel.

(31)And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, lo! Satan hath earnestly sought
you, that he might sift you as wheat: (32)but I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith may not fail: and when thou art returned, stablish thy
brethren. (33)Then he said unto him, Lord, I am ready to go with thee,
to prison, and to death! (34)And he said, I tell thee, Peter, the cock
shall not crow this day, before thou shalt thrice deny having known me.

(35)And he said unto them, When I sent you without purse, or scrip, or
sandals, lacked ye any thing? And they said, Nothing. (36)Then said he
to them, But now, he that hath a purse, let him also take a scrip: and
he that hath none, let him sell his cloak, and buy a sword. (37)For I
tell you, that what hath already been written must be fulfilled in me,
namely, "He was numbered with the transgressors[21]:" for the things
also concerning me draw to their period. (38)Then they said, Lord,
behold, here are two swords, and he said to them, It is enough.

(39)And going out, he went, according to his custom, to the mount of
Olives; and his disciples also followed him. (40)And when he came to
the spot, he said unto them, Pray that ye enter not into temptation.
(41)And he withdrew from them about a stone's cast, and kneeling down,
he prayed, (42)saying, Father, if thou wilt, remove this cup from me!
nevertheless, not my will, but thine, be done. (43)And an angel from
heaven appeared to him, strengthening him. (44)And being in an agony,
he prayed with greater intenseness: and his sweat was as clots of blood
falling on the ground. (45)And when he rose up from prayer, on coming
to his disciples, he found them sleeping from sorrow. (46)And he said
unto them, Why sleep ye? rise up, and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation.

(47)And while he was yet speaking, behold a multitude, and he who was
called Judas, one of the twelve, went before them, and approached Jesus
to kiss him. (48)Then said Jesus unto him, Judas, betrayest thou the
Son of man with a kiss? (49)Then when they who were about him saw what
was ready to happen, they said unto him, Lord, shall we strike with the
sword? (50)And one of them struck at a servant of the high-priest, and
cut off his right ear. (51)Then Jesus, addressing them, said, Permit me
thus far: and touching his ear, he healed him. (52)Then said Jesus to
the chief priests and captains of the temple, and to the elders who
were come forth against him, Are ye come out as against a robber, with
swords and staves? (53)When I was daily with you in the temple, ye
stretched out no hands upon me: but this is your hour, and the power of
darkness.

(54)Then seizing upon him, they led him away, and brought him into the
palace of the high-priest. But Peter followed at a distance. (55)And as
they had lighted a fire in the middle of the hall, and had seated
themselves in a company, Peter sat down in the midst of them. (56)But a
certain maid-servant who sat at the fire, eyeing him, and looking at
him stedfastly, said, This man was also with him. (57)But he denied
him, saying, Woman, I know him not. (58)And after a little while
another seeing him, said, Surely thou art one of them. Then said Peter,
Man, I am not. (59)And at about an hour's distance, another person
strongly asserted, saying, Of a certainty this fellow was also with
him: for he too is a Galilean. (60)And Peter said, Man, I know not what
thou sayest. And instantly, while he was yet speaking, the cock crew.
(61)And the Lord, turning round, looked upon Peter. And Peter
remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said to him, That before
the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. (62)And Peter going without,
wept bitterly.

(63)And the men who held Jesus insulted him, beating him with rods;
(64)and blindfolding him, smote him on the face, and asked him, saying,
Prophesy, who is he that struck thee? (65)And many other things,
blaspheming, spake they against him.

(66)And when the day broke, the elders of the people and the chief
priests and scribes assembled, and brought him into their sanhedrim,
saying, (67)If thou art the Messiah, tell us. And he said unto them, If
I tell you, ye will not believe: (68)and if I shall ask you any
question, ye will neither answer me, nor let me go free. (69)Hereafter
shall the Son of man sit at the right hand of the power of God.
(70)Then said they all, Art thou then the Son of God? And he said unto
them, Yourselves say that I am. (71)Then they said, What further need
have we of witness? for we have heard it from his own mouth.

CHAP. XXIII.

AND the whole multitude of them rising up, led him to Pilate, (2)and
began to accuse him, saying, We have found this fellow perverting the
nation, and forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar; pretending that he
himself is the King Messiah. (3)Then Pilate interrogated him, saying,
Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answering said to him, Thou
sayest so. (4)Then said Pilate unto the chief priests and the
multitudes, I find nothing culpable in this man. (5)But they were
urgent, saying, He stirreth up the people, teaching through all Judea,
beginning from Galilee even to this place. (6)When Pilate heard of
Galilee, he asked whether the man were a Galilean? (7)And when he knew
that he came out of Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was
himself at Jerusalem in those days.

(8)Now when Herod saw Jesus, he was vastly delighted: for he had been
long desirous to see him, because he had heard many things of him; and
he hoped to see some miracle wrought by him. (9)And he put a variety of
questions to him; but he made him no reply. (10)And the chief priests
and the scribes stood up vehemently accusing him. (11)Then Herod with
his guards treated him with contempt, and in derision clothed him in a
splendid robe, and sent him back to Pilate. (12)And Pilate and Herod
the same day became friends together: for they had previously been at
enmity with each other.

(13)Then Pilate, convoking the chief priests and the rulers and the
people, (14)said unto them, Ye have brought this man to me, as one who
perverteth the people: and lo! on examining him before you, I have
found nothing culpable in this man, respecting the charges ye bring
against him: (15)nor Herod neither: for I referred you to him; and, lo,
nothing is done to this man, as if he deserved death. (16)I will
therefore, after scourging, discharge him. (17)(Now he held it
necessary to release one to them at the feast.) (18)Then the whole
multitude set up a cry, saying, Away with this fellow, and release unto
us Barabbas! (19)(who for a certain sedition raised in the city, and
for murder, had been cast into prison.) (20)Again therefore Pilate
called out to them, desirous to see Jesus at liberty. (21)But they
clamoured the more, saying, Crucify, crucify him. (22)Then the third
time he said to them, What evil hath this man done? I have found
nothing deserving death in him: I will therefore, after scourging,
discharge him. (23)But they were instant with the most clamorous
vociferations, soliciting that he might be crucified. And their
clamours, and those of the chief priests, bore him down. (24)Then
Pilate decreed that their petition should be granted.

(25)Then released he to them him who for sedition and murder had been
cast into prison; but he gave up Jesus to their will. (26)And as they
led him out, laying hold on one Simon, a Cyrenian, who was coming from
the country, they laid on him the cross, to carry after Jesus. (27)And
a great multitude of the people and of women followed him, who also
beat their breasts and lamented him bitterly. (28)But Jesus turning to
them, said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but for
yourselves, and for your children. (29)For, behold, the days are
coming, in which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs
which have not borne, and the breasts which never suckled. (30)Then
shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us! and to the hills,
Cover us! (31)For if they do all these things with the green wood, what
will be done with the dry?

(32)Now there were two other persons, malefactors, led out with him to
be executed. (33)And when they came to a place called Calvary, there
they crucified him, and the malefactors, the one on the right hand, and
the other on the left. (34)And Jesus said, Father, forgive them; for
they know not what they do. Then dividing his garments, they cast the
lot.

(35)And the people stood looking on. And the rulers also with them
derided him, saying, He saved others; let him save himself, if this
fellow is the Messiah, the elect of God. (36)And the soldiers also
insulted him, coming and offering him vinegar, (37)and saying, if thou
art the King of the Jews, save thyself. (38)And there was an
inscription written over him in Greek, Roman, and Hebrew characters,
THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

(39)Then one of the suspended malefactors blasphemed him, saying, If
thou art the Messiah, save thyself and us. (40)But the other addressing
him, rebuked him, saying, Hast thou no fear of God, when thou art under
the same condemnation? (41)And we indeed justly, for we receive
deserved punishment for the crimes we have committed: but this man hath
done nothing amiss. (42)And he said to Jesus, Remember me, Lord, when
thou comest in thy kingdom. (43)And Jesus said to him. Verily I say
unto thee, To-day thou shalt be with me in paradise.

(44)And it was about the sixth hour, and there was darkness over all
the land until the ninth hour. (45)And the sun was darkened, and the
veil of the temple was rent in the midst. (46)And Jesus crying with a
loud voice, said, Father, into thy hands I commit my spirit: and having
said this, he expired. (47)And the centurion observing what had come to
pass, glorified God, saying, Verily this man was a righteous person.

(48)And all the multitudes who had come together for this spectacle,
when they saw the things which were done, beating their breasts,
returned. (49)And all his acquaintance stood afar off, and the women
which followed him from Galilee, beholding these things.

(50)And lo! a man named Joseph, being a member of the council, a good
man, and a just; (51)(who had not given his assent to their
determination and deed;) being of Arimathea, a city of the Jews: who
himself also expected the coming of the kingdom of God. (52)He went in
to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus. (53)And taking it down from
the cross, he wrapped it in linen cloth, and laid it in a sepulchre
hewn out of a rock, where none had ever yet lain. (54)And that was the
preparation-day, and the sabbath's twilight[22] was approaching.

(55)Then the women also, his attendants, who had followed him out of
Galilee, observed the sepulchre, and how his corpse was laid out.
(56)And returning, they made preparation of aromatics and unguents; and
they rested the sabbath-day, according to the commandment.

CHAP. XXIV.

NOW on the first day of the week, at the earliest dawn of day, they
came to the sepulchre, bringing the aromatics which they had prepared,
and certain others with them. (2)And they found the stone rolled away
from the sepulchre. (3)And on entering, found not the body of the Lord
Jesus. (4)And it came to pass, as they were in the greatest perplexity
concerning this matter, then behold, two men stood by them in refulgent
garments: (5)and when they were exceedingly terrified, and inclined
their face to the earth, they said unto them, Why seek ye the living
among the dead? (6)he is not here; he is risen: remember how he spoke
to you, while he was yet in Galilee, (7)saying, That the Son of man
must be delivered up into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified,
and the third day rise again. (8)And they remembered his declarations,
(9)and returning from the sepulchre, told all these things to the
eleven, and to the rest. (10)Now there were Mary Magdalene, and Joanna,
and Mary the mother of James, and the other women who were with them,
that told these things to the apostles. (11)And their declarations
seemed in their view as a mere fancy, and they gave them no credence.
(12)Then Peter rising up, ran off to the sepulchre, and leaning forward
saw the linen clothes laid separately, and went away wondering in
himself what was become of him.

(13)And behold, two of them were going the same day to a village,
distant about sixty furlongs from Jerusalem, called Emmaus. (14)And
they were conversing with each other, concerning all those things which
had happened. (15)And it came to pass, as they were conversing
together, and talking the matter over, even Jesus himself drew near,
and walked on with them. (16)But their eyes were under a restraint,
that they might not discover him. (17)And he said unto them, What are
these discourses that ye interchange among you, as ye are walking, and
bear such a face of dejection? (18)Then one of them, named Cleopas,
answering said, Art thou the only sojourner at Jerusalem, who hath not
known the singular events of those days? (19)And he said to them, Of
what sort? and they said to him, Those which relate to Jesus the
Nazarean, who was a man, a prophet, mighty in word and deed before God
and all the people: (20)and how our chief priests and rulers delivered
him up to a sentence of death, and crucified him. (21)But we had
entertained hopes that this was the person who should have redeemed
Israel: and ah! besides all these things, to-day concludes that third
day since these things were done. (22)And indeed, certain women
belonging to us exceedingly amazed us who were very early at the
sepulchre; (23)and not finding his body, came, saying, that they had
also seen a vision of angels, who told them that he was alive. (24)And
some of those who were with us went to the sepulchre, and found every
thing just as the women had said: but him they did not see. (25)And he
said unto them, O ye void of understanding, and slow of heart to
believe all that the prophets have spoken! (26)Ought not the Messiah to
suffer these things, and to enter into his glory? (27)And beginning
from Moses and all the prophets, he explained to them in all the
scriptures, the things relating to himself. (28)And they drew nigh to
the village, whither they were going: and he was proceeding on, as if
going farther. (29)And they warmly pressed him, saying, Stay with us:
for the evening draws on, and the day declines. And he went in to stay
with them. (30)And it came to pass, when he was sitting down at table
with them, taking up a loaf, he blessed it, and breaking, distributed
it to them. (31)Then their eyes were opened, and they knew him; and he
became invisible to them. (32)And they said to each other, Did not our
hearts burn within us, as he talked with us on the road, and as he
distinctly opened to us the scriptures? (33)And rising up the same
hour, they returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven and those who
were with them crowded together, (34)saying, The Lord is risen
assuredly, and hath appeared to Simon. (35)Then these recounted what
had passed on the road, and how he was known to them by the breaking of
the bread.

(36)While they were relating these things, Jesus himself stood in the
midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you! (37)But
terrified and affrighted, they thought they saw a spirit. (38)And he
said to them, Why are ye under such agitation of mind? and why do
reasonings arise in your hearts? (39)look upon my hands and my feet,
that it is my very self: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not
flesh and bones, as ye see me have. (40)And thus speaking, he exposed
to them his hands and his feet. (41)But when they still could not
credit it for joy, and marvelled, he said unto them, Have ye here any
thing eatable? (42)Then they gave him a part of a broiled fish, and a
piece of honey-comb. (43)And receiving it, he did eat in their
presence. (44)And said unto them, These are the sayings which I spake
unto you, when I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled,
which are written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the
Psalms, concerning me. (45)Then opened he thoroughly their
understanding, that they should understand the scriptures, (46)and said
to them, That thus it is written, and thus must the Messiah suffer, and
rise again from the dead the third day (47)and that repentance and
remission of sin should be preached in his name unto all nations,
beginning from Jerusalem. (48)And ye are the witnesses of these things.
(49)And, behold, I send unto you the promise of my Father: but sit ye
down in the city of Jerusalem, until ye shall be endued with power from
on high. (50)And he led them without _the city_ as far as Bethany, and
lifting up his hands he blessed them. (51)And it came to pass, as he
pronounced the benediction upon them, he was parted from them, and
taken up into heaven. (52)And they, after paying him their adorations,
returned to Jerusalem with vast joy: (53)and were continually in the
temple, praising and blessing God. Amen.



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN.

CHAP. I.

IN the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word
was God. (2)He was in the beginning with God. (3)All things were made
by him; and without him was not one thing made that was made. (4)In him
was life; and the life was the light of men. (5)And the light shineth
in darkness; and the darkness did not comprehend it.

(6)A man was sent from God, whose name was John. (7)He came for a
witness, that he might bear testimony concerning the Light, that all
men through him might believe. (8)He was not the Light, but sent that
he should bear testimony concerning the Light. (9)He was that true
Light, which illumines every man by his coming into the world. (10)He
was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him
not. (11)He came unto his peculiar people, and his peculiar people did
not receive him. (12)But as many as did receive him, on them he
bestowed authority to become children of God, even on those who believe
on his name: (13)who were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. (14)And the Word became
incarnate, and tabernacled with us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory
as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth.

(15)John bore witness concerning him, and cried, saying, This is he of
whom I said, He that is coming after me, is before me: because before
me he was. (16)And from his plenitude we all have received, even grace
corresponding with _his_ grace. (17)For the law was given by Moses, but
the grace and the reality came by Jesus Christ. (18)No man hath seen
God at any time; the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the
Father, he hath thoroughly described him.

(19)And this is the testimony of John, when the Jews sent from
Jerusalem priests and Levites, that they should question him, Who art
thou? (20)And he confessed, and denied it not; but acknowledged, I am
not the Messiah. (21)And they asked him, What then? art thou Elias? and
he said, I am not. Art thou that prophet? and he answered, No. (22)Then
said they to him, Who art thou? that we may give an answer to those who
sent us: What description givest thou of thyself? (23)He said, I am a
voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way for the
Lord, as said the prophet Isaiah. (24)And they who were sent, were of
the Pharisees. (25)And they questioned him, and said to him, Why then
dost thou baptise, if thou be not the Messiah, nor Elias, nor that
prophet? (26)John answered them, saying, I baptise with water: but in
the midst of you hath stood a person, whom ye have not known; (27)it is
he, though coming after me, who was before me, the thong of whole
sandal I am not worthy to untie. (28)These things were done in
Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptising.

(29)The next day John seeth Jesus coming to him, and saith, Behold the
Lamb of God, who taketh away the sin of the world, (30)This is he of
whom I spake, After me cometh a man who was before me: for before me he
existed. (31)And I knew him not: though that he might be manifested to
Israel, therefore am I come baptising with water. (32)And John bore
witness, saying, I saw the Spirit descending as a dove from heaven, and
it rested upon him. (33)And I did not know him: but he that sent me
baptising with water, he said to me, Upon whomsoever thou shalt see the
Spirit descending as a dove, and resting upon him, that is he who
baptiseth with the Holy Ghost. (34)And I have seen it, and have borne
testimony that this is the Son of God.

(35)On the morrow John was again standing with two of his disciples;
(36)and looking upon Jesus as he walked by, he saith, Behold the Lamb
of God! (37)And the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed
Jesus. (38)Then Jesus turned about, and seeing them following, saith to
them, What are ye seeking? They said unto him, Rabbi (which signifies,
when translated, Master), where is thy abode? (39)He saith unto them,
Come and see. They came and saw where he abode, and continued with him
that day: and it was about the tenth hour.

(40)One of the two, who had heard from John mention of Jesus, and had
followed him, was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother. (41)He first finds his
own brother Simon, and saith to him, We have found the Messiah (which
is, being translated, the Christ). (42)And he brought him to Jesus.
Then Jesus looking on him, said, Thou art Simon the son of Jonas: thou
shalt be called Cephas, which, interpreted _in Greek_, is Petros, a
Rock.

(43)The next day Jesus resolved to go into Galilee, and he findeth
Philip, and saith to him, Follow me. (44)Now Philip was of Bethsaida,
the city of Andrew and Peter. (45)Philip findeth Nathaniel, and saith
to him, We have found him whom Moses in the law has described, and the
prophets, Jesus the son of Joseph, who is of Nazareth. (46)And
Nathaniel said to him, Can any thing good come out of Nazareth? Philip
saith to him, Come and see. (47)Jesus saw Nathaniel coming to him, and
saith of him, Behold an Israelite in reality, in whom there is no
guile! (48)Nathaniel saith unto him, From whence canst thou know me?
Jesus answered and said unto him, Before Philip called thee, when thou
wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee. (49)Nathaniel answered and said to
him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the king of Israel.
(50)Jesus answered and said unto him, Because I said to thee, I saw
thee under the fig-tree, dost thou believe? thou shalt see greater
things than these. (51)And he saith to him, Verily, verily, I tell you,
From henceforth ye shall see heaven opened, and the angels of God
ascending and descending upon the Son of man.

CHAP. II.

AND on the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee; and the
mother of Jesus was there: (2)So Jesus also, and his disciples, were
invited to the marriage. (3)And the wine being exhausted, the mother of
Jesus saith to him, They have no more wine. (4)Jesus saith unto her,
What is that to me and thee, woman? my hour is not yet come. (5)His
mother saith to the waiters, Whatsoever he orders you, do it. (6)Now
there stood there six large stone jars, for the customary purifying
ablution of the Jews, containing two or three baths each. (7)Jesus
saith to them, Fill these jars with water. And they filled them to the
brim. (8)And he said unto them, Draw out now, and carry to the
president of the table. So they carried it. (9)And when the president
of the table had tasted the water become wine, and knew not whence it
came: (but the waiters knew, who drew the water;) the president of the
table called the bridegroom, (10)and saith to him, Every man at first
produces the good wine; and after men have drunk plentifully, then that
which is worse: but thou hast kept back the good wine until now.
(11)This beginning of miracles Jesus wrought in Cana of Galilee, and
displayed his glory; and his disciples believed on him.

(12)After this he went down to Capernaum, he and his mother, and his
brethren, and his disciples: and he continued there not many days.
(13)And the passover of the Jews was nigh, and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem. (14)And he found in the temple those who sold oxen, and
sheep, and doves, and the moneychangers seated: (15)and having made a
whip of cords, he drove them all out of the temple, and the sheep, and
the oxen; and scattered the money of the exchangers, and overturned the
tables; (16)and said to those who sold doves, Take these hence; make
not my Father's house a house of merchandise. (17)Then the disciples
remembered that it was written, "The zeal of thine house hath eaten me
up." (18)The Jews then addressed him, and said to him, What miracle
shewest thou, seeing thou actest thus? (19)Jesus answered and said to
them, Pull down this temple, and in three days I will rear it up again.
(20)Then said the Jews, This temple has been forty-six years in
building, and canst thou rear it up in three days? (21)Now he had
spoken with reference to the temple of his own body. (22)When therefore
he was risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had spoken
thus unto them; and they believed the scriptures, and the word which
Jesus had spoken.

(23)Now while he was at Jerusalem at the passover, during the feast,
many believed on his name, when they beheld the miracles which he did.
(24)But Jesus himself did not trust himself to them, because he knew
them all, (25)and because he had no need that any man should testify
respecting man; for he knew what was in man.

CHAP. III.

NOW there was a man of the Pharisees, whose name was Nicodemus, a ruler
of the Jews: (2)this man came to Jesus in the night, and said to him,
Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God: for no man can do
these miracles which thou dost, unless God be with him. (3)Jesus
answered and said to him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man
be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. (4)Nicodemus saith
unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter a second
time into his mother's womb, and be born? (5)Jesus replied, Verily,
verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. (6)That which is born of the
flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.
(7)Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again. (8)The wind
bloweth where it will, and thou hearest the sound of it, but knowest
not from whence it cometh, nor whither it goeth: just so is every one
who is born of the Spirit. (9)Nicodemus answered and said unto him, How
can these things be? (10)Jesus answered and said to him, Art thou a
teacher of Israel, and knowest not these things? (11)Verily, verity, I
tell thee, That what we know we speak, and what we have seen we affirm;
and ye receive not our testimony. (12)If I have told you of earthly
things, and ye believe not, how will you believe, if I tell you of
heavenly things? (13)Though no man hath ascended into heaven, except he
that descended from heaven, that Son of man the I am in heaven. (14)And
as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, in like manner must
the Son of man be lifted up: (15)that every one who believeth on him
may not perish, but have life eternal. (16)For God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that every one who believeth in him
should not perish, but have life eternal. (17)For God sent not his Son
into the world to condemn the world, but that the world by him might be
saved. (18)He that believeth on him is not condemned: but he that
believeth not is already under condemnation, because he hath not
believed on the name of the only begotten Son of God. (19)Now this is
the condemnation, that the light is come into the world, and men loved
the darkness rather than the light, because their deeds were evil.
(20)For every one whose practices are foul hateth the light, and cometh
not to the light, that his actions may not be brought to conviction.
(21)But he who practices the truth, cometh to the light, that his
actions may be evident, as being done for God.

(22)After these things Jesus and his disciples went into the land of
Judea; and there he abode with them, and baptised. (23)Now John also
was baptising at Enon, near to Salem, for there were many streams of
water there: and they came, and were baptised. (24)For as yet John was
not cast into prison.

(25)Then a dispute arose between the disciples of John and the Jews
with regard to purification. (26)And they came to John, and said to
him, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou gavest
testimony, lo! this man baptiseth, and all men come to him. (27)John
answered and said, A man cannot assume any thing, except it be given
him from heaven. (28)Ye yourselves bear me witness, that I said, I am
not the Messiah, but that I am sent before him. (29)It is the
bridegroom, who possesses the bride: and the friend of the bridegroom,
standing by and hearing him, rejoiceth exceedingly at the bridegroom's
voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled. (30)He must grow great, but
I diminutive. (31)He that cometh from above is above all: he whose
origin is from earth is of the earth, and speaketh of the earth: he who
cometh from heaven is above all. (32)And what he hath seen and heard,
that he testifieth; though no man receiveth his testimony. (33)He that
receiveth his testimony hath avouched that God is true. (34)For he whom
God hath sent speaketh the words of God: for God hath not given the
Spirit by measure unto him. (35)The Father loveth the Son, and hath
given all things into his hand. (36)He that believeth on the Son hath
life eternal: and he that believeth not on the Son shall not see life:
but the wrath of God abideth upon him.

CHAP. IV.

AS soon then as the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus
made and baptised more disciples than John (2)(though Jesus himself did
not baptise, but his disciples), (3)he left Judea, and went again into
Galilee. (4)Now he must necessarily pass through Samaria. (5)Then he
cometh to a city of Samaria, called Sichar, near the spot of ground
which Jacob gave to his son Joseph. (6)And Jacob's well was there.
Therefore Jesus, weary with his journey, e'en sat himself down on the
well: it was about the sixth hour. (7)A woman of Samaria comes to draw
water: Jesus saith to her, Give me to drink. (8)(For his disciples were
gone into the city to buy provisions.) (9)The Samaritan woman therefore
saith to him, How canst thou, a Jew, ask of me, who am a Samaritan
woman, to drink? for Jews avoid all intercourse with Samaritans.
(10)Jesus answered and said to her, If thou hadst known the gift of
God, and who he is that speaketh to thee, thou wouldest have requested
him, and he would have given thee life-giving water. (11)The woman
saith unto him, Thou hast no bucket, and the well is deep: whence then
canst thou have this water that giveth life? (12)Art thou greater than
our father Jacob, who gave us the well, and drank of it himself, and
his children, and his cattle? (13)Jesus answered and said unto her,
Every one who drinketh of this water shall thirst again: (14)but
whosoever shall drink of the water which I shall give him, he shall no
more thirst to eternity; but the water which I will give him, shall be
in him a fountain of water springing up to life eternal. (15)The woman
saith to him, Sir, give me this water, that I may no more thirst, nor
come hither to draw. (16)Jesus saith to her, Go, call thy husband, and
come hither. (17)The woman answered and said, I have no husband. Jesus
saith to her, Thou hast spoken right, that thou hast no husband:
(18)for thou hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not
thy husband: in this thou hast spoken true. (19)The woman saith to him,
Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet. (20)Our fathers worshipped in
this mountain; and ye affirm, That the place where we ought to worship
is at Jerusalem. (21)Jesus saith to her, Woman, believe me, that the
hour approaches, when ye shall worship the Father neither in this
mountain, nor at Jerusalem. (22)Ye worship ye know not what: we worship
what we do know: for salvation cometh from the Jews. (23)But the hour
is coming, yea, is now come, when the true worshippers shall worship
the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such
worshippers of him. (24)God is a Spirit: and they who worship him, must
worship him in spirit and in truth. (25)The woman saith, I know that
Messiah is coming (who is called Christ): when he cometh, he will
inform us of all things. (26)Jesus saith unto her, I that am speaking
to thee am he.

(27)And upon this came his disciples, and wondered that he talked with
the woman: yet no one said, What art thou seeking? or, Why art thou
talking with her?

(28)Then the woman left her pitcher, and went into the city, and said
to the men, (29)Come with me; behold a man, who told me all things that
I ever did: is not this the Messiah? (30)Then they went out of the
city, and came unto him.

(31)In the mean time his disciples invited him, saying, Rabbi, eat.
(32)But he said to them, I have meat to eat that ye know not of.
(33)Then said his disciples to each other, Hath any person brought him
ought to eat? (34)Jesus saith unto them, My meat is to do the will of
him that sent me, and to finish his work. (35)Do ye not say, That yet
there are four months, and then the harvest cometh? behold, I tell you,
lift up your eyes, and look upon the fields; for they are now white for
harvest. (36)And he that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit
unto life eternal: that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may
rejoice together. (37)For herein is the saying true, That one soweth
and another reapeth. (38)I have sent you to reap that on which ye have
bestowed no labour: others have laboured, and ye have entered into
their labour.

(39)Now many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him, on the
report of the woman, who said, That he told me all things I ever had
done. (40)So on this the Samaritans came to him, and besought him to
abide with them: and he tarried there two days. (41)And many more
believed because of his own word; (42)and said to the woman, Now we
believe, not merely on account of thy relation: for we ourselves have
heard, and know that this is of a certainty the Saviour of the world,
the Messiah.

(43)Then after two days he departed thence, and went into Galilee.
(44)For Jesus himself testified, that a prophet hath no honour in his
own country. (45)When therefore he was come into Galilee, the Galileans
welcomed him, having seen all the things which he did at the feast: for
they also had gone to the feast. (46)Then came Jesus again to Cana of
Galilee, where he had made the water wine. And there was a certain
attendant on the king, whose son was sick at Capernaum. (47)This person
having heard that Jesus was come out of Judea into Galilee, went to
him, that he might come down, and cure his son: for he was at the point
of death. (48)Then said Jesus unto him, Unless ye see miracles and
wonders, ye will not believe. (49)The courtier said to him, Sir, come
down before my child is dead. (50)Jesus saith to him, Go home; thy son
liveth. And the man believed the word which Jesus had spoken, and went
home. (51)And as he was now going down home, his servants met him, and
told him, saying, Thy son is recovered! (52)Then inquired he of them
the hour at which he began to amend? and they told him, It was
yesterday, at the seventh hour, when the fever left him. (53)Then the
father knew that it was the very hour when Jesus said, Thy son liveth:
and himself believed, and his whole family. (54)This is again a second
miracle which Jesus did, when he came from Judea into Galilee.

CHAP. V.

AFTER these things there was a feast of the Jews; and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem. (2)Now there is at Jerusalem near the sheep-market a pool,
called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, having five porticos. (3)In these
lay a vast multitude of infirm persons, blind, lame, withered, waiting
the motion of the water. (4)For occasionally an angel descended into
the pool, and put the water into commotion: he therefore who first
stepped in after the commotion of the water became well, under whatever
complaint he had laboured. (5)And there was a certain man there, who
had a complaint of thirty years standing. (6)Jesus seeing him laid
there, and knowing that he had been so for a long while, saith to him,
Wilt thou be made sound? (7)The infirm man answered him, Sir, I have no
man, when the water is disturbed, to cast me into the pool: but when I
am coming, another goeth down before me. (8)Jesus saith to him, Arise,
take up thy bed, and walk. (9)And instantly the man was made whole, and
took up his bed, and walked away: and that day was the sabbath. (10)The
Jews therefore said to him that was cured, It is the sabbath: it is not
lawful for thee to carry thy bed. (11)He answered them, He that made me
whole, the same person said to me, Take up thy bed, and walk. (12)Then
they asked him, Who is the man that said to thee, Take up thy bed, and
walk? (13)Now he that was cured knew not who he was: for Jesus had
slipped away, a crowd being on the spot.

(14)After these things Jesus findeth him in the temple, and said unto
him, Take care; thou art made whole: sin no more, lest something worse
befall thee. (15)The man went, and informed the Jews, that it was Jesus
who had made him whole. (16)And therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus,
and sought to kill him, because he had done these things on the
sabbath-day.

(17)Then Jesus answered them, My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.
(18)Therefore sought they the more to kill him, because he had not only
broken the sabbath, but called God his own Father, setting himself on
an equality with God. (19)Jesus therefore answered and said unto them,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing by himself,
except what he hath seen the Father do: for whatsoever things he doeth,
the same and in the same manner doth the Son. (20)For the Father loveth
the Son, and sheweth him all things which he himself doeth: and greater
works than these will he shew him, that ye may wonder. (21)For as the
Father raiseth the dead, and quickeneth them; so also doth the Son
quicken whom he pleases. (22)For the Father never judgeth any man, but
hath committed all judgment to the Son: (23)in order that all may
honour the Son, just as they honour the Father. He that honoureth not
the Son, doth not honour the Father who sent him. (24)Verily, verily, I
say unto you, That he that heareth my word, and believeth on him that
sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into judgment; but
is passed from death into life. (25)Verily, verily, I say unto you, The
hour is coming, yea, it is now, when the dead shall hear the voice of
the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. (26)For as the Father
hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son also to have life in
himself; (27)and hath given him authority also to execute judgment,
because he is the Son of man. (28)Marvel not at this: for the hour is
coming, in which all who are in the graves shall hear his voice,
(29)and they shall come forth; they who have done good actions to the
resurrection of life; and they who have been guilty of foul practices,
to the resurrection of damnation. (30)I am not able to perform any
thing by myself: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; for I
seek not my own will, but the will of my Father who sent me. (31)If I
bear witness of myself, my witness is not true. (32)There is another
who beareth witness of me, and I know that his witness is true which he
witnesseth concerning me. (33)Ye sent to John, and he bore testimony to
the truth. (34)But I receive not testimony from man: but I speak these
things, that ye may believe. (35)He was a lamp glowing and luminous:
and ye were pleased for a time to exult in his light. (36)But I have a
testimony greater than that of John: for the works which the Father
hath given me that I should fulfil them, these very works which I am
doing, they bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent me. (37)And
the Father who sent me, himself hath borne witness concerning me. Ye
have neither at any time heard his voice, nor seen his form. (38)And ye
have not his word abiding in you: for whom he hath sent, him ye believe
not. (39)Search the scriptures; for ye suppose in them ye have eternal
life: and these are they which testify of me. (40)And ye will not come
to me, that ye might have life. (41)I receive not glory from men.
(42)But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you. (43)I have
come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not: if another come in his
own name, him ye will receive. (44)How can ye believe, who receiving
honour one from another, seek not the honour which cometh from God
alone? (45)Do not suppose that I shall accuse you to my Father: there
is one who is accusing you, even Moses, on whom ye place your hope.
(46)For if ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for of me did
he write. (47)But if ye believe not his writings, how will ye believe
my words?

CHAP. VI.

AFTER these things Jesus went beyond the sea of Galilee, that is of
Tiberias. (2)And a vast multitude followed him, because they saw the
miracles which he performed on those who were diseased. (3)Then Jesus
went up into a mountain, and there he sat down with his disciple.
(4)And the passover, a feast of the Jews, was nigh. (5)Then Jesus
lifting up his eyes, and seeing that a vast concourse of people was
come to him, said to Philip, Whence shall we buy loaves, that these may
eat? (6)And this he said to try him: for himself knew what he would do.
(7)Philip answered him, Two hundred denarii spent in bread would not
procure a sufficiency for them, that every one of them might have a
morsel. (8)One of his disciples saith to him, (Andrew, Simon Peter's
brother,) (9)There is a little lad here, who hath five barley-loaves,
and two small fishes: but these, what are they among so many? (10)Then
said Jesus, Make the men sit down. For there was plenty of grass on the
spot. Therefore the men sat down, in number about five thousand.
(11)And Jesus took the loaves; and giving thanks, gave to the
disciples, and the disciples to those who were sat down; and in the
same manner of the fishes, as much as they chose. (12)And when they had
made a hearty meal, he saith to his disciples, Gather up the broken
bits which are left, that not a morsel be wasted. (13)Then they
collected them, and filled twelve baskets with fragments out of the
five barley-loaves, which were more than enough for those who had
eaten. (14)When therefore the men saw the miracle which Jesus had done,
they said, This is of a certainty that prophet which is to come into
the world. (15)Then Jesus, knowing their intention to come and to seize
him by force, in order to make him king, retired again into the
mountain by himself alone.

(16)So when evening was now come, his disciples went down to the
sea-side, (17)and embarking on a vessel were coming across the sea to
Capernaum. And it was now dark, and Jesus was not come to them. (18)And
the sea was greatly agitated by a tempestuous wind that blew.
(19)Having rowed therefore about five and twenty or thirty furlongs,
they saw Jesus walking on the sea, and coming near the vessel, and they
were affrighted. (20)But he saith to them, It is I; be not afraid.
(21)Then they desired to take him into the vessel: and instantly the
vessel was at the land whither they were going.

(22)The next day the multitude who stayed on the other side of the sea,
when they saw that there was no little vessel there, except the one
into which his disciples went, and that Jesus went not with his
disciples in the vessel, but that his disciples went away alone;
(23)(but now little vessels had come from Tiberias near to the spot
where they had eaten bread, after the Lord had given thanks:) (24)then
when the multitude saw that Jesus was not there, nor his disciples,
they also went into the vessels, and came to Capernaum, in search of
Jesus. (25)And when they found him on the other side the sea, they said
to him, Rabbi, when camest thou hither? (26)Jesus replied to them and
said, Ye seek me, not because ye have seen the miracles, but because ye
did eat of the loaves, and were filled. (27)Labour not for the meat
which is perishable, but for that meat which endureth unto life
eternal, which the Son of man will give you: for him hath the Father
sealed, even God. (28)Then said they unto him, What shall we do, that
we may work the works of God? (29)Jesus answered and said unto them,
This is the work of God, that ye should believe on him whom he hath
sent. (30)Then said they to him, What miracle therefore dost thou, that
we may see and believe thee? what dost thou work? (31)Our fathers did
eat manna in the wilderness; as it is written, "He gave them bread from
heaven to eat." (32)Then said Jesus unto them, Verily, verily, I tell
you, It was not Moses who gave you the bread from heaven; but my Father
giveth you the real bread from heaven. (33)For he that cometh down from
heaven, and giveth life to the world, is the bread of God. (34)Then
said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this bread. (35)Then said
Jesus to them, I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall never
hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst more. (36)But I
have told you, That though ye have seen me, yet ye have not believed.
(37)Every individual which the Father giveth me will come to me; and
him that cometh to me I will in nowise cast out. (38)For I came down
from heaven, not with a view to do my own will, but the will of him
that sent me. (39)Now this is the will of the Father who sent me, That
every thing which he hath given me I should not be deprived of it, but
raise it up at the last day. (40)And this is the will of him that sent
me, That every one who seeth the Son, and believeth on him, should have
life eternal: and I will raise him up at the last day.

(41)Then the Jews murmured against him, because he said, I am the bread
which came down from heaven. (42)And they said, Is not this Jesus, the
son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? how then saith this
man, That I came down from heaven? (43)Jesus answered and said to them,
Murmur not among yourselves. (44)No man can come to me, except the
Father who hath sent me draw him: and I will raise him up at the last
day. (45)It is written in the prophets, And "they shall all be taught
of God." Every one therefore who heareth from the Father, and learneth,
cometh to me. (46)Not that any man hath seen the Father, except he that
is with God, he hath seen the Father. (47)Verily, verily, I say unto
you, He that believeth on me hath everlasting life. (48)I am the bread
of life. (49)Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and they are
dead. (50)This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that any
person may eat of it, and never die. (51)I am the bread that giveth
life, which came down from heaven: if any person eat of this bread, he
shall live to eternity; and the bread indeed which I shall give is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

(52)Then the Jews contended with each other, saying, How can this man
give us his flesh to eat? (53)Jesus therefore said to them, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, ye have no life in yourselves. (54)He that eateth my
flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath life eternal: and I will raise him
up at the last day. (55)For my flesh truly is meat, and my blood truly
is drink. (56)He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, abideth
in me, and I in him. (57)As the life-giving Father hath sent me, and I
live by the Father; so he that eateth me, the same shall live by me.
(58)This is the bread which came down from heaven, not as the manna
your fathers did eat, and died: he that eateth this bread shall live to
eternity.

(59)These things he spake in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.
(60)Many therefore of his disciples, who heard him, said, Difficult is
this discourse, who is able to fathom it? (61)Then Jesus, conscious in
himself that his disciples murmured concerning this discourse, said
unto them, Doth this stumble you? (62)What then if ye see the Son of
man ascending where he was formerly? (63)The Spirit is the life-giving
power; the flesh contributeth nothing: the declarations which I make to
you, they are spirit, and they are life. (64)But there are some of you
who do not believe. For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were who
did not believe, and who the person was that should betray him. (65)And
he said, Therefore have I informed you, That no man can come to me,
except it be given him of my Father.

(66)From that _discourse_ many of his disciples went away back, and no
more followed him about. (67)Then said Jesus to the twelve, Will ye
also go away? (68)Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, unto whom shall
we go from thee? thou hast the words of eternal life. (69)And we have
believed and known that thou art the Messiah, the Son of the living
God. (70)Jesus answered them, Have I not chosen you twelve, and one of
you is a devil? (71)Now he spake of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon:
for this man was ready to betray him, though he was one of the twelve.

CHAP. VII.

AND Jesus after these things travelled about in Galilee: for he would
not go about in Judea, because the Jews sought to kill him. (2)And a
feast of the Jews was nigh, the feast of tabernacles. (3)Then said his
disciples to him, Depart hence, and go into Judea, that thy disciples
also may see thy works which thou doest. (4)For no man doeth any thing
in secret, yet seeketh himself to appear publicly: if thou doest these
things, exhibit thyself to the world. (5)For even his own brethren did
not believe on him. (6)Jesus therefore saith to them, My proper time is
not yet come: but your time is always ready. (7)The world cannot hate
you, but me it hateth, because I testify of it, that its deeds are
evil. (8)Go ye up to this feast: for I am not yet going up to this
feast, because my fixed time is not yet arrived. (9)Thus speaking to
them then, he continued in Galilee. (10)But as soon as his disciples
were gone up, then went he also himself up to the feast: not in public,
but as in concealment.

(11)The Jews then sought for him at the feast, and said, Where is he?
(12)And there was a great murmur concerning him among the multitude:
some said, Surely he is a good man: others said, No; he only deceiveth
the people. (13)Yet no person spake openly of him for fear of the Jews.

(14)But now at the middle of the feast Jesus went up into the temple,
and taught. (15)And the Jews marvelled, saying, How knoweth this man
the scriptures, not being a scholar? (16)Jesus answered them and said,
My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. (17)If any man will do
his will, he shall know respecting the doctrine, whether it is of God,
or whether I speak from myself. (18)He that speaketh from himself,
seeks his own individual honour: but he that seeketh the glory of him
that sent him, he is true, and iniquity in him there is none. (19)Hath
not Moses given you the law, yet none of you practises the law? Why do
ye seek to kill me? (20)The multitude answered and said, Thou hast a
devil: who is seeking to kill thee? (21)Jesus answered and said unto
them, I have performed one work, and ye all marvel. (22)Because Moses
ordered you circumcision; (not that it comes from Moses, but from our
ancestors;) so ye circumcise a man on the sabbath-day. (23)If a man
receive circumcision on the sabbath-day, that the law of Moses should
not be violated; are ye incensed against me, because I have made a man
whole on the sabbath-day? (24)Judge not by appearance, but judge
righteous judgment. (25)Then said some of the people of Jerusalem, is
not this the man whom they are seeking to kill? (26)And, lo! he
speaketh openly, and they say not a word to him. Do the rulers
certainly know that this man is really the Messiah? (27)But we know
this man whence he is: but when the Messiah cometh, no man knoweth
whence he is. (28)Then spake Jesus aloud as he was teaching in the
temple, and said, Ye both know me, and ye know from whence I am: and I
came not of myself, but he that sent me is true, whom ye know not.
(29)But I know him: for I am from him, and he hath sent me.

(30)Then they sought to apprehend him: but no man laid hands on him,
because his hour was not yet come. (31)But many of the multitude
believed on him, and said, When the Messiah cometh, will he do greater
miracles than those which this man doth? (32)The Pharisees heard the
people muttering these things respecting him; and the Pharisees and
chief priests sent officers to apprehend him. (33)Then said Jesus unto
them, A little while longer I am with you, and I am going to him that
sent me. (34)Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am,
ye cannot come. (35)Then said the Jews among themselves, Whither will
this man go, that we shall not find him? will he go to the dispersed
among the Grecians, and teach the Greeks? (36)What is this saying which
he hath spoken, Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I
am, ye cannot come?

(37)Now on the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood up and
spake aloud, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink.
(38)He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, from his belly
shall rivers flow of living water. (39)(Now he spake this in reference
to the Spirit, which they who believe on him should afterwards receive:
for as yet the Holy Ghost was not given; because Jesus was not yet
glorified.) (40)Many then of the multitude, when they heard this
declaration, said, This man is certainly a prophet. (41)Others said, He
is the Messiah. But others said, No: for cometh the Messiah out of
Galilee? (42)Doth not the scripture say, That the Messiah cometh of the
seed of David, and from the town of Bethlehem, whence David originally
was? (43)There was a division therefore among the multitude on account
of him. (44)Now some of them were desirous to apprehend him; but no one
laid hands upon him. (45)Then came the officers to the chief priests
and Pharisee; and they said to them, Why have ye not brought him?
(46)The officers answered, Never did man before speak in such a manner
as this man. (47)The Pharisees then replied to them, Are ye also
deluded? (48)Hath any one of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on
him? (49)But this rabble, which knoweth not the law, is accursed.
(50)Nicodemus saith unto them, (the same person who came to him by
night, being one of their body,) (51)Doth our law condemn a man,
without first hearing his defence, and knowing what he hath done?
(52)They answered and said to him, Art thou not from Galilee too?
Search and see: for a prophet, out of Galilee, never was raised up.
(53)So each went to his own home.

CHAP. VIII.

THEN Jesus went to the mount of Olives. (2)But early in the morning he
came again to the temple, and all the people came to him; and sitting
down he taught them. (3)Then the scribes and Pharisees brought to him a
woman caught in adultery; and placing her in the midst, (4)they say
unto him, Master, this woman was caught in adultery, in the very act.
(5)Now Moses in the law commanded, that such women should be stoned:
therefore what sayest thou? (6)But this they said, trying to entrap
him, that they might have ground of accusation against him. But Jesus
stooping down, with his finger wrote on the ground. (7)Now when they
continued questioning him, raising himself up, he said to them, Let the
person who is sinless among you, first cast a stone at her. (8)And
again stooping down, he wrote on the ground. (9)But when they heard
him, and felt the conviction of their conscience, they slunk away one
by one, beginning from the elders to the last: so Jesus was left alone,
with the woman standing in the midst. (10)Then Jesus raising himself
up, and seeing no person but the woman, said unto her, Woman, where are
these thine accusers? hath no man condemned thee? (11)She said, No man,
Lord. Then said Jesus unto her, Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin
no more.

(12)Then spake Jesus again to them, saying, I am the light of the
world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
the light of life. (13)The Pharisees said to him, Thou bearest witness
of thyself; thy witness is not true. (14)Jesus answered and said to
them, Though I do bear witness of myself, my witness is true: for I
know whence I came, and whither I am going; but ye know not whence I
come, nor whither I am going. (15)Ye judge after the flesh; I judge no
man. (16)But though I should judge, my judgment is true: for I am not
alone, but I and the Father who sent me. (17)Now even in your law it is
written, that the testimony of two men is true. (18)I am a witness for
myself, and the Father who sent me beareth witness of me. (19)Then said
they to him, Where is thy father? Jesus answered, Ye neither know me,
nor my Father: if ye had known me, ye would have known my Father also.
(20)These words spake Jesus in the treasury, as he taught in the
temple: and no person apprehended him; for his hour was not yet come.

(21)Then spake Jesus again to them, I am going away, and ye shall seek
me, and shall die in your sin: whither I am going ye cannot come.
(22)The Jews said therefore, Will he kill himself? because he said,
Whither I go, ye cannot come. (23)And he said to them, Ye are from
those beneath; I am from those above: ye are of this world; I am not of
this world. (24)I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your
sins: for if ye believe not that I am, ye shall die in your sins.
(25)They said, therefore to him, Who art thou? And Jesus said to them,
Assuredly the same as I am telling you. (26)I have many things to speak
and to decide concerning you: but he that sent me is true; and the
things which I have heard from him I speak to the world. (27)They knew
not that he spake to them of the Father.

(28)Then said Jesus to them, When ye shall have lifted up on high the
Son of man, then shall ye know that I am, and of myself have I done
nothing; but as the Father hath instructed me, so I speak. (29)And he
that sent me is with me: the Father hath not left me alone; because I
always do the things acceptable to him. (30)As he spake these words,
many believed on him.

(31)Then said Jesus to those Jews who believed on him, If ye abide in
my word, assuredly ye are my disciples; (32)and ye shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make you free. (33)They answered him, We are
Abraham's seed, and never were in bondage to any man: how sayest thou,
That we shall be made free? (34)Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I
say unto you, That every one who committeth sin is the slave of sin.
(35)But the slave abideth not in the family for ever: but the son
abideth for ever. (36)If the Son therefore make you free, ye will be
truly free. (37)I know that ye are Abraham's seed; yet ye seek to kill
me, because my word has no place in you. (38)I speak what I have seen
with my Father: and ye do therefore what ye have seen with your father.
(39)They answered and said unto him, Our Father is Abraham. Jesus saith
unto them, If ye were the children of Abraham, ye would have done the
works of Abraham. (40)But now ye seek to kill me, a man who hath told
you the truth, which I have heard from God. Abraham did not so. (41)Ye
do the works of your father. They said unto him, We are not born of
whoredom; we have one Father, even God. (42)Then said Jesus unto them,
If God was your Father, ye would have loved me: for I came out from
God, and I am coming; neither indeed came I of myself, but he hath sent
me. (43)Wherefore do ye not understand my speech? because ye cannot
hear my word. (44)Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of
your father ye will practise. He was a murderer from the beginning, and
stood not fast in the truth, because truth was not in him. When he
speaketh a lie, he speaketh what is peculiarly his own: for he is a
liar, and the father of it. (45)But because I tell you the truth, ye
believe me not. (46)Which of you can convict me of sin? Now if I speak
the truth, why do ye not believe me? (47)He that is of God heareth the
words of God: ye therefore do not hear him, because ye are not of God.

(48)Then answered the Jews, and said to him, Do we not rightly affirm,
that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil? (49)Jesus answered, I have
not a devil; but I honour my Father, and ye dishonour me. (50)But I
seek not my own glory: there is one that seeketh and judgeth.
(51)Verily, verily, I say unto you, If any man observe my saying, he
shall never see death to all eternity. (52)Then said the Jews to him,
Now we know that thou hast a devil. Abraham is dead, and the prophets;
and thou sayest, If any man observe my word, he shall never taste of
death to eternity. (53)Art thou greater than our father Abraham, who is
dead? and the prophets are dead: whom makest thou thyself?

(54)Jesus answered, If I assume glory to myself, my glory is nothing:
it is the Father who glorifies me; of whom ye say, that he is your God:
(55)yet have ye not known him; but I know him: and if I should say,
that I know him not, I should be like you, a liar: but I know him, and
observe his word. (56)Your father Abraham exulted for joy that he
should see this day of mine: and saw it, and rejoiced. (57)Then said
the Jews unto him, Thou hast not yet reached the age of fifty, and hast
thou seen Abraham? (58)Jesus said unto them, Before Abraham had a
being, I Am. (59)Then took they up stones to hurl at him: but Jesus was
hid, and went out of the temple, passing through the midst of them, and
so went away.

CHAP. IX.

AND as he passed along, he saw a man blind from his birth. (2)And his
disciples inquired of him, saying, Rabbi, who was in fault, this man or
his parents, that he was born blind? (3)Jesus answered, Neither hath
this man been in fault, nor his parents; but it is in order to make
manifest the works of God in him. (4)I must work the works of him that
sent me, while it is day: the night is coming, when no man can work.
(5)As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world. (6)So
speaking, he spat on the ground, and made mud with the spittle, and
anointed with the mud the eyes of the blind man; (7)and said to him,
Go, wash in the pool of Siloam, (which signifies, Sent.) Then he went
and washed, and came seeing.

(8)The neighbours therefore, and they who saw him formerly, that he was
blind, said, Is not this the man who was sitting and begging? (9)Some
said, That this is he: but others, That he is like him: he himself
said, I am he. (10)When said they to him, How were thine eyes opened?
(11)he answered and said, A man called Jesus made mud, and anointed my
eyes, and said to me, Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash: then I went,
and washing received sight. (12)They said to him, Where is he? He
replied, I know not.

(13)They brought him to the Pharisees, who had before been blind.
(14)(Now it was the sabbath-day when Jesus made the mud, and opened his
eyes.) (15)The Pharisees therefore questioned him again, How he had
received sight? And he told them, He put mud upon my eyes, and I
washed, and do see. (16)Then said certain of the Pharisees, This man is
not from God, because he observeth not the sabbath. Others said, How is
it possible for a wicked man to do such miracles? And there was a
division among them. (17)They say to the blind man again, What sayest
thou of him? that he opened thine eyes? Then he replied, That he is a
prophet.

(18)Then the Jews did not believe that he had been blind, and received
sight, until that they had called the parents of him who had received
sight. (19)And they questioned them, saying, Is this your son, of whom
ye say, that he was born blind? how then doth he now see? (20)His
parents answered them and said, We know that this is our son, and that
he was born blind: (21)but how he now seeth, we know not; or who hath
opened his eyes, we know not: he is of age; ask him: he himself will
tell you about it. (22)So spake his parents, because they were afraid
of the Jews: for the Jews had already come to a resolution, that if any
person acknowledged him Messiah, he should be excluded the synagogue.
(23)Therefore said his parents, He is of age; ask him.

(24)The second time therefore they called the man who had been blind,
and said unto him, Give the glory to God: we know that this man is a
sinner. (25)Then answered he and said, Whether this man be a sinner, I
know not: one thing I do know, that, whereas I was blind, now I see.
(26)Then said they to him again, What did he to thee? how opened he
thine eves? (27)He answered them, I have already told you, and ye did
not hearken: why do ye wish to hear it again? will ye also become his
disciples? (28)Then they reviled him, and said, Thou art his disciple,
but we are the disciples of Moses. (29)We know that God spake to Moses:
but we know nothing of this man, whence he is. (30)The man replied, and
said to them, Now herein is something very surprising, that you know
not whence he is, though he hath opened my eyes. (31)Now we know that
God doth not hearken to sinners: but if any man be a devout worshipper,
and doeth his will, him he heareth. (32)From the creation of the world
hath it never been heard, that any man opened the eyes of one born
blind. (33)If this man were not from God, he could not do any thing.
(34)They answered and said unto him, Thou wast wholly born in sins, and
dost thou teach us? And they cast him out. (35)Jesus heard that they
had cast him out; and finding him, said to him, Believest thou in the
Son of God? (36)The man answered and said, Who is he, Sir, that I might
believe on him? (37)Then said Jesus him, Thou hast even seen him, and
he that is now talking with thee is the very person. (38)Then he said,
Lord, I believe: and worshipped him.

(39)And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world, that they
who see not may see; and they who see become blind. (40)And some of the
Pharisees who were with him heard these things, and said to him, Are we
blind also? (41)Jesus said to them, If ye were blind, ye should not
have had sin: but now ye say, We see; therefore your sin is permanent.

CHAP. X.

VERILY, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into
the sheep-fold, but getteth in some other way, that person is a thief
and a robber. (2)He that entereth by the door is the shepherd of the
sheep. (3)To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and
he calleth his own peculiar sheep by name, and leadeth them forth.
(4)And when he bringeth out his own sheep, he goeth before them, and
the sheep follow him: because they know his voice. (5)And a stranger
will they not follow, but will fly from him: for they know not the
voice of strangers. (6)This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they
knew nothing of the things which he spake to them.

(7)Therefore Jesus said unto them again, Verily, verily, I say unto
you, that I am the door of the sheep. (8)All, as many as have gone
before me, are thieves and robbers: but the sheep hearkened not to
them. (9)I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved;
and shall go in and out, and find pasture. (10)The thief cometh not but
to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they may have
life, and that they may have it more abundantly. (11)I am the good
shepherd: the good shepherd layeth down his life for the sheep. (12)But
the hireling, and he that is not the shepherd, whose own property the
sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and
fleeth; and the wolf seizes upon them, and disperseth the sheep.
(13)Now the hireling fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth not
for the sheep. (14)I am the good shepherd, and know my own _sheep_, and
am known of my own. (15)As the Father knoweth me, so know I the Father:
and I lay down my life for the sheep. (16)And other sheep I have, which
are not of this fold: these also I must bring, and they shall hear my
voice; and there shall be one fold, one shepherd. (17)Therefore doth
the Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I may take it
again. (18)No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I
have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This
commandment I have received from my Father.

(19)There was therefore a division again among the Jews, on account of
these sayings. (20)Then many of them said, He hath a devil, and is mad;
why hearken to him? (21)Others said, These are not the discourses of a
demoniac. Can a devil open the eyes of the blind?

(22)Then was the feast of dedication at Jerusalem, and it was winter.
(23)And Jesus was walking in the temple, in Solomon's portico. (24)Then
the Jews came about him, and said to him, How long dost thou keep our
soul in suspense? If thou art the Messiah, tell us plainly. (25)Jesus
answered them; I told you, and ye believed not: the works which I do in
the name of my Father, they bear witness of me. (26)But ye believe not,
for ye are not of my sheep, as I told you. (27)My sheep hear my voice,
and I know them, and they follow me: (28)and I give unto them
everlasting life and they shall never perish to eternity, and no person
shall pluck them out of my hand. (29)My Father, who gave them to me, is
greater than all and no one shall pluck them out of my Father's hand.
(30)I and my Father are one.

(31)Then the Jews again brought stones, in order to stone him.
(32)Jesus said unto them, Many good works have I shewed you from my
Father; for which work of these are ye going to stone me? (33)The Jews
answered him, For a good work we do not stone thee; but for blasphemy;
and that thou, being merely a man, makest thyself God. (34)Jesus
answered them, Is it not written in your law, "I said ye are gods?"
(35)If he called those gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the
scripture cannot be broken; (36)do ye say of him, whom the Father hath
sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest because I said, I
am the Son of God? (37)If I do not the works of my Father, believe me
not. (38)But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works: that
ye may know, and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in him.
(39)Then sought they again to apprehend him and he departed out of
their reach, (40)and went again beyond Jordan, unto the place where
John at first baptised; and there he abode. (41)And many came to him,
and said, That John indeed performed no miracle: but all things
whatsoever John spake of this man were true. (42)And many believed on
him there.

CHAP. XI.

NOW there was a sick man, Lazarus, of Bethany, the village of Mary and
her sister Martha. (2)(It was the Mary who had anointed the Lord with
the balm, and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was
sick.) (3)The sisters therefore sent unto him, saying, Lord, behold, he
whom thou lovest is sick. (4)When Jesus heard it, he said, This
sickness is not for death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of
God may be glorified thereby.

(5)Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. (6)Then, though
he heard he was ill, yet notwithstanding he abode in the same place
where he was two days. (7)But after that he saith to his disciples, Let
us go again into Judea. (8)The disciples say unto him, Rabbi, the Jews
have just now sought to stone thee; and art thou going thither again?
(9)Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours in the day? If any man
walk in the day, he doth not stumble, because he seeth the light of
this world. (10)But if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because
there is no light with him. (11)These things said he: and after that he
saith to them, Our friend Lazarus is asleep; but I go to waken him up.
(12)Then said his disciples, Lord, if he is asleep, he will recover.
(13)Now Jesus had spoken of his death: but they apprehended that he
spake of taking rest in sleep. (14)Then Jesus therefore told them
plainly, Lazarus is dead. (15)And I rejoice on your account that I was
not there, in order that ye may believe; but let us go to him. (16)Then
said Thomas, (called Didymus, the twin,) to his fellow-disciples, Let
us go too, that we may die with him.

(17)Then Jesus, when he came; found that he had already lain in the
tomb four days. (18)Now Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem, about fifteen
furlongs off: (19)and many of the Jews had come with the women who were
about Martha and Mary, to comfort them concerning their brother.
(20)Then Martha, when she heard that Jesus was coming, met him: but
Mary sat in the house. (21)And Martha said to Jesus, Lord, if thou
hadst been here, my brother had not died. (22)But even now I know, that
whatsoever things thou shalt ask of God, God will give thee. (23)Jesus
saith to her, Thy brother shall rise again. (24)Martha saith to him, I
know that he shall rise at the resurrection in the last day. (25)Jesus
said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth
in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: (26)and every one who is
alive, and believeth in me, shall never die to eternity. Believest thou
this? (27)She saith to him, Yes, Lord I believe that thou art the
Messiah, the Son of God, who cometh into the world.

(28)So when she had thus spoken, she went away, and called her sister
Mary privately, saying, The Master is near at hand, and calleth for
thee. (29)As soon as she heard it, she rose hastily, and came to him.

(30)Now Jesus was not yet come into the village, but was on the spot
where Martha had met him. (31)Then the Jews who were with her in the
house, and comforting her, observing Mary, that she rose up hastily,
and went out, followed her, saying, She is going to the tomb, to weep
there.

(32)When therefore Mary was come where Jesus was, beholding him, she
fell at his feet, saying to him, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my
brother would not have died! (33)When Jesus then saw her weeping, and
all the Jews who came with her lamenting, he groaned in spirit, and was
himself greatly agitated: (34)and he said, Where have ye laid him? They
say to him, Lord, come and see. (35)Jesus wept. (36)Then said the Jews,
Behold, how he loved him! (37)But some of them said, Could not this
man, who openeth the eyes of the blind, have caused that this person
should not have died? (38)Then Jesus again groaning in himself, cometh
to the sepulchre. It was an excavation, and a stone lay upon it.
(39)Jesus saith, Remove the stone. The sister of the deceased, Martha,
said to him, Lord, he is by this time putrid: for he hath been dead
four days. (40)Jesus saith unto her, Did I not tell thee, that, if thou
wouldest believe, thou shalt see the glory of God? (41)Then they
removed the stone where the deceased was lying. And Jesus lifted his
eyes upwards, and said, Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me!
(42)And I knew that thou always dost hear me: but for the sake of the
multitude standing by I spake, that they may believe that thou hast
sent me. (43)And when he had thus spoken, with a loud voice he cried,
Lazarus, come forth! (44)And the deceased came forth, his feet and his
hands wrapped with the linen swathes; and his face bound round with a
napkin. Jesus saith to them, Loose him, and let him go!

(45)Then many of the Jews who came to Mary, and saw what Jesus had
done, believed on him. (46)But some of them went to the Pharisees, and
told them what things Jesus had done. (47)The chief priests and
Pharisees therefore called the sanhedrim together, and said, What are
we about? for this man is doing many miracles. (48)If we suffer him to
go on thus, all men will believe on him: and the Romans will come, and
take away both our place and nation. (49)Then one particular person of
them, Caiaphas, being the high-priest of that year, said unto them, Ye
know nothing, (50)nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one
man should die for the people, and that the whole nation be not
destroyed. (51)And this he spake not from himself: but being the
high-priest of that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for the
nation; (52)and not for that nation only, but that he should collect
into one body the children of God wherever dispersed. (53)Then from
that day they consulted together how they might kill him.

(54)Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews, but went
thence into the country bordering on the desert, to a city called
Ephraim, and there he abode with his disciples. (55)Now the passover of
the Jews was near, and many went up to Jerusalem out of the country
before the passover, in order to purify themselves. (56)Then they
sought for Jesus, and said one to another, as they stood in the temple,
What think ye, that he will not come to the feast? (57)Now both the
chief priests and the Pharisees had given commandment, that, if any
person knew where he was, they should declare it, that they might
apprehend him.

CHAP. XII.

JESUS then before the days of the passover came to Bethany, where the
deceased Lazarus was, whom he had raised from the dead. (2)Therefore
they made him a supper there; and Martha waited: but Lazarus was one of
those who sat at table with him. (3)Then Mary taking a pound of
unadulterated balm of nard, very valuable, anointed the feet of Jesus,
and wiped his feet with her hair: and the house was filled with the
odour of the ointment. (4)Then said one of his disciples, Judas
Iscariot, the son of Simon, who was preparing to betray him,
(5)Wherefore was not this aromatic ointment sold for three hundred
denarii, and given to the poor? (6)Now he said this, not that he cared
for the poor; but because he was a thief, and kept the purse, and
carried the money put therein. (7)Then said Jesus, Let her alone: for
the day of my burial hath she reserved this. (8)For the poor ye have
always with you; but me ye have not always.

(9)Then the whole multitude of the Jews knew that he was there: and
they came not for the sake of Jesus only, but also that they might see
Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead. (10)Then the chief priests
consulted how they might kill Lazarus also; (11)because on his account
many of the Jews went away, and believed on Jesus.

(12)On the morrow a great multitude who came to the feast, when they
heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, (13)took branches of palm,
and went out to meet him, and cried, Hosanna! blessed is the king of
Israel, that cometh in the name of the Lord.

(14)Then Jesus, having found a young ass, sat upon it; as it is
written, (15)"Fear not, daughter of Sion: behold, thy King cometh,
sitting on the foal of an ass." (16)These things indeed knew not his
disciples at first: but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered
that these things were written of him, and that they had done these
things unto him.

(17)Then the multitude that was with him, when he called Lazarus out of
the tomb, and raised him from the dead, bore their testimony.
(18)Therefore also the multitude met him, because they had heard that
he had done this miracle. (19)Then said the Pharisees among themselves,
Do ye not perceive that ye gain no advantage? behold, the world is gone
after him.

(20)Now there were certain Greeks among those who went up to worship at
the feast: (21)these then came to Philip, who was of Bethsaida, of
Galilee, and they asked him, saying, Sir, we wish to see Jesus.
(22)Philip comes and speaks to Andrew: and again Andrew and Philip tell
Jesus. (23)Then Jesus answered them, saying, The hour is come, that the
Son of man should be glorified. (24)Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Except a grain of wheat falling on the earth undergo a deathlike
change, it abideth single: but if it _thus_ die, it beareth abundant
produce. (25)He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hateth
his life in this world, shall preserve it to life eternal. (26)If a man
will be my servant, let him follow me; and where I am, there also shall
my servant be: and if any man serve me, him will my Father honour.
(27)Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from
this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour. (28)Father,
glorify thy name! Then came a voice from heaven, I have both glorified
it, and will glorify it again. (29)The multitude that stood by, and
heard it, said that it was thunder: others said, An angel hath spoken
to him. (30)Jesus answered and said, This voice came not for my sake,
but for your's. (31)Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the
ruler of this world be ejected out _of it_. (32)And I, when I am lifted
up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. (33)And this he said,
signifying by what death he should die.

(34)Then the multitude answered him, We have heard out of the law, that
the Messiah abideth for ever: and how sayest thou, That the Son of man
must be lifted up? who is this Son of man? (35)Then said Jesus unto
them, Yet a little while is the light with you. Walk while ye have the
light, lest the darkness overtake you: he that walketh in darkness,
knoweth not even whither he is going. (36)While ye have the light,
believe in the light, that ye may be the children of the light. These
things spake Jesus, and going away, concealed himself from them.

(37)Now, though he had done so many miracles before them, they believed
not on him: (38)that the saying of Isaiah the prophet might be
fulfilled, which he spake, "Lord, who hath believed our report? and to
whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?" (39)For this reason they
could not believe, because Isaiah had said again; (40)"He hath blinded
their eyes, and hardened their hearts; lest they should see with their
eyes, and understand with the heart, and be converted, and I should
heal them." (41)These things said Isaiah, when he saw his glory, and
spake of him. (42)However, notwithstanding, many even of the rulers
believed on him; but on account of the Pharisees they did not make open
profession, lest they should be put out of the synagogues: (43)for they
loved honour from men, more than honour from God.

(44)Then Jesus cried and said, He that believeth on me, believeth not
on me, but on him that sent me. (45)And he that seeth me, seeth him
that sent me. (46)I am come a light into the world, that every one who
believeth on me should not abide in darkness. (47)And if any man,
hearing my words, believeth not, I judge him not: for I came not to
judge the world, but to save the world. (48)He that sets me at nought,
and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him: even the word
which I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day.
(49)Because I have not spoken of myself; but the Farther who has sent
me, he gave me commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak.
(50)And I know that his commandment is life eternal: therefore the
things which I speak to you, just as the Father spake to me, so speak
I.

CHAP. XIII.

NOW before the feast of the passover, Jesus, knowing that his hour was
come, that he should go out of this world to the Father, having loved
his peculiar people that are in the world, he loved them to the end.
(2)And supper being served, (the devil having now injected into the
heart of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon, that he should betray him;)
(3)Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands,
and that he came out from God, and was going to God; (4)he rises from
supper, and lays aside his garments, and taking a towel, he wound it
about himself. (5)Then he poureth water into a bason, and began to wash
the disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel with which he was
begirt. (6)Then cometh he to Simon Peter: and he saith to him, Lord,
dost thou wash my feet? (7)Jesus answered and said to him, What I am
doing thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter. (8)Peter
saith to him, Thou shalt never wash my feet: no, never. Jesus answered
him, Except I wash thee, thou hast no part with me. (9)Simon Peter
saith to him, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head.
(10)Jesus saith to him, He that is washed hath need only to wash his
feet, for he is entirely clean: and ye are clean, but not all. (11)(For
he knew who would betray him; therefore he said, Ye are not all clean.)
(12)When therefore he had washed their feet, and taken his garments,
and sat down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done unto
you? (13)Ye call me Master, and Lord: and ye speak truly; for such I
am. (14)If therefore I have washed your feet, though the Lord and the
Master; ye also ought to wash one another's feet. (15)For I have given
you an example, that just as I have done to you, ye should do also.
(16)Verily, verily, I say unto you, The servant is not greater than his
master; nor the messenger greater than him that sent him. (17)If ye
know these things, blessed are ye if ye practise them. (18)I speak not
of you all: I know whom I have chosen: but that the scripture may be
fulfilled, He that eateth bread with me, hath lift up his heel against
me. (19)Now I tell you previously, before this comes to pass, that,
when it cometh to pass, ye may believe that I am. (20)Verily, verily, I
say unto you, He that receiveth whomsoever I shall send, receiveth me;
and he that receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me.

(21)As Jesus was speaking these words, he was greatly agitated in
spirit, and testified, and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, that
one of you shall betray me. (22)Then the disciples looked one at
another, doubting of whom he spake. (23)Now there was one of the
disciples reclining on the bosom of Jesus, whom Jesus loved.
(24)Therefore Simon Peter gave him a significant look, that he should
inquire of Jesus, which of them it should be of whom he spake. (25)And
he leaning on the breast of Jesus, said to him, Lord, which is it?
(26)Jesus answered, It is he to whom I shall give this morsel of bread,
when I have dipped it. And dipping the morsel of bread, he gave it unto
Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon. (27)And after the sop, then entered
Satan into him. Jesus saith to him, What thou doest, do quickly.
(28)Now none of those who sat at table knew wherefore he had spoken to
him. (29)For some supposed, as Judas kept the purse, that Jesus was
saying to him, Buy what we need for the feast; or, that he should give
something to the poor. (30)Having then received the sop, he went out
immediately: now it was night.

(31)When therefore he was gone, Jesus saith, Now is the Son of man
glorified, and God is glorified in him. (32)If God is glorified in him,
God will also glorify him with himself, and immediately glorify him.
(33)My dear children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek
me: as I said to the Jews, Whither I am going, ye cannot come; so say I
now to you. (34)A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one
another; even as I have loved you, that ye also love one another.
(35)By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have
love one to another.

(36)Simon Peter saith to him, Lord, Whither art thou going? Jesus
answered him, Whither I am going, thou canst not follow me now; but
thou shalt follow me hereafter. (37)Peter saith to him, Lord, why
cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my life for thee. (38)Jesus
answered him, Wilt thou lay down thy life for me? Verily, verily, I
tell thee, the cock will not crow, before thou shalt deny me thrice.

CHAP. XIV.

LET not your hearts be troubled: trust in God, and trust in me. (2)In
my Father's house are many mansions: and if not, I would have told you.
I go to prepare a place for you. (3)And if I go and prepare you a
place, I will come again, and receive you to myself; that where I am,
there ye may be also. (4)And whither I am going ye know, and the way ye
know.

(5)Thomas saith to him, We know not whither thou art going; and how can
we know the way? (6)Jesus saith to him, I am the way, and the truth,
and the life: no man cometh to the Father, but by me. (7)If ye had
known me, ye would have known my Father: and from henceforth ye know
him and have seen him.

(8)Philip saith to him, Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us.
(9)Jesus saith to him, Am I all this while with you, and hast thou not
known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how
sayest thou, Shew us the Father? (10)Dost thou not believe that I am in
the Father, and that the Father is in me? the words which I speak unto
you I speak not of myself: but the Father, who dwelleth in me, he
performeth these works. (11)Believe me that I am in the Father, and the
Father in me: and at least believe me on account of the works
themselves. (12)Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on
me, the works which I do shall he do also; yea, and greater than these
shall he do; because I go to the Father. (13)And whatsoever ye shall
ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the
Son. (14)If ye ask any thing in my name, I will do it. (15)If ye love
me, keep my commandments. (16)And I will ask the Father, and he shall
give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever;
(17)the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it
seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; because he
dwelleth with you, and shall be in you. (18)I will not leave you
orphans: I am coming to you. (19)Yet a little while, and the world
seeth me no more; but ye see me: because I live, ye shall live also.
(20)In that day ye shall know that I am in the Father, and ye in me,
and I in you. (21)He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he is
the person who loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my
Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him.

(22)Then Judas (not Iscariot) said to him, Lord, how is it that thou
wilt manifest thyself to us, and not unto the world? (23)Jesus answered
and said to him, If any man love me, he will observe my word: and my
Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make our abode with
him. (24)He that loveth me not, doth not observe my sayings: and the
word which ye are hearing is not mine, but of him that sent me.
(25)These things have I spoken to you, while I continue among you.
(26)But the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, which I have spoken to you. (27)Peace I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I to you. Let not
your heart be agitated, nor shrink back through fear. (28)Ye have heard
that I told you, I am going away, though I am coming again to you. If
ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I am going to the
Father: because my Father is greater than I. (29)And now I have
informed you before it comes to pass, that, when it is come to pass, ye
may believe. (30)I shall not speak many things more with you: for the
ruler of this world is coming, though in me he hath no part. (31)But
that the world may know that I love the Father; and as the Father hath
given me commandment, so I do. Arise, let us go hence.

CHAP. XV.

I AM the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. (2)Every branch in
me that beareth no fruit, he taketh it away: and every branch that
beareth fruit, he pruneth it clean, that it may bring forth more fruit.
(3)Ye are already clean through the word which I have spoken unto you.
(4)Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of
itself, unless it abide in the vine: so neither can ye, except ye abide
in me. (5)I am the vine, ye are the branches: he that abideth in me,
and I in him, this person beareth much fruit: because without me ye can
do nothing. (6)If any man abide not in me, he is cast out as a branch,
and withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and
they are burned. (7)If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye
shall ask whatsoever ye will, and it shall be done for you. (8)Herein
is my Father glorified, that ye should bring forth much fruit; so shall
ye be my disciples. (9)Just as the Father hath loved me, I also have
loved you: abide in my love. (10)If ye keep my commandments, ye shall
abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and as
I abide in his love. (11)These things have I spoken unto you, that my
joy may abide in you, and your joy may be full. (12)This is my
commandment, That ye love one another, just as I have loved you.
(13)Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends. (14)Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever things I
command you. (15)I no more call you servants; for the servant knoweth
not what his master is doing: but I have called you friends because I
have made known to you all things which I have heard of my Father.
(16)Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and appointed you
that ye should go forth and bear fruit, and that your fruit should be
permanent: that so whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he
may give it you. (17)These things I command you, that ye love one
another. (18)If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before
you. (19)If ye were of the world, the world would love its own: but
because ye are not of the world, but I have elected you out of the
world, for this very cause the world hateth you. (20)Remember the word
which I spake unto you, The servant is not greater than his master. If
they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also; if they have
observed my words, they will observe your's also. (21)But all these
things will they do unto you for my name's sake, because they know not
him that sent me. (22)Had I not come and spoken to them, they would not
have had sin: but now they have no excuse for their sin. (23)He that
hateth me hateth my Father also. (24)If I had not done among them the
works which no other ever did, they would not have had sin: but now
they have both seen and hated both me and my Father. (25)But it is in
order that the word may be fulfilled which is written in their law,
"They hated me without a cause." (26)But when the Comforter is come,
whom I will send unto you from the Father, the Spirit of truth, who
proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me: (27)and ye too
shall bear your testimony, because ye have been with me from the
beginning.

CHAP. XVI.

THESE things have I spoken, that ye might not be stumbled. (2)They will
put you out of their synagogues: yea, the hour is coming, that every
one who killeth you will think he offers God a sacred service. (3)And
these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the
Father, nor me. (4)But these things have I spoken to you, that when the
hour is come, ye may remember the same for I had told you. But these
things I told you not at the beginning, because I was with you. (5)But
now I am going away to him that sent me; and none of you asketh me,
Whither art thou going? (6)But because I have spoken these things to
you, sorrow hath filled your heart. (7)Yet I tell you the truth; It is
expedient for you that I go away: for if I went not away, the Comforter
would not come to you; but if I go, I will send him unto you. (8)And
when he cometh, he will convince the world of sin, of righteousness,
and of judgment: (9)of sin first, because they believe not in me;
(10)then of righteousness, because I am going to the Father, so ye see
me no more; (11)and of judgment, because the ruler of this world hath
sentence pronounced on him.

(12)I have many things to say to you, but ye cannot bear them just now.
(13)But when he is come, the Spirit of truth, he will conduct you into
all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever things he
shall hear, he shall speak: and he will declare to you the things that
shall come hereafter. (14)He shall glorify me: for he shall take of
mine, and shall shew it unto you. (15)All things whatsoever the Father
hath are mine: therefore I said, that he shall take of mine, and shall
shew it unto you. (16)A little while longer, and ye shall not see me:
and again a little while, and ye shall see me, because I am going to
the Father.

(17)Then said some of the disciples unto each other, What is this which
he saith to us, A little while longer, and ye shall not see me: and
again a little while, and ye shall see me: and this, because I am going
to the Father? (18)They said therefore, What is this which he saith,
This little while? we know not what he means.

(19)Now Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him, and said unto
them, Are ye questioning among yourselves concerning this declaration,
which I spake, A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again a
little while, and ye shall see me? (20)Verily, verily, I say unto you,
That ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: and ye
shall be very sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.
(21)A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is
come: but when the little son is born, she no more remembers the
anguish, for joy that a man is brought into the world. (22)And ye
therefore have indeed at present sorrow: but I will see you again, and
your heart shall be made glad, and your joy no man taketh from you.
(23)And in that hour ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, That whatsoever things ye shall ask the Father in my name, he
will give you. (24)Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name: ask, and
ye shall receive, that your joy may be complete. (25)These things have
I spoken to you in parables: but the hour is coming when I will no more
speak to you in parables, but will plainly inform you respecting the
Father. (26)In that day ye shall ask in my name: and I do not say to
you, I will entreat the Father for you: (27)for the Father himself
loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out
from God. (28)I came out from the Father, and am come into the world:
again, I am leaving the world, and going to the Father.

(29)His disciples said unto him, Lo! now thou speakest plainly, and
speakest in no-wise proverbial. (30)Now we know that thou knowest all
things, and needest not that any person should ask thee: by this we
believe that thou hast come forth from God. (31)Jesus answered them, Do
ye now believe? (32)Behold, the hour is coming, yea, it is already
come, that ye shall be dispersed, each after his own concerns, and
shall leave me alone: though I am not alone, because the Father is with
me. (33)These things have I spoken to you, that ye might have peace. In
the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good courage; I have
overcome the world.

CHAP. XVII.

THESE things spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said,
Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify
thee: (2)even as thou hast given him authority over all flesh, that
with regard to all those whom thou hast given him, he should give to
them eternal life: (3)and this is eternal life, that they should know
thee the only true God, and him whom thou hast sent, Jesus, the
Messiah. (4)I have glorified thee upon earth: I have completed the work
which thou gavest me to perform. (5)And now, Father, do thou glorify me
with thyself in the glory which I held with thee before the world was.
(6)I have made known thy name to the persons whom thou gavest me out of
the world: for thee they had a being, and to me thou hast given them;
and thy word have they kept. (7)Now have they known, that all things
whatsoever thou hast given me are from thee. (8)For the declarations
which thou gavest to me I have delivered to them; and they have
received them, and have known assuredly that I came out from thee, and
they have believed that thou hast sent me. (9)I entreat for them: I
make no request for the world; but for those thou hast given me; for
they are thine. (10)And all mine are thine, and thine mine; and I have
been glorified in them. (11)And now no longer am I in this world, but
these are in the world, and I am coming to thee. Holy Father! preserve
them for thy name's sake whom thou hast given me, that they may be one,
as we are. (12)When I was with them in the world, I preserved them by
thy name: those whom thou hast given me have I guarded, and not one of
them is perished, except the son of perdition; that the scripture might
be fulfilled. (13)But now I am coming to thee; and I am speaking these
things in the world, that they might have my joy fulfilled in
themselves. (14)I have given them thy word and the world hath hated
them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
(15)I entreat not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but
that thou shouldest preserve them from the wicked one. (16)They are not
of the world, just as I am not of the world. (17)Sanctify them by thy
truth: thy word is truth. (18)As thou hast sent me into the world, even
so have I sent them into the world. (19)And for them I devote myself,
that they also might be sanctified by the truth. (20)And not for them
do I make request only, but also for those who shall believe in me
through their word; (21)that all may be one; as thou, Father, in me,
and I in thee, that these also may be one in us: that the world may
believe that thou hast sent me. (22)And I have given them the glory,
which thou hast given me; that they may be one, even as we are one:
(23)I in them, and thou in me, that they may be perfected into one; and
that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as
thou hast loved me. (24)Father, those whom thou hast given me, I will
that where I am they may also be with me; that they may behold my
glory, which thou gavest me: because thou hast loved me before the
foundation of the world.

(25)Righteous Father! though the world hath not known thee, yet I have
known thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me. (26)And I have
made known to them thy name, and will make it known: that the love
wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them.

CHAP. XVIII.

HAVING thus spoken, Jesus went out with his disciples beyond the brook
Cedron, where was a garden, into which he went himself, and his
disciples. (2)Now Judas also, who betrayed him, knew the place: for
frequently had Jesus consorted with his disciples there. (3)Then Judas
having taken a band of soldiers, and the inferior officers of the chief
priests and Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns and torches and
arms. (4)Jesus therefore, conscious of all things that were coming upon
him, going forward, said to them, Whom are ye seeking? (5)They answered
him, Jesus the Nazarean. Jesus saith unto them, I am he. Then stood
also Judas, who betrayed him, with these men. (6)As he then spake to
them, I am he, they retreated backward, and fell flat on the ground.
(7)Again therefore he demanded of them, Whom seek ye? Then they said,
Jesus the Nazarean. (8)Jesus answered, I told you that I am he: if
therefore ye are seeking me, permit these to go away: (9)that the
saying might be fulfilled, which he spake, That of those whom thou hast
given me, I have not lost one of them.

(10)Then Simon Peter having a sword, drew it, and struck a servant of
the high-priest, and cut off his right ear. Now the servant's name was
Malchas. (11)Then said Jesus to Peter, Put up thy sword into the
scabbard: the cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?

(12)The band therefore, and the chief captain, and the inferior
officers of the Jews, seized on Jesus, and bound him, (13)and led him
away to Annas first; for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was the
high-priest of that year. (14)Now Caiaphas was the person who had given
his advice to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should be
destroyed instead of the people.

(15)Now Simon Peter had followed Jesus, and another disciple: and that
disciple was acquainted with the high-priest, and went in with Jesus
into the palace of the high-priest. (16)But Peter stood without at the
door. Then that other disciple, who was acquainted with the
high-priest, went out, and spoke to the porteress, and introduced
Peter. (17)Then said the damsel who kept the door to Peter, Art not
thou also one of the disciples of this man? He saith, I am not. (18)Now
the servants and inferior officers having made a fire, for it was cold,
stood and warmed themselves: and there stood Peter with them, and
warmed himself.  (19)The high-priest then questioned Jesus concerning
his disciples, and respecting his doctrine. (20)Jesus answered him, I
spake openly to the world; I always taught in the synagogue, and in the
temple, whither the Jews resorted; and in secret have I spoken nothing.
(21)Why dost thou question me? ask those who have heard me, what I have
spoken to them: lo, they know what I said. (22)As he was thus speaking,
one of the servants who stood by him gave Jesus a slap on the face,
saying, Dost thou answer the high-priest in this fashion? (23)Jesus
replied to him, If I have spoken in an improper manner, bear witness of
the evil deed: but if properly, why strikest thou me? (24)Now Annas had
sent him bound to Caiaphas the high-priest.

(25)Meanwhile Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. Then said
they to him, Art not thou also one of this man's disciples? He denied
it, and said, I am not. (26)One of the servants of the high-priest,
being a kinsman of him whose ear Peter cut off, said, Did I not see
thee in the garden with him? (27)Then again Peter denied: and instantly
the cock crew.

(28)Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas to the praetorium: and it was
early: and they themselves went not into the praetorium, that they
should not be defiled; but that they might eat the passover. (29)Pilate
then came out to them, and said, What accusation bring ye against this
man? (30)They answered and said to him, If this fellow had not been a
malefactor, we should not have delivered him up to thee. (31)Pilate
then said to them, Take him yourselves, and according to your own law
judge him. The Jews then said to him, It is not lawful for us to put
any man to death: (32)that the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled,
which he spake, intimating by what manner of death he should die.

(33)Pilate therefore entered again into the praetorium, and called
Jesus, and said to him, Art thou the king of the Jews? (34)Jesus
answered him, Dost thou speak this from thyself, or did others speak to
thee concerning me? (35)Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thy own nation and
the chief priests have delivered thee to me: what hast thou done?
(36)Jesus replied, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom had
been of this world, then would my servants have struggled hard, that I
should not have been delivered up to the Jews: but now my kingdom is
not from hence. (37)Then said Pilate unto him. Art thou not a king
then? Jesus answered, Thou sayest that I am a king. For this end I was
born, and for this I came into the world, that I should be a witness
for the truth. Every one who is of the truth heareth my voice.
(38)Pilate saith unto him, What is truth? And having thus spoken, he
went out again unto the Jews and saith to them, I find no fault in him.
(39)But ye have a custom, that I should release to you one person at
the passover: will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the
Jews? (40)Then again they all clamoured, saying, Not this man, but
Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber.

CHAP. XIX.

THEN Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him. (2)And the soldiers
having platted a crown of thorns, put it on his head, and they clothed
him in a purple robe, (3)and said, Hail, King of the Jews! and they
gave him slaps on the face with their hands. (4)Then again went Pilate
out, and said to them, Behold, I bring him out to you, that ye may know
that I find in him no fault at all. (5)Then came Jesus out, bearing the
thorny crown, and the purple robe. And he said to them, Behold the man!
(6)When the chief priests therefore and the officers saw him, they
cried vociferously, saying, Crucify him! crucify him! Pilate saith to
them, Take him yourselves, and crucify him: for I have not found in him
a fault. (7)The Jews replied to him, We have a law, and according to
our law he ought to die, because he hath made himself the Son of God.
(8)When Pilate then heard this saying, he was the more afraid: (9)and
entered into the praetorium again, and saith to Jesus, From whence art
thou? But Jesus gave him no answer. (10)Then saith Pilate to him, Dost
thou not speak to me? dost thou not know that I have power to crucify
thee, and that I have power to release thee? (11)Jesus answered, Thou
wouldest have had no authority over me, unless it had been given thee
from above: for this reason, he that hath delivered me up to thee hath
the greater crime. (12)Upon this Pilate sought to release him: but the
Jews clamoured, saying, If thou release this fellow, thou art no friend
of Caesar's: every one who professes himself a king, speaks in
opposition to Caesar.

(13)When Pilate therefore heard this speech, he brought Jesus out, and
sat down on the judgment seat, in a place called the Stone Pavement,
but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha. (14)And it was the preparation of the
passover, and about the sixth hour: and he saith to the Jews, Behold
your King! (15)But they cried vociferously, Away with him, away!
crucify him! Pilate saith unto them, Shall I crucify your King? The
chief priests answered, We have no king but Caesar.

(16)Then delivered he him therefore unto them, that he should be
crucified. And they took Jesus and led him away. (17)And carrying his
cross he went forth to a place called the Place of a Skull, which in
the Hebrew is termed Golgotha: (18)where they crucified him, and two
others with him, on this side and on that, and in the midst Jesus.
(19)And Pilate also wrote a title, and put it on the cross. And this
was the writing: JESUS THE NAZAREAN, THE KING OF THE JEWS, (20)This
title then many of the Jews read: for the spot where Jesus was
crucified was nigh unto the city: and it was written in Hebrew, in
Greek, and in Latin. (21)The chief priests of the Jews then said to
Pilate, Write not, The King of the Jews; but that he said, I am King of
the Jews. (22)Pilate answered, What I have written, I have written.

(23)Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his
garments, and made four parts, for each soldier a part; and his vest:
now the vest was without a seam, woven from the upper parts throughout
the whole. (24)They said therefore one to another, Let us not rend it,
but cast lots for it, whose it shall be: that the scripture might be
fulfilled, which saith, "They parted my garments among them, and for my
vest they cast lots." So the soldiers therefore did these things.

(25)Now beside the cross of Jesus stood his mother, and his mother's
sister, Mary the wife of Cleopas, and Mary Magdalene. (26)When Jesus
then beheld his mother, and the disciple whom he loved, standing by, he
saith to his mother, Woman, behold thy son! (27)Then saith he to the
disciple, Behold thy mother! And from that hour the disciple took her
unto his own home.

(28)After this, Jesus, conscious that all things were now finished,
that the scripture might be fulfilled, saith, I thirst. (29)Now there
was placed a vessel full of vinegar: they then filling a spunge with
the vinegar, and putting it on a stick of hyssop, carried it to his
mouth. (30)When therefore Jesus had received the vinegar, he said, It
is finished: and inclining his head, he surrendered up his spirit.

(31)The Jews therefore, as it was the preparation, that the bodies
might not remain on the cross on the sabbath, (for that sabbath-day was
a great day,) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that
they might be taken away. (32)Then came the soldiers, and brake the
legs of the first, and of the other who was crucified with him. (33)But
when they came to Jesus, as they saw that he was already dead, they
brake not his legs: (34)but one of the soldiers with his lance pierced
his side, and immediately there gushed out blood and water. (35)And he
that saw it bore witness, and we know that his testimony is true: and
he himself is conscious that he speaketh what is true, that ye might
believe. (36)Now these things were done, that the scripture might be
fulfilled, "A bone of him shall not be broken." (37)And again another
scripture saith, "They shall look on him whom they have pierced."

(38)And after these things Joseph of Arimathea, (being a disciple of
Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews,) besought Pilate that he
might take away the body of Jesus and Pilate permitted him. Then he
came and took away the body of Jesus. (39)And Nicodemus, who had come
to Jesus by night formerly, came also, bringing a mixture of myrrh and
aloes, about a hundred weight.

(40)Then they took the body, and bound it with swathes together with
the aromatics, as the custom is with the Jews to bury. (41)And there
was near the spot were he was crucified a garden and in the garden a
new tomb, wherein no person had ever yet been laid. (42)Because of the
preparation of the Jews therefore, they laid Jesus there; for the
sepulchre was just by.

CHAP. XX.

AND on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalen came very early, whilst
yet some darkness remained, to the sepulchre, and seeth the stone taken
away from the sepulchre. (2)She therefore runneth, and cometh to Simon
Peter, and to the other disciple, whom Jesus loved, and saith to them,
They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not
where they have laid him. (3)Then Peter went out, and that other
disciple, and came to the sepulchre. (4)And they two ran together: and
the other disciple ran before more swiftly than Peter, and came first
to the sepulchre. (5)And stooping forward, he sees the swathing clothes
lying there; yet he did not go in. (6)Then cometh Simon Peter following
him, and went into the sepulchre, and saw the swathing clothes lying,
(7)and the napkin, which had been round his head, not laid with the
linen swathes, but apart folded up in another place. (8)Then went in
also the other disciple, who had come the first to the sepulchre, and
saw, and believed. (9)Though not even yet had they known the scripture,
that he should rise from the dead. (10)Then the disciples went back
again to their companions. (11)But Mary stood at the sepulchre,
without, weeping: as therefore she wept, she bent forward towards the
sepulchre. (12)And saw two angels in white, sitting, the one at the
head, and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain.
(13)And they say unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? She saith to them,
Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have
laid him. (14)And as she thus spoke, she turned about, and beheld Jesus
standing by, and knew not that it was Jesus. (15)Then Jesus said to
her, Woman, why art thou weeping? whom art thou seeking? She, supposing
that it was the gardener, said to him, Sir, if thou hast carried him
hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away.
(16)Jesus saith to her, Mary! Starting round, she said to him, Rabboni!
that is, Master! (17)Jesus saith to her, Touch me not; for I have not
yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and tell them, I am
ascending to my Father, and your Father; to my God, and your God.
(18)Mary Magdalen cometh declaring to the disciples, that she had seen
the Lord, and that he had spoken these things to her.

(19)When the evening therefore was come, on the same first day of the
week, and the doors being fastened where the disciples were assembled
for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and said unto
them, Peace be to you. (20)And thus speaking, he shewed them his hands
and his side. Then were the disciples glad when they saw the Lord.
(21)Jesus therefore spake to them again, Peace be unto you: as the
Father hath sent me, even so send I you. (22)And so speaking, he
breathed on them, and said, Receive the Holy Ghost: (23)whose soever
sins ye forgive, they are forgiven them; and whose sins soever ye
retain, they are retained.

(24)Now Thomas, one of the twelve, who is called Didymus, the twin, was
not with them when Jesus came. (25)Then the other disciples said to
him, We have seen the Lord. But he said to them, Except I should see in
his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of
the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I shall never believe it.
(26)And eight days after, his disciples were again within, and Thomas
with them: Jesus cometh, though the doors were fastened, and stood in
the midst, and said, Peace be unto you. (27)Afterwards he spake to
Thomas, Bring hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and take thy
hand, and thrust into my side: and be not incredulous, but a believer.
(28)And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord and my God!
(29)Jesus saith to him, Because thou hast seen me, Thomas, hast thou
believed: blessed are they who though they have not seen me, yet have
believed.

(30)Now many other miracles did Jesus therefore also in the presence of
his disciples, which are not written in this book: (31)but these are
written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of
God; and that believing ye might have life through his name.

CHAP. XXI.

AFTER these things Jesus again shewed himself to the disciples at the
sea of Tiberias; and he appeared in the following manner: (2)Simon
Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, the twin, and Nathaniel who was of
Cana of Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two others of the
disciples were together. (3)Simon Peter said to them, I am going
a-fishing. They say to him, We too will go with thee. They went out,
and got on board the vessel immediately; and that night they caught
nothing. (4)But when the morning was now come, Jesus stood upon the
beach: yet the disciples had not discovered that it was Jesus. (5)Then
saith Jesus unto them, My youths, have ye any thing eatable? They
answered him, No. (6)Then he said to them, Shoot the net on the right
side of the vessel, and ye shall find fish. They shot it therefore, and
now they were not able to drag it in from the quantity of fishes.
(7)Then said that disciple whom Jesus loved to Peter, It is the Lord!
Then Simon Peter, when he heard that it was the Lord, girt his coat
round him, (for he was stripped,) and threw himself into the sea.
(8)And the other disciples came in the little vessel, (for they were
not far from land, only about two hundred cubits,) dragging the net
with the fishes. (9)When therefore they were come to land, they saw a
fire laid, and a fish upon it, and a loaf. (10)Jesus saith to them,
Bring some of the fish which ye have just caught. (11)Simon Peter went
aboard, and drew the net to land full of large fishes, to the number of
a hundred and fifty-three: and though they were so many, yet was not
the net rent. (12)Jesus saith to them, Come, dine. Now not one of the
disciples dared inquire, Who art thou? conscious that it was the Lord.
(13)Then Jesus cometh, and taketh the loaf, and distributed to them,
and of the fish in like manner. (14)Now this was the third time Jesus
had shewed himself to the disciples, after he rose from the dead.

(15)When therefore they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon,
son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these? He saith to him, Yes,
Lord! thou knowest that I love thee. He saith to him, Feed my lambs.
(16)He saith to him again the second time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest
thou me? He saith to him, Yes, Lord! thou knowest that I love thee.
Jesus saith unto him, Feed my sheep. (17)He saith to him the third
time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me? Peter was grieved because he
said unto him the third time, Lovest thou me? And he said to him, Lord,
thou knowest all things, thou knowest that I love thee! Jesus saith to
him, Feed my sheep. (18)Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast
a younger man, thou didst gird up thyself, and go about whithersoever
thy choice led thee: but when thou shalt grow old, another person
extending thy hands, shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou
wouldest not. (19)This he told him, to intimate by what kind of death
he should glorify God. And having thus spoken, he said to him, Follow
me. (20)Now Peter, turning about, saw the disciple whom Jesus loved
following; who also at the supper reclined on his bosom, and said,
Lord, which is the person who betrayeth thee? (21)Peter looking at him,
saith to Jesus, Lord, and what will become of this man? (22)Jesus saith
to him, If I will that he abide till I come, what is that to thee?
follow thou me. (23)Then this speech went forth among the disciples, as
though this disciple was not to die: yet Jesus had not said to him,
That he shall not die; but, If I will that he abide till I come, what
is that to thee?

(24)This is the disciple who is testifing of these things, and hath
written these things: and we know that his testimony is true. (25)And
there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if every
particular was written, I am of opinion that the world itself would not
be capable of retaining the books which should be written. Amen.



THE ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLES.

CHAP. I.

THE former treatise, Theophilus, I composed, concerning all things
which Jesus began both to do and to teach, (2)until that day, when
having given a charge to his apostles through the Holy Ghost, whom he
had chosen, he was taken up: (3)to whom also he had shewed himself
alive, after he had suffered, by many infallible proofs, during forty
days being frequently seen by them, and speaking of the things which
relate to the kingdom of God: (4)and assembling them together,
commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the
promise of the Father, which, said he, ye have heard from me. (5)For
John indeed baptised with water; but ye shall be baptised with the Holy
Ghost not many days after the present.

(6)They then accordingly assembling together, asked him, saying, Lord,
wilt thou at this time reestablish the kingdom of Israel? (7)But he
said unto them, It is not for you to know the times and the seasons,
which the Father hath reserved under his own authority. (8)But ye shall
receive power, when the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be
witnesses for me, both in Jerusalem, and throughout all Judea, and
Samaria, and unto the extremity of the earth.

(9)And as he was speaking these things, while they were looking upon
him, he was taken up; and a cloud enveloping him hid him from their
eyes. (10)And as they looked up earnestly into the heaven, while he was
passing, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel; (11)who also
said to them, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up to heaven? this
Jesus, who hath been taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, in
the same manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.

(12)Then they returned unto Jerusalem, from the mount called Olivet,
which is near Jerusalem, about a sabbath-day's journey distant. (13)And
when they had arrived, they went up to an upper room, where abode
Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas,
Bartholomew, and Matthew, James son of Alpheus, and Simon the zealous,
and Jude brother to James. (14)These all persevered unanimously in
prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus,
and with his brethren.

(15)And in those days arose Peter in the midst of the disciples, and
said, (there was a number of persons together, about an hundred and
twenty,) (16)Men and brethren, it must needs be that this scripture
should be fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost delivered before by the mouth
of David concerning Judas, who was the conductor of those who seized on
Jesus. (17)For he was reckoned of our number, and had obtained an
appointment to this ministry. (18)This man indeed accordingly purchased
a spot of ground with the wages of iniquity; and projected forward, he
burst in the midst, and all his bowels fell out. (19)And it was a fact
known to all who dwelt at Jerusalem; so that this field is called in
their own dialect, Aceldama, that is, The field of blood. (20)For it is
written in the book of Psalms[23], Let his habitation be desolate, and
let there be no man to dwell in it: and his office, as bishop, let
another take[24].

(21)Wherefore from among the men who have associated with us always
during the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,
(22)beginning from his baptism by John, until the day in which he was
taken up from us, must there be chosen with us a witness of his
resurrection, even one of these. (23)So they appointed two persons,
Joseph called Barsabas, whose sirname was Justus, and Matthias. (24)And
joining in prayer, they said, Do thou, O Lord, who knowest the hearts
of all men, point out the one of these two which thou hast chosen,
(25)to take a part in this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas
by transgression fell, to go to his own place. (26)And they drew lots
for them and the lot fell to Matthias and he was by unanimous suffrage
numbered with the eleven apostles.

CHAP. II.

SO when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with
unanimity assembled together. (2)And there came suddenly from heaven a
sound as it were of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled the whole
house where they were sitting. (3)And there was an appearance to them
of divided tongues, as of fire, and it rested on every one of them.
(4)And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they began to
speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them power to express
themselves.

(5)Now there were dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews, men of piety, from every
nation under heaven. (6)And when this report spread, the multitude
collected around them, and were overwhelmed with astonishment, because
they heard them speaking every one in his own peculiar dialect. (7)And
they were all amazed, and wondered, saying one to another, Are not all
these who are speaking Galileans? (8)And how do we hear every man in
our own peculiar dialect, in which from our birth we were brought up?
(9)Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and they who inhabit
Mesopotamia, and Judea, and Cappadocia, Pontus, and Asia, (10)and
Phrygia, and Pamphylia, Egypt, and the parts of Lybia adjoining Cyrene,
and the sojourners, who are Romans, both Jews and proselytes,
(11)Cretans and Arabians, we hear them speaking in our own several
tongues the marvellous things of God. (12)And they were all amazed, and
much perplexed, and knew not what to think, saying one to another, What
can this mean? (13)But others scoffing said, These men are brimful of
sweet wine. (14)But Peter, standing up with the eleven, raised his
voice, and addressed them; Men of Judea, and all ye who dwell at
Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and listen to my words: (15)for
these men are not, as ye suppose, drunk, for it is only the third hour
of the day. (16)But this is what was spoken by the prophet Joel;
(17)"And it shall come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour
our of my spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy, your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall
dream dreams: (18)and upon my servants and my handmaidens in those days
will I pour out of my spirit; and they shall prophesy: (19)and I will
perform prodigies in the heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath;
blood, and fire, and vapour of smoke. (20)The sun shall be turned into
darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and illustrious day
of the Lord come. (21)And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall
call on the Lord shall be saved[25]." (22)Men of Israel, hear these
words; Jesus the Nazarean, a man from God, pointed out to you by
miracles and wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of
you, as yourselves also know: (23)him, by the destined counsel and
foreknowledge of God delivered up, ye have seized, and by wicked hands
have crucified and slain: (24)whom God hath raised up, having loosed
the pains of death: forasmuch as it was not possible that he should be
held thereby. (25)For David speaketh concerning him, "I have seen the
Lord always before me, for he is at my right hand, that I might not be
shaken: (26)therefore is my heart full of joy, and my tongue hath
exulted; and still shall my flesh also repose in hope, (27)that thou
wilt not leave my soul in the mansion of the dead, nor permit that Holy
One of thine to see corruption. (28)Thou hast made known to me the ways
of life; thou shalt fill me with delight by thy countenance[26]."

(29)Men and brethren, permit me to speak with freedom to you concerning
the patriarch David, that he hath been both dead and buried, and his
sepulchre is with us to this day. (30)Being therefore a prophet, and
knowing that God had sworn to him with an oath, that of the fruit of
his loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up the Messiah to sit
upon his throne; (31)he, foreseeing this, spake of the resurrection of
the Messiah, that his soul should not be left in the mansion of the
dead, and that his flesh should not see corruption. (32)This very Jesus
hath God raised up, of which we all are witnesses. (33)He therefore
being exalted at the right hand of God, and having received from the
Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, hath poured out this, which ye
now see and hear. (34)For David is not ascended into the heavens: for
he saith himself, "The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit on my right hand,
(35)until I make thine enemies a footstool for thy feet[27]." (36)Let
all the house of Israel therefore know assuredly, that God hath made
him Lord and Messiah, even that very Jesus whom ye crucified.

(37)Now when they heard this, they were cut to the heart, and said unto
Peter and the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?

(38)Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptised every one of you
into the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. (39)For the promise is to you, and
to your children, and to all that are afar off; even as many as the
Lord our God shall call. (40)And with many other words he testified and
exhorted, saying, Be saved from this untoward generation.

(41)They therefore who gladly received his discourse were baptised: and
there were added to them that day about three thousand souls. (42)And
they persevered stedfastly in the doctrine of the apostles, and in
communion, and in breaking bread, and in prayers. (43)And on every soul
there was an awe: and many miracles and signs were done by the
apostles. (44)Now all who believed were together, and had all things
common; (45)and sold their possessions and goods, and divided them
among all, as every one had need. (46)And daily continuing with one
mind at the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, they
partook of their food with great joy and simplicity of heart,
(47)praising God, and having favour with all the people. And the Lord
added the saved ones daily to the church.

CHAP. III.

NOW at that time Peter and John were going up to the temple at the hour
of prayer, the ninth; (2)when a certain man who was lame from his
mother's womb was carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the
temple called Beautiful, to ask alms of those who were entering into
the temple; (3)who seeing Peter and John just going into the temple,
asked to receive alms.

(4)Then Peter fixing his eves stedfastly on him with John, said, Look
on us. (5)So he attentively regarded them, expecting to receive
something from them. (6)Then said Peter, I have neither silver nor
gold; but what I have, that I give thee: By the name of Jesus Christ
the Nazarean, arise, and walk! (7)And taking him by the right hand, he
raised him up: and immediately his feet and ancles were restored to
strength. (8)And springing up he stood on his feet, and walked, and
entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising
God. (9)And all the people beheld him walking and praising God: (10)and
they took notice of him, that it was the same person who had sat for
alms at the Beautiful gate of the temple: and they were filled with
astonishment and amazed at what had happened to him. (11)But as the
lame man that was cured held fast Peter and John, all the people ran
together unto them into the portico called Solomon's, in vast
amazement.

(12)Then Peter observing it, addressed himself to the people, Ye men of
Israel, why marvel ye at this? or why gaze ye upon us, as if by our own
power or piety we had enabled this man to walk?

(13)The God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our fathers,
hath glorified his Son Jesus; whom ye delivered up, and denied him in
the presence of Pilate, when he had determined to release him. (14)But
ye denied the Holy One and the Just, and besought that a man, a
murderer, might as a favour be given unto you; (15)but ye slew the
Author of life, whom God raised from the dead: of which we are
witnesses. (16)And through faith in his name hath his name restored
this man to strength, whom ye behold and know: yea, the faith which is
by him hath given him this perfect soundness in the sight of you all.
(17)And now, brethren, I know that through ignorance ye did this deed,
as did also your rulers. (18)But the things which God before announced
by the mouth of all his prophets, that Messiah should suffer, he hath
thus fulfilled. (19)Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your
sins may be blotted out, when refreshing seasons shall come from the
presence of the Lord; (20)and he will send Jesus Christ, who was before
preached unto you: (21)whom the heaven indeed must receive, until the
times of restoration of all things, which God hath spoken of by the
mouth of all his holy prophets from the beginning of the world. (22)For
Moses truly said unto the fathers, "A prophet shall the Lord your God
raise up unto you from among your brethren, like myself; him shall ye
hear in all things whatsoever he shall speak to you. (23)But it shall
come to pass, that every soul which will not hearken to that prophet,
shall be utterly exterminated from amidst the people[28]." (24)And all
the prophets indeed from Samuel, and those who succeeded him, as many
as have spoken, have also foretold those days. (25)Ye are the children
of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers,
saying unto Abraham, And "in thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed[29]." (26)Unto you in the first instance, hath God,
after raising up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, to the end that
every one of you should turn away from your iniquities.

CHAP. IV.

AND as they were thus speaking, the priests, and the captain of the
temple-guard, and the Sadducees, came upon them, (2)worn down with
vexation, because they taught the people, and preached by Jesus the
resurrection of the dead. (3)And they laid hands on them, and committed
them to prison till the next day: for it was then evening.

(4)But many of those who heard the word believed; and the number of the
men was about five thousand. (5)Now it came to pass that the next
morning, their rulers, and elders, and scribes, were assembled at
Jerusalem, (6)and Annas the high-priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and
Alexander, and as many as were the high-priest's relations. (7)And
placing them in the midst, they interrogated them, By what power, or by
what name, have ye done this thing?

(8)Then Peter, filled with the Holy Ghost, said unto them, Ye rulers of
the people, and elders of Israel, (9)if we are this day examined
relative to the good deed done to the infirm man, by what means he was
restored; (10)be it known unto you all, and to all the people of
Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarean, whom ye
crucified, whom God raised from the dead, by him doth this man stand
here sound in your presence. (11)This is the stone which, though set at
nought by you builders, is become the head of the corner[30]. (12)And
there is no salvation in any other person: for there is no other name
under heaven given unto men, whereby we must be saved.

(13)Attentively regarding then the noble confidence of Peter and John,
and perceiving that they were men unlettered, and destitute of
education, they were astonished; and they recollected them, that they
had been with Jesus. (14)But seeing the man who was healed standing
with them, they had not a word to reply in contradiction. (15)But
bidding them retire out of the council-chamber, they conferred among
themselves, (16)saying, What shall we do with these men? for that an
acknowledged miracle hath been wrought by them is evident to all the
inhabitants of Jerusalem; and we cannot deny it. (17)But that it be no
farther spread among the people, we will menace them with threats, no
more to speak in this name to any man. (18)So calling them in, they
charged them not to speak in any manner, nor to teach, in the name of
Jesus.

(19)But Peter and John, answering them, said, If it be right in the
sight of God to obey you rather than God, be yourselves the judges.
(20)For we cannot refrain from speaking the things which we have seen
and heard. (21)Then they with many additional threatenings dismissed
them, finding no pretext how they might punish them, because of the
people: for all men glorified God for what had been done. (22)For the
man was more than forty years of age, upon whom this miracle of healing
was performed.

(23)But they being dismissed, came unto their own friends, and told
them all things which the high-priests and elders had said. (24)Now
when they heard it, they lifted up their united voice to God, and said,
Lord, thou art the God which made the heaven, and the earth, and the
sea, and all things which are in them: (25)who by the mouth of David
thy servant saidst, Why do the heathen so furiously rage, and the
people meditate vain things? (26)The kings of the earth rose up, and
the rulers were gathered together against the Lord and against his
Messiah[31]. (27)For they have been in truth collected together against
thy holy Son Jesus, whom thou hast anointed, even Herod, and Pontius
Pilate, with the heathen, and the people of Israel, (28)to do all that
thy hand and thy counsel predestined should come to pass. (29)And as to
the present transactions, Lord, look upon their threatnings: and grant
thy servants power with all boldness to speak thy word, (30)by
stretching out thy hand for healing; and that signs and miracles may be
performed by the name of thy holy child Jesus.

(31)And while they were praying, the place in which they were assembled
was shaken; and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they
spake the word of God with boldness.

(32)And in the multitude of those that believed there was one heart and
soul: and not one person said, that any part of his substance was his
peculiar property; but all things were in common among them.

(33)And with great power bore the apostles witness of the resurrection
of the Lord Jesus: and great grace was upon them all. (34)Neither was
there any person in want among them: for as many as were possessors of
fields or houses disposed of them, and brought the prices of the things
sold, (35)and laid them at the apostles' feet: and a distribution was
made to every one according as he had need. (36)And Joses, who was
surnamed Barnabas by the apostles, (which is, being interpreted, A son
of consolation,) a Levite, a Cyprian by birth, (37)having a field
belonging to him, sold it, and brought the money, and laid it at the
apostles' feet.

CHAP. V.

NOW a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, had sold an
estate, (2)and secreted a part of the price paid, his wife also being
privy to the transaction, and he brought a part, and laid it at the
apostles' feet. (3)But Peter said, O Ananias! why hath Satan filled thy
heart that thou shouldst lie to the Holy Ghost, and secrete something
from the price of the estate? (4)it remained unsold, was it not vested
in thee? and when sold, was it not in thine own power? why then hast
thou determined in thine heart to do this deed? thou hast not lied unto
men, but unto God. (5)Then Ananias, hearing those words, sunk down and
expired: and great dread fell upon all who heard these things. (6)Then
the young men arose, and swathed him up, and carrying him out, buried
him.

(7)Now it came to pass at the distance of about three hours, his wife
also, not knowing what had passed, came in. (8)And Peter addressed her,
Tell me, if ye sold the estate for so much? And she said, Yes, for so
much.

(9)Then Peter said unto her, How is it that ye have conspired together
to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? see, the feet of them who have buried
thy husband are at the door, and shall carry thee out. (10)Then she
fell instantly at his feet, and expired: and the young men entering,
found her dead, and carrying her out, buried her with her husband.
(11)And great awe fell on all the Church, and on all who heard these
things.

(12)But by the hands of the apostles were many signs and miracles done
among the people; (and they were all with one accord in the portico of
Solomon. (13)But of the rest no man had the courage to unite himself
with them: though the people extolled them. (14)But believers on the
Lord were abundantly added to them, multitudes, both of men and women.)
(15)Insomuch that they carried out into the streets the sick, and laid
them on beds and couches, that when Peter was coming by, if but even
his shadow might pass over some of them.

(16)Then came together also a multitude from the neighbouring cities to
Jerusalem, bringing the sick, and those who were disturbed by unclean
spirits; who were healed universally.

(17)Then arose the high-priest, and all those who were connected with
him, (which was the sect of the Sadducees,) and were filled with zeal,
(18)and laid their hands on the apostles, and put them in the common
prison. (19)But the angel of the Lord by night opened the doors of the
prison, and conducting them forth, said, (20)Go, and taking your
station in the temple, speak to the people all the words of this life.
(21)Having heard this therefore, they entered very early in the morning
into the temple, and taught. But when the high-priest came, and those
who were with him, they convoked the sanhedrim, and all the assembly of
elders of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison to bring them.
(22)But the officers, on their arrival, found them not in the prison:
and returning, informed them, (23)saying; The prison indeed found we
fast locked with all security, and the guards standing without, before
the door: but when we opened it, we found no person within.

(24)Now when they heard these words, both the priest and captain of the
temple and the chief priests were in the utmost perplexity concerning
these things, what could be the meaning of it. (25)Then came a person
and informed them, saying, the men whom ye put in prison are standing
in the temple, and teaching the people. (26)Then went the captain, with
the officers, and brought them; not forcibly, for they were afraid of
the people, lest they should stone them. (27)But when they had
conducted them, they placed them in the sanhedrim: and the high-priest
interrogated them, (28)saying, Did we not lay our strict injunction
upon you, that you should not teach in this name? and, lo, ye have
filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, and would fain bring this man's
blood upon us.

(29)Then Peter and the apostles answering said, We must obey God rather
than men. (30)The God of our fathers hath raised up Jesus, whom ye had
killed, suspending him on a tree. (31)Him hath God exalted at his right
hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, to give repentance unto Israel, and
remission of sins. (32)And we are witnesses of these things; and the
Holy Ghost also, which God hath given to those who obey him.

(33)But when they heard this, they were cut asunder as with a saw, and
took counsel how to make away with them.

(34)Then arose a certain Pharisee, in the sanhedrim, named Gamaliel, a
doctor of the law, held in high esteem by all the people, and ordered
the apostles to be taken out for a little space; (35)and he said unto
them, Men of Israel, take heed to yourselves respecting these men, what
ye mean to do to them. (36)For before these days arose Theudas, saying
that he himself was a singular personage: to whom a number of men,
about four hundred, attached themselves: who was taken off; and as many
as obeyed him, were dispersed, and came to nothing. (37)And after him
arose Judas the Galilean, in the days of the enrolment, and drew away a
multitude of the populace after him: he also perished, and all, as many
as obeyed him, were dispersed. (38)And as to the matters now before
you, I say unto you, Abstain from these men, and leave them to
themselves: for if this design or this work be of men, it will come to
nothing: (39)but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; and in that
case would be found fighters against God. (40)And to him they assented:
and calling in the apostles, after scourging them, they commanded them
not to speak in the name of Jesus, and dismissed them.

(41)Then they went rejoicing from the presence of the sanhedrim, that
for his name's sake, they had been counted worthy to suffer this
injurious treatment. (42)And all the day long in the temple, and from
house to house, they never ceased teaching and preaching Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VI.

NOW in those days, when the disciples were multiplied, there arose a
murmuring of the Grecian proselytes against the Hebrews, because their
widows were overlooked in the daily distribution. (2)Then the twelve
assembling the multitude of the disciples, said, It is not fit that we
should leave the word of God, to make distribution to the tables.
(3)Therefore, brethren, do ye look out for seven men from among
yourselves, the best approved, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, whom
we may appoint to superintend this business. (4)But we will devote
ourselves constantly to prayer, and to the ministry of the word.

(5)And this saying was very agreeable to all the multitude: and they
elected Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, and Philip,
and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicholas a
proselyte a man of Antioch: (6)whom they presented before the apostles:
and having prayed, they laid their hands upon them.  (7)And the word of
God increased: and the number of the disciples in Jerusalem was
multiplied greatly; and a vast body of the priests were obedient to the
faith.

(8)Now Stephen, full of faith and of power, wrought great miracles and
signs among the people. (9)Then rose up certain men of the synagogue of
the freed-men, and of the Cyrenians, and of the Alexandrians, and of
those from Cilicia and Asia, disputing with Stephen. (10)And they could
not resist the wisdom and the spirit with which he spoke. (11)Then they
suborned men to say, We heard him speak blasphemous things against
Moses, and against God. (12)And they stirred up the people, and the
elders, and the scribes, and coming upon him, they seized him together,
and dragged him to the sanhedrim; (13)and they set up false witnesses,
saying, This man doth not cease speaking blasphemous words against this
holy place, and the law: (14)for we have heard him affirm, that Jesus
the Nazarean, even he, will destroy this place, and change the
accustomed ordinances which Moses delivered to us. (15)And fixing their
eyes upon him, all who sat in the sanhedrim, beheld his face as the
face of an angel.

CHAP. VII.

THEN said the high-priest, Are these things so?

(2)He replied, Men, brethren, and fathers, hear me:

The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham, when he was in
Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran, (3)and said to him, Go forth
out of thy country, and from among thy relations, and come hither to a
land which I will shew thee[32]. (4)Then he went out from the country
of the Chaldeans, and, dwelt in Charran: and from thence, after his
father was dead, God removed him as a sojourner into this very country,
in which we now dwell. (5)Yet he gave him no inheritance in it, not so
much as the print of his foot: yet he promised to give it for a
possession to him and to his seed after him, when he had no son.
(6)Then spake God to him thus, That his seed should sojourn in a
foreign land: and that they should enslave it, and grievously afflict
it, four hundred years. (7)And the nation by which they shall be
enslaved will I judge, said God: and after these things they shall come
out, and shall worship me in this place[33]. (8)And he gave him the
covenant of circumcision: and so he begat Isaac, and circumcised him on
the eighth day; and Isaac Jacob, and Jacob the twelve patriarchs.
(9)And the patriarchs, envious, sold Joseph into Egypt: yet God was
with him, (10)and delivered him out of all his afflictions, and gave
him favour and wisdom before Pharaoh king of Egypt; and he appointed
him governor over Egypt and all his house. (11)Then came a famine upon
all the land of Egypt and Canaan, and great distress: and our fathers
found no provisions. (12)But when Jacob heard that there were
provisions in Egypt, he sent our fathers, the first time. (13)And the
second time Joseph was made known unto his brethren; and Joseph's
family was made known unto Pharaoh. (14)Then sent Joseph, and invited
his father Jacob to come to him, and all his kindred, consisting of
seventy-five persons. (15)So Jacob went down into Egypt, and died,
himself, and our fathers, (16)and they removed him to Sychem, and laid
him in the sepulchre which Abraham had bought, at a price paid in
silver, of the sons of Emmor, the father of Shechem. (17)But as the
time of the promise which God had with an oath confirmed unto Abraham
drew nigh, the people increased and multiplied in Egypt, (18)until
another king arose, who knew not Joseph. (19)This man, forming crafty
designs against our nation, grievously treated our fathers, so as to
cause them to expose their children, in order to exterminate the race.
(20)At which time Moses was born, and was endued with singular beauty
from God, who was brought up three months in the house of his father:
(21)and when he was exposed, Pharaoh's daughter took him home, and
brought him up for herself, as a son. (22)And Moses was educated in all
the wisdom of Egypt, and was mighty in words and actions. (23)But when
he had completed his fortieth year, it came into his heart to visit his
brethren the children of Israel. (24)And seeing one of them treated
injuriously, he defended him, and executed vengeance for him who had
suffered the outrage, smiting the Egyptian. (25)For he thought that his
brethren would understand that God by his hand would give them
deliverance: but they understood not. (26)And the following day he
shewed himself to them as they were fighting, and urged them to peace,
saying, My friends, ye are brethren; wherefore do ye ill treat one
another? (27)Then he who did his neighbour wrong thrust him from him,
saying, Who appointed thee a ruler and a judge over us? (28)Wilt thou
kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian yesterday? (29)Then fled Moses
at this saying, and was a sojourner in the land of Midian, where he
begat two sons.

(30)And when forty years were completed, there appeared to him in the
desert of mount Sinai the angel of the Lord, in a flame of fire in a
bush. (31)But when Moses saw it, he marvelled at the sight: and as he
was drawing nearer to observe it, a voice from the Lord came to him,
(32)"I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob[34]." Then Moses trembling, dared not to
look farther.

(33)Then the Lord said unto him, "Loose the sandal from thy feet: for
the place whereon thou standest is holy ground. (34)Attentive I have
beheld the evil treatment of my people in Egypt, and I have heard their
groaning, and I am come down to deliver them. And now come hither, I
will send thee into Egypt[35]." (35)This very Moses whom they had
rejected, saying, Who made thee a ruler and a judge? the same did God
send to be a ruler and redeemer by the hand of the angel who appeared
to him in the bush. (36)He brought them forth, after performing
miracles and signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red sea, and in the
wilderness forty years. (37)This is the Moses who said unto the
children of Israel, "A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up for you
from among your brethren, as myself; him shall ye hear[36]." (38)This
is he, who was with the church in the wilderness with the angel who
spake to him in the mount Sinai, and with our fathers: who received the
oracles of life to give unto us: (39)to whom our fathers would not be
obedient, but thrust him from them, and turned back in their hearts
unto Egypt, (40)saying to Aaron, Make us gods who shall go before us:
for this Moses, who brought us out of the land of Egypt, we know not
what hath happened to him. (41)And they made a calf in those days, and
brought a sacrifice for the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their
own hands.

(42)Then God turned, and gave them up to worship the host of heaven; as
it is written in the book of the prophets, Have ye offered me slain
beasts and sacrifices forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
(43)Yet have ye taken up the tabernacle of Moloc, and the star of your
god Remphan, those figures which ye made to pay adoration to them: and
I will transport you beyond Babylon[37].

(44)The tabernacle of the testimony was with our fathers in the
wilderness, as he that spake to Moses commanded, that he should make it
according to the model which he had seen. (45)Which also our fathers
having received, brought in with Joshua into the place possessed by the
Gentiles, whom God drove out from before the presence of our fathers,
unto the days of David; (46)who found favour before God, and sought to
procure an habitation for the God of Jacob. (47)But Solomon built an
house for him. (48)Though the Most High dwelleth not in temples made
with hands; as the prophet saith, (49)"Heaven is my throne, and earth
the footstool for my feet: what kind of house will ye build me? saith
the Lord: or what place is there for my repose? (50)hath not my hand
made all these things[38]?"

(51)Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and in ears, ye do
always oppose yourselves against the Holy Ghost: as your fathers, so
are ye. (52)Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and
they killed those who before published the tidings of the coming of
that Righteous Person; of whom ye have now been the betrayers and
murderers: (53)who have received the law through arrangements of
angels, yet have not observed it.

(54)Now when they heard these things, they were cut through their
hearts as with a saw, and gnashed upon him with their teeth.

(55)But he being full of the Holy Ghost, and looking up stedfastly to
heaven, saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of
God; (56)and he said, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of
man standing at the right hand of God.

(57)Then they screamed out with a great cry, and stopped their ears,
and rushed all together upon him, (58)and dragging him out of the city,
stoned him: and the witnesses laid down their garments at the feet of a
young man, named Saul. (59)And they stoned Stephen, in the act of
prayer, and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit! (60)Then falling on
his knees, he cried with a loud voice, Lord, impute not to them this
sin! And thus speaking, fell asleep.

CHAP. VIII.

BUT Saul was delighted with his execution.

Now on that very day commenced a great persecution against the church
which was at Jerusalem; and all, besides the apostles, were dispersed
through the regions of Judea and Samaria.

(2)Then some pious men assembling, carried Stephen to his grave, and
made great lamentation over him.

(3)But Saul ravaged the church, entering into the houses, and dragging
men and women, cast them into prison.

(4)Those therefore who were dispersed, travelled through the country,
preaching the word. (5)But Philip, going down to a city of Samaria,
preached Christ unto them. (6)And the multitudes with united minds were
very attentive to the things spoken by Philip, when they heard him, and
saw the miracles which he did. (7)For the unclean spirits, roaring with
great cries, came forth out of many who were possessed: and many who
were paralytic and lame were healed. (8)And there was great joy in that
city.

(9)But a certain man, named Simon, lived previously in that city, who
practised magic, and astonished the nation of Samaria, giving out
himself as an extraordinary great personage: (10)to whom all gave heed
from the small to the great, saying, This man is the great power of
God. (11)And to him they attended, because he had of a considerable
time astonished them by his magical tricks. (12)But when they believed
Philip, who preached the glad tidings of the things which related to
the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptised
both men and women. (13)Then Simon also himself believed: and being
baptised, he attached himself to Philip, and beholding the signs and
great miracles which were performed, he was astonished.

(14)But when the apostles who were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had
received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John: (15)who,
when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the
Holy Ghost: (16)for as yet he had not fallen on any one of them: only
they had been baptised into the name of the Lord Jesus. (17)Then they
laid their hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost.

(18)Now when Simon saw, that by the imposition of the apostles' hands,
the Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money, (19)saying, Confer on
me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay my hands, they may receive
the Holy Ghost. (20)But Peter said unto him, May thy silver with
thyself go into perdition, because thou hast imagined that the gift of
God can be purchased with money. (21)There is for thee neither part nor
lot in this word: for thy heart is not right before God. (22)Repent
therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray to God, if haply this
thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee. (23)For I see that thou art
in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity. (24)Then Simon
answering said, Pray ye for me unto the Lord, that none of the things
which ye have spoken may come upon me.

(25)Then they, after bearing their testimony, and speaking the word of
the Lord, returned towards Jerusalem, and preached the gospel in many
villages of the Samaritans.

(26)Now the angel of the Lord spake to Philip, saying, Arise, and go
towards the south, on the road which leads down from Jerusalem to Gaza:
it is a wilderness. (27)And he arose and went: and lo! an Ethiopian
man, an eunuch, a person in power under Candace queen of the
Ethiopians, who was over all her treasury; he had gone to worship unto
Jerusalem, (28)and was returning, and sitting in his chariot, was
reading the prophet Isaiah. (29)Then said the Spirit to Philip, Go up,
and approach close to that chariot. (30)Then Philip running up to him,
heard him reading the prophet Isaiah; and he said, Well! but dost thou
understand what thou art reading? (31)He replied, How indeed can I,
except some person guide me in the way? And he besought Philip to come
up and sit with him. (32)The portion of scripture which he had been
reading was this: "He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; and as a
lamb before him who sheareth it is dumb, so he opened not his mouth:
(33)in his humiliation his judgment was taken away: but his generation
who can describe? for his life was taken away from the earth[39]."
(34)Then the eunuch addressing himself to Philip, said, I pray thee, of
whom doth the prophet thus speak? of himself, or of some other person?
(35)Then Philip opening his mouth, and beginning from that scripture,
preached to him Jesus. (36)But as they went on the road, they came to
some water: and the eunuch said, Here is water, what forbids my being
baptised? (37)And Philip said, If thou believest with the whole heart,
it is allowable. Then he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ
is the Son of God. (38)And he bid the carriage stop: and they went down
both into the water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptised him.
(39)But when they were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord
caught up Philip, and the eunuch saw him no more: then he went on his
way rejoicing. (40)But Philip found himself at Azotus: and passing
through he preached the gospel in all the cities, until he came to
Caesarea.

CHAP. IX.

BUT Saul, still breathing out threatenings and murder against the
disciples of the Lord, applying to the high-priest, (2)besought of him
letters for the synagogues at Damascus, that if he should find any
persons of this way, whether men or women, he might bring them in
chains to Jerusalem. (3)So advancing on his journey, he was drawing
nigh to Damascus: and suddenly there shone around him a light from
heaven: (4)and falling on the ground, he heard a voice saying unto him,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? (5)Then said he, Who art thou,
Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou art persecuting: It is
difficult for thee to kick against the goads. (6)And trembling and
amazed he said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? And the Lord said
unto him, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what
thou must do.

(7)And the men who travelled with him stood astonished, hearing indeed
a voice, but seeing no man. (8)Then Paul arose from the earth; and when
his eyes were opened, he saw no man: but leading him by the hand, they
brought him into Damascus. (9)And he was three days seeing nothing, and
did neither eat nor drink.

(10)Now there was a certain disciple at Damascus named Ananias; and the
Lord said unto him in a vision, Ananias! And he said, Here I am, Lord.
(11)Then the Lord said to him, Arise, go into the street called Strait,
and inquire at the house of Judas for one named Saul a man of Tarsus:
for, behold, he is praying, (12)and hath seen in a vision a man named
Ananias coming to him, and laying his hand upon him, that he may
recover his sight. (13)But Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard from
many of this man, how many evils he hath inflicted on thy saints at
Jerusalem: (14)and here he hath authority from the chief priests to
bind all that call upon thy name. (15)But the Lord said unto him, Go:
for this man is an elect vessel for me, to bear my name before nations,
and kings, and the children of Israel: (16)for I will shew him how many
things he must suffer for my name's sake.

(17)Then went Ananias, and entered into the house; and laying his hands
upon him, said, Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus, who was seen by thee in
the way that thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mightest recover thy
sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. (18)And directly there fell
from his eyes as it were scales: and he recovered sight instantly, and
arose, and was baptised. (19)And when he had taken nourishment, he
regained his strength. And Saul continued with the disciples who were
at Damascus several days. (20)And immediately he preached Christ in the
synagogues, that he is the Son of God. (21)And all who heard him were
amazed, and said, Is not this the man who made havoc at Jerusalem,
among those who called on this name? and hither he came for this
purpose, that he might carry them in chains unto the chief priests?
(22)But Saul was endued with still greater power, and confounded the
Jews who dwelt at Damascus, conclusively evincing that this person is
the Messiah.

(23)But when many days were fulfilled, the Jews consulted together how
to kill him: (24)but their design was discovered to Saul. And they kept
guard at the gates of the city day and night, that they might kill him.
(25)But the disciples taking him by night, got him off through the
wall, letting him down in a basket.

(26)But when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he attempted to join the
disciples: and they were all afraid of him, not crediting that he was a
disciple. (27)Then Barnabas taking him by the hand, brought him to the
apostles, and related to them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and
that he had spoken to him, and how boldly he had preached at Damascus
in the name of Jesus. (28)And he was with them coming in, and going out
at Jerusalem: (29)and speaking boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus.
And he talked and disputed with the Grecian proselytes: but they made
an attempt to murder him. (30)Then the brethren, when they knew it
brought him down to Caesarea, and sent him off to Tarsus.

(31)Then had the churches peace through all Judea and Galilee and
Samaria, being edified; and walking in the fear of God, and in the
consolation of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied.

(32)Now it came to pass, as Peter was passing through all parts, that
he went down also to the saints which dwelt at Lydda. (33)And found
there a certain man named AEneas, during six years stretched on a bed,
who was paralytic. (34)And Peter said to him, AEneas, Jesus the Messiah
maketh thee whole: arise, and make thine own bed. And he arose
immediately. (35)And all who dwelt at Lydda and Saron saw him, and they
turned to the Lord.

(36)But there was at Joppa a woman, a disciple, named Tabitha, (which
by interpretation is called Dorcas:) this woman was full of good works
and of alms which she did. (37)But it came to pass that in those days
she sickened and died: having then washed her, they laid her out in an
upper room. (38)And as Lydda was near to Joppa, the disciples hearing
that Peter was there, sent two men to him, entreating him without delay
to come over to them. (39)Then Peter arose and went with them. And they
carried him, on his arrival, into the upper room: and all the widows
stood round him weeping, and shewing the coats and garments which
Dorcas had made, whilst she was with them. (40)But Peter putting them
all out, fell upon his knees, and prayed; and turning to the body,
said, Tabitha, arise! And she opened her eyes: and when she saw Peter,
she sat up. (41)Then he gave her his hand, and raised her up; and
calling in the saints and the widows, presented her to them alive.
(42)And it was known through all Joppa; and many believed on the Lord.
(43)Then it came to pass, that he abode many days at Joppa with one
Simon a tanner.

CHAP. X.

NOW there was a man at Caesarea named Cornelius, a centurion of the
cohort called the Italic, (2)a man of piety, and who feared God with
all his house, giving much alms to the people, and praying to God
continually. (3)He saw in a vision evidently about the ninth hour of
the day an angel of God coming to him, and saying to him, Cornelius.
(4)Then looking stedfastly on him, and being terrified, he said, What
means this, Lord? And he said unto him, Thy prayers and thine alms are
come up for a memorial before God. (5)And now send men to Joppa, and
inquire for Simon, who is surnamed Peter: (6)he lodgeth with one Simon
a tanner, whose house is near the sea: this man will tell thee what
thou must do. (7)But when the angel departed who spake to Cornelius, he
called two of his domestics, and a pious soldier, persons who
constantly were in attendance upon him; (8)and relating all things to
them, sent them to Joppa.

(9)Then the next morning, as they were on their journey, and drew near
to the city, Peter went up to the flat roof to pray about the sixth
hour: (10)and he grew very hungry, and desired something to eat: but
whilst they were getting it ready, a sacred ecstacy fell upon him.
(11)And he saw heaven opened, and there descended to him a certain
vessel, as a great sheet with chains at the four corners, and resting
upon the earth: (12)in which were all the quadrupeds of the earth, and
wild beasts, and reptiles, and birds of the air. (13)And there came a
voice to him, Rise, Peter; slay and eat. (14)But Peter said, By no
means, Lord for I have never at any time eaten of any thing common or
unclean. (15)And the voice again a second time came to him, What God
hath cleansed, call not thou unclean. (16)This was thrice repeated: and
the vessel was again taken up into heaven.

(17)But while Peter was perplexed in himself what was meant by the
vision which he had seen, then, behold! the men which had been sent by
Cornelius having inquired out the house of Simon, stood before the
door, (18)and calling, asked if Simon, surnamed Peter, lodged there.
(19)But while Peter was musing upon the vision, the Spirit said to him,
Lo! three men are inquiring after thee. (20)Arise then, and go down,
and go with them, entertaining no doubt, for I have sent them. (21)Then
Peter went down to the men who were sent by Cornelius to him; and said,
Lo! I am the person that ye ask for: what is the business on which ye
are come hither? (22)Then they said, Cornelius a centurion, a just man,
and one that feareth God, and of good report with all the nation of the
Jews, has been divinely admonished by a holy angel to send for thee to
his house, to hear words from thee.

(23)Then inviting them in, he lodged them there. And the next morning
Peter went with them, and some of the brethren from Joppa accompanied
him. (24)And the next day they entered into Caesarea. Now Cornelius was
expecting them, having called together his relations and nearest
friends. (25)And as Peter was entering, Cornelius met him, and falling
at his feet, paid him homage. (26)But Peter raised him up, saying,
Arise; I also myself am a man. (27)And conversing with him, he entered,
and found many assembled together.

(28)And he said unto them, Ye know how contrary it is to established
usage, for a man who is a Jew to associate with or visit one of another
nation; but God hath shewed me to call no man common or unclean.
(29)Wherefore also without a word, I came when invited: I beg to know
therefore for what purpose ye have sent for me?

(30)Then Cornelius said, Four days ago I was fasting till this hour;
and at the ninth hour I was praying in my house, and, lo! a man stood
before me in shining apparel, (31)and said, Cornelius, thy prayer is
heard, and thy alms are remembered before God. (32)Send therefore to
Joppa, and invite Simon, whose surname is Peter, to come to thee; he
lodgeth in the house of Simon the tanner, near the sea: who, when he is
come will talk with thee. (33)Immediately therefore I sent to thee; and
thou hast done well in coming. Now therefore are all we here present
before God, to hear all things that are given in charge to thee from
God.

(34)Then Peter opening his mouth, said, In truth I perceive that God is
not a respecter of persons: (35)but in every nation he that feareth
him, and worketh righteousness, is acceptable to him. (36)The word
which he sent to the children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus
Christ, (he is Lord of all,) ye know: (37)even that which was the
common talk through all Judea, beginning from Galilee, after the
baptism which John preached; (38)respecting Jesus, who was of Nazareth,
how God had anointed him with the Holy Ghost and with power: who went
about doing good, and healing all that were tyrannically oppressed of
the devil; for God was with him. (39)And we are witnesses of all things
which he did both in the region of the Jews, and in Jerusalem; whom
they killed suspending him on a tree: (40)him God raised up the third
day, and ordained that he should be visibly manifested; (41)not to all
the people, but to witnesses chosen before of God, even to us, who did
eat and drink with him after he was arisen from the dead. (42)And hath
commanded us to proclaim to the people, and to bear our testimony that
this is the person who is ordained of God the Judge of the living and
the dead. (43)To him bear all the prophets witness, that through his
name every one who believeth in him, shall receive remission of sins.

(44)While Peter was yet speaking these words, the Holy Ghost fell on
all who heard the discourse. (45)And they of the circumcision who were
believers, as many as came with Peter, were amazed, because even on the
Gentiles the gift of the holy Ghost was poured out. (46)For they heard
them speaking in different languages, and magnifying God. Then Peter
addressed them, (47)Can any one forbid the water for baptising these
persons, who have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? (48)So he
commanded them to be baptised in the name of the Lord. Then they
entreated him to tarry there some days.

CHAP. XI.  NOW the apostles and brethren who were in Judea heard that
the Gentiles also had received the word of God. (2)And when Peter went
up to Jerusalem, they of the circumcision disputed with him, (3)saying,
Thou hast gone in to men holding uncircumcision, and hast eaten with
them.

(4)Then Peter taking up the matter from the beginning, explained it to
them regularly, saying, (5)I was in the city of Joppa praying and I saw
in a trance a vision, a certain vessel descending as a vast sheet let
down from heaven by its four corners; and it came close to me: (6)on
which looking attentively, I perceived, and saw the quadrupeds of the
earth, and the wild beasts, and the reptiles, and the birds of the air.
(7)Then I heard a voice saying to me, Rise, Peter; slay and eat. (8)But
I said, By no means, Lord: for never yet hath any thing common or
unclean entered into my mouth. (9)But the voice replied the second time
from heaven, What God hath cleansed, call not thou common. (10)Now this
was repeated thrice: and the whole withdrawn again into heaven.
(11)And, lo! immediately three men stood before the house where I was,
sent from Caesarea unto me. (12)And the Spirit bade me go with them,
making no hesitation. But with me went also these six brethren, and we
entered into the man's house: (13)and he informed us how he had seen an
angel in his house, standing and saying to him, Send men to Joppa, and
invite Simon, who is surnamed Peter; (14)who will speak words to thee,
by which thou mayest be saved, and thy house. (15)So when I had begun
to speak, the Holy Ghost fell on them, just as on us at the beginning.
(16)Then I recollected the word of the Lord, how he had said, John
indeed baptised with water; but ye shall be baptised with the Holy
Ghost. (17)If God then gave an equal gift to them even as to us, on
believing on the Lord Jesus Christ; I, indeed, who was I, that I should
be able to restrain God?

(18)So when they heard these things they were satisfied, and glorified
God, saying, Well! then hath God even to the Gentiles given repentance
unto life.

(19)Now those also who were dispersed by the persecution which arose on
account of Stephen passed on as far as Phenice, and Cyprus, and
Antioch, speaking the word to no man except the Jews only. (20)And some
of them were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who, when they arrived at
Antioch, spake to the Grecian proselytes, preaching the Lord Jesus.
(21)And the hand of the Lord was with them: and a vast multitude
believing, turned to the Lord. (22)And the report concerning them was
heard in the ears of the church which was at Jerusalem: and they
dispatched Barnabas, to go as far as Antioch. (23)Who, when he arrived
there, and beheld the grace of God, rejoiced, and exhorted them all,
with full purpose of heart to adhere to the Lord. (24)For he was a good
man, and full of the Holy Ghost and of faith: and a great multitude was
added to the Lord.

(25)Then went forth Barnabas to Tarsus, in search of Saul: (26)and
having found him, he brought him to Antioch. And it came to pass, that
during a whole year they were jointly employed in that church, and
taught a vast multitude, and they called for the first time in Antioch
the disciples Christians. (27)Now there came down in those days
prophets from Jerusalem to Antioch. (28)And one of them named Agabus,
rising up, signified by the spirit that a great famine was coming upon
the whole habitable globe: which also came in the reign of Claudius
Caesar. (29)Then the disciples, as everyman had ability, determined
every individual of them to send a sum to be distributed among the
brethren who dwelt in Judea: (30)which also they did, sending it off to
the presbyters by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.

CHAP. XII.

NOW at that time Herod the king stretched forth his hand to treat
cruelly certain persons belonging to the church. (2)And he slew James
the brother of John with a sword. (3)And seeing how agreeable this was
to the Jews, he proceeded to seize Peter also. (Then were the days of
unleavened bread.) (4)Whom having apprehended, he put him in prison,
delivering him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep guard over him;
intending after the Passover to bring him forth to the people _for
execution_. (5)So then Peter was kept in prison: but fervent prayer was
offered up by the church to God for him. (6)Now when Herod was going to
bring him forth, the same night was Peter fast asleep between the two
soldiers, fastened to them with two chains: and the guards before the
door kept the prison. (7)And, lo! an angel of the Lord stood there, and
light glared through the apartment: then with a stroke on Peter's side,
he roused him up, and said, Arise quickly. And his chains fell from his
hands. (8)And the angel said to him, Gird thyself up, and bind on thy
sandals. And he did so. And he said unto him, Wrap thyself in thy
mantle, and follow me. (9)And going out, he followed him; and knew not
that it was a reality which was done by the angel; but he supposed he
saw a vision. (10)So passing through the first ward and the second,
they came to the iron door which leads into the city, which opened to
them spontaneously: and being come out, they walked forward through one
street; and immediately the angel departed from him. (11)And Peter
coming to himself, said, Now I know assuredly, that the Lord hath sent
his angel, and hath delivered me from the hand of Herod, and all the
eager expectation of the people of the Jews. (12)And after considering
with himself, he went to the house of Mary the mother of John, who is
surnamed Mark; where many were thronged together, and praying.
(13)Peter then knocking at the door of the gatetway, there came a
damsel to ask who was there, named Rhoda. (14)And well knowing Peter's
voice, she opened not the door for joy; but running in, told that Peter
was standing before the door. (15)But they said, Thou art raving. But
she confidently persisted that it was so. Then they said, It is his
angel. (16)But Peter continued knocking: and they opened the door and
saw him, and were astonished. (17)Then beckoning with the hand that
they should be silent, he informed them in what manner the Lord had
brought him out of the prison. And he said, Tell James and the brethren
these things. And departing thence he went into another place.

(18)Now when the day broke, there was no small stir among the soldiers,
what could possibly become of Peter. (19)And Herod sought him out
earnestly, but not being able to find him, after having examined the
guards strictly, he commanded them to be executed. And going down from
Jerusalem to Caesarea, took up his abode there.

(20)Now Herod was fiercely bent on war against the Tyrians and
Sidonians: but they presented themselves unanimously before him, and
ingratiating themselves with Blastus who was over the king's
bedchamber, they begged for peace; because their country received all
their supply of provisions from the king's territories. (21)Then on a
day appointed, Herod, arrayed in royal apparel, and seated on his
throne, made an harangue unto them. (22)And the populace shouted, It is
the voice of a god, and not a man. (23)But instantly the angel of the
Lord smote him, because he gave not the glory to God: and being
devoured with worms, he expired.

(24)But the word of the Lord increased, and was widely diffused.
(25)Then Barnabas and Saul departed from Jerusalem, having completed
the distribution _of the sum entrusted with them_; and they took with
them John, whose surname was Mark.

CHAP. XIII.

NOW there were at Antioch, according to the established church,
prophets and teachers; such as Barnabas, and Simeon called Niger the
black, and Lucius a Cyrenian, and Manaen, Herod the tetrarch's
foster-brother, and Saul. (2)And as they were employed in the ministry,
and kept a fast, the Holy Ghost said, Set apart for me now both
Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them. (3)Then
having kept a fast and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent
them out. (4)They then being sent forth indeed by the Holy Ghost, went
down to Seleucia; and from thence sailed to Cyprus. (5)And being at
Salamis, they preached the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews:
and they had John also as their attendant. (6)Now as they travelled
through the island as far as Paphos, they found a certain person who
professed magic, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name was Bar-jesus:
(7)who was with the proconsul Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man; he
inviting to his house Barnabas and Saul, desired earnestly to hear the
word of God. (8)But Elymas the magician (for such is his name when
interpreted) opposed them, seeking to pervert the proconsul from the
faith. (9)Then Saul (now Paul), filled with the Holy Ghost, and fixing
his eyes upon him, (10)said, O thou full of all guile and all mischief,
thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not
cease perverting the strait ways of the Lord? (11)And now, behold, the
hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, seeing the sun
no more for a season. And instantly there fell on him a thick mist and
darkness; and groping about he sought some to lead him by the hand.
(12)Then when the proconsul saw what was done, he believed, being
struck with the doctrine of the Lord.

(13)Hereupon sailing from Paphos, they who were about Paul came to
Perga in Pamphylia: but John departing from them returned to Jerusalem.
(14)And they departed from Perga, and came to Antioch in Pisidia, and
entering into the synagogue on the sabbath-day, they sat down. (15)Then
after the reading of the law and the prophets, the rulers of the
synagogues sent to them, saying, Men and brethren, if ye are disposed
to give a word of exhortation to the people, speak.

(16)Then Paul arose, and waving his hand, said, Men of Israel, and ye
that fear God, hear me. (17)The God of this people Israel selected our
fathers, and exalted the people during their abode in the land of
Egypt, and with a mighty arm brought he them out of it. (18)And about
the space of forty years he bore with their behaviour in the
wilderness. (19)And destroying seven nations in the land of Canaan, he
distributed their territory to them by lot. (20)And after these things,
during a space of about four hundred and fifty years, he gave them
judges until Samuel the prophet. (21)And from that time they desired a
king: and God gave them Saul the son of Kis, a man of the tribe of
Benjamin, during forty years. (22)And removing him, he raised up unto
them David to be king; respecting whom also he spake testifying, "I
have found David the son of Jesse, a man after my own heart, who shall
perform all my intentions[40]." (23)From this man's seed according to
the promise hath God raised up to Israel a Saviour, Jesus: (24)John
having preached before his first coming the baptism of repentance to
all the people of Israel. (25)But as John was finishing his course, he
said, Whom do ye suppose me to be? I am not _the Messiah_. But, behold!
he is coming after me, the sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to
loose. (26)Men and brethren, children of the race of Abraham, and all
among you who fear God, to you is the word of this salvation sent.
(27)For they who dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers, being ignorant
of him, and the words of the prophets that are read every sabbath-day,
by condemning him have fulfilled them. (28)And though they found no
cause of death in him, they besought Pilate that he might be killed.
(29)But when they had finished all things that were written of him,
they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a sepulchre. (30)But
God raised him from the dead: (31)and he was seen many days by those
who went up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses
to the people. (32)And we preach to you the promise made to our
fathers; (33)for this hath God fulfilled to their children, even to us,
in raising up Jesus: as it is also written in the second Psalm, "Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee[41]." (34)But that he raised
him from the dead, no more in future to return to corruption, he hath
thus spoken, "I will give you the holy things of David, which are
sure[42]." (35)Wherefore also he saith in another place, "Thou wilt not
permit thy Holy One to see corruption[43]." (36)For David indeed, after
having served his own generation by the will of God, fell asleep, and
was placed with his fathers, and saw corruption. (37)But he, whom God
raised up, saw no corruption. (38)Be it therefore known unto you, men
and brethren, that through this man remission of sin is proclaimed to
you: (39)and by this man shall every one who believeth be justified
from all things, from which it was not possible that he should be
justified by the law of Moses. (40)Take heed then, that this come not
upon you, which is spoken by the prophets; (41)"Behold, ye despisers,
and wonder, and perish: for I do a work in your days, a work which ye
shall in no wise believe, though one declare it unto you[44]."

(42)But when the Jews were going out of the synagogue, the Gentiles
entreated that these words might be spoken to them the following
sabbath. (43)And when the synagogue was dismissed, many of the Jews and
of the devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas: who, exhorting
them, persuaded them to abide stedfast in the grace of God.

(44)And on the next sabbath almost all the city thronged together to
hear the word of God. (45)But the Jews seeing the multitude, were
filled with envy, and opposed the things spoken by Paul, contradicting
and reviling. (46)Then Paul and Barnabas speaking with undaunted
boldness, said, It was necessary that the word of God should be first
spoken unto you: but since ye have thrust it from you, and judged
yourselves not worthy of eternal life, lo! we turn to the Gentiles.
(47)For so hath the Lord enjoined us, "I have set thee for a light of
the Gentiles, that thou mightest be for salvation unto the extremity of
the earth[45]." (48)Now when the Gentiles heard this, they rejoiced,
and glorified the word of the Lord: and they believed, even as many as
were ordained to life eternal. (49)So the word of the Lord was diffused
through the whole region.

(50)Then the Jews stirred up the devout women, and those who were
respectable, and the principal persons of the city, and raised up a
persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and cast them out of their
borders. (51)But they, shaking off the dust of their feet against them,
came to Iconium. (52)And the disciples were filled with joy, and with
the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. XIV.

NOW it came to pass at Iconium, that they went together into the
synagogue of the Jews, and spake in such a manner, as that a vast
multitude both of the Jews and Greek proselytes believed. (2)But the
unbelieving Jews stirred up, and maliciously prejudiced the spirits of
the Gentiles against the brethren. (3)A long space therefore continued
they there speaking boldly in the Lord, who bore witness to the word of
his grace, and granted signs and miracles to be wrought by their hands.
(4)So the multitude was divided: some indeed were with the Jews, but
others with the apostles. (5)And when there was a strong effort made
both by the Gentiles and Jews with their rulers to ill-treat and stone
them, (6)conscious of their danger, they fled unto the cities of
Lycaonia, Lystra, and Derbe, and the circum-jacent country: (7)and
there they preached the gospel.

(8)And there was a certain man at Lystra, who having lost the use of
his feet was sitting, being lame from his mother's womb, and who had
never been able to walk: (9)this person heard Paul speaking; who fixing
his eyes on him, and discovering that he had faith to be healed,
(10)said with a loud voice, Stand up firm on thy feet! And he leaped
and walked. (11)But when the multitudes beheld what Paul had done, they
lifted up their voice, in the dialect of Lycaonia, saying, The gods in
the form of mortals are come down to us. (12)And they called Barnabas,
Jupiter; and Paul, Mercury, because he principally led the discourse.

(13)Then the priest of Jupiter, who was the presiding deity of their
city, brought bulls and garlands unto the gates of the city, and
intended to offer a sacrifice with the people. (14)But when the
apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard it, they rent their garments, and
rushed into the crowd, crying out, (15)and saying, Sirs, why do ye
these things? We too are mortals subject to the same infirmities with
you; preaching to you the gospel, that ye should turn from these vain
things unto the living God, who made heaven, and earth, and the sea,
and all things which are therein: (16)who in the past generations hath
suffered all nations to walk in their own ways. (17)Although indeed he
left not himself untestified of, doing us good, giving us from heaven
showers, and fruitful seasons, replenishing our hearts with food and
gladness. (18)And thus speaking, scarce restrained they the multitudes
from offering the sacrifice to them.

(19)Then came the Jews from Antioch and Iconium, and gaining over the
multitudes, they stoned Paul, and dragged him out of the city,
supposing him to be dead. (20)But as the disciples stood around him, he
arose, and entered into the city: and on the morrow he departed with
Barnabas for Derbe. (21)And after preaching the gospel in that city,
and bringing many to become disciples, they returned to Lystra, and
Iconium, and Antioch; (22)strengthening the souls of the brethren,
exhorting them to abide firm in the faith, and that through many
afflictions we must pass into the kingdom of heaven. (23)Then
appointing them presbyters in every city, by prayer with fastings they
commended them to the Lord, on whom they had believed.

(24)Then passing through Pisidia, they came unto Pamphylia. (25)And
having spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia: (26)and
thence sailed for Antioch, from whence they had been commended to the
grace of God for the service which they had performed. (27)So when they
arrived they called the church together, and related what great things
God had done by them, and that he had opened to the heathen the door of
faith.

(28)And there they abode no inconsiderable time with the disciples.

CHAP. XV.

AND certain persons coming down from Judea taught the brethren, That if
ye are not circumcised according to the ordinances of Moses, ye cannot
be saved. (2)There being therefore no small contention and dispute
maintained by Paul and Barnabas against them, they determined that Paul
and Barnabas, and certain others of their body, should go up to the
apostles and presbyters at Jerusalem, for the decision of this
question. (3)They therefore being sent on their way by the church,
passed through Phoenicia and Samaria, giving a particular narrative of
the conversion of the Gentiles: and they gave great joy to all the
brethren. (4)Then when they arrived at Jerusalem, they were cordially
received by the church, and the apostles and presbyters, and they
related how great things God had done by them. (5)But up rose some of
the pharisaical sect, who professed the faith, insisting, That it was
necessary to circumcise them, and to enjoin them to observe the law of
Moses. (6)Then the apostles and presbyters were assembled to consider
of this matter. (7)When after much dispute, Peter arose, and said unto
them,

Men and brethren, ye know that a considerable time ago God chose among
us, by my mouth, that the Gentiles should hear the gospel-word, and
believe. (8)And God, who is the discerner of the heart, bore them
witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as to us; (9)and made no
difference betwixt either us or them, purifying their hearts by faith.
(10)Why then now tempt ye God, by imposing a yoke on the neck of the
disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? (11)But
we believe that we shall be saved by the grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ, in the same way as they. (12)Then the whole multitude kept
silence, and listened to Barnabas and Paul, relating how great signs
and miracles God had wrought among the Gentiles by them.

(13)Now when they ceased speaking, James replied, saying, Men and
brethren, hear me: (14)Simon hath fully related, how at first God
graciously looked upon _the Gentiles_, to take from them a people for
his name. (15)And in accord with this are the words of the prophets; as
it is written, (16)"After this will I return, and build again the
tabernacle of David, that is fallen; and re-edify what hath been dug up
from the foundation, and will set it upright again: (17)that the
residue of men may diligently seek the Lord, and all the Gentiles,
among whom my name is invoked, even among them, saith the Lord, who
doth all these things[46]." (18)Known unto God from the beginning are
all his works. (19)Therefore I am decided, that we give no unnecessary
disquietude to those who from the heathen have turned to God: (20)but
that we write to them, that they abstain from pollutions of idol
_sacrifices_, and from whoredom, and from what is strangled, and from
blood. (21)For Moses for ages past in every city hath those who preach
him, being read in the synagogues every sabbath-day.

(22)Then it was determined by the apostles and presbyters with the
whole church, to send select men from themselves unto Antioch with Paul
and Barnabas; Judas surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, leading men among the
brethren; (23)writing a letter by their hand, in these words:

The apostles and presbyters and the brethren, to the brethren from
among the Gentiles which are at Antioch, and in Syria, and Cilicia,
greeting: (24)Forasmuch as we have heard, that certain persons who went
out from us have disturbed you with discourses, unsettling your minds,
insisting, that you should be circumcised, and observe the law: to whom
we gave no such charge: (25)it hath seemed fit to us, assembled
unanimously, to send unto you select men with our beloved Barnabas and
Paul, (26)men who have hazarded their lives for the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ. (27)We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, and they by
word of mouth will tell you the same things. (28)For it hath seemed
good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no other burden
except these things which are of absolute necessity; (29)that ye
abstain from eating whatever is sacrificed to idols, and from blood,
and from what is strangled, and from whoredom: from which things
carefully preserving yourselves, ye shall do well. Farewell.

(30)They then being thus dispatched, came to Antioch: and assembling
the multitude, they delivered the letter: (31)and when they had read
it, they rejoiced in the consolation _of it_.  (32)Then Judas and
Silas, being also themselves prophets, exhorted the brethren, in many a
discourse, and established them. (33)And having stayed their time, they
were dismissed in peace from the brethren to the apostles. (34)However
Silas thought proper to abide there. (35)Paul also and Barnabas abode
at Antioch, teaching and preaching, with many others also, the word of
the Lord.

(36)Then after certain days said Paul to Barnabas, Let us now return
and visit our brethren in every city among whom we have preached the
word of the Lord, that we may see how they hold on. (37)Now Barnabas
had resolved to take with him John, whose surname is Mark. (38)But Paul
did not think him a fit person to take with them, who had withdrawn
from them from Pamphylia, and no longer went with them to the service.
(39)So there grew up a sudden quarrel, insomuch that they separated
from each other: and Barnabas, taking Mark with him, sailed away to
Cyprus: (40)but Paul selecting Silas, departed, being commended by the
brethren to the favour of God. (41)And he passed through Syria and
Cilicia, confirming the churches.

CHAP. XVI.

THEN he came to Derbe and Lystra: and, behold! a certain disciple was
there, named Timothy, the son of a certain Jewish woman, who believed;
but his father was a Greek: (2)who was highly spoken of by the brethren
at Lystra and Iconium. (3)Him Paul resolved to take out with him; and
took and circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those places:
for they all knew his father, that he was a Greek. (4)So as they passed
through the cities, they delivered to them for their observance the
ordinances decreed by the apostles and presbyters that were at
Jerusalem.

(5)Then were the churches established truly in the faith, and increased
in number daily. (6)So passing through Phrygia and the region of
Galatia, being forbidden by the Holy Ghost to speak the word in Asia,
(7)coming as far as Mysia, they made an effort to go unto Bythinia: but
the Spirit permitted them not. (8)Whereupon passing by Mysia they went
down to Troas. (9)And a vision by night appeared to Paul; a certain
man, a Macedonian, stood by him, entreating him, and saying, Pass over
into Macedonia, and help us. (10)But when he saw the vision,
immediately we sought to go forth into Macedonia, concluding that the
Lord had called us to preach the gospel to them. (11)Therefore sailing
from Troas, we came in a direct course to Samothrace, and the next day
to Neapolis; (12)and from thence to Philippi, which is the first city
in that part of Macedonia, and a colony: and we abode in that city some
days.

(13)And on the sabbath-day we went forth out of the city to the river
side, where an oratory was by custom established; and sitting down, we
spoke to the women who there assembled. (14)And a certain woman, Lydia
by name, a seller of purple, from the city of Thyatira, a worshipper of
God, hearkened: whose heart the Lord thoroughly opened, to attend to
the words spoken by Paul. (15)So when she was baptised, and her house,
she entreated, saying, Since ye have judged that I am faithful to the
Lord, come and abide at my house. And she constrained us.

(16)Now it happened as we were going to the oratory, a certain damsel
having a pythonic spirit met us, who produced for her masters much gain
as a fortuneteller: (17)she following Paul and us, cried out, saying,
These men are the servants of the most high God, who preach to you the
way of salvation. (18)And this she did for several days. Then Paul was
wearied out, and turning, said to the spirit, I command thee in the
name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And he came out that very
hour. (19)But when her masters saw that the hope of their gain was
gone, they laid hold on Paul and Silas, and dragged them into the forum
before the chief rulers, (20)and presenting them to the magistrates,
they said, These are the men that exceedingly disturb the peace of our
city, being Jews, (21)and enjoin customs which it is not lawful for us
to receive, or to practise, being Romans. (22)And the populace stood up
together against them: and the magistrates, after having had their
garments torn from their backs, commanded them to be beaten with rods.
(23)And laying on them many stripes, cast them into prison, commanding
the jailor to keep them in safe custody: (24)who, receiving such an
injunction, thrust them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast
in the stocks. (25)But about midnight Paul and Silas, after joining in
prayer, sang hymns to God: and the prisoners heard them. (26)And
suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the very foundations of
the prison were shaken: and instantly all the doors flew open, and
every man's chains were loosed. (27)Then the jailor being roused from
sleep, and seeing the doors of the prison open, drew his sword, going
to destroy himself, supposing the prisoners had escaped. (28)But Paul
called out with a loud voice, saying, Do thyself no injury: for we are
all here. (29)Thereupon calling for a light, he rushed in, and fell
down trembling before Paul and Silas; (30)and having first brought them
out, said, Sirs! what must I do to be saved? (31)And they said, Believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, thou, and thy house.
(32)And they spake unto him the word of the Lord, and to all who were
in his house. (33)And taking them that same hour of the night, he
washed their stripes; and was baptised, himself and all who belonged to
him immediately. (34)And when he had brought them into his house, he
spread the table, and greatly rejoiced with all his household,
believing in God.

(35)But when it was day, the magistrates sent the lictors, saying, Set
those men at large. (36)Then the jailor told these words to Paul, That
the magistrates had sent to set them at liberty: now therefore, _said
he,_ get ye out, and pursue your journey in peace. (37)But Paul said to
them, They have beaten us publicly, uncondemned, men that are Roman
citizens, and have cast us into prison; and would they now
clandestinely send us away? no, verily; but let them come themselves
and fetch us out. (38)Then the lictors reported all these words to the
magistrates: and they were terrified, when they heard they were Roman
citizens. (39)So they came and spoke kindly to them, and fetching them
out, besought them to depart from the city. (40)Then leaving the
prison, they went unto Lydia: and when they had seen the brethren, they
comforted them, and went their way.

CHAP. XVII.

SO journeying through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to
Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of Jews: (2)And Paul,
according to his usual custom, went in to them, and for three sabbaths
he reasoned with them from the scriptures, (3)opening them clearly, and
laying it evidently down that the Messiah must suffer, and rise again
from the dead; and that this man is the Messiah, even Jesus, whom I
preach unto you. (4)And some of them believed, and associated
themselves with Paul and Silas; and of the religious Greeks a vast
multitude, and of the wives of the first people not a few. (5)But the
unbelieving Jews, roused to a fit of zeal, and taking some of the
lowest vulgar men of vile characters, and raising a mob, set the city
in an uproar, and besetting the house of Jason, sought them to bring
them unto the people. (6)But not finding them there, they dragged Jason
and certain brethren to the city magistrates, roaring out, These are
the men who are movers of sedition through the world, and are come in
hither; (7)whom Jason has entertained in his house: and the practice of
all these fellows is in direct opposition to all Caesar's ordinances,
for they affirm that another is king, one Jesus. (8)And they greatly
agitated the people and the city magistrates when they heard these
things. (9)So after taking sufficient security from Jason and the rest,
they dismissed them.

(10)Then the disciples immediately by night sent off both Paul and
Silas to Berea; who were no sooner arrived, than they went into the
synagogue of the Jews. (11)Now these were more liberally minded men
than those of Thessalonica, for they received the word with all
readiness of mind, daily, examining the Scriptures if these things were
really so. (12)Then many of them truly believed: and of the Grecian
proselyte women of respectability, and of the men not a few.

(13)But when the Jews of Thessalonica knew that at Berea also the word
of God was preached by Paul, they came thither, and stirred up the
populace. (14)Then immediately on this the brethren sent off Paul, to
go as if by sea: but Silas and Timothy abode there still. (15)And those
who conduced Paul brought him as far as Athens, and receiving an
injunction for Silas and Timothy that they should come to him as
speedily as possible, they departed.  (16)Now while Paul waited for
them at Athens, his spirit within him was greatly grieved, beholding
the city so devoted to idolatry. (17)Therefore he reasoned in the
synagogue with the Jews, and those who worshipped there, and in the
forum every day with those he happened to meet.

(18)Then certain of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers attacked him:
and some said, What will this chattering fellow say? but others, He
seemeth to be a preacher of foreign deities, because he preached to
them Jesus and the resurrection. (19)So they took him and led him to
the hill of Mars, saying, May we know what this novel doctrine taught
by thee is? (20)For thou bringest some strange stories to our ears; we
wish therefore to know what these things mean. (21)Now all the
Athenians and the strangers who come to sojourn there, take pleasure in
spending their time in nothing else but in talking, or hearing of some
novelty.

(22)Then Paul standing in the midst of the Areopagus said, Ye men of
Athens, I observe that in all things ye are too much devoted to the
worship of daemons. (23)For as I walked about, and attentively viewed
the objects of your worship, I found even an altar on which was this
inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore you in ignorance adore,
him I preach unto you. (24)The God who created the world, and all
things in it, he that is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in
temples of man's construction; (25)nor is he served by human hands, as
if he needed any creature, himself imparting to all beings life, and
breath, and all things. (26)And hath made from one man's blood all the
nations of mankind, to dwell upon the whole face of the earth, fixing
the predetermined periods of their existence, and the boundaries of
their several abodes; (27)that they should seek the Lord, if indeed
they might haply grope him out, and find him, though truly he is not
far from any individual of us: (28)for from him we derive life, and
power of motion, and existence; as also some of your own poets have
said, "For we are even his offspring." (29)Being then the offspring of
God, we ought not to imagine that the Divinity is like to gold, or
silver, or stone sculptured by human art or contrivance. (30)These
times indeed of ignorance God then overlooked; but he now commands all
men in every place to repent: (31)because he hath fixed the day in
which he will judge the whole world in righteousness by the man whom he
hath appointed; affording evidence of this to all, by raising him from
the dead.

(32)But when they heard of the resurrection from the dead, Some
scoffed: and others said, We will hear thee again on this subject.
(33)And so Paul departed from the midst of them. (34)But certain
persons cleaving to him, believed: among whom was even Dionysius the
Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.

CHAP. XVIII.

AND after these transactions, Paul departing from Athens, came to
Corinth; (2)and finding a certain Jew named Aquila, a native of Pontus,
lately arrived from Italy, with Priscilla his wife, (because Claudius
had issued an order that all Jews should depart from Rome,) he turned
in to them. (3)And as he was of the same occupation, he abode with
them, and worked, (for by trade they were tent-makers:) (4)and he
discoursed in the synagogue every sabbath-day, and persuaded both the
Jews and the Greek proselytes. (5)And when Silas and Timothy were come
from Macedonia, Paul felt a strong impulse on his spirit, and forcibly
testified to the Jews, that Jesus was the Messiah. (6)But as they
continued opposing and blaspheming, he shook his garments, and said
unto them, Your blood be upon your own heads; I am pure from it: from
this moment will I go to the Gentiles. (7)And departing thence, he came
to the house of a person, called Justus, one who worshipped God, whose
house was contiguous to the synagogue. (8)But Crispus, the ruler of the
synagogue, believed in the Lord with all his house: and many of the
Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptised. (9)Then spake the
Lord in a vision by night to Paul, Fear not, but speak; and hold not
thy peace: (10)for I am with thee, and no man shall set himself against
thee to do thee harm; because I have much people in this city. (11)And
he sat down there a year and six months, teaching among them the word
of God.

(12)But when Gallio was the proconsul of Achaia, the Jews, with one
accord, rose up against Paul, and brought him to the judgment-seat,
(13)saying, This is the fellow that earnestly persuades men to worship
God contrary to the law. (14)Then Paul being about to open his mouth,
Gallio said to the Jews, (15)If indeed this was now a matter of
injustice, or wicked knavery, with reason I should hear you patiently;
but if it be merely a controversy about the word, and names, and a law
peculiar to yourselves, settle it yourselves: for I will be no judge of
these matters. (16)And he drove them from the judgment-seat. (17)Then
all the Greeks laid hold on Sosthenes the ruler of the synagogue, and
beat him before the tribunal. And Gallio paid no regard to any of these
things.

(18)Then Paul abode there yet many days, and taking leave of the
disciples, he set sail for Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila;
having cut off his hair at Cenchrea: for he had a vow. (19)And he came
to Ephesus, and left them there: but he himself went into the
synagogue, and discoursed with the Jews. (20)But when they were
importunate with him to prolong his stay among them, he consented not;
(21)but took his leave of them, saying, I must by any means keep the
approaching feast at Jerusalem: but I mean to return to you again, if
God so please. So he sailed from Ephesus. (22)And landing at Cesarea,
he went up, and having saluted the church _at Jerusalem_, he went down
to Antioch. (23)And after making some stay, he departed, passing in
regular order through the Galatian district, and Phrygia, confirming
all the disciples.

(24)Now a certain Jew named Apollos, an Alexandrian by birth, a man of
eloquence, who was powerful in the Scriptures, had come to Ephesus.
(25)He was instructed in the way of the Lord: and being fervent in
spirit, he spake and taught very diligently the things concerning the
Lord, though knowing only the baptism of John. (26)So this man began to
speak with great boldness in the synagogue: but when Aquila and
Priscilla heard him, they took him home with them, and more accurately
expounded to him the way of the Lord. (27)And when he wished to pass
over to Achaia, the brethren wrote, exhorting the disciples to receive
him; who arriving, contributed much to _confirm_ those who believed
through grace. (28)For he strenuously argued with the Jews in public,
demonstrating by the Scriptures that Jesus is the Messiah.

CHAP. XIX.

NOW it came to pass that during the time Apollos was at Corinth, Paul,
after passing through the upper provinces, came to Ephesus; and finding
certain disciples, (2)said unto them, Have ye received the Holy Ghost
since ye believed? And they said unto him, We have not even heard if
the Holy Ghost is _given_. (3)And he asked them, Into what then were ye
baptised? And they replied, Into John's baptism. (4)Then said Paul,
John indeed baptised with the baptism of repentance, saying to the
people, That they should believe on him who was coming after him, that
is, in Christ Jesus. (5)Now when they heard it, they were baptised into
the name of the Lord Jesus. (6)And Paul laying on them his hands, the
Holy Ghost came upon them; and they spake with tongues, and prophesied.
(7)And the men were in all about twelve. (8)And entering into the
synagogue, he spake boldly during three months, reasoning and
persuading the things that concern the kingdom of God. (9)And when some
were hardened, and infidel, speaking evil of the way before the people,
he withdrew from them, and separated the disciples, discoursing daily
in the school of one Tyrannus. (10)And this he did for two years; so
that all who dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews
and Greeks. (11)And God wrought by the hands of Paul extraordinary
miracles; (12)so that even from his skin there were brought
handkerchiefs and aprons unto the diseased, and their disorders were
chased from them, and the evil spirits came out of them.

(13)Then certain of the Jews, who went about as exorcists, attempted to
make mention of the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had evil
spirits, saying, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth. (14)And
they were seven sons of Sceva a Jew, a chief priest, who did this.
(15)Then the evil spirit replied, Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but
who are ye? (16)And the man sprang upon them, in whom was the evil
spirit, and getting the mastery over them, prevailed against them, so
that they fled out of that house naked and wounded. (17)And this was
known to all, both Jews and Greeks, who dwelt at Ephesus: and fear fell
on them all, and they magnified the name of the Lord. (18)And many of
those who believed came, confessing and declaring their practices.
(19)And many of those who practised magical arts brought the books, and
burned them before all men; and they calculated the prices of them, and
found them worth fifty thousand pieces of silver. (20)So mightily did
the word of God increase and prevail.

(21)Now when these things were accomplished, Paul purposed by the
Spirit, passing through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem,
saying, That after I have been there, I must see Rome also. (22)Then he
dispatched into Macedonia two of those who attended upon him, Timothy
and Erastus; while he himself continued a while longer in Asia. (23)And
there happened at that time no small disturbance about this way.
(24)For a person named Demetrius, a silversmith, who made little
temples in silver to represent that of Diana, brought to the artificers
no small gain; (25)whom collecting together, with the workmen also of
such trinkets, he said, Sirs, ye know that by this employment we make
our advantageous livelihood: (26)and ye see and hear how not only at
Ephesus, but almost through all Asia, this fellow Paul, by his
persuasions, hath perverted a vast multitude, affirming that they are
not gods which are made with hands: (27)so that not only is this our
trade in danger of falling into contempt, but also that this temple of
the great goddess Diana should be counted as nothing, and that
henceforth also her magnificence should be utterly destroyed, whom all
Asia and the whole world worshippeth. (28)On hearing this then, and
being filled with rage, they cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians. (29)And the whole city was filled with confusion; and they
rushed unanimously into the theatre, dragging with them Gaius and
Aristarchus, Macedonians, Paul's travelling companions. (30)But though
Paul wished to go in to the people, the disciples would not permit him.
(31)And some of the Asiarchs also, who were his friends, sent unto him,
admonishing him not to venture himself into the theatre. (32)So they
were crying out some one thing and some another: for the assembly was a
scene of confusion, and the greater part knew not on what account they
were collected together. (33)Then out of the crowd they brought forward
Alexander, the Jews pushing him on: and Alexander, waving his hand,
would fain have addressed his apology to the people. (34)But when they
knew he was a Jew, one shout burst from all, crying for about the space
of two hours, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

(35)Then the recorder having quieted the multitude, said, Men of
Ephesus, who indeed is the man that doth not know that the city of the
Ephesians is wholly devoted to the great goddess Diana, and to the
image which fell down from Jupiter? (36)These things being then
incontrovertible, it becomes you to be quiet, and to do nothing with
precipitation. (37)For ye have brought hither these men, neither
robbers of the temple, nor blasphemers of your goddess. (38)If then
indeed Demetrius and the artificers that are with him have a charge
against any man, the courts are held, and there are proconsuls: let
them implead one another. (39)And if ye have any dispute about other
matters, it shall be terminated in a lawful assembly, (40)For we are
even in danger of being called to account for this day's insurrection,
there being no cause on account of which we can justify this tumultuary
concourse: (41)and so saying, he dissolved the assembly.

CHAP. XX.

THEN after the tumult was quieted, Paul called to him the disciples,
and taking his leave, departed to go into Macedonia. (2)And passing
through those parts, and having exhorted them with much discourse, he
went into Greece. (3)And after three months stay, as the Jews were
lying in wait for him, when he was just embarking for Syria, he
determined to return through Macedonia. (4)And there accompanied him as
far as Asia, Sopater a Berean; and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus
and Secundus; and Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy; and Tychicus and
Trophimus, Asiatics. (5)These going before tarried for us at Troas.
(6)And we sailed from Philippi after the days of unleavened bread, and
came to them to Troas after five days; where we stayed seven days.
(7)And on the first day of the week, when the disciples were assembled
to break bread, Paul preached unto them (ready to depart on the
morrow), and extended his discourse until midnight. (8)Now there were
many lamps in the upper room, where they were assembled. (9)And a
certain youth named Eutytchus, who sat in the window, fell into a
profound sleep: as Paul discoursed much longer than usual, quite
overpowered with sleep, he fell down from a third story, and was taken
up dead. (10)But Paul came down, and fell upon him, and taking him in
his arms, said, Trouble not yourselves, for his life is yet in him.
(11)And when he had gone up, and broken bread, and eaten, and conversed
a long time, even to the break of day, he then departed. (12)And they
brought the lad alive, and were comforted exceedingly.

(13)Then we going before to the ship, sailed for Assos, intending there
to take in Paul: for so he had ordered, meaning himself to walk
thither. (14)And when he met us at Assos, we took him up, and came to
Mytelene. (15)And sailing from thence, on the following day we advanced
over against Chios; and the next day we touched at Samos, and staying
at Trogyllium, the day following we came to Miletus. (16)For Paul had
determined to sail by Ephesus, that he might not spend the time in
Asia: for he hastened on, if it was possible for him, to be at
Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost. (17)So he sent to Ephesus from
Miletus, and called the presbyters of the church to attend him. (18)And
when they were come unto him, he said unto them,

Ye know, from the very first day in which I entered into Asia, how I
have been among you at every season, (19)serving the Lord with all
humility, and with many tears and trials, which have befallen me
through the lying in wait of the Jews: (20)and that I have suppressed
nothing which could conduce to your profiting; not desisting from
preaching to you, and teaching you in public, and from house to house,
(21)repeatedly urging both on Jews and Greeks repentance towards God,
and faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ. (22)And now behold I am going,
bound by the Spirit, unto Jerusalem, not knowing what things shall
there befal me: (23)only this, that the Holy Ghost witnesseth in every
city, saying, that bonds and tribulation await thee. (24)Yet I make no
account of any _suffering_, nor regard my life as of any value to
myself, farther than as I may finish my course with joy, and the
ministry which I have received of the Lord, to testify fully the Gospel
of the grace of God. (25)And now behold, I know that ye shall see my
face no more, even ye all, among whom I have gone in and out preaching
the kingdom of God. (26)Wherefore I appeal to you this day as witnesses
that I am pure from the blood of all men. (27)For I have concealed
nothing, so as not repeatedly to declare to you the whole counsel of
God. (28)Take heed therefore to yourselves, and to all the flock, over
which the Holy Ghost hath made you bishops, to feed as shepherds the
church of God, which he purchased with his own blood. (29)For this I
know, that after my departure there will come among you grievous
wolves, not sparing the flock: (30)Yea, from among yourselves shall men
arise, speaking perverting doctrines, to draw away disciples after
them. (31)Therefore watch, remembering that for three years, by night
and by day, I have never ceased with tears to admonish every
individual. (32)And now, brethren, I commit you to God and to the word
of his grace, which is able to finish the superstructure, and to give
you an inheritance among all those who are sanctified. (33)The silver,
or gold, or apparel of no man have I coveted: (34)but ye yourselves
know that these hands have by labour furnished necessaries for my own
wants, and for those who were with me. (35)In all things I have set you
the example, that so labouring hard ye ought to help the infirm, and to
remember the words of the Lord Jesus, because he himself said, "It is
more blessed to give than to receive."

(36)And when he had spoken these things, he fell on his knees, and
prayed with them all. (37)And all of them shed floods of tears, and
fell upon Paul's neck, and kissed him again and again, (38)most
peculiarly afflicted at that word which he had spoken, that they should
see his face no more: and they accompanied him unto the ship.

CHAP. XXI.

AND tearing ourselves away from them, when we had set sail, we came in
a direct course to Coos, and the day after to Rhodes, and from thence
to Patara. (2)And finding a ship passing over to Phenice, we went on
board and set sail: (3)and coming in sight of Cyprus, and leaving it on
the left, we sailed unto Syria, and landed at Tyre; for there the ship
was to discharge her cargo. (4)And finding disciples, we tarried there
seven days: and they said to Paul, by the Spirit, that he should not go
up unto Jerusalem. (5)But when we had stayed out those days, we
departed, and went on our journey, all of them attending us on our way,
with wives and children, till we were out of the city: and kneeling
down on the sea shore, we joined in prayer; (6)and embracing one
another, we went on ship-board, and they returned to their own homes,
(7)So completing our voyage, we arrived from Tyre at Ptolemais, and
saluting the brethren, tarried with them one day. (8)And on the morrow
we who were Paul's companions departed with him, and went to Caesarea;
and entering into the house of Philip the evangelist (who was one of
the seven deacons), we abode with him. (9)Now this man had four maiden
daughters endued with the gift of prophecy. (10)And as we tarried there
several days, there came down a certain prophet from Judea named
Agabus. (11)And coming to us, he took Paul's girdle, and binding both
his own hands and feet together, said, Thus saith the Holy Ghost, The
man, whose girdle this is, shall the Jews bind in like manner at
Jerusalem, and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.
(12)Then when we heard these things, both we and all who were in the
place, besought him not to go up to Jerusalem. (13)But Paul replied,
Why do ye thus--weeping and breaking my heart? for I am ready not only
to be bound, but to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.
(14)And when he could not be persuaded, we desisted, saying, The will
of the Lord be done.

(15)Then after those days, packing up our baggage, we went up to
Jerusalem: (16)and there went also with us some disciples from
Caesarea, bringing one Mnason a Cyprian, an ancient disciple, at whose
house we were to lodge. (17)And when we arrived at Jerusalem, the
brethren received us with delight. (18)And on the morrow Paul went in
with us unto James: and all the presbyters were present. (19)And after
embracing them, he related every particular of the things which God had
done among the Gentiles by his ministry. (20)And they, when they heard
it, glorified the Lord, and said unto him, Thou seest, brother, how
many myriads there are of Jews who have believed; and they are all
zealots for the law: (21)And they have been informed of thee, that thou
teachest all the Jews, who are among the Gentiles, apostacy from Moses,
saying, That they should not circumcise the children, nor walk after
the usual practices. (22)What then is to be done? The multitude must
certainly be assembled; for they will hear that thou art come. (23)Do
this therefore which we say to thee: we have four men, who have a vow
upon themselves; (24)them take with thee, be purified with them, and be
at the same expence as they, that they may shave their heads: and all
men will know that there is no truth in the things reported of thee,
but that thou thyself walkest orderly and observest the law.
(25)Concerning the Gentiles who have believed, we have already written,
deciding that they should observe no such thing, except that they
should guard themselves from idol sacrifices, and blood, and what is
strangled, and from whoredom.

(26)Then Paul took the men, and the following day being purified with
them, he entered into the temple, declaring when the days of their
purification would be completed, in order whereunto an oblation was to
be offered for every one of them. (27)But as the seven days were now
drawing to their period, some Jews from Asia seeing him in the temple,
excited all the populace to tumult, and laid hands upon him, (28)crying
out, Men of Israel, help! This is the man, who, by his preaching, sets
all men everywhere against the people, and the law, and this place: yea
and more still, hath brought Greeks into the temple, and defiled this
holy place: (29)(for they had before seen Trophimus the Ephesian in the
city with him, whom they imagined that Paul had introduced into the
temple.) (30)And the whole city was in motion, and there was a
concourse of people assembled: and laying hands on Paul, they dragged
him out of the temple; and immediately the doors were shut. (31)And as
they were attempting to murder him, the report reached the military
tribune of the band, that all Jerusalem was in confusion. (32)Who
instantly taking soldiers and centurions ran down unto them: and when
they saw the tribune and the soldiers, they left off beating Paul.

(33)Then the tribune approaching him, laid hold on him, and ordered him
to be bound with two chains; and asked who he was, and what he had
done. (34)Then some among the multitude bellowed out one thing, and
some another: so unable to know the certainty of the case because of
the tumult, he ordered him to be brought into the fortress. (35)But
when he was on the stairs, it happened that he was borne up by the
soldiers, because of the press of the crowd. (36)For a multitude of the
people followed, crying, Away with him! (37)And when he was just ready
to be carried into the fortress, Paul said to the military tribune, May
I be permitted to speak a word to thee? And he said, Dost thou know
Greek? (38)Art not thou certainly that Egyptian who some time since
raised a sedition, and led out into the desert four thousand
cutthroats? (39)But Paul replied, I am indeed a Jew, a man of Tarsus,
of Cilicia, a citizen of no contemptible city: and, I entreat thee,
permit me to speak to the people. (40)So having his permission, Paul
standing on the stairs, waved his hand to the people. And profound
silence being obtained, he spake to them in the Hebrew tongue, saying,

CHAP. XXII.

MEN, brethren, and fathers, hear ye my apology which I now offer unto
you. (2)Then when they heard that he spoke unto them in the Hebrew
tongue, they kept the more silence: and he said, (3)I am indeed a
Jewish man, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but educated in this city at the
feet of Gamaliel, instructed accurately in the law of our fathers,
being zealous for God, as ye all are this day: (4)so much so that I
persecuted this way unto death, binding and delivering up to prisons
both men and women. (5)As also the high-priest will bear me witness,
and all the body of elders: from whom also having received letters unto
the brethren, I went unto Damascus, to bring those who were there in
chains unto Jerusalem, that they might be punished. (6)But as I went
and drew nigh to Damascus, at noon-day, suddenly there shone a great
light from heaven around me. (7)And I fell to the ground, and heard a
voice saying to me, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? (8)And I
answered, Who art thou, Lord? And he said to me, I am Jesus the
Nazarean, whom thou persecutest. (9)Now they who were with me saw the
light indeed, and were terrified; but the voice of him that spake to me
heard they not. (10)Then I said, What shall I do, Lord? And the Lord
said to me, Arise, go into Damascus; and there information shall be
given thee of all things which are ordained for thee to do.

(11)Then as I could no longer see through the dazzling brightness of
that light, led by the hand of those who were with me, I came to
Damascus. (12)And one Ananias, a religious man according to the law,
and in high repute with all the Jews dwelling there, (13)came to me,
and standing by me, said, Brother Saul, recover sight. And the same
hour I looked up at him. (14)And he said, The God of our fathers hath
predestinated thee to know his will, and to see the Just One, and to
hear a voice from his mouth. (15)For thou shalt be a witness for him to
all men, of the things which thou hast seen and heard. (16)And now why
delay? arise, to be baptised, and wash away thy sins, calling upon the
name of the Lord.

(17)Now it came to pass, that, when I had returned to Jerusalem, and
was praying in the temple, that I was in a trance; (18)and beheld him
saying to me, Make haste, and depart quickly from Jerusalem: for they
will not receive thy testimony of me. (19)And I said, Lord, they know
that I was imprisoning and scourging from synagogue to synagogue those
who believe on thee: (20)and when the blood of Stephen thy martyr was
shed, I myself even stood by, and took delight in his execution, and
guarded the garments of those who slew him. (21)And he said to me, Go:
for I will send thee forth to the Gentiles afar off.

(22)And they gave him audience to this sentence, and lifted up their
voice, saying, Away with such a fellow from the earth: for it is not
fit that he should live. (23)So when they began raising a vast clamour,
and stripping off their garments, and casting dust into the air,
(24)the military tribune commanded him to be brought into the fortress,
ordering that he should be put to the question by scourging; that he
might know for what cause they clamoured so loudly against him. (25)So
as they were tying him up for the thongs, Paul said to the centurion
standing by him, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man who is a Roman
citizen, and uncondemned? (26)And when the centurion heard this, he
came and told the military tribune, saying, Consider what you are going
to do: for this man is a Roman citizen. (27)Then the tribune came, and
said to him, Tell me, art thou a Roman citizen? And he said, Yes.
(28)And the tribune replied, With a large sum of money I purchased this
citizenship. And Paul said, But I enjoy it as my birthright.
(29)Immediately then they who were about to put him to the question,
withdrew from him: and indeed the tribune dreaded the consequences,
when he knew that he was a Roman citizen, that he had even gone so far
as to bind him. (30)So on the morrow, desirous to know of a certainty
what it was of which he was accused by the Jews, he loosed him from the
bonds, and commanded the high-priest and all the sanhedrim to appear,
and bringing Paul down, set him before them.

CHAP. XXIII.

THEN Paul, looking earnestly at the sanhedrim, said, Men and brethren,
I have lived in all good conscience unto God even to this day.

(2)Then the high-priest Ananias commanded those who stood by him to
smite him on the mouth.

(3)Then said Paul unto him, God is ready to smite thee, thou whited
wall: for art thou sitting to judge me according to the law, and
violating that law, commandest me to be smitten?

(4)Then they who stood by, said, Revilest thou God's high-priest?
(5)And Paul said, I had not observed, brethren, that he was
high-priest: for it is written, "Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler
of thy people [47]."

(6)Now when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees, and the
other Pharisees, he cried in the sanhedrim, Men and brethren, I am a
Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee: for the hope and resurrection of the
dead am I brought to this bar.

(7)So when he had said this, a great dissension arose between the
Pharisees and the Sadducees: and the multitude was divided. (8)For the
Sadducees say indeed, that there is no resurrection, nor angel, nor
spirit: but the Pharisees confess both. (9)And a great clamour arose:
and the scribes rising up who were of the party of the Pharisees,
contended stoutly, saying, We find no fault in this man: but if a
spirit have spoken to him, or an angel, let us not fight against God.
(10)Then a great tumult arising, the tribune, apprehensive that Paul
might be pulled in pieces by them, commanded the guard to go down, and
take him by force from the midst of them, and bring him into the
fortress.

(11)And the night following the Lord stood by him, and said, Be of good
courage, Paul: for as thou hast borne testimony of the things
concerning me at Jerusalem, so must thou bear a testimony at Rome also.

(12)Then as soon as it was day, some of the Jews forming a conspiracy,
bound themselves under the direst imprecation, declaring that they
would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. (13)Now there
were more than forty who had on oath formed this conspiracy. (14)So
they came to the high-priests and elders, and said, We have bound
ourselves by the direst imprecation, to taste nothing till we have
killed Paul. (15)Now therefore do ye with the sanhedrim give notice to
the military tribune, that to-morrow he bring him down to you, as if
intending to make more accurate inquiries into the things concerning
him: but we, ere he come nigh, are ready to kill him.

(16)Now Paul's sister's son having heard of their lying in wait, came,
and entering into the fortress told Paul. (17)Then Paul calling to him
one of the centurions, said, Carry this young man to the tribune: for
he hath something to communicate to him. (18)Then he took him, and
brought him to the tribune, and said, The prisoner Paul calling me to
him, entreated me to bring this young man to thee, having something to
say to thee. (19)Hereupon the tribune taking him by the hand, and
leading him aside, inquired, What is it that thou hast to communicate
to me? (20)And he said, The Jews have agreed together to entreat thee
that to-morrow thou wouldest bring down Paul into the sanhedrim, as
about to make some more accurate inquiry concerning him. (21)But do not
thou consent to them: for more than forty men of them are lying in wait
for him, who have bound themselves under an anathema, neither to eat
nor drink till they have killed him: and now they are in readiness,
waiting only to procure the promise from thee.

(22)Hereupon the tribune dismissed the youth, with an injunction, not
to mention it to any body that thou hast discovered these things to me.
(23)And calling to him two certain persons of the centurions, he said,
Get ready two hundred soldiers to go to Caesarea, and seventy horsemen,
and two hundred spearmen, at the third hour of the night; (24)and
provide beasts, that setting Paul thereon, you may convey him safely to
Felix the governor.

(25)And he wrote a letter containing this form of words:

(26)Claudius Lysias to his excellence the governor Felix, greeting.

(27)This person had been seized by the Jews, and was ready to be slain
by them: but coming on them with the guard, I rescued him out of their
hands, having understood that he was a Roman citizen. (28)And desirous
of knowing the crime of which they accused him, I brought him down into
their sanhedrim (29)and found him accused of some disputed points of
their law; but to have no charge laid against him worthy of death or of
bonds. (30)But it being discovered to me that a design was forming
against the man's _life_ by the Jews, immediately I sent him to thee,
commanding his accusers also to produce what they have against him
before thee. Farewel.

(31)Hereupon then the soldiers, as it was commanded them, took Paul,
and brought him by night unto Antipatris. (32)And on the morrow,
leaving the horsemen to go on with him, they returned to the fortress.
(33)So when they came to Caesarea, and had delivered the letter to the
governor, they presented Paul also to him. (34)Then when the governor
had read it, and asked of what province he was, and understood he was
of Cilicia; (35)I will give thee a thorough hearing, said he, when thy
accusers are also come hither. And he commanded them to be kept under
guard in Herod's praetorium.

CHAP. XXIV.

SO after five days Ananias the high-priest went down with the elders,
and a certain rhetorician, Tertullus, who made their appearance before
the governor against Paul. (2)And he being summoned, Tertullus began to
accuse him, saying,

Since by thee we enjoy so much peace, and such noble acts are happily
performed for this nation by thy provident administration, (3)always
and in all places we acknowledge it, most excellent Felix, with all
gratitude. (4)Now that I may not be unnecessarily tedious to thee, I
entreat thee to hear us briefly with thy wonted candour. (5)For we
found this fellow a pest _to society_, and exciting sedition among all
the Jews throughout the whole world, and a ringleader of the sect of
the Nazareans: (6)who even attempted to profane the temple: we seized
him therefore, and intended to judge him according to our own law.
(7)But Lysias the tribune came, and with great violence took him out of
our hands, (8)commanding his accusers to appear before thee: whereby
thou mayest thyself be able after examination to know the certainty of
those things whereof we accuse him.

(9)Then the Jews also joined in affirming, that these things were so.

(10)But Paul (the governor having made him a sign to speak) replied,

Knowing that for so many years thou hast been the judge of this nation,
I with the more confidence offer my defence respecting the matters
which concern me: (11)as thou mayest be ascertained, that it is not
more than twelve days ago since I went up to worship in Jerusalem.
(12)And neither in the temple found they me disputing with any man, nor
raising any sedition among the people, neither in the synagogues, nor
in the city: (13)neither can they produce any proof of the facts of
which they accuse me. (14)But this I confess to thee, that after the
way which they call a sect, so worship I the God of our ancestors,
believing all things that are written in the law, and in the prophets:
(15)and having hope in God, the same which they also profess to look
for, that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just
and of the unjust. (16)For this cause indeed I exert my utmost care to
keep my conscience ever unoffending towards God and towards man.
(17)Now after many years absence I was returned bringing alms to my
countrymen, and oblations _to the temple_. (18)In the discharge of
which offices certain Jews of Asia found me purified in the temple,
neither with a multitude, nor with any tumult. (19)Who ought to have
appeared before thee, and prefer their accusation, if they had any
thing against me. (20)Or let the persons themselves here present say,
if they found any thing criminal in me, when I stood before the
sanhedrim, (21)except for this one sentence, which I uttered aloud when
I was standing among them, For the resurrection of the dead am I this
day judged by you.

(22)When Felix then heard these things he put them off, (for he knew
very exactly all that related to that way,) saying, When Lysias the
tribune is come down, I will inquire thoroughly into the matters
between you. (23)And he commanded the centurion that Paul should be
safe kept, yet have no close confinement, and not to hinder any of his
friends from supplying his wants, or visiting him.

(24)Now after some days, Felix returning with Drusilla his wife, who
was a Jewess, sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in
Christ. (25)And as he discoursed of righteousness, and temperance, and
the judgment which is ready to be revealed, Felix being greatly
terrified, replied, Go, for the present, I will some time hence take
another opportunity of calling for thee. (26)Indeed he had also
entertained hope that money would be given him by Paul, in order to
release him: wherefore he sent for him the oftener, and conversed with
him. (27)But when two years were ended, Felix had Portius Festus
appointed for his successor: and willing to curry favour with the Jews,
Felix left Paul in chains.

CHAP. XXV.

WHEN Festus then was come into the province, after three days he went
up to Jerusalem from Caesarea. (2)And the high-priest and the principal
persons among the Jews informed him against Paul, and entreated him,
(3)begging it as a favour from him, that he would send him back to
Jerusalem, lying in wait for him to kill him on the road. (4)Then
Festus answered, that Paul should be kept in custody at Caesarea, and
that he himself was going thither shortly. (5)Let therefore, said he,
those among you who are able, go down with me, and accuse him, if there
be anything criminal in this man.

(6)And after staying with them more than ten days, he went down to
Caesarea; and on the morrow seated on the bench, commanded Paul to be
brought. (7)And on his appearing, the Jews who came down from Jerusalem
surrounded him, and laid many and heavy accusations against Paul, which
they were not able to prove. (8)But he pleaded in his defence, That
neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor
against Caesar, have I committed the least offence.

(9)Then Festus, desirous of ingratiating himself with the Jews,
replying to Paul, said, Wilt thou go up unto Jerusalem, and there be
judged of these things before me?

(10)Then said Paul, I am standing before the tribunal of Caesar, where
I have a right to be judged: against the Jews I have committed no
offence, as thou also clearly perceivest. (11)For indeed if I have
committed any crime, or done aught worthy of death, I object not to be
put to death: but if there is nothing in those things whereof they
accuse me, no man dare gratify them by abandoning me to them. (12)I
appeal unto Caesar.

Then Festus, after conferring with the council, answered, Hast thou
appealed to Caesar? to Caesar shalt thou go.

(13)Now when some days were passed, Agrippa and Bernice came to
Caesarea to salute Festus. (14)And as their stay there was extended to
a considerable time, Festus communicated to the king Paul's affairs,
saying, There is a certain man left by Felix, a prisoner: (15)against
whom when I was at Jerusalem, the high-priest and the elders of the
Jews appeared, desiring judgment against him. (16)To whom I replied,
That it was not customary for Romans to give up any man gratuitously to
destruction, before that the person accused should have his accusers
produced face to face, and be allowed opportunity to defend himself
against the charge. (17)When therefore they were come here together,
making no demur, the very next day I sat on the tribunal, and commanded
the man to be brought. (18)Against whom his accusers standing forth,
brought no charge of such things as I expected: (19)but only pleaded
against him certain disputes about their own mode of religious worship,
and about one Jesus, who was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive.
(20)But being in doubt respecting a question of this sort, I demanded
if he would go to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things.
(21)But Paul appealing that he should be reserved for the cognizance of
Augustus, I ordered him to be kept in custody until I should send him
to Caesar.

(22)Then Agrippa said to Festus, I wish also myself to hear the man. He
said, To-morrow thou shalt hear him.

(23)On the morrow therefore, when Agrippa was come, and Bernice, with a
very splendid retinue, and were entered into the place of audience,
with the military tribunes, and the men of superior eminence in the
city, then at the order of Festus Paul was produced.

(24)And Festus said, King Agrippa, and all you, sirs, who are present
with us, behold the man, concerning whom the whole multitude of the
Jews have set upon me, both at Jerusalem and in this place, clamouring
that he ought not to live a moment longer. (25)But finding on inquiry
that he had done nothing worthy of death, and he himself indeed having
appealed to Augustus, I have determined to send him. (26)Respecting
whom I have nothing determinate to write to my sovereign. Wherefore I
have brought him forth before you, and especially before thee, king
Agrippa, that on a fresh examination taken, I might have something to
write. (27)For it appears to me highly unreasonable to send a prisoner,
and not also signify the charges against him.

CHAP. XXVI.

THEN Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou art permitted to speak for thyself.
Then Paul stretching out his hand, began his defence: (2)I count myself
happy, king Agrippa, that I am about to address my defence to thee this
day concerning all the things of which I am accused by the Jews:
(3)especially as thou art skilled both in all the customs, and
questions which respect the Jews: wherefore I beg the favour of thee to
hear me patiently.

(4)The manner of my life even from my youth, which from its beginning
was spent amidst my own nation at Jerusalem, know indeed all the Jews;
(5)who previously knew me a long while ago, (if they chose to bear
testimony,) that according to the most precise sect of our religion I
lived a Pharisee. (6)And this moment for the hope of the promise made
of God to our fathers am I standing here to be judged: (7)which promise
our twelve tribes, with fervour night and day worshipping God, hope to
attain. For which hope, king Agrippa, I am criminated by the Jews.

(8)What! is it judged a thing incredible by you, that God should raise
the dead?

(9)I indeed then thought in myself, that I ought to do many things in
opposition to the name of Jesus the Nazarean. (10)Which also I did at
Jerusalem: and many of the saints did I shut up in prisons, having
received authority from the chief priests; and when they were killed, I
gave my vote against them. (11)And in every synagogue oftentimes
punishing them, I compelled them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly
maddened with rage against them, I persecuted them even to the cities
that are without. (12)In which pursuits, even as I was going to
Damascus with authority and a commission from the chief priests, (13)at
midday, O king, I saw on the road a light from heaven, beyond the
splendour of the sun, shining around myself and those who were
travelling with me. (14)And as we were all fallen prostrate on the
earth, I heard a voice speaking to me, and saving in the Hebrew tongue,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is difficult for thee to kick
against the goads. (15)Then I said, Who art thou, Lord? And he replied,
I am Jesus whom thou art persecuting. (16)Notwithstanding, arise, and
stand on thy feet: for to this end have I appeared to thee, to ordain
thee both a minister and a witness of the things which thou hast seen,
and of those which I will shew thee; (17)delivering thee both from the
people, and from the Gentiles, to whom now I send thee, (18)to open
their eyes, to convert them from darkness to light, and from the
dominion of Satan unto God, that they may receive remission of sins,
and an inheritance with those who are sanctified by faith which is in
me. (19)Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the
heavenly vision: (20)but preached first to those at Damascus, and
Jerusalem, and to all the region of Judea, and to the Gentiles, that
they should repent and turn to God, practicing works worthy of
repentance.

(21)Because of these things, the Jews seizing me in the temple,
attempted to kill me on the spot. (22)Having however obtained help from
God, unto this day, I stand witnessing both to small and great, saying
nothing but what both the prophets and Moses said should come to pass:
(23)that the Messiah should suffer, _and_ that he being the first who
should rise from the dead, should display light to the people, and to
the Gentiles.

(24)As thus he was proceeding in his defence, Festus with a loud voice
said, Paul, thou art raving; much reading hath driven thee to madness.

(25)But he said, I am not mad, most noble Festus; but utter words of
truth and sobriety. (26)For the king is well acquainted with these
things, before whom also I speak with the greatest freedom. For I am
persuaded that none of these events have escaped his notice; for this
thing was not done in a corner. (27)King Agrippa! believest thou the
prophets? I know that thou believest.

(28)Then Agrippa said to Paul, Almost thou persuadest me to be a
Christian. (29)And Paul replied, would to God, that not only thou, but
also that all who are hearing me this day, were both almost, and
altogether such as I am, except these chains.

(30)So when he had thus spoken, the king arose, and the governor, and
Bernice, and they who sat with him, (31)and retiring, conversed
together, saying, This man hath done nothing worthy of death, or of
chains.

(32)And Agrippa said to Festus, This man might have been discharged, if
he had not appealed to Caesar.

CHAP. XXVII.

NOW as it was determined that we should sail for Italy, they delivered
Paul and certain other prisoners to a centurion named Julius, of the
Augustan cohort. (2)And embarking in a ship of Adrymittium, ready to
sail for the coast of Asia, we proceeded on our voyage, Aristarchus a
Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us. (3)And the next day we
arrived at Sidon: and Julius treated Paul with the greatest humanity,
and permitted him to go to his friends, to enjoy the benefit of their
care. (4)And taking our departure from thence, we sailed under Cyprus,
because the winds were contrary. (5)And traversing the sea opposite to
Cilicia and Pamphylia, we arrived at Myra, a city of Lycia. (6)And the
centurion finding there a ship of Alexandria bound for Italy, he put us
on board of it.

(7)Then for many days making very slow way, and scarce reaching over
against Knidos, the wind not favouring us, we coasted Crete, opposite
Cape Salmone: (8)and weathering it with difficulty, we came to a
certain place called, The fair havens; near to which is the city Lasea.
(9)And much time being consumed, and sailing now becoming dangerous,
because the fast was already past, Paul admonished them, (10)saying
unto them, Sirs, I perceive that this voyage will be attended with much
damage and loss, not only of the cargo and of the ship, but _danger_ of
our lives also. (11)But the centurion paid more attention to the master
and to the pilot than to the things which were spoken by Paul. (12)And
the harbour not being well situated for a winter station, the greater
part advised to sail from thence, if they possibly could reach as far
as Phenice to pass the winter, a harbour open to the south-west and
north-west. (13)So when the south wind blew softly, supposing they had
obtained their purpose, they weighed anchor, and kept near the coast of
Crete. (14)But not long after a hurricane wind, called Euroclydon,
drove us towards the island, (15)and the ship becoming ungovernable,
and unable to bear up in the eye of the wind, we gave up the attempt,
and let her drive. (16)And running under a little island called Clauda,
it was with difficulty we were able to come at the boat: (17)which when
they had hoisted out, they used all helps, carrying ropes round the
ship's bottom; and fearing lest they should run on the quick-sands,
they lowered the mast, and so were driven. (18)And being exceedingly
tossed with the storm, we the next day threw out the cargo. (19)And the
third day with our own hands we threw overboard the tackling of the
vessel. (20)So when neither sun nor stars had appeared for many days,
and no small tempest beating on us, all hope of our being preserved was
entirely taken from us.

(21)Now after being a long while without food, then stood up Paul in
the midst of them, and said, Ye ought, my friends, to have been
persuaded by me, and not have sailed from Crete, and got this loss and
damage. (22)Yet even now I exhort you to be of good courage: for there
shall be no loss of life among you, but only of the ship. (23)For there
stood by me this night an angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve,
(24)saying, Fear not, Paul; thou must stand before Caesar: and behold!
God hath graciously given thee all who are sailing with thee.
(25)Wherefore, sirs, cheer up: for I believe God that it will be so,
exactly as he hath spoken to me. (26)But we must be cast on a certain
island.

(27)Now as the fourteenth night was passing, whilst we were driving
about in the Adriatic sea, about midnight the sailors imagined that
some land was near to them: (28)and sounding, had twenty fathoms; then
passing on a little farther, and sounding again, they had fifteen
fathoms. (29)And fearing lest they might run on some rocky coast, they
cast out four anchors astern, and wished eagerly for the day to break.

(30)Now as the sailors were seeking to escape out of the ship, and had
hoisted out the boat into the sea, under pretence as if they were going
to carry out anchors a-head, (31)Paul said to the centurion and to the
soldiers, Except these men abide in the ship, ye cannot be preserved.
(32)Then the soldiers cut off the ropes of the boat, and let her fall
off.

(33)And while they waited until the day should break, Paul exhorted
them all to take some nourishment, saying, To day, expecting the
fourteenth day, ye are continuing without food, taking nothing.
(34)Wherefore I exhort you to take some food, for this is for your
preservation: for a hair shall not fall from the head of any one of
you. (35)And so saying, and taking a loaf, he gave thanks to God before
them all, and breaking it, began to eat. (36)Then were they all cheered
up, and they too took refreshment.

(37)Now all the souls which were in the ship amounted to two hundred
seventy-six: (38)and having made a hearty meal, they lightened the
vessel, throwing the wheat into the sea. (39)And when the day broke,
they knew not the land: but they observed a certain creek with a beach,
into which they resolved, if they could, to run the vessel aground.
(40)And weighing the anchors, they committed her to the sea, and
loosing at the same time the chains of the rudders, and hoisting the
foresail to the breeze, they made for the beach. (41)But falling on a
shoal where two currents met, they ran the ship aground; and the
forecastle stuck fast, and remained immoveable, but the stern was stove
in by the violence of the waves. (42)Then the soldiers' design was to
have murdered the prisoners, lest any of them should swim ashore and
escape. (43)But the centurion, desirous to preserve Paul, withheld them
from their purpose, and commanded those who were able to swim to jump
overboard first, and reach the land: (44)and that the rest should make
the attempt, some on planks, and some on the floating materials of the
ship: and in this manner so it was that they all safely reached the
shore.

CHAP. XXVIII.

AND being safe landed, we then understood that the island was called
Melita. (2)And the rude people treated us with singular humanity; for,
lighting a fire, they received us all, because of the violent rain, and
because of the cold. (3)But as Paul was gathering up a faggot of
sticks, and laying them on the fire, there came a viper out of the
heat, and fastened on his hand.

(4)Now when the rude people saw the venomous animal hanging from his
hand, they said one to another, Surely this man is a murderer, whom
though preserved from the sea, righteous vengeance suffereth not to
live. (5)But he then shaking off the venomous animal into the fire,
suffered no manner of inconvenience. (6)Now they expected that a
violent inflammation would ensue, or that he would have fallen suddenly
dead: but when, after waiting a considerable time, they saw no
inconvenience arise to him, they changed their opinion, and said that
he was a divinity.

(7)Now in the vicinity of that place was the estate of the principal
person on the island, named Publius, who received us into his house,
and lodged us with great humanity three days. (8)And it so happened
that the father of Publius was then confined to his bed with an attack
of fever and dysentery: unto whom Paul went in, and after praying, laid
his hands upon him, and healed him. (9)This then being the case, all
the rest also who had diseases in the island came to him, and were
healed. (10)Then they honoured us with many tokens of respect; and when
we were about to sail, laid in for us every necessary store. (11)And
after three months stay we sailed in a ship which had wintered in the
island, from Alexandria, whose sign was Castor and Pollux: (12)and
proceeding on our voyage to Syracuse, we tarried there three days:
(13)from whence we came round, and arrived opposite to Rhegium; and
after one day the south wind arising, we came in two more to Puteoli:
(14)where finding brethren, we were solicited by them to tarry seven
days; and so we went for Rome. (15)And the brethren from thence, when
they heard of our motions, came out to meet us as far as Appii Forum
and the Three Taverns: whom when Paul saw, he gave thanks to God, and
felt fresh courage.

(16)And when we were come to Rome, the centurion delivered the
prisoners to the captain of the guard; but he permitted Paul to have an
apartment by himself, with a soldier only who guarded him.

(17)Now it came to pass that after three days Paul called together the
principal persons of the Jews. And when they were assembled, he said
unto them, Men and brethren, though I have done nothing contrary to the
people and the customs of our ancestors, yet have I been delivered up a
prisoner into the hands of the Romans. (18)Who, after a full
examination, would have discharged me, because there was not the least
cause found in me for death. (19)But when the Jews opposed it, I was
constrained to appeal unto Caesar; not that I have any accusation to
bring against my countrymen. (20)For this cause therefore have I
invited you hither, to see and to converse with you; for on account of
the hope of Israel am I bound with this chain.

(21)Then they said to him, We have neither received letters concerning
thee from Judea, nor hath any one of the brethren who is arrived
reported or spoken any thing evil of thee. (22)But we think it highly
proper to hear from thee what thy sentiments are; for indeed as to this
sect, it is well known to us that everywhere it meets with opposition.

(23)Then having fixed a day with him, still more of them came to him at
his lodging, to whom bearing his testimony, he set forth the kingdom of
God, and persuaded them of the things relating to Jesus, both out of
the law of Moses and the prophets, from morning until evening: (24)and
some were convinced by the things which were spoken, but others
continued in their unbelief. (25)So being divided in sentiment among
themselves, they broke up, Paul adding one word, That well had the Holy
Ghost spoken by Isaiah the prophet unto our fathers, (26)saying, Go to
this people, and say, "In hearing ye shall hear, and shall not
understand; and seeing ye shall see, yet in nowise perceive. (27)For
the heart of this people is waxed gross, and with their ears they are
thick of hearing, and their eyes have they shut; lest at any time they
should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their hearts, and become converts, and I should heal them[48]."
(28)Be it known therefore unto you, that to the Gentiles is the
salvation of God sent, and they will hear. (29)And when he had thus
spoken, the Jews went away, and had much disputing among themselves.

(30)But Paul abode two whole years in his own hired apartment, and
received all who came to him, (31)preaching the kingdom of God, and
teaching the things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ with all
freedom of discourse, and without the least interruption.



THE EPISTLE of PAUL the APOSTLE, TO THE ROMANS.

CHAP. I.

PAUL, a servant of Jesus Christ, a called apostle, set apart for the
Gospel of God, (2)(which he had promised before by his prophets in the
holy scriptures,) (3)concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; made
from the seed of David after the flesh, (4)definitively marked out as
the Son of God by miracle, according to the spirit of holiness, by the
resurrection of the dead: (5)through whom we have received grace and
apostolic mission among all nations for his name, to bring them to the
obedience of faith: (6)among whom are ye also the called of Jesus
Christ.

(7)To all that are at Rome, beloved of God, called saints, grace unto
you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

(8)First then I give thanks to my God, through Jesus Christ, for you
all, because your faith is proclaimed through the whole world. (9)For
God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his
Son, how incessantly I make mention of you, (10)always in my prayers
entreating that haply now at last I may have a prosperous journey by
the will of God, to come to you. (11)For I long to see you, that I may
impart unto you some spiritual gift, in order that you may be
established; (12)and that so I may be comforted together with you, by
the mutual faith both of you and of me.

(13)But I would not that ye should be unacquainted, brethren, that
oftentimes I have been purposing to come to you (and have been
prevented until now), that I might have some fruit among you also, even
as among the other Gentile nations. (14)Both to the Greeks and
barbarians, both to the wise and the ignorant am I a debtor. (15)So, as
far as is in my power, I am desirous to preach the Gospel to you that
are at Rome also. (16)For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for
it is the power of God for salvation to every one who believeth; to the
Jew first, and also to the Greek. (17)For the righteousness of God by
faith is therein revealed for belief; as it is written, "Now the just
by faith shall live[49]." (18)For the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against all impiety and unrighteousness of men, holding back the
truth in unrighteousness. (19)Because that which is capable of being
known relative to God, is evident among them; for God hath manifested
it to them. (20)For from the creation of the world his invisible
perfections, discoverable in the works that are made, are clearly seen,
even his eternal power and deity; so that they are inexcusable:
(21)because though they knew _there was_ a God, they glorified him not
as God, nor gave him thanks, but became triflers in their disputations,
and their stupid heart was darkened. (22)Affecting to be sophists, they
turned idiots, (23)and changed the glory of the incorruptible God into
the likeness of an image of a corruptible man, and of birds, and of
quadrupeds, and of reptiles. (24)Wherefore God abandoned them, through
the lusts of their own hearts, unto impurity, to dishonour their own
bodies by themselves: (25)who perverted the truth of God by falsehood,
and worshipped and paid divine honours to the thing created instead of
the Creator, who is blessed for evermore. Amen.

(26)For this cause God gave them up to dishonourable passions. For even
their women did change the natural use into that which was contrary to
nature; (27)and likewise the men also, leaving the natural use of the
woman, burned in their lewdness one towards another; men with men
committing indecency, and receiving in themselves the recompence of
their delusion, which was meet. (28)And since they thought not fit to
hold the Deity in acknowledgment, God abandoned them to a reprobate
mind, to practise deeds unbecoming; (29)replete with all injustice,
whoredom, wickedness, covetousness, villany; full of envy, murder,
contention, deceit, evil habits; whisperers, (30)backbiters,
God-haters, contumelious, insolent, boasters, inventors of wicked
practices, disobedient to parents, (31)unintelligent, unfaithful to
engagements, unnatural, implacable, unmerciful: (32)who, though they
know the righteous judgment of God, that they who live in such
practices are worthy of death, not only do the same, but also find
pleasure in the company of those who live in these practices.

CHAP. II.

THEREFORE thou art inexcusable, O man, even every one that judgeth: for
in the very thing wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest
thyself; for thou that judgest art living in the practices of the same
things. (2)But we know that the judgment of God is according to truth,
against those who practise such things. (3)For thinkest thou this, O
man, that judgest those who do such things, and doest the same, that
thou shalt escape the judgment of God? (4)Or despisest thou the riches
of his kindness and patience and long-suffering, ignorant that this
goodness of God is leading thee to repentance? (5)But after thy
obdurate and impenitent heart treasurest up for thyself wrath at the
day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, (6)who
will recompense to every man according to his works; (7)to those who,
in the patient practice of good works, seek glory and honour and
immortality--eternal life. (8)But to those who are of a contentious
spirit, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness,
indignation, and wrath; (9)tribulation and anguish upon every soul of
man that doeth wickedness, of the Jew first, and also of the Greek.
(10)But glory and honour and peace be to every man who doeth that which
is good, to the Jew first and also to the Greek: (11)for there is no
acceptance of persons with God. (12)For as many as have sinned without
the law, shall perish also without the law: and as many as have sinned
under the law shall be judged by the law; (13)for the hearers of the
law are not righteous before God, but the doers of the law shall be
counted righteous; (14)(for when the Gentiles, who have not the law
naturally, do the things of the law, these, though not having the law,
are a law unto themselves: (15)which exhibit the practice of the law
written on their hearts, their conscience also bearing its testimony,
and their mutual reasonings at intervals bringing accusations or
forming excuses;) (16)in the day when God shall judge the hidden things
of men, according to my gospel by Jesus Christ.

(17)Lo! thou art named a Jew, and restest on the law, and boastest in
God, (18)and knowest the will of God, and bringest to the test the
things that are different, being instructed out of the law; (19)and
hast confidence that thou thyself art a leader of the blind, a light of
those who are in darkness, (20)an instructor of the uninformed, a
teacher of babes, holding the form of knowledge and of truth in the
law. (21)Thou therefore who teachest another, dost thou not teach
thyself? thou that proclaimest aloud that a man should not steal, dost
thou steal? (22)thou that sayest, Do not commit adultery, dost thou
commit adultery? thou that holdest idols in abomination, dost thou
commit sacrilege? (23)thou who gloriest in the law, dishonourest thou
God by the transgression of the law? (24)for the name of God is
blasphemed through you among the heathen, as it is written[50]. (25)For
circumcision indeed is advantageous, if thou practise the law: but if
thou art a transgressor of the law, thy circumcision becomes
uncircumcision, (26)If then the uncircumcision observe the righteous
judgments of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be accounted for
circumcision? (27)And the uncircumcision by nature which fulfilleth the
law shall condemn thee, who through the letter and circumcision art a
transgressor of the law. (28)For not he who is outwardly such, is the
Jew; neither is that which is outward in the flesh, circumcision.
(29)But he is a Jew who is such inwardly; and circumcision is of the
heart, in spirit, not in letter; whose praise is not from men, but from
God.

CHAP. III.

WHAT then is the superiority of the Jew? or what is the advantage of
circumcision? (2)Much in every view: the principal one indeed is, that
the oracles of God were entrusted to them. (3)For what if some were
unbelievers? shall their unbelief render the faithfulness of God
ineffectual? (4)God forbid: but let God be true, though every man were
a liar; as it is written, "That thou mayest be acknowledged just in thy
sayings, and overcome when thou art judged[51]."

(5)But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what
shall we say? Is not God unrighteous in inflicting wrath? (I speak
humanly).

(6)God forbid: for how then shall God judge the world? (7)For if the
truth of God by my lying hath more abundantly contributed to his glory;
why am I notwithstanding judged as a sinner? (8)And why not admit, (as
we are falsely reported of; and as some affirm we say,) That we should
do evil things, that good may come? whose condemnation is just. (9)What
then? have we pre-eminence? Not at all: for we have before proved that
both the Jews and Greeks are all under sin; (10)as it is written,
"There is not a just person, no not one: (11)there is none that
understandeth, there is none that seeketh after God. (12)All are turned
aside together, they are become worthless; there is none that doeth
good, there is not even one. (13)Their throat is an open sepulchre;
with their tongues they have spoken craftily; the poison of asps is
under their lips: (14)whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness:
(15)their feet are swift to shed blood: (16)destruction and misery are
in their ways. (17)And they have not known the way of peace: (18)there
is not the fear of God before their eyes[52]."

(19)Now we know that whatsoever things the law saith, it speaks to
those who are under the law: that every mouth might be sealed up, and
all the world become criminal before God. (20)Wherefore by the works of
the law shall no flesh be justified before God: for by the law is the
knowledge of sin. (21)But now distinct from the law the righteousness
of God is manifest, receiving testimony from the law and the prophets;
(22)the righteousness of God indeed by faith in Jesus Christ unto all
and upon all that believe: for there is no difference: (23)for all have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God; (24)justified freely by his
grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus: (25)whom God
hath proposed as the propitiatory sacrifice through faith in his blood,
in demonstration of his justice for the remission of past sins, through
the patience of God; (26)for a demonstration of his justice at this
present time: that he might be just, though justifying him who is of
the faith of Jesus.

(27)Where then is boasting? It is excluded. By what law? of works? No:
but by the law of faith. (28)We conclude therefore that by faith a man
is justified, without works of law. (29)Is he the God of the Jews only,
and is he not also of the Gentiles? Yes, verily, of the Gentiles also:
(30)since it is one God who will justify the circumcision by faith, and
the uncircumcision through faith.

(31)Do we then abolish the law through faith? God forbid: but on the
contrary, we give the law stability.

CHAP. IV.

WHAT then shall we say that Abraham our father hath obtained by the
flesh? (2)For if Abraham was justified by works, he hath cause for
glorying; though not before God. (3)For what doth the scripture say?
Abraham truly believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness[53]. (4)Now to him that worketh, the reward is not
brought to account as a favour, but as a debt. (5)But to him who doth
not work, but believeth in him who justifieth the ungodly, his faith is
reckoned in account for righteousness. (6)As David also describeth the
blessedness of that man, to whom God imputeth righteousness without
works, (7)"Blessed are they whose unrighteousnesses are forgiven, and
whose sins are covered up. (8)Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will
in nowise impute sin[54]." (9)This blessedness then, _is it_ for the
circumcision, or for the uncircumcision also? for we say that faith was
imputed to Abraham for righteousness. (10)How then was it imputed to
him? when circumcised, or while uncircumcised? Not when circumcised,
but whilst uncircumcised. (11)And he received the sign of circumcision,
as a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had when
uncircumcised: that he might be the father of all those who believe,
though uncircumcised; that to them also the righteousness might be
imputed: (12)and the father of circumcision, not to those who are of
the circumcision merely, but who also tread in the steps of the faith
of our father Abraham, which he exercised while uncircumcised. (13)For
not by the law _came_ the promise to Abraham and his seed, that he
should be heir of the world, but by the righteousness of faith. (14)For
if they who are of the law are heirs, faith becomes vain, and the
promise is useless: (15)for the law causeth wrath: for where there is
no law, neither is there transgression.

(16)Therefore it is by faith, that it might be of grace; in order that
the promise might be secured to all the seed; not only to that which is
of the law, but to that which is of the faith of Abraham; who is the
father of us all, (17)(as it is written "that I have constituted thee
father of many nations[55],") before God, in whom he trusted, who
quickeneth the dead, and calleth things that are not as if existing.
(18)Who contrary to hope, in hope believed, that he should be the
father of many nations, according to what was said, "So shall thy seed
be[56]." (19)And not being weak in faith, he regarded not his own body
now deadened, being about an hundred years old, nor the deadness of
Sarah's womb: (20)for he disputed not against the promise of God with
unbelief; but was mighty in faith, giving glory to God; (21)and enjoyed
the fullest assurance, that what he had promised, he was able also to
perform. (22)And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness.
(23)Now it was not written for his sake only, that it was imputed to
him; (24)but also for our sakes, to whom it will be imputed, if we
believe in him who raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead; (25)who was
delivered up for our offences, and was raised again for our
justification.

CHAP. V.

BEING justified therefore by faith, we have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ: (2)by whom also we have had an introduction through
faith into this grace in which we have stood fast, and are rejoicing in
hope of the glory of God.

(3)And not only so, but we glory also in tribulations: knowing that
tribulation produceth patience; (4)and patience, proof; and proof,
hope; (5)and hope doth not make us ashamed; because the love of God is
poured out into our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given to us.
(6)For even then when we were without strength, Christ died in due time
for the ungodly. (7)For scarcely for a righteous person will any one
die: though for a good man perhaps some one might even dare to die.
(8)But God commendeth his own love towards us, that, though we were yet
sinners, Christ died in our stead. (9)Therefore much more, being
justified already by his blood, shall we be saved by him from wrath.
(10)For if, being enemies, we have been reconciled to God by the death
of his son, much more, having been reconciled, shall we be saved by his
life.

(11)And not so only, but we exult in God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom already we have received reconciliation. (12)Therefore, as
by one man sin entered into the world, and by sin death; even so death
passed into all men through him, in whom all have sinned. (13)For until
the law sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed if there be no
law. (14)But death reigned from Adam unto Moses, even over those who
have not sinned after the similitude of the transgression of Adam, who
is a type of him that was to come.

(15)But not as the transgression, so also _is_ the gift. For if by the
transgression of one the many became dead, much more the grace of God,
and the gift by grace, which is in that one man, Christ Jesus, hath
abounded unto many. (16)And the gift _is_ not as for one who sinned:
for the judgment indeed _came_ by one to condemnation, but the free
gift _leads_ to justification from many offences. (17)For if by the
offence of one, death reigned by that one; much more they who receive
the abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign
in life by one, Christ Jesus. (18)Well then, as by the offence of one,
_judgment issued_ against all men unto condemnation; so also by the
righteousness of one, _the gift came_ to all men for justification unto
life. (19)For as by the disobedience of one man the many were
constituted sinners; so also by the obedience of one shall the many be
constituted righteous. (20)But the law was introduced, that the offence
might be more abundant. But where sin had abounded, there hath grace
abounded more exceedingly: (21)that as sin had reigned by death, even
so might grace reign through righteousness unto life eternal by Jesus
Christ our Lord.

CHAP. VI.

THAT then shall we say? Shall we abide in sin, that grace may abound?
(2)God forbid. We who are dead to sin, how shall we still live therein?
(3)Do ye not know, that as many as have been baptised into Christ Jesus
have been baptised into his death? (4)We have been buried therefore
with him by baptism into death: that as Christ was raised from the dead
by the glory of the Father, so also we should walk in newness of life.
(5)For if we have been planted with him in the likeness of his death,
so shall we be also of his resurrection: (6)knowing this, that our old
man hath been crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
abolished, that we should no longer be slaves to sin. (7)For he that is
dead is discharged from sin. (8)But if we have been dead with Christ,
we believe that we shall also live with him: (9)knowing that Christ
being raised from the dead dieth no more; death over him hath no more
dominion. (10)For in that he died, for sin he died once: but in that he
liveth, he liveth to God. (11)So also do ye account yourselves dead
indeed to sin, but living unto God in Christ Jesus our Lord. (12)Let
not therefore sin reign in your mortal body, that you should obey it in
the passions thereof. (13)Neither present your members as weapons of
unrighteousness for sin: but present yourselves to God, as alive from
the dead, and your members as weapons of righteousness for God. (14)For
sin shall not hold dominion over you: for ye are not under the law, but
under grace. (15)What then? shall we sin, because we are not under the
law, but under grace? God forbid.

(16)Do ye not know, that to whomsoever ye present yourselves servants
to obey, ye are his servants to whom ye obey; if of sin unto death, or
of obedience, unto righteousness? (17)But thanks be to God, that though
ye were the servants of sin, ye have obeyed from the heart the model of
doctrine into which ye were delivered. (18)Emancipated then from sin,
ye became servants to righteousness. (19)I speak humanly, because of
the infirmity of your flesh: for as ye have presented your members
servants to impurity and iniquity for iniquity; so now present your
members servants to righteousness for holiness. (20)For when ye were
the slaves of sin, ye were free from righteousness. (21)What fruit
therefore had ye then in those things at which ye are now confounded?
for the end of those things is death. (22)But now being set at liberty
from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness,
and at the end life eternal. (23)For the wages of sin is death; but the
gift of God is life eternal in Jesus Christ our Lord.

CHAP. VII.

ARE you unacquainted, brethren, (for I am speaking to those who know
the law,) that the law exercises dominion over a person for as long
time as he liveth? (2)For the woman who is subject to a husband, is
bound by the law to that husband during his life; but if the husband be
dead, she is discharged from that husband. (3)She shall therefore
certainly be counted an adulteress, if, her husband being alive, she be
for another man: but if her husband is dead, she is free from the law;
so that she shall be no adulteress, though married to another husband.
(4)Wherefore, my brethren, ye also have become dead to the law through
the body of Christ; that ye might be for another, who was raised from
the dead, that we might bring forth fruit for God. (5)For when we were
in the flesh, the sinful passions excited by the law, wrought
powerfully in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death. (6)But now
we have been discharged from the law, that being dead by which we were
held fast; that we should serve in renovation of spirit, and not in the
antiquity of the letter. (7)What then shall we say? Is the law sin? God
forbid. Yea, I had not known sin, but by the law: for I had not even
known concupiscence, unless the law had said, Thou shalt not covet.
(8)But sin, seizing the opportunity by the law, wrought in me all
concupiscence. For without the law sin is dead. (9)For though I lived
without the law formerly; yet when the commandment came, sin revived,
but I died. (10)And the commandment, which _was_ for life, the same was
found by me for death. (11)For sin, seizing the occasion by the
commandment, deceived me, and thereby slew me. (12)So then the law
indeed is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and good.

(13)Did then that which is good become fatal to me? God forbid. But
sin, that it might appear sin by that which was good _in itself_, was
the cause of death to me; that sin through the commandment might become
transcendantly sinful. (14)For we know that the law is spiritual; but I
am fleshly, sold under sin. (15)For that which I am doing I approve
not: for not the thing which I wish, that do I practise; but the very
thing I hate, that I do. (16)But if what I would not, that I do, I
concur with the law that it is excellent. (17)Now then no more I do
this, but sin dwelling in me. (18)For I know that there dwelleth not in
me (that is, in my flesh) any good thing: for to will is present with
me; but how to perform that which is good I find not. (19)For I do not
the good which I wish: but the evil which I would not, that I do.
(20)If then I do that which I would not, it is no more I that do it,
but sin that dwelleth in me. (21)I find then a law, that, when I wish
to do good, evil is presented to me. (22)For I am delighted with the
law of God, as respecting the inward man: (23)but I see another law in
my members, militating against the law in my mind, and making me
captive to the law of sin which is in my members. (24)O wretched man,
I! who shall pluck me from the body of this death? (25)I give thanks to
God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Well then, I myself with my mind am
servant to the law of God; but in my flesh to the law of sin.

CHAP. VIII.

THERE is therefore now no condemnation to those who are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. (2)For the
law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath liberated me from the
law of sin and of death. (3)For that which was impossible by the law,
inasmuch as it was impotent through the flesh, God having sent his own
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in that
flesh: (4)that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled by us,
who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. (5)For they who are
after the flesh, mind the things of the flesh; but they who are after
the Spirit, the things of the Spirit. (6)For to be carnally minded is
death; but to be spiritually minded is life and peace. (7)Because the
propensity of the flesh is inimical against God: for it is not in
subjection to the law of God, neither indeed can it be. (8)They then
who are in the flesh, cannot please God. (9)But ye are not in the
flesh, but in the Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God dwelleth in you.
But if any man hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is not his. (10)But if
Christ be in you, the body indeed is dead on account of sin; but the
Spirit is alive through righteousness. (11)But if the Spirit of him who
hath raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he who raised Christ
from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his indwelling
Spirit in you. (12)Truly then we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live
after the flesh. (13)For if ye live after the flesh, ye are ready to
die: but if by the Spirit ye mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall
live. (14)For as many as are guided by the Spirit of God, they are the
sons of God. (15)For ye have not received a spirit of bondage again
unto fear; but ye have received a Spirit of adoption, by which we cry,
Abba, Father. (16)The same spirit beareth witness with our spirit, that
we are the children of God. (17)But if children, then heirs; heirs
indeed of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be we suffer with
him, that we may also together with him be glorified. (18)For I reckon
that the sufferings of the present moment are not worthy to be placed
against the future glory that shall be revealed to us. (19)For the
eager expectation of the creation is waiting for the revelation of the
children of God. (20)For the creation was made subject to vanity, not
voluntarily, but by him who made it subject, (21)in hope that the same
creation shall be emancipated from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the children of God. (22)For we know that the whole
creation groaneth together and travaileth in birth to this moment.
(23)And not only so, but ourselves also, who have the first-fruits of
the Spirit, even we ourselves groan in ourselves, expecting the
adoption, the redemption of our body. (24)For by hope we have been
saved: now hope seen is not hope; for that which any man seeth how doth
he yet hope for? (25)But if we hope for what we see not, we with
patience expect it. (26)In like manner also the Spirit affords
assistance to our infirmities: for even this, what we should pray for
as we ought, we know not: but the same Spirit more abundantly maketh
intercession for us with groanings unutterable. (27)Now he that trieth
the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, for he maketh
intercession for the saints according to God's will. (28)But we know
that to those who love God all things work together for good, even to
those who are called according to his purpose. (29)For whom he
foreknew, he predestinated also to a conformity with the image of his
Son, that he might be the first-begotten among many brethren. (30)But
whom he predestinated, those also he called: and whom he called, those
also he justified: but whom he justified, those also he glorified.

(31)What then shall we say to these things? If God be for us, who
_shall be_ against us? (32)He who even spared not his own Son, but
freely delivered him up for us all, how shall he not also, together
with him, freely give us all things? (33)Who shall put in an accusation
against the elect of God? God? He is their justifier. (34)Who is he
that condemneth? Christ? He died, yea, rather, also is risen again, who
is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us.
(35)Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall distress of
circumstances, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
the sword? (36)As it is written, "That for thy sake we have been put to
death the whole day long; we have been reckoned indeed as sheep for
slaughter[57]." (37)But in all these things we are more than conquerors
through him that loved us. (38)For I am assured that neither death, nor
life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor those to come, (39)nor exaltation, nor deepest depression, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

CHAP. IX.

I SPEAK the truth in Christ, I lie not, (my conscience also bearing
witness to me in the Holy Ghost,) (2)that great is my sorrow and
unceasing the anguish in my heart. (3)For could I myself wish that an
anathema should be from Christ upon my brethren, my kinsmen according
to the flesh? (4)who are Israelites; whose is the adoption, and the
glory, and the covenants, and the gift of the law, and the sacred
service, and the promises; (5)of whom are the fathers, and from whom as
respecting the flesh Christ sprung, who is over all, the blessed God
for evermore. Amen.

(6)Now it is not supposable that the word of God hath failed. For these
are not all Israel, who are of Israel: (7)nor, because they are the
seed of Abraham, are they all children: but, in Isaac shall thy seed be
called. (8)That is, not the children of the flesh, these are the
children of God: but the children of the promise are accounted for the
seed. (9)For the word of promise is this, At that time will I come, and
Sarah shall have a son. (10)And not only so; but when Rebecca also had
conception by one, even Isaac our father; (11)(though the children were
not yet born, nor had done any thing good or evil, that according to
the election of God the purpose might abide, not from works, but from
him who called;) (12)it was said unto her, "That the elder shall be
servant to the younger[58]." (13)As it is written, "Jacob have I loved,
but Esau have I hated[59]." (14)What shall we say therefore? Is there
unrighteousness with God? God forbid. (15)For he saith to Moses[60], "I
will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion
on whom I will have compassion." (16)Well then, it is not of him that
willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God who sheweth mercy.

(17)For the scripture saith[61] to Pharaoh, "That for this very end
have I raised thee up, that I might display in thee my power, and that
my name may be proclaimed in all the earth." (18)Well then, he hath
mercy on whom he will, but whom he will he hardeneth. (19)Wilt thou
then say to me, Why yet doth he blame us? Who hath resisted his will?
(20)Nay but, O man, who art thou that disputest against God? Shall the
thing fashioned say to him that fashioned it, Why hast thou made me
thus? (21)Hath not the potter power over the clay, from the same mass
to make one vessel for an honourable use, and another for a
dishonourable? (22)But what if God, willing to display his wrath, and
to make known what is possible with him, hath borne with much
long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted for perdition: (23)and that
he might make known the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy
which he had before prepared for glory: (24)even us, whom he hath
called, not only out of the Jews, but out of the Gentiles? (25)As also
he saith in Hosea[62], "I will call her which was not my people, my
people; and her which was not beloved, beloved. (26)And it shall be in
the place where it was said unto them, ye are not my people; there
shall they be called the sons of the living God." (27)But Isaiah[63]
crieth concerning Israel, "Though the number of the sons of Israel be
as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved: (28)for he will
finish the account, and cut it short in righteousness: because a
concise account will the Lord make on the earth." (29)Even as Isaiah
had said before[64], "Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left unto us a
seed, we should have become as Sodom, and been made like unto
Gomorrha."

(30)What then shall we say? That the Gentiles, who pursued not after
righteousness, have attained unto righteousness, even the righteousness
which is by faith. (31)But Israel, pursuing after the law of
righteousness, hath not come up to the law of righteousness. (32)And
why? Because they sought it not by faith, but as by the works of the
law. For they stumbled against that stone of stumbling; (33)as it is
written, "Behold, I lay in Zion a stone of stumbling, and a rock of
offence: and every one that believeth in him shall not be
confounded[65]."

CHAP. X.

BRETHREN, the kind wish of my heart indeed, and the prayer which I
offer to God for Israel, is for their salvation. (2)For I am a witness
for them, that they have a zeal for God, but not according to
knowledge. (3)For being ignorant of the righteousness which is of God,
and seeking to establish a righteousness of their own, they have not
submitted to the righteousness of God. (4)For Christ is the end of the
law for righteousness to every one that believeth. (5)For Moses
describeth the righteousness which is by the law, "That the man who
doeth these things shall live by them[66]." (6)But the righteousness
that is by faith speaketh thus[67], "Say not in thy heart, Who shall
ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down:) (7)or, Who shall
descend into the abyss?" (that is, to bring Christ up again from the
dead.) (8)But what saith it? "The word is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and
in thy heart:" that is, the word of faith which we preach; (9)That if
thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in
thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved.
(10)For with the heart faith is exercised unto righteousness; and with
the mouth is confession made unto salvation. (11)For the scripture
saith[68], "Every one who believeth in him shall not be confounded."

(12)For there is no difference between either Jew or Greek: for the
same Lord of all is rich to all that call upon him. (13)"For every one
shall be saved, whosoever calleth on the name of the Lord[69]." (14)How
then shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? and how
shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard? but how shall
they hear without a preacher? (15)and how shall they preach unless they
are sent? as it is written[70], "How beautiful are the feet of those
who preach the gospel of peace, of those who preach the glad tidings of
good things!" (16)But they have not all obeyed the gospel. For Isaiah
saith, "Lord, who hath believed our report[71]?" (17)Faith then cometh
by report, but the report by the word of God. (18)But I say, Have they
not heard? Yea verily, "the sound of their voice is gone forth into all
the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world[72]."

(19)But I say, Did not Israel know? Moses first saith, "I will excite
your jealousy by what is no nation, and by an ignorant people will I
provoke you to wrath[73]." (20)But Isaiah is very bold, and saith[74],
"I have been found by those who sought me not; I have become manifest
to those who inquired not after me." (21)But unto Israel he saith, "All
the day long have I stretched out my hands unto a people disobedient
and contradicting."

CHAP. XI.

I SAY then, Hath God rejected his people? God forbid. For I also am an
Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. (2)God
hath not rejected his people whom he foreknew. Know ye not what the
scripture saith of Elias[75]? how he maketh intercession with God
against Israel, saying, (3)"Lord, they have killed thy prophets, and
digged down thine altars; and I only am left, and they seek my life."
(4)But what saith the oracle of God to him? "I have left to myself
seven thousand men who have not bowed the knee to Baal." (5)So then at
this present time also there is a remnant according to the election of
grace. (6)But if by grace, it is no more by works: otherwise grace is
no more grace. But if by works, it is no more grace: otherwise work is
no more work.

(7)What then is the result? Israel hath not obtained that which it
seeketh; but the election hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded,
(8)as it is written[76], "God hath given them the spirit of slumber,
eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear; unto
this present day." (9)And David saith[77], "Let their table be for a
snare, and for a trap, and for a stumbling-block, and for a recompence
unto them: (10)let their eyes be blinded, that they may not see, and
bow down their back continually."

(11)I say then, Have they stumbled so as to fall? God forbid: but by
their stumbling salvation is come to the Gentiles, to provoke them to
jealousy. (12)For if their stumbling is the riches of the world, and
their diminution the riches of the Gentiles; how much more their
fulness? (13)For I address myself to you Gentiles; inasmuch as I am
indeed the apostle of the Gentiles, I exalt my ministry: (14)if by any
means I might provoke to jealousy my flesh, and save some of them.
(15)For if the rejection of them is the reconciliation of the world,
what shall their recovery be, but life from the dead? (16)Now if the
first fruits be holy, so is the mass: and if the root be holy, so are
the branches. (17)But if some of the branches have been broken off, and
thou though a wild olive hast been grafted in among them, and become a
partaker of the root and fatness of the olive tree; (18)boast not
against the branches. But if thou boast, thou bearest not the root, but
the root thee.

(19)Wilt thou say then, The branches were broken off, that I might be
grafted in? (20)Admitted; by unbelief they were broken off, and thou
standest by faith. Be not high minded, but fear: (21)for if God spared
not the native branches, tremble lest he spare not thee.

(22)Behold therefore the kindness and severity of God: to those indeed
who fell, severity; but unto thee, kindness, if thou continuest in that
kindness: otherwise thou also shalt be cut off. (23)But they also, if
they continue not in unbelief, shall be grafted in: for God is able to
graft them in again. (24)For if thou hast been cut out of the naturally
wild olive, and contrary to nature hast been grafted into the good
olive: how much more shall these, which are native branches, be grafted
into their own olive tree? (25)For I would not that you should be
ignorant, brethren, of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own
conceits; that blindness in part is come on Israel, until the fulness
of the Gentiles be come in. (26)And so all Israel shall be saved: as it
is written, "The Deliverer shall go forth out of Sion, and shalt turn
away ungodliness from Jacob; (27)and this is my covenant with them,
When I shall take away their sins[78]." (28)As concerning the gospel
indeed, they are now enemies for your sakes: as concerning the
election, they are beloved for the fathers' sake. (29)For unchangeable
are the gifts and the calling of God. (30)For as ye also in times past
did not believe in God, but now have obtained mercy through their
unbelief: (31)so also these now have not believed in your mercy, that
they also might obtain mercy. (32)For God hath shut up all in unbelief,
that he might have mercy upon all. (33)O the depth of the riches both
of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments,
and how incomprehensible his ways! (34)For who hath known the mind of
the Lord, or who hath been admitted his counsellor? (35)Or who hath
first given unto him, and it shall be repaid him again? (36)Because by
him, and through him, and for him, are all things, to whom be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. XII.

I BESEECH you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, to present
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your
reasonable service. (2)And be not conformed to this world, but be
transformed by the renovation of your mind, that you may prove by
experience what is the will of God, that is good, acceptable, and
perfect. (3)For, I say, by the grace which is given unto me, to every
one that is among you, not to think of himself above what he ought to
think; but to think soberly, as God has divided to every one the
measure of faith. (4)For as we have in one body many members, but the
members, though many, have not the same function, (5)so we, being many,
are one body in Christ, and every one reciprocally members of each
other. (6)Having then different gifts according to the grace which is
given unto us, if it be prophecy, speak according to the analogy of
faith; (7)or if the deacon's office, be active in the service; or he
that teacheth, in teaching; (8)or he that exhorteth, in exhortation; he
that distributes, let him do it with simplicity; he that presideth,
with diligence; he that is employed in acts of mercy, with
cheerfulness. (9)Let love be undissembled. Abhor that which is evil;
cleave to that which is good. (10)In brotherly affection be tenderly
attached to each other; in honour preferring one another: (11)not
slothful in business; fervent in spirit; serving the Lord:
(12)rejoicing in hope; patient in affliction; persevering in prayer:
(13)communicating to the wants of the saints; prompt to hospitality.
(14)Bless them who persecute you; bless, and curse not. (15)Rejoice
with those that rejoice, and weep with those that weep. (16)Be of the
same mind among each other. Affect not high things, but be
condescending to the lowly. Be not wise in your own conceits.
(17)Render to no man evil for evil. Be provident of things laudable in
the sight of all men. (18)If possible, as far as you can, be at peace
with all men. (19)Avenge not yourselves, beloved, but give place unto
wrath: for it is written, "Vengeance belongeth to me; I will
recompence, saith the Lord[79]." (20)If therefore thine enemy hunger,
give him food; if he thirst, give him drink: for so doing, thou shalt
heap up coals of fire on his head. (21)Be not overcome of evil, but
overcome evil with good.

CHAP. XIII.

LET every soul be subject to the superior powers: for there is no power
but from God; the existing powers are appointed by God. (2)Wherefore he
that sets himself against authority, resists the ordinance of God: and
they who resist shall receive to themselves condemnation. (3)For rulers
are not a terror to good works, but to evil. Wilt thou then not be
afraid of the power? Do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise
from it: (4)for he is the minister of God to thee for good. But if thou
doest that which is evil, tremble! for he beareth not the sword in
vain: for he is the minister of God, an avenger to inflict wrath on him
that practises what is evil. (5)Wherefore there is a necessity for
being in subjection, not only for fear of wrath, but also for
conscience sake. (6)For on this account pay ye taxes also: for they are
God's ministers, continually employed on this very service. (7)Render
therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to
whom custom, fear to whom fear, honour to whom honour. (8)Owe no man
any thing, but to love one another: for he that loveth another hath
fulfilled the law. (9)For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou
shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false
witness, Thou shalt not covet; and if there be any other commandment,
it is comprised in this word, even in this, Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself. (10)Love doeth no ill to a neighbour; the
fulfilment therefore of the law is love. (11)And thus do, knowing the
time; for the hour is come that we should awake from sleep, for now our
salvation is nearer than when we believed. (12)The night is far
advanced, the day approaches: let us therefore put off the works of
darkness, and let us put on the armour of light. (13)Let us walk
becomingly as in the face of day, not in revels and drunkenness, not in
impurities and wantonness, not in strife and envy. (14)But put ye on
the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to gratify
its passions.

CHAP. XIV.

HIM that is weak in faith take by the hand, and enter not into niceties
of disputes. (2)One man indeed thinketh he may eat all meats; another,
who is weak, eateth vegetables. (3)Let not him that eateth despise him
that eateth not, and let not him that eateth not judge him that eateth;
for God hath accepted him. (4)Who art thou that judgest another man's
servant? To his own master he standeth or falleth; but he shall be
established: for God is able to establish him. (5)One man judgeth one
day different from another day: another judgeth every day alike. Let
every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. (6)He that observeth a
day, to the Lord he observeth it; and he that observeth not a day, to
the Lord he doth not observe it. He that eateth, to the Lord he eateth,
for he giveth thanks to God; and he that eateth not, to the Lord he
eateth not, and giveth thanks to God. (7)For no one of us liveth to
himself, and no one dieth to himself. (8)For whether we live, to the
Lord we live, and whether we die, to the Lord we die; whether therefore
we live, or whether we die, we are the Lord's. (9)For to this end
Christ both died, and rose again, and revived, that he might be the
Lord both of the dead and of the living. (10)But thou, why judgest thou
thy brother? And thou, why dost thou disparage thy brother? for we must
all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ. (11)For it is written,
"As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every
tongue shall make confession to God[80]." (12)Assuredly then every one
of us shall give an account of himself to God. (13)Let us therefore no
more judge one another; but judge this rather, that no one put a
stumbling-block or offence before his brother. (14)I know, and am
convinced by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of itself;
but to him who thinketh any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean.
(15)But if by meat thy brother is grieved, thou walkest no more
according to love. Do not by thy meat destroy him for whom Christ died.
(16)Let not therefore food, which is good for you, give occasion of
reproach. (17)For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. (18)For he who in
these things is the servant of Christ, is acceptable to God, and
approved of men. (19)Well then, let us earnestly pursue the things that
conduce to peace, and the things which are for mutual edification.
(20)For the sake of meat destroy not the work of God. All things indeed
are clean; but it is an evil thing for a man to eat, giving offence.
(21)It is laudable not to eat flesh, or to drink wine, nor to do any
thing whereby thy brother is stumbled, or scandalized, or weakened.
(22)Hast thou faith, exercise it before God within thyself. Blessed is
the man who condemneth not himself in that which he alloweth. (23)But
he that maketh a difference between meats, if he eat is condemned,
because he doth it not by faith: for every thing which is not of faith,
is sin.

CHAP. XV.

WE then that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of those who are
feeble, and not to gratify ourselves. (2)Let every one of us gratify
his neighbour in that which is good for his edification. (3)For even
Christ gratified not himself; but as it is written, "The reproaches of
them that reproached thee are fallen upon me[81]." (4)For whatsoever
things were written aforetime, were written for our instruction; that
by patience and the consolation of the Scriptures we might have hope.
(5)Now the God of patience and consolation give you to be like-minded
among each other, according to Christ Jesus: (6)that in one mind, with
one mouth, ye may glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. (7)Therefore help one another, as Christ also hath helped us,
for the glory of God.

(8)Now I say that Jesus Christ was the minister of circumcision for the
truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the fathers: (9)and
that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy; as it is
written[82], "For this cause will I confess unto thee among the
Gentiles, and sing unto thy name." (10)And again he saith[83],
"Rejoice, ye Gentiles, with his people." (11)And again[84], "Praise the
Lord, all ye nations, and laud him, all ye people." (12)And again
Isaiah saith, "There shall be a root of Jesse, and he that ariseth to
reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust[85]." (13)Now
the God of hope fill you with all joy, and peace in believing, that ye
may abound in hope by the power of the Holy Ghost.

(14)And I myself also am persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye
yourselves are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, and able to
admonish one another. (15)But I have written to you, my brethren, in
part, with greater freedom, as refreshing your memory through the grace
which is given to me of God; (16)that I should be the minister of Jesus
Christ unto the Gentiles, ministering the Gospel of God; that the
oblation of the Gentiles might be acceptable, sanctified by the Holy
Ghost.

(17)I have therefore cause to glory in Christ Jesus with regard to the
things of God. (18)For I will not dare to say any thing of those things
which Christ hath not wrought by my ministry, to engage the obedience
of the Gentiles, by word and deed, (19)by the power of signs and
miracles, by the might of the Spirit of God; so that from Jerusalem,
and in a circle quite round unto Illyricum, I have fully spread the
gospel of Christ. (20)But I have in such manner endeavoured to preach
the gospel, not where Christ's name had been heard, lest I should build
upon another man's foundation: (21)but as it is written[86], "To whom
the tidings concerning him have not reached, they shall see, and they
who have not heard, shall understand." (22)Wherefore also I have found
many things to hinder me from coming to you; (23)but now having no
longer cause to detain me in these regions, and having an earnest
desire to come unto you for many years past, (24)whenever I proceed on
my journey into Spain, I will come unto you: for I hope on my journey
to see you, and by you to be forwarded thither, after I shall have
first, in a measure, fully enjoyed your society. (25)But I am now going
to Jerusalem, to carry alms to the saints. (26)For Macedonia and Achaia
have been pleased to make a certain contribution for the poor of the
saints that are at Jerusalem. (27)They have been so pleased indeed, and
their debtors they are. For if the Gentiles have been admitted to a
participation in their spiritual things, they ought also to minister to
them in carnal things. (28)When therefore I have completed this work,
and sealed unto them this fruit, I will pass by you into Spain. (29)But
I know that, when I come to you, I shall come with the fulness of the
blessing of the gospel of Christ. (30)Now I exhort you, brethren, by
our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the love of the Spirit, that you wrestle
earnestly with me in prayers for me unto God; (31)that I may be
delivered from those who do not believe in Judea; and that my service
which regards Jerusalem may be kindly accepted by the saints; (32)that
I may come unto you with joy by the will of God, and may be refreshed
together with you.

(33)Now the God of peace be with you all! Amen.

CHAP. XVI.

I NOW commend unto you Phoebe our sister, who is a deaconess of the
church which is at Cenchrea: (2)that ye receive her in the Lord, as
becometh saints, and that you assist her in every matter wherein she
may have need of you: for she hath also been a succourer of many, and
of me myself.

(3)Salute Priscilla and Aquila my fellow-labourers in Christ Jesus:
(4)(who for my life have laid down their own neck: to whom not only I
give thanks, but also all the churches of the Gentiles:) (5)and the
church which is in their house.

Salute Epinetus my beloved, who is the first-fruits of Achaia unto
Christ. (6)Salute Mary, who laboured in many things to serve us.
(7)Salute Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen, and fellow-prisoners, who
are eminent among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me.
(8)Salute Amplias my beloved in the Lord. (9)Salute Urban, our
fellow-labourer in Christ, and Stachys my beloved. (10)Salute Apelles
the approved in Christ. Salute those who are of the family of
Aristobulus. (11)Salute Herodion my kinsman. Salute those which belong
to the family of Narcissus, who are in the Lord. (12)Salute Tryphena
and Tryphosa, who have laboured hard in the Lord. Salute Persis the
beloved, who laboured much in the Lord. (13)Salute Rufus elect in the
Lord, and his mother and mine. (14)Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Dermas,
Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren which are with them. (15)Salute
Philologus, and Julia, Nereus, and his sister, and Olympas, and all the
saints with them. (16)Salute one another with the holy kiss. The
churches of Christ salute you. (17)Now I beseech you, brethren, keep a
sharp eye over those who cause divisions and offences contrary to the
doctrine ye have learned, and turn away from them. (18)For such are not
servants to our Lord Jesus Christ, but to their own belly; and by
smooth speeches and flattering commendations deceive the hearts of the
guileless. (19)For your obedience is gone forth in report to all men. I
rejoice therefore on your account: but I wish you to be wise indeed
unto good, but harmless respecting evil. (20)Now the God of peace shall
bruise Satan under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you. Amen.

(21)There salute you Timothy, my fellow-labourer, and Lucius, and
Jason, and Sosipater, my kinsmen. (22)I Tertius, who have written this
epistle, salute you in the Lord. (23)Gaius mine host, and of the whole
church, saluteth you. Erastus the chamberlain of the city saluteth you,
and Quartus a brother.

(24)The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. _Amen_.

(25)Now to him that is able to stablish you according to my gospel, and
the preaching of Jesus Christ, agreeable to the revelation of the
mystery; which was concealed from all former ages, (26)but is now made
manifest, and by the prophetical scriptures, according to the
commandment of the eternal God, notified to all the Gentiles to bring
them to the obedience of faith: (27)to the only wise God, through Jesus
Christ, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Written to the Romans, and sent by Phoebe, a deaconess of the church in
Cenchrea.



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.

CHAP. I.

PAUL, a called apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and
Sosthenes a brother, (2)to the church of God which is at Corinth,
sanctified in Christ Jesus, to the called saints, with all those who
invoke the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place, both their's
and our's: (3)grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and
our Lord Jesus Christ. (4)I give thanks to my God always on your
behalf, for the grace of God which hath been given you in Christ Jesus;
(5)that in every thing ye have been enriched by him, in all utterance,
and all knowledge; (6)thus the testimony of Jesus hath been confirmed
among you: (7)so that ye have not been deficient in any gift; waiting
for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ: (8)who shall confirm you
to the end blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. (9)Faithful
is God, by whom ye have been called into communion with his Son Jesus
Christ our Lord.

(10)Now I conjure you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no schisms among
you; but that ye be perfectly united together in the same mind and the
same sentiment. (11)For I have been informed concerning you, my
brethren, by those of the family of Chloe, that there are contentions
among you. (12)Now this I observe, that one and another of you saith, I
am indeed of Paul; but I of Apollos; but I of Cephas; but I am of
Christ. (13)Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye
baptised into the name of Paul?

(14)I thank God that I baptised none of you, except Crispus and Gaius;
(15)that no man might say, I baptised into my own name. (16)And I also
baptised the household of Stephanus: besides these, I know not if I
baptised any other person. (17)For Christ sent me not to baptise, but
to preach the gospel: not with wisdom of discourse, lest the cross of
Christ should be slighted. (18)For the discourse, _the subject of which
is_ the cross, is indeed to those who perish, folly; but to us who are
saved it is the power of God. (19)For it is written, "I will destroy
the wisdom of the wise, and the understanding of the intelligent will I
make useless[87]." (20)Where is the sophist? where is the scribe? where
is the inquisitive searcher after this world's wisdom? hath not God
turned into folly the wisdom of this world? (21)for since in the wisdom
of God the world by its wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. (22)For the Jews
demand a miracle, and the Greeks seek wisdom: (23)but we preach Christ
crucified, to the Jews indeed an offence, and to the Greeks folly;
(24)but to those who are called, whether Jews or Greeks, Christ the
power of God, and the wisdom of God. (25)For this foolishness of God is
wiser than men; and this weakness of God is stronger than men. (26)For
ye see your calling, brethren, that not many fleshly wise, not many men
in power, not many men of high birth, are called: (27)but the foolish
things of this world hath God elected, that he might confound the wise;
and the feeble things of the world hath God elected, that he might
confound the mighty; (28)and the ignoble things of the world, and the
despicable, hath God elected, and the things that are not, to bring to
nought the things which are, (29)that no flesh should glory in his
presence. (30)But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who hath been made to
us of God wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption: (31)that, as it is written, "He that glorieth, let him
glory in the Lord[88]."

CHAP. II.

AND I, when I came to you, brethren, came not with superior excellence
of discourse or wisdom, preaching unto you the gospel of God. (2)For I
determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him
crucified. (3)And in weakness, and in fear, and in much timidity, was I
among you. (4)And my conversation and my preaching was not with
persuasive words of human wisdom, but with demonstration of the Spirit,
and of power: (5)that your faith might not stand on the wisdom of men,
but on the power of God. (6)But we speak wisdom among the perfect: yet
not the wisdom of this world, nor of the rulers of this world, who are
destroying themselves: (7)but we speak the wisdom of God, which had
been hid in mystery, which God predestined before the worlds were, for
our glory: (8)which none of the rulers of this world have known: for if
they had known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
(9)But, as it is written[89], "The things which eye hath not seen, and
ear hath not heard, and that have not entered into the heart of man,
these hath God prepared for those who love him." (10)But to us hath God
revealed them by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth out all things,
even the depths of God. (11)For who among men knoweth the things of
man, save the spirit of man which is in him? so also the things of God
knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.

(12)Now we have not received the spirit of the world, but the spirit
which is from God; that we might know the things that are freely given
to us of God. (13)Which things also we speak, not in discourses framed
by human wisdom, but taught by the Spirit of God; comparing spiritual
things with spiritual.

(14)But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God:
for they are folly to him: and he cannot know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. (15)But the spiritual man discerneth indeed all
things, though himself is discernible by no man. (16)For who hath known
the mind of the Lord? who will instruct him? But we have the mind of
Christ.

CHAP. III.

AND I, brethren, have been unable to speak to you as unto spiritual
men, but as to carnal, even as to babes in Christ. (2)And I have given
you milk to drink, and not meat: for hitherto ye have not been capable
of it, yea, even to the present moment ye are not capable of it. (3)For
ye are still carnal: for since there are among you envy, and strife,
and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as _other_ men? (4)For when
one saith, I am indeed of Paul; and another, I am of Apollos; are ye
not carnal? (5)Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but the ministers
through whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to each _of us_? (6)I
have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase. (7)So then
neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that watereth; but God
who giveth the increase. (8)Now he that planteth and he that watereth
are one: but every one shall receive his own reward according to his
own labour. (9)For we are God's fellowlabourers: ye are God's
husbandry, ye are God's building.

(10)According to the grace of God given unto me, as a skilful
architect, I have laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon.
But let every one take heed how he buildeth upon it. (11)For other
foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus the
Messiah. (12)But if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver,
precious stones, timbers, hay, stubble; (13)every man's work shall be
made manifest: for that day shall declare it, for it shall be laid open
by fire; and the fire shall prove every man's work of what sort it is.
(14)If any man's work which he hath built abide _the trial_, he shall
receive a reward. (15)If any man's work be burnt up, he shall suffer
loss: but himself shall be saved; yet so as through the fire.

(16)Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of
God dwelleth in you? (17)If any man prophane the temple of God, him
will God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.

(18)Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you thinketh himself a
wise man in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.
(19)For the wisdom of this world is folly in the sight of God. For it
is written, "He entangleth the wise in their own craftiness[90]."
(20)And again[91], "The Lord knoweth the reasonings of the wise, that
they are futile." (21)Wherefore let no man glory in men. For all things
are your's; (22)whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or
life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all things are
your's; (23)and ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's.

CHAP. IV.

LET a man so account of us, as the under servants of Christ, and
stewards of the mysteries of God. (2)Moreover it is expected of
stewards, that a man be found faithful. (3)But it is my least
consideration that I should be judged by you, or by human opinion: yea
I decide not respecting myself. (4)For though I am not conscious to
myself of any unfaithfulness, yet am I not thereby justified; but he
that judgeth me is the Lord. (5)Wherefore judge nothing before the time
until the Lord come, who also will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will manifest the counsels of men's hearts; and then
shall praise be given to each from God.

(6)But these things, brethren, I have figuratively applied to myself,
and Apollos for your sake; that in us ye might learn not to be
attached, beyond what is written, lest one being for one _minister_, ye
be puffed up _with prejudice_ against another. (7)For who
distinguisheth thee? and what hast thou which thou hast not received?
But if thou also hast received it, why dost thou glory, as if thou
hadst not received it?

(8)Now ye are full, now ye have grown rich, ye have reigned without us:
and I wish indeed that you may reign, that we also might reign together
with you. (9)For I think that God hath exposed us his apostles the last
as devoted unto death. For we have been made a spectacle to the world,
and to angels, and to men. (10)We are counted fools for Christ's sake,
but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are mighty; ye are
honourable persons, but we despised. (11)For even to this present hour
we undergo hunger and thirst and nakedness, and are buffeted about, and
have no settled abode; (12)and work hard, labouring with our own hands:
being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it; (13)being
injuriously spoken of, we entreat; we are made as the ordures of the
world, as the sweepings of all things unto this day.

(14)I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved children I
admonish you. (15)For though ye may have ten thousand teachers in
Christ, yet not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus through the Gospel I
have begotten you. (16)Now I conjure you, be followers of me. (17)For
this cause have I sent unto you Timothy, who is my son beloved and
faithful in Christ, who will remind you of my ways which are in Christ
Jesus, as I teach every where in every church.

(18)Now some are puffed up, as though I would not really come to you.
(19)But I will come shortly unto you, if the Lord please, and will
know, not the prating of them that are puffed up, but the power.
(20)For the kingdom of God is not in talk, but in power. (21)What is
your wish? That I should come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in
the spirit of meekness?

CHAP. V.

IT is generally reported that there is whoredom among you, and such
whoredom as is not even named among the Gentiles, that one should have
his father's wife. (2)And ye are puffed up, though ought ye not rather
to be grieved? that he who hath done this deed might be plucked from
the midst of you. (3)For I indeed, as absent in body, but present in
spirit, have already, as present, passed judgment on him who hath so
done this thing; (4)in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, ye being
assembled together and my spirit with the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ, (5)to deliver such a one over to Satan for the destruction of
the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

(6)Your glorying is not good: know ye not that a little leaven
leaveneth the whole mass? (7)Purge out therefore the old leaven, that
ye may be a new mass, as ye are unleavened.

For our passover hath been sacrificed for us, even Christ. (8)Therefore
let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, nor with the leaven of
malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth.

(9)I have written unto you in an epistle that you should not associate
with fornicators. (10)Yet not altogether with the fornicators of this
world, or the covetous, or extortioners, or idolaters: for then must ye
indeed go out of the world. (11)But now I have written unto you not to
associate with him, if any man, professing to be a brother, be a
fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or
an extortioner, with such a one not even to eat. (12)For what call have
I to judge those who are without? Do not ye judge those who are within
_the church_? (13)But those who are without God judgeth. Put then away
that wicked man from among yourselves.

CHAP. VI.

DARE any of you, having a matter of controversy with another, sue for
judgment before the unjust, and not before the saints? (2)Know ye not
that the saints shall judge the world? and if the world shall be judged
by you, are ye unworthy to be judges in the smallest matters? (3)Know
ye not that we shall judge angels, much more things pertaining to this
life?

(4)If then ye have disputes about the things of this life, do you seat
those on the bench who are least esteemed in the church? (5)I speak to
you to shame you. Is it so, that there is not among you a wise man? Not
so much as one who is able to judge between one brother and another?
(6)But brother goes to law with brother, and this before the
unbelievers. (7)Now verily therefore there is altogether a fault among
you, because ye have law-suits one with another. Why do ye not rather
submit to the wrong? Why do ye not rather suffer yourselves to be
defrauded? (8)But ye do wrong and defraud, and that the brethren.

(9)Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of
God? Be not deceived; neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor sodomites, (10)nor thieves, nor the
covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit
the kingdom of God. (11)Yet such were some of you: but ye have been
washed, but ye have been sanctified, but ye have been justified in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.

(12)All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient; all
things are lawful for me, but I will not put myself under the power of
any. (13)Meats are for the belly, and the belly for meats; but God will
destroy both it and them. Now the body is not for whoredom, but for the
Lord, and the Lord for the body. (14)And God hath both raised up the
Lord, and will raise us up by his own power.

(15)Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? Taking then
the members of Christ, shall I make them members of an harlot? God
forbid.

(16)Do you not know that he that is joined to an harlot is one body
with her? For they two, saith he, shall be "one flesh[92]." (17)But he
that is joined to the Lord is one spirit.

(18)Flee whoredom. Every other sin which a man may commit is without
the body; but he who committeth whoredom sinneth against his own body.
(19)Do ye not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost,
which is in you, which ye have from God, and ye are not your own?
(20)For ye have been bought with a price: glorify then God in your
body, and in your spirit, which are God's.

CHAP. VII.

NOW with regard to those things concerning which ye have written unto
me, it were good for a man not to touch a woman. (2)But because of the
whoredoms, let every man have his own wife, and every wife her own
husband.

(3)Let the husband render to the wife due benevolence, and in like
manner also the wife to the husband. (4)The wife hath not power over
her own body, but the husband: in like manner also the husband has not
power over his own body, but the wife. (5)Defraud not one another,
except it may be by consent occasionally, that ye may have more leisure
for fasting and prayer; and come together again, lest Satan tempt you
through your incontinence. (6)But in this I speak my opinion only, not
authoritatively. (7)For I would that all men were even as myself: but
every man hath his peculiar gift from God, one of this sort, and
another of that. (8)I say then to the unmarried and the widows, that it
is becoming them if they abide as I am. (9)But if they have not the
gift of continence, let them marry: for it is better to marry than to
burn. (10)But to the married not I command, but the Lord, That the wife
be not separated from the husband: (11)and even if she should be
separated, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband:
and let not the husband put away his wife.

(12)But to the others I speak, not the Lord, If any brother hath a wife
unbelieving, yet she chuseth to dwell with him, let him not put her
away. (13)And the wife which hath a husband not a believer, and he
chuses to dwell with her, let her not put him away. (14)For the husband
that believeth not is sanctified by the wife, and the wife who
believeth not is sanctified by the husband: else indeed your children
were unclean, but now are they holy. (15)But if the unbelieving person
depart, let him depart. A brother or a sister is not under bondage in
these cases, but God hath called us unto peace.

(16)For how knowest thou, O wife, but thou shalt save thy husband? and
how knowest thou, O husband, but thou shalt save thy wife?
(17)Nevertheless as God has bestowed the gift on every man as the Lord
hath called every man, so let him walk, and so I give command in all
the churches.

(18)Is any man called being circumcised? let him not affect
uncircumcision. Is any man called in uncircumcision? let him not be
circumcised. (19)Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is
nothing, but the observance of the commandments of God.

(20)Let every one abide in the calling in which he is called. (21)Art
thou called being a slave? let it give thee no concern; but if thou
canst also obtain thy freedom, rather make use of it. (22)For he that
is called in the Lord, being a slave, is the Lord's freed man: in like
manner also, he that is called, being a free man, is the servant of
Christ. (23)Have you been redeemed with a price? become not the slaves
of men. (24)Let every one, brethren, in the vocation wherein he is
called, therein abide with God.

(25)Now concerning virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord; but I
offer my opinion, as having obtained mercy from the Lord to be
faithful. (26)I think then that this is becoming, considering our
present straits, that it is proper for a man to be thus. (27)Art thou
bound to a wife? seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed from a wife?
seek not a wife. (28)But if thou shouldst marry, thou hast not sinned;
and if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned; though such will have
tribulation in the flesh; but I spare you.

(29)Now this I say, brethren, that the time is short. The conclusion
is, that even they who have wives, should be as though they had not;
(30)and they who weep as though they wept not; and they who rejoice as
though they rejoiced not; and they that purchase as though they
possessed not; (31)and they who use this world, as not abusing it: for
the fashion of this world passeth away. (32)But I would have you to be
free from anxiety. He who is unmarried is anxious for the things of the
Lord, how he shall please the Lord: (33)but he who is married is
anxious about the things of the world, how he shall please his wife.
(34)A wife and a virgin hath different pursuits: the unmarried woman is
anxious about the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body
and spirit; but the married woman is anxious about the things of the
world, how she shall please her husband. (35)Now I say this for your
own advantage, and not that I should lay a snare in your way, but as
what is seemly, and that you may wait on the Lord without distraction.
(36)But if a person supposes it would be unseemly for a virgin of his
if she should pass the flower of her age _in celibacy_, and that duty
directs it should be so, let him do as he is inclined, he doth not sin:
let such marry. (37)But he that is stedfast in his heart, not having
any necessity, but retaineth power over his own inclination, and hath
determined this in his heart that he will preserve his own virgin
state, doeth well. (38)Wherefore though he who giveth in marriage doeth
well, yet he who avoids a matrimonial connection, doeth better.

(39)The wife is bound by the law as long as her husband liveth: but if
her husband be dead, she is free to be married to whomsoever she will,
but only in the Lord. (40)But she is more blessed if she abide as she
is, in my opinion: and I think I have the spirit of God.

CHAP. VIII.

NOW concerning the things sacrificed to idols, we know that we all have
knowledge. Knowledge puffeth up, but love edifieth. (2)But if any man
conceit that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought
to know. (3)But if any man love God, the same is known of him.

(4)Now concerning eating things sacrificed unto idols: we know that an
idol is nothing in the world, and that there is no other God but one.
(5)For though there are gods so called, whether celestial or
terrestrial, (as _of this sort_ there are gods many, and lords many;)
(6)but to us there is one God, the Father; of whom are all things, and
we for him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we
by him. (7)Howbeit there is not in all men this knowledge; but some
having conscientious respect for the idol to this moment, eat the meat
as sacrificed to the idol; and their conscience being weak, is defiled.
(8)But meat commendeth us not to God: for neither if we eat are we the
better, or if we eat not are we the worse. (9)But take heed that this
power of yours become not an occasion of stumbling to the weak. (10)For
if any man see thee that hast knowledge, sitting in an idol's temple,
shall not the conscience of him who is weak be emboldened to eat what
is sacrificed to idols? (11)And the weak brother will be destroyed by
thy knowledge, for whom Christ died. (12)But when ye sin so against the
brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ.
(13)Wherefore if meat give occasion of offence to my brother, I will in
no wise eat meat for ever, that I give no cause of offence to my
brother.

CHAP. IX.

AM I not an apostle? am I not a free man? have I not seen Jesus Christ
our Lord? are not ye my work in the Lord? (2)If I am not an apostle
unto others, doubtless I am to you: for ye are the seal of my apostolic
mission in the Lord. (3)My apology to those who interrogate me is this,
(4)Have we not power to eat and drink? (5)Have we not power to carry
about with us a sister wife, as do also the other apostles, even the
brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? (6)or I alone and Barnabas, have we
not power to forbear labour? (7)Who goeth at any time to war at his own
expences? who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit of it?
or who feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock?
(8)Speak I these things _rationally_ as a man, or doth not the law
speak the same things? (9)for in the law of Moses it is written, "Thou
shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox which treadeth out the corn[93]."
Doth God take care for oxen? (10)or saith he it altogether for our
sakes? For our sakes doubtless it was written; because he who ploweth
ought to plow in hope, and he who soweth in hope should be partaker of
his hope. (11)If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great
thing if we should reap your corporal things? (12)if others partake of
this power over you, ought not we much more? But we have not used this
power, and we suffer all things, that we might not put any obstruction
in the way of the gospel of Christ.

(13)Know ye not that they who are employed about the holy things, are
fed from the temple? and they who serve at the altar, partake with the
altar? (14)So also the Lord hath commanded to those who preach the
gospel, that they should live by the gospel. (15)But I have used
nothing of these things, nor have I written indeed these things, that
it should be so done respecting me; for it would become me to die
rather than that any man should make my glorying void. (16)For though I
preach the gospel, I have nothing to glory of: for necessity is laid
upon me, yea verily woe is to me if I preach not the gospel. (17)For if
I do this willingly, I have a reward; but if unwillingly, I am
entrusted with the dispensation _of it_. (18)What then is my reward?
That when I preach the gospel, I may put the gospel of Christ to no
expence, that I abuse not my power in the gospel.

(19)For though I be free from all men, I have made myself the servant
of all, that I might gain the more. (20)And I became to the Jews as a
Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to those under the law, as under the
law, that I might gain those who are under the law; (21)to those who
are without law, as without law (not as being without law to God, but
under the law to Christ), that I might gain those who were without law.
(22)I became to the weak as weak, that I might gain the weak; I became
all things to all men, that by every means I might save some. (23)And
this I do for the gospel's sake, that I may be a partaker of it with
you.

(24)Know ye not that they who run on the course, all run indeed, yet
but one obtaineth the price? So run, that ye may obtain. (25)And every
one who contendeth _in the games_ is temperate in all things: they
indeed therefore do it that they may receive a corruptible crown, but
we an incorruptible. (26)I therefore so run not as uncertainly; so do I
exercise with my fists, not as striking the air: (27)but I beat down my
body, and bring it into subjection, that I may not by any means, after
having preached to others, myself become reprobate.

CHAP. X.

BUT I would not that you should be ignorant, brethren, that our fathers
were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; (2)and were
all baptised unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea; (3)and did all eat
the same spiritual meat; (4)and did all drink the same spiritual drink:
for they drank of that spiritual rock which followed them; but that
rock was Christ. (5)Nevertheless with the most of them God was not well
pleased, for they were destroyed in the wilderness.

(6)Now these things were examples for us, that we might not be coveters
of evil things, as they also coveted. (7)Neither be ye idolaters as
some of them; as it is written, "The people sat down to eat and drink,
and rose up to sport themselves[94]." (8)Neither let us commit
whoredom, as some of them also committed, and in one day fell
twenty-three thousand[95]. (9)Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of
them also tempted[96], and were destroyed by serpents. (10)Neither
murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and perished by the
destroyer[97]. (11)Now all these things happened unto them as examples,
but they are written for our admonition, on whom the ends of the ages
are come. (12)Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed
lest he fall.

(13)No temptation hath overtaken you, but what is common to men. And
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted beyond what ye
are able to bear; but will with the temptation make also a way to
escape, that ye may be able to bear up under it.

(14)Wherefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry. (15)I speak as unto wise
men: judge ye what I say. (16)The cup of blessing which we bless, is it
not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is
it not the communion of the body of Christ? (17)For we, though many,
are one loaf, one body; for we all partake of that one loaf.

(18)Behold Israel after the flesh. Are not they who eat of the
sacrifices partakers with the altar? (19)What do I say then? that an
idol is any thing, or that which is sacrificed to an idol is any thing?
(20)But that what the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to daemons,
and not to God: and I would not have you in communion with daemons.
(21)Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of daemons: ye
cannot be partakers of the table of the Lord, and the table of daemons.
(22)Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?

(23)All things are lawful for me, but all things are not profitable;
all things are lawful for me, but all things edify not. (24)Let no man
seek his own gratification, but every one another's good.

(25)Every thing which is sold in the shambles eat, asking no question
for conscience sake; (26)"for the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness
thereof[98]." (27)And if any one of those, who do not believe, invite
you, and ye incline to go, eat every thing set before you, asking no
question for conscience sake. (28)But if any person say unto you, This
is an idol's sacrifice, eat not of it, for his sake who pointed it out,
and for conscience sake. For the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness
thereof. (29)Conscience indeed I say, not merely thine own, but that of
the other person.

(30)For why is my liberty abridged by another's conscience? If I truly
with thanksgiving am a partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that for
which I give thanks?

(31)Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all
things to the glory of God. (32)Give no occasion of stumbling either to
the Jews or the Gentiles, or the church of God: (33)even as I please
all men, not seeking my own advantage, but that of the many, that they
may be saved.

CHAP. XI.

BE ye imitators of me, as I am of Christ. (2)Now I praise you,
brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and hold fast the
injunctions as I delivered them unto you. (3)But I desire you to take
notice that the head of every man is Christ; but the head of the woman
is the man, and the head of Christ is God. (4)Every man praying or
prophesying, holding _a veil_ over his head, dishonoureth his head;
(5)but every woman praying or prophesying with her head unveiled,
dishonoureth her head; for it is one and the same thing, as if she were
shaven. (6)For if the woman be not veiled, let her hair be clipped: but
if it would be scandalous for a woman to appear clipped or shaved, let
her be veiled. (7)For a man indeed ought not to veil his head, being
the image and the glory of God; but the woman is the glory of the man.
(8)For the man is not from the woman, but the woman from the man.
(9)Also the man was not created for the woman, but the woman for the
man. (10)Therefore ought the woman to retain upon her head _this badge
of authority_, because of the angels _of the churches_.
(11)Nevertheless neither is the man without the woman, nor the woman
without the man in the Lord. (12)For as the woman was taken out of the
man, so also is the man by the woman: but all things are of God.
(13)Judge among yourselves, is it decent for a woman to be praying to
God without a covering? (14)Does not even nature itself teach you, that
if a man wear long flowing hair it is a dishonour to him? (15)But if a
woman let her hair flow, it is an ornament to her; for the hair was
given her for a covering, (16)But if any man mean to be contentious
about it, we have no such custom, nor the churches of God.

(17)But in the matter I am going to denounce, I do not commend you,
that ye meet together not for the better, but for the worse. (18)For in
the first place, when ye assemble in the church, I hear that there are
divisions among you; and I partly believe it. (19)For there must be
heresies among you, that they who are the tried ones, may be made
manifest among you.

(20)When therefore ye assemble in the same place, it is not to eat the
Lord's supper. (21)For one in the eating it taketh before another his
own supper: and one is hungry, and another drinks to excess. (22)What!
have ye not houses to eat in and to drink? or despise ye the church of
God, and make those ashamed who have none? What shall I say unto you?
shall I praise you in this? I praise you not. (23)For I received of the
Lord what also I delivered to you, That the Lord Jesus, in the night in
which he was betrayed, took a loaf: (24)and when he had blessed it, he
brake it, and said, Take, eat; this is my body, which is broken for
you: do this in remembrance of me. (25)In like manner also he took the
cup, after they had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament in my
blood: this do, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. (26)For
as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew forth the
death of the Lord till he come. (27)Wherefore, whosoever eateth of this
bread, or drinketh the cup of the Lord unworthily, he is guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord. (28)But let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat of the bread, and drink of the cup. (29)For he that eateth
and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh condemnation to himself,
not distinguishing the Lord's body. (30)For this cause many are
diseased and infirm among you, and some asleep _in death_. (31)For if
we thoroughly judged ourselves, we should not be judged of the Lord.
(32)But being judged, we are corrected by the Lord, that we might not
be condemned with the world. (33)Wherefore, when ye meet together to
eat the Lord's supper, wait for one another. (34)And if any man be
hungry, let him eat at home; that ye meet not together for
condemnation. And the other matters I will regulate when I come.

CHAP. XII.

NOW concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you
ignorant. (2)Ye know that ye were Gentiles, drawn away after the idols
that are dumb, even as ye have been led. (3)Wherefore I advertise you,
that no man speaking by the Spirit of God, call Jesus anathema: and no
man can say, Lord Jesus, but by the Holy Ghost. (4)But there are
diversities of gifts, though the same Spirit. (5)And there are
diversities of services, but the same Lord. (6)And there are
diversities of mighty operations, but it is the same God who worketh
all in all.

(7)Now to every one is given the manifestation of the Spirit for
usefulness. (8)For to one man by the Spirit is given wise discourse;
but to another speech _communicative_ of knowledge by the same Spirit;
(9)to another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing
_diseases_ by the same Spirit; (10)to another miraculous powers; to
another prophecy; to another discernments of spirits; to another
different kinds of tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues:
(11)but all these things worketh that one and the same Spirit,
distributing peculiar gifts to every one even as he wills. (12)For as
the body is one, and hath many members, but all the members of that one
body, though many, are one body: so also is Christ. (13)For by one
Spirit we all have been baptised into one body, whether Jews or Greeks,
whether slaves or free men; and we have all been made to drink into one
Spirit. (14)For the body is not one member, but many. (15)If the foot
should say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body; is it, on
this account, not of the body? (16)And if the ear should say, Because I
am not the eye, I am not of the body; is it not therefore of the body?
(17)If the whole body were eye, where were the hearing? If the whole
were hearing, where were the smelling? (18)But now hath God placed the
members, every one of them in the body, as he hath chosen. (19)But if
the whole were one member, where were the body? (20)But now the members
indeed are many, but the body one. (21)Nor can the eye say to the hand,
I have no need of thee: or again the head to the feet, I have no need
of you. (22)Yea, much more the members of the body, which appear to be
more feeble, are necessary: (23)and those parts which we esteem as the
more dishonourable of the body, on them we bestow more abundant honour,
and our uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness. (24)For our
comely parts have no need: but God hath tempered together the body,
giving more abundant honour to that part which lacked: (25)that there
might be no schism in the body; but that the members should have the
same care one for another. (26)And if one member suffer, all the
members suffer with it; and if one member be exalted, all the members
rejoice with it. (27)Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in
particular. (28)And these also hath God placed in the church, first
apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers, next miracles, then
gifts of healings, helpers, directors, different kinds of tongues.
(29)Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all
workers of miracles? (30)have all gifts of healings? do all speak with
tongues? do all interpret? (31)But zealously seek the gifts that are
the best: and yet I shew unto you a more transcendently excellent way.

CHAP. XIII.

THOUGH I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, but have not
love, I am become as sounding brass, and tinkling cymbal. (2)And though
I have the gift of prophecy, and know all mysteries, and all manner of
science; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains,
but have not love, I am nothing. (3)And if I deal out all my goods in
alms, and deliver up my body that I should be burned, but have not
love, I am nothing advantaged by it. (4)Love is long-suffering, is
kind; love envieth not; love is no vain boaster, is not inflated _with
pride_, (5)doth not act unseemly, seeketh not her own advantage, is not
passionate, thinketh no evil; (6)rejoiceth not in unrighteousness, but
rejoiceth in the truth; (7)beareth all things, believeth all things,
hopeth all things, endureth all things. (8)Love never faileth: but if
there be prophetic gifts, they shall be no more; if tongues, they shall
cease; if science, it shall vanish away. (9)For we know partially, and
prophesy partially. (10)But when that which is perfect cometh, then
that which is in part shall be done away. (11)When I was a child, I
spake as a child, I thought as a child, I reasoned as a child: but when
I grew a man, I put away childish things. (12)For now we see by
reflected light, indistinctly; but then face to face: now I know
partially; but then shall I know even as I am known. (13)But now
abideth faith, hope, love, these three; but the greater of these is
love.

CHAP. XIV.

FOLLOW earnestly after love, and zealously seek spiritual gifts, but
rather that ye may prophesy. (2)For he that speaketh in an unknown
tongue, speaketh not to men, but to God: for no man understandeth him;
although in spirit he speaketh mysterious truths. (3)But he that
prophesieth, addresseth men for edification, and exhortation, and
consolation. (4)He that speaketh in an unknown tongue, edifieth
himself; but he that prophesieth, edifieth the church. (5)Now I could
wish that you all spake with tongues, but rather that ye should
prophesy: for greater is he that prophesieth, than he that speaketh
with tongues, except he interpret also, that the church may receive
edification. (6)Now I, brethren, if I should come unto you, speaking in
unknown languages, what should I profit you, unless I should speak to
you _intelligibly_ by revelation, or by science, or by prophecy, or by
doctrine? (7)In like manner things inanimate, giving sound, whether the
pipe, or the harp, unless they express a distinction in their tones,
how shall it be known what is piped, or what is harped? (8)For if the
trumpet also give an uncertain sound, who will prepare himself for the
battle? (9)So also ye, unless with the tongue you speak an intelligible
discourse, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye will speak to
the air. (10)For though there are so many different kinds of languages
in the world, yet is not one of them without its meaning. (11)If
therefore I know not the force of the expression, I shall be to him
that speaketh a barbarian, and he that speaketh will be a barbarian
unto me. (12)So also ye, if ye zealously affect spiritual gifts, seek
that ye may abound in them for the edification of the church.
(13)Therefore let him who speaketh in an unknown tongue, pray that he
may interpret also. (14)For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit
prayeth, but my mind produces no fruit. (15)What then is my object? I
will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also:
I will sing psalms with the spirit, and I will sing psalms with the
understanding also. (16)Else, though thou bless God in spirit, how
shall he who filleth the place of an illiterate man, say Amen after thy
thanksgiving, seeing he knoweth not what thou sayest? (17)For thou
indeed givest thanks to God well, but another man is not edified by it.
(18)I thank my God, that I speak with different tongues more than you
all: (19)but in the church I had rather speak five words with my
understanding, that I may instruct others also, than ten thousand words
in an unknown tongue.

(20)Brethren, be not children in your minds: though in naughtiness be
ye children, but in your minds be men complete. (21)In the law it is
written, "That with other tongues, and with other lips, will I speak to
this people: and even thus will they not attend to me, saith the
Lord[99]." (22)Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to those that
believe, but to those who do not believe: but the gift of prophecy is
not for those who are infidels, but for believers. (23)If then the
whole church assemble together in the same place, and all speak
different tongues, and there come in illiterate persons, or infidels,
will they not say ye are mad? (24)But if all prophesy, and any infidel
or illiterate person come in, he receives conviction from all, he is
judged of all: (25)and thus the secrets of his heart are made manifest;
and so falling down on his face, he will worship God, declaring that
God verily is among you.

(26)How comes it then, brethren, that when ye assemble together, every
one of you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a
revelation, hath an interpretation? Let all things be done to
edification. (27)If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be by
two, or at most by three, and one after another; and let one interpret.
(28)But if there be not an interpreter, let him be silent in the
church; but let him speak to himself and to God. (29)Let the prophets
two or three speak, and let the others judge. (30)But if any thing
should be revealed to one sitting by, let the first be silent. (31)For
ye may all prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all be
comforted. (32)And the spirits of the prophets are subject to the
prophets. (33)For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as
in all the churches of his saints.

(34)Let your women be silent in the churches: for it is not permitted
to them to speak: but to be in subjection, as also the law saith[100].
(35)But if they will learn any thing, let them ask their own husbands
at home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the church. (36)Went
the word of God from you? or came it unto you only? (37)If any man
thinketh that he is a prophet, or spiritually gifted, let him
acknowledge that the things which I write unto you are the commandments
of the Lord. (38)But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant.
(39)Wherefore, my brethren, desire earnestly to prophesy, and forbid
not to speak with tongues. (40)Let all things be done with propriety,
and orderly.

CHAP. XV.

NOW I make known unto you, brethren, the gospel which I have preached
unto you, and which ye have received, in which also ye have stood fast;
(2)by which also ye are saved; if ye cleave to that word I have
preached to you, except haply ye have believed in vain. (3)For I
delivered to you among the first things that which I also had received,
that Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures; (4)and that
he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the
scriptures: (5)and that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve:
(6)afterwards he appeared before five hundred brethren at once; of whom
the greater number remain alive unto this hour, but some also are gone
to rest. (7)Afterwards he was seen of James; then of all the apostles.
(8)And last of all he was seen also by me, who am but as an abortion.
(9)For I am the least of the apostles, who am not meet to be called an
apostle, because I persecuted the church of God. (10)But by the grace
of God I am what I am: and his grace which was given to me was not in
vain; but I laboured more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the
grace of God which was with me. (11)Therefore whether I or they, so we
preach, and so ye believed.

(12)But if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some
among you, that there is no resurrection of the dead? (13)But if there
is no resurrection of the dead, neither is Christ risen: (14)and if
Christ be not risen, vain indeed is our preaching, and vain also your
faith. (15)Yea, and we also are found false witnesses for God; because
we have testified on the behalf of God, that he raised up Christ: whom
he raised not up, if indeed the dead are not raised. (16)For if the
dead are not raised, neither is Christ risen: (17)and if Christ be not
risen, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins. (18)Then also they
who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished. (19)If in this life
only we have hope in Christ, we are more miserable than all other men.

(20)But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first-fruit
of those who have fallen asleep. (21)For since by man came death, by
man came also the resurrection of the dead. (22)For as in Adam all are
dead, so also in Christ shall all be made alive. (23)But every one in
his own rank: Christ the first-fruit; afterwards those that are
Christ's at his appearing. (24)Then cometh the end, when he shall
deliver up the kingdom to God, and the Father; when he shall have
destroyed every dominion and every authority and power. (25)For he must
reign, until he hath put all enemies under his feet. (26)The last enemy
shall be destroyed, death. (27)For he hath put all things under his
feet. But when he saith, that all things are put under him, it is
evident that there is an exception of him, who subjected all things to
him. (28)But when he shall have put all things under him, then also the
Son himself shall be subjected to him who put all things under him,
that God may be all in all. (29)Else what will they do who are
baptised? for the dead, if wholly dead they rise no more. Why are they
then baptised for the dead? (30)and why do we also expose ourselves to
danger every hour? (31)I solemnly declare by all the joy over you which
I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily. (32)If after the manner
of men I have fought with wild beasts at Ephesus, of what advantage
would it be to me, if the dead did not rise again? shall we eat and
drink; because to-morrow we die? (33)Be not deceived: evil
conversations corrupt good manners. (34)Awake as the righteous, and sin
not; for some have an ignorance of God: I speak this to your shame.

(35)But will any man say, How are the dead raised up? and with what
body do they come? (36)Thou fool! what thou sowest is not quickened
except it die: (37)and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not the body
which shall be afterwards, but the bare grain, perhaps of wheat, or of
some of the other seeds: (38)but God giveth it a body as he pleaseth,
and to each of the seeds its peculiar body.

(39)All flesh is not the same flesh: but there is one kind of flesh of
men, and another flesh of cattle, and another of fishes, and another of
birds. (40)Also there are celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but
the glory of the celestial is one, and that of the terrestrial another.

(41)There is one glory of the sun; and another glory of the moon, and
another glory of the stars: for star differeth from star in glory.
(42)So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption;
it is raised in incorruption: (43)it is sown in dishonour; it is raised
in glory: it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power: (44)it is sown
an animal body; it is raised a spiritual body. There is an animal body,
and there is a spiritual body. (45)And so it is written, There was a
first man Adam a living soul; a last Adam a quickening spirit. (46)But
that which is spiritual was not first, but that which is animal; and
afterward that which is spiritual. (47)The first man was of the earth,
earthly; the second man was the Lord from heaven. (48)As is the
earthly, so are they also that are earthly: and as is the heavenly,
such also are they that are heavenly. (49)And as we have borne the
image of the earthly, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.

(50)But this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God: neither doth corruption inherit incorruption.
(51)Behold, I shew you a mystery; we shall not indeed all sleep, but we
shall all be changed, (52)in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at
the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be
raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. (53)For that which is
corruptible must put on incorruption, and that which is mortal must put
on immortality. (54)So when that which is corruptible shall have put on
incorruption, and that which is mortal shall have put on immortality,
then shall come to pass the saying which is written, Death is swallowed
up in victory. (55)O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy
victory? (56)The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the
law. (57)But thanks be to God, who giveth us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ. (58)Wherefore, my beloved brethren, be stedfast,
unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your
labour is not in vain in the Lord.

CHAP. XVI.

NOW concerning the collection which is for the saints, as I have given
an order to the churches of Galatia, so also do ye. (2)On the first day
of the week let every one of you set apart with himself, treasuring it
up, whatsoever he may please to give, that when I come there may be
then no gatherings. (3)But when I come, whosoever you shall approve by
letters, those will I send to carry your charity to Jerusalem. (4)But
if it be of importance that I should go also, they shall go with me.
(5)Now I will come unto you when I have passed through Macedonia (for I
am passing through Macedonia); (6)and perhaps I shall abide with you,
yea and winter with you, that you may send me forward whithersoever I
go. (7)For I will not see you now in passing, but I hope to remain some
considerable time with you if the Lord permit. (8)But I shall abide at
Ephesus until the Pentecost: (9)for there is opened to me a great door,
and effectual, and there are many adversaries.

(10)But if Timothy come, see that he may be among you without fear: for
he worketh the Lord's work, as I also do. (11)Let no man therefore
treat him with disrespect; but forward him on his way in peace, that he
may come to me; for I expect him with the brethren.

(12)As concerning brother Apollos, I besought him much that he would
come to you with the brethren; but it was not at all his wish to come
at this time: but he will come when he can find a good opportunity.

(13)Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, be manful, be strong. (14)Let
all your concerns be transacted in love.

(15)Now I exhort you, brethren, (ye know the house of Stephanas, that
it is the first fruits of Achaia, and they have devoted themselves to
the ministry of the saints:) (16)wherefore submit yourselves to such,
and to every one that worketh with us and laboureth.

(17)I rejoice in the arrival of Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and
Achaicus; because what was lacking from you, they have supplied.
(18)For they have refreshed my spirit and yours; respect therefore such
men.

(19)The churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute you
much in the Lord, with the church which is in their house. (20)All the
brethren salute you. Salute one another with a holy kiss.

(21)The salutation of Paul with mine own hand. (22)If any man love not
the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maranatha.

(23)The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. (24)My love be with
you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.

The first epistle to the Corinthians was written from Philippi by
Stephanas, and Fortunatus, and Achaicus, and Timothy.



THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.

CHAP. I.

PAUL an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timothy a
brother, to the church of God which is at Corinth, with all the saints
which are in all Achaia: (2)grace unto you, and peace from God our
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

(3)Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of mercies, and God of all consolation; (4)who comforteth us in all our
tribulation, that we might be able to comfort those who are in all
tribulation, by the consolation with which we ourselves are comforted
of God. (5)Because as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so through
Christ aboundeth also our consolation. (6)But whether we be afflicted,
it is for your consolation and salvation, which is effectually wrought
by patient endurance of the same sufferings which we also suffer; or if
we are comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation. (7)And our
hope of you is sure, knowing that as ye are partakers of the
sufferings, so also of the consolation.

(8)For we would not have you ignorant, brethren, of the tribulation
which came to us in Asia, that above measure we have been burdened
beyond our strength, so that we despaired even of life: (9)for we
ourselves, in ourselves have received the sentence of death, that we
should have no confidence in ourselves, but in God who raiseth the
dead. (10)Who from so imminent a prospect of death hath delivered us,
and still delivers: in whom we trust also that he will yet deliver us:
(11)ye also labouring together for us in prayer, that from many persons
thanks may be given on our behalf for the gifts bestowed on us by many.

(12)For our glorying is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, not with carnal wisdom, but by the
grace of God, we have conducted ourselves in the world, and peculiarly
towards you. (13)For we write no other things to you than those which
you know and acknowledge; and I trust also ye will acknowledge them
even to the end. (14)As also ye have acknowledged us in part, that we
are your glory, as also ye are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus.

(15)And in this confidence I was intending to come unto you a second
time, that ye might receive a second blessing; (16)and through you to
pass into Macedonia, and again from Macedonia return unto you, and by
you to be forwarded on my journey towards Judea. (17)Such then being my
intention, did I indeed change it with levity? or the things which I
purpose, do I purpose after the flesh, that with me there should be
yea, yea, and nay, nay? (18)But as sure as God is true, our word to you
was not yea and nay. (19)For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was
preached among you by us--by me and Silvanus and Timotheus--was not yea
and nay, but there was yea in him; (20)for all the promises of God in
him are yea, and in him Amen, to the glory of God by us.

(21)Now he that confirmeth us with you in Christ, and hath anointed us,
is God; (22)who also hath put his seal upon us, and given us the
earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.

(23)But I appeal to God as a witness unto my soul, that to spare you I
have not yet come to Corinth: (24)not that we have dominion over your
faith, but are fellow-helpers of your joy; for by faith ye stand.

CHAP. II.

BUT I prescribed to myself this rule, not to come again to you with
sorrow. (2)For if I make you sorry, who is he that maketh me glad, but
he that is made sorrowful by me? (3)And I have written unto you for
this very purpose, that I might not, when I come to you, have sorrow
from those in whom I ought to rejoice, having confidence in you all,
that my joy is the joy of you all. (4)For out of much affliction and
anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many tears, not that ye should
be grieved, but that ye might know the love which I have more
abundantly towards you.

(5)Now if any person hath given cause for grief, he hath not grieved me
_merely_, but partly all of you; that I may add no farther burden.
(6)Sufficient for such person is that chastisement which hath been
inflicted by the majority of you. (7)Wherefore, on the contrary, ye
rather ought to forgive and comfort him, lest such a one be swallowed
up with excess of sorrow. (8)Wherefore I exhort you to confirm your
love towards him. (9)For to this end also have I written, that I may
know by this proof of you if ye are obedient in all things. (10)But to
whomsoever ye forgive any thing, so do I; and if I forgive any thing,
to whom I forgive, for your sakes I do it, in the person of Jesus
Christ, (11)that no advantage be gained over us by Satan; for we are
not ignorant of his devices.

(12)But when I came to Troas to preach the Gospel of Christ, though a
door was opened unto me by the Lord, (13)I had no test in my spirit on
my not finding there Titus my brother: so taking my leave of them I
went forth unto Macedonia. (14)But thanks be to God, who causeth us
always to triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest the savour of his
knowledge by us in every place. (15)For we are a sweet odour of Christ
to God in those who are saved, and in those who perish. (16)To the one
we are the odour of death unto death, to the other the odour of life
unto life: and who is sufficient for these things? (17)For we are not
as the many, adulterating the word of God; but as of sincerity, but as
of God, in the sight of God, speak we in Christ.

CHAP. III.

DO we begin again to commend ourselves? or need we, as some,
commendatory letters to you, or commendatory letters from you? (2)Ye
are our letter written in our hearts, acknowledged and read of all men:
(3)because ye are manifestly seen to be the letter of Christ, of which
we have been the secretaries, written not with ink, but by the Spirit
of the living God, not on tables of stone, but on the fleshly tables of
the heart. (4)And such confidence have we through Christ towards God:
(5)not that we are sufficient of ourselves to account any thing of
ourselves, but our sufficiency is of God. (6)Who hath made us also able
ministers of the new testament, not of the letter but of the spirit;
for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life.

(7)For if the ministry of death in letters graven on stone, was
attended with glory, so that the children of Israel could not keep
their eyes fixed upon the countenance of Moses, because of the glory of
his countenance, though _soon_ evanescent; (8)how much more will not
the ministry of the Spirit be attended with glory? (9)For if the
ministry of condemnation is glory, much more doth the ministry of
righteousness excel in glory. (10)For that which was glorious hath no
glory, comparatively, because of the glory which excelleth. (11)For if
that which was abolished came in a glorious manner, much more is that
which remaineth glorious.

(12)Having therefore such a hope, we use much freedom of speech.
(13)And _act_ not as Moses who spread a veil over his face, in order
that the children of Israel might not look stedfastly to the end of
that which should be abolished. (14)But their understandings were
darkened: for unto this day the same veil in their reading the old
testament abideth unremoved; which veil is taken away by Christ.
(15)For unto this day, when Moses is read, the veil is spread over
their hearts. (16)Nevertheless, when Israel shall turn unto the Lord,
the veil shall be taken away.

(17)Now the Lord is that Spirit: and where the Spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty. (18)And we all with face unveiled, beholding the
glory of the Lord _reflected_ as in a mirror, according to the same
image, receive a transformation from glory into glory, as by the Lord,
the Spirit.

CHAP. IV.

THEREFORE having this ministry, as we have obtained mercy, we faint
not; (2)but have renounced all shameful secret practices, not
conducting ourselves with artifice, nor deceitfully disguising the word
of God, but by clear manifestation of the truth, commending ourselves
to every man's conscience as in the presence of God. (3)And if now our
gospel be hid, it is hid from those who are lost: (4)among whom the god
of this world hath blinded the minds of the unbelievers, that the light
of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God, should
not dart its bright beams upon them. (5)For we preach not ourselves,
but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your servants for Jesus' sake.
(6)For the God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, he
hath shined into our hearts, to give illumination of the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. (7)But we have this
treasure in earthen vessels, that the transcendent excellence of the
power might be of God, and not of us.

(8)We are afflicted on every side, yet not reduced to extremities;
under difficulties, yet not in despair; (9)persecuted, yet not
abandoned; cast down, but not destroyed; (10)always bearing about in
the body the death pangs of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus
may be manifested in our body. (11)For we who are yet alive are
continually delivered up to death for Jesus' sake, that the life also
of Jesus may be made manifest in our mortal flesh. (12)Wherefore death
indeed is working in us, but life in you.

(13)Having then the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I
believed, and therefore I have spoken[101], we also believe, and
therefore speak; (14)knowing that he who raised up our Lord Jesus
Christ, will raise up us also through Jesus, and present us together
with you. (15)For all things are for your sakes, that the abundant
grace, through the thanksgiving of more persons, may more abound to the
glory of God.

(16)Therefore we never faint; for though our outward man decay, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day. (17)For our momentary light
affliction worketh for us a transcendently far more exceeding eternal
weight of glory; (18)whilst we direct our aim not to the things which
are seen, but to the things which are not seen: for the things which
are seen are temporary, but the things that are not seen are eternal.

CHAP. V.

FOR we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle should be
taken down, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens. (2)For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to
be clothed with our mansion which is from heaven; (3)that so invested,
we may not be found naked. (4)For we which are in this tabernacle,
groan, being burdened; wherein we desire not to be unclothed, but
clothed upon, that what is mortal may be swallowed up of life.

(5)But he that hath wrought us for this very thing is God, who also
hath given us the earnest of the spirit. (6)Therefore we have always
confidence, and know that whilst we are indwelling in the body, we are
absent from the Lord: (7)(for we walk by faith, not by sight.) (8)We
are confident indeed, and with pleasure expect to go out from the body,
and to dwell within with the Lord: (9)wherefore also our ambition is,
that whether dwelling in the body, or out of the body, we may be
acceptable to him.

(10)For we must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, that
each may receive the things done in the body according to what he hath
done, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. (11)Knowing therefore
the terror of the Lord, we persuade men; but we have been made manifest
to God, and I hope also have been made manifest in your consciences.

(12)For we commend not ourselves again unto you, but give you occasion
of glorying on our behalf, that ye may have an answer for those who
glory in countenance, and not in heart. (13)For if we are transported
out of ourselves, it is for God; or if we are sober-minded, it is for
your sake. (14)For the love of Christ constraineth us, because we judge
thus, that if one died for all, then were all dead: (15)and he died for
all, that they who live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but
unto him that died for them, and rose again.

(16)Wherefore from the present moment know we no man after the flesh:
yea though we have also known Christ after the flesh, yet so henceforth
know we him no more. (17)Wherefore if any person be in Christ, he is a
new creation: the old things are passed away; behold, all things are
become new. (18)But all things are of God, who hath reconciled us to
himself by Jesus Christ, and hath given to us the ministry of
reconciliation; (19)namely, that God was in Christ, reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing to them their offences: and hath
committed to us the word of reconciliation. (20)Therefore we are
ambassadors for Christ, as though God exhorted you by us; we entreat
you for Christ's sake, be ye reconciled to God. (21)For he hath made
him, who knew no sin, to be a sin offering for us, that we might become
the righteousness of God in him.

CHAP. VI.

WE then as labourers with him, exhort you also that ye receive not the
grace of God in vain: (2)for he saith, "In an acceptable time have I
heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I succoured thee [102]."
Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation.
(3)Giving no offence in any thing, that the ministry be not blamed:
(4)but in every thing approving ourselves as ministers of God, in much
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in straits, (5)in stripes, in
imprisonments, in tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings, (6)in
purity, in knowledge, in long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy
Ghost, by love unfeigned, (7)by the word of truth, by the power of God,
with weapons of righteousness in the right hand and in the left,
(8)through honour and dishonour, through evil report and good report:
as deceivers, yet true men; (9)as unknown, though well known; as dying,
and lo! we live; as chastened, yet not given over to death; (10)as
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as
having nothing, and yet possessing all things.

(11)Our mouth is opened unto you, O Corinthians! our heart is enlarged.
(12)Ye are not straitened in us, but ye are straitened in your own
bowels. (13)Let us have a like return; I speak as unto children; be ye
also enlarged.

(14)Be not unequally yoked with infidels; for what participation hath
righteousness with unrighteousness? and what fellowship _is there_
between light and darkness? (15)and what concord of Christ with Belial?
or what share hath he that believeth with an infidel? (16)or what
agreement hath the temple of God with idols? for ye are the temple of
the living God; as God hath said, "I will inhabit in them, and walk
about in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be for me a
people[103]." (17)"Wherefore go forth from the midst of them, and be ye
separated, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean; and I will
receive you[104], (18)and I will be as a father unto you, and ye shall
be to me for sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty[105]."

CHAP. VII.

HAVING therefore these promises, beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from
all defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God. (2)Give us a favourable reception: we have injured no man, we have
corrupted no man, we have defrauded no man. (3)I speak not for your
condemnation, for I have already said, that ye are in our hearts to die
and live together. (4)Great is my freedom of speech to you, great is my
glorying over you: I am filled with consolation, I overflow with joy in
all our tribulation.

(5)For when we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we
were afflicted on every side; without were fightings; within were
fears. (6)But God that comforteth the lowly comforted us by the coming
of Titus: (7)and not by his coming only, but also by the consolation
wherewith he had been comforted among you, declaring to us your fervent
desire, your mourning, your zeal for me, so that I rejoiced the more.

(8)For if I grieved you by a letter, I do not repent, though I did
repent: for I perceive that this letter made you sorry, though but for
a season. (9)Now I rejoice, not that ye have been made sorrowful, but
that ye have sorrowed unto repentance; for ye have been made sorry in a
godly manner, that ye might receive damage from us in nothing. (10)For
sorrow of a godly sort worketh repentance unto salvation never to be
repented of, but worldly sorrow worketh death. (11)For behold this very
thing, that ye were made sorry after a godly manner, how great
diligence did it produce in you! yea, what apologizing! yea, what
indignation! yea, what fear! yea, what earnest desire! yea, what zeal!
yea, what vengeance! In every step ye have approved yourselves as pure
in this affair.

(12)And indeed though I wrote unto you, I did it not _merely_ for his
cause that had done the wrong, nor for his cause who had suffered the
injury, but that our diligent attention for you might be more
abundantly manifested to you in the presence of God. (13)Therefore we
were comforted in your consolation; and exceeding abundantly the more
rejoiced we in the joy of Titus, because his spirit was refreshed by
you all. (14)For if I have boasted of you to him in any thing, I am not
ashamed; but as we have spoken all things to you in truth, so our
boasting of you to Titus hath been found truth. (15)And his bowels more
abundantly yearn over you, when he remembers the obedience of you all,
how with fear and trembling ye received him. (16)I rejoice therefore
that in every thing I have confidence in you.

CHAP. VIII.

NOW we inform you, brethren, of the grace of God which hath been
bestowed on the churches of Macedonia; (2)that in a great trial of
affliction the abundance of their joy, and their deep poverty, hath
more abounded to the riches of their liberality. (3)For unto their
power, I bear them witness, and above their power, they were
voluntarily ready _to give_: (4)with much entreaty praying us that we
would receive the gift, and _undertake_ the communication of the
contribution for the saints. (5)And not _merely_ as we hoped, but gave
themselves first to the Lord, and to us according to the will of God.
(6)So that we exhorted Titus, that as he had been active before, so
also he would perfect in you this grace also. (7)So as ye abound in
every thing, in faith, and elocution, and knowledge, and in all
diligence, and in your love to us, see that ye abound in this grace
also.

(8)I speak not by commandment, but because of the forwardness of
others, and to prove the genuineness of your love. (9)For ye know the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that for your sake he became poor
though he was rich, that ye by his poverty should be made rich. (10)And
in this I give my opinion: for this is expedient for you, who have
before begun not only to do, but also to be willing a year ago. (11)Now
then accomplish also the doing it, that as there was a readiness to
will, so there may be also to perform out of that which ye have.
(12)For if there is first a ready mind, a man is acceptable according
to what he hath, and not according to what he hath not. (13)For I mean
not that there should be ease for others and a burden on you; (14)but
that according to equality, your abundance on the present occasion
should afford a supply for their deficiency, that their abundance also
may supply your deficiency, that there may be equality. (15)According
as it is written, "He that _gathered_ much had no more than others, and
he who _gathered_ little, had no less[106]."

(16)But thanks be to God, who put the same solicitude for you into the
heart of Titus. (17)For he received in deed the exhortation, but being
more diligent, of his own ready mind he went unto you. (18)We have sent
with him also a brother, whose praise in the gospel is _spread_ through
all the churches; (19)and not only so, but who was chosen by the
churches as my fellow-traveller with this charity, ministered by us to
the glory of the same Lord, and _to shew_ your ready mind. (20)Avoiding
this, that no man should lay any blame to us in this abundance which is
administered by us: (21)providing what is fair, not only before the
Lord, but also before men. (22)And we have sent with him our brother,
whom we have often experienced in many things to be a man of diligence,
but now much more diligent, through the great confidence which I have
in you. (23)If _any inquire_ concerning Titus, he is my companion and
fellow-labourer to you; or our brethren _be inquired of_, they are the
messengers of the churches, the glory of Christ. (24)Therefore shew
unto them, and in the presence of the churches, a proof of your love,
and of our _just_ boasting in you.

CHAP. IX.

NOW concerning the contribution for the saints, it is superfluous for
me to write unto you. (2)For I know your readiness of mind, for which I
boast of you to the Macedonians, that Achaia had made preparation a
year ago; and your zeal hath stirred up very many. (3)But I have sent
the brethren, that our glorying in you might not be vain in this
matter; that as I have said, ye may be prepared. (4)Lest haply if the
Macedonians come with me, and find you unprepared, we (not to say, you)
may be confounded in this confidence of boasting. I (5)have thought it
necessary therefore to exhort the brethren, that they would go before
unto you, and prepare before your promised bounty, that it may be ready
as a matter of bounty, and not as _extorted_ of covetousness.

(6)But this I add, He that soweth sparingly, shall reap also sparingly,
and he that soweth bountifully, shall reap also bountifully. (7)Let
every man, as he hath purposed in heart, give, not with reluctance or
of necessity; for God loveth a cheerful giver. (8)And God is able to
make all grace abound towards you; that in every case having always all
sufficiency, ye may abound unto every good work: (9)as it is written,
"He hath scattered abroad, he hath given to the poor, his righteousness
abideth for ever[107]." (10)Now he that supplieth seed to the sower,
shall also supply bread for food, and multiply your seed sown, and
increase the fruits of your righteousness, (11)being in every thing
enriched unto all liberality, which _causeth_ by us thanksgiving to
God. (12)For the ministration of this _charitable_ service not only
abundantly supplies the deficiencies of the saints, but also overflows
with many thanksgivings to God; (13)(while by the evidence of this
ministration they glorify God for your professed subjection to the
gospel of Christ, and for your liberality towards them, and towards all
men;) (14)and with their prayers for you, greatly longing after you, on
account of the transcendent grace of God in you. (15)Thanks be to God
for his inexpressible gift.

CHAP. X.

NOW I Paul myself exhort you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ,
who, when present, am indeed lowly among you, but being absent, am bold
towards you. (2)But I pray, that when I am present I may not be bold
with the confidence with which I purpose to act resolutely against some
who think of us, as if we walked after the flesh. (3)For though we walk
in the flesh, we war not after the flesh: (4)for the weapons of our
warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God for the casting down the
strong holds _of corruption_; (5)laying low proud reasonings, and every
high thing which exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and
making every thought captive to the obedience of Christ: (6)and holding
ourselves ready to avenge every act of disobedience, when your
obedience is fully proved. (7)Regard ye the things that are personal?
If any man is confident in himself that he is Christ's, let him reflect
again in himself, that as he is Christ's, so are we Christ's. (8)Yea,
and if I should boast somewhat more highly of our authority, which the
Lord hath given us for your edification, and not for your destruction,
I shall not be ashamed; (9)that I may not seem as if I would terrify
you by letters. (10)For his letters indeed, say they, are weighty and
forcible, but his bodily presence is feeble, and his speech
contemptible. (11)Let such a man be assured of this, that such as we
are by word in our letters when absent, such also will we be in deed
when we are present. (12)For we will not presume to put ourselves on
the level, or compare ourselves with some who vaunt themselves; but
they measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves with
themselves, have no understanding. (13)But we will not glory in things
beyond our measure, but according to the measure of the rule which God
hath marked out for us--a measure that hath reached even unto you.
(14)For we stretch not our pretensions beyond bounds, as though we
reached not unto you; for we have advanced even unto you in the gospel
of Christ: (15)not boasting ourselves unmeasurably in other men's
labours; but having hope that when your faith is increased, we shall be
enlarged by you according to our rule for more abundant usefulness,
(16)to preach the gospel in the regions beyond you, and not to arrogate
glory in another man's line for things already prepared. (17)But he
that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord. (18)For not he who commendeth
himself is approved, but he whom the Lord commendeth.

CHAP. XI.

I WISH ye would bear with me a little in my foolishness, yea indeed
bear with me. (2)For I am jealous over you with godly jealousy; for I
have espoused you to one husband, to present you a chaste virgin to
Christ. (3)But I fear lest as the serpent beguiled Eve by his
craftiness, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity which
belongs to Christ. (4)For if he indeed that cometh preach another
Jesus, whom we have not preached, or ye receive another spirit, which
ye have not received, or another gospel, which ye have not embraced, ye
might well bear with him. (5)For I reckon myself to be nothing inferior
to the very chief of the apostles. (6)For though I may be rude in
speech, yet not in knowledge; but on every occasion we have been made
manifest in all things among you.

(7)Am I chargeable with a fault (humbling myself that you might be
exalted), that I preached to you the gospel of God freely? (8)I
plundered other churches, receiving a provision from them, in order to
minister to you. (9)And when I was with you, and in want, I was
burdensome to no man; for my want the brethren who came from Macedonia
supplied; and on every occasion I have kept myself from being
burdensome, and will keep myself. (10)I protest, by the truth of Christ
in me, that from this boasting no man shall seal up my lips in the
regions of Achaia. (11)Wherefore? Because I love you not? God knoweth.
(12)But what I do, I will do also, that I may cut off occasion from
those who desire occasion, that wherein they boast, they may be found
even as we. (13)For such are fake apostles, deceitful labourers,
transforming themselves into apostles of Christ. (14)And no marvel! For
Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light. (15)It is no
wonder therefore if his ministers also be transformed as ministers of
righteousness; whose end will be according to their works. (16)I repeat
it again, Let no man suppose that I am a fool; but if otherwise, then
as a fool receive me, that I too may boast myself a little. (17)What I
speak, I speak not after the Lord, but as it were in folly in this
confidence of boasting. (18)Seeing many boast themselves after the
flesh, I will boast also. (19)For ye bear with fools easily when you
are wise yourselves. (20)For ye bear if a man enslave you, if a man eat
you up, if a man receive from you, if a man is insolent, if a man smite
you on the face. (21)I speak with reference to the reproach _cast on
me_, as though we were feeble; but wherein any man is bold (I speak in
foolishness), I am bold also. (22)Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they
Israelites? so am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? so am I. (23)Are
they the ministers of Christ? (I speak foolishly) I am above _them_: in
labours more abundantly, in stripes exceedingly more, in prisons more
frequently, in the most immediate danger of death often. (24)Of the
Jews five times I have received forty stripes save one. (25)Thrice I
have been scourged with rods, once I have been stoned, thrice I have
suffered shipwreck, a whole night and day I have passed in the deep;
(26)in journeyings often, in perils of rivers, in perils of robbers, in
perils from my own countrymen, in perils from the heathen, in perils in
the city, in perils in the desert, in perils on the sea, in perils
among false brethren; (27)in labour and travail, in watchings often, in
fastings frequently, in hunger and thirst, in cold and nakedness;
(28)and beside all these things from without, that accumulated burden
which cometh on me daily, the care of all the churches. (29)Who is
feeble, and am I not feeble? Who is offended, and am I not on fire?
(30)If I must glory, I will glory in the things which respect my
infirmities. (31)The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is
blessed for evermore, knoweth that I lie not. (32)In Damascus the
governor under Aretas the king guarded the city of the Damascenes,
intending to seize me; (33)and through a window in a basket I was let
down by the wall, and escaped out of his hands.

CHAP. XII.

IT is not expedient doubtless for me to boast. I will yet come to
visions and revelations of the Lord. (2)I knew a man in Christ above
fourteen years ago, (whether in the body I know not, or whether out of
the body I know not: God knoweth;) such a one was caught up unto the
third heavens. (3)And I knew such a man, (whether in the body or out of
the body I know not: God knoweth,) (4)that he was caught up into
paradise, and heard ineffable words, which it is not permitted to man
to speak. (5)Of such a one will I boast; but in myself will I not
boast, save in my infirmities. (6)For though I should be disposed to
boast, I shall not be a fool; for I shall speak truth: but I desist,
lest any man think of me above what he seeth me to be, or what he
heareth of me. (7)And that I might not be lifted up above measure by
the transcendent greatness of the revelations, there was given me a
thorn in the flesh, the angel Satan, to buffet me, that I might not be
lifted up above measure. (8)For this thrice I besought the Lord, that
he might depart from me. (9)And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient
for thee; for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Most gladly
therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of
Christ may fix its residence in me. (10)Therefore I take pleasure in
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
distresses, for Christ's sake; for when I am weak, then am I strong.

(11)Have I become a fool in boasting? ye have compelled me; for I ought
to have been commended of you: for in nothing have I been inferior to
the very chief apostles, though I be nothing. (12)The signs indeed of
an apostle have been wrought among you in all patience, in miracles,
and wonders, and mighty deeds. (13)For what is there wherein ye have
been inferior to the other churches, except that I have not been
burdensome to you? Forgive me this wrong. (14)Lo! I hold myself ready
the third time to come unto you, and I will not burden you; for I seek
not yours but you: for the children ought not to lay up treasure for
their parents, but the parents for the children. (15)And I will most
cheerfully spend and be spent for your souls, though the more
abundantly I love you, the less I am loved.

(16)But admit it, I was not burdensome to you: but being crafty, I
caught you with guile. (17)Did I make a gain of you by any one
individual whom I sent unto you? (18)I entreated Titus _to go to you_,
and with him I sent a brother. Did Titus make any advantage of you?
walked we not in the same spirit? walked we not in the same steps?

(19)Think ye that we are again making an apology to you? In the sight
of God speak we in Christ: but all things, beloved, for your
edification. (20)For I am afraid that when I come I shall not find you
such as I wish, and that I shall be found of you such as ye would not:
lest haply there be contentions, jealousies, animosities, quarrels,
backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults: (21)and lest when I come
to you again, my God should bow me down, and I should lament over many
who have sinned before, and have not repented of the impurities, and
whoredom, and lasciviousness which they have committed.

CHAP. XIII.

THIS third time I am coming to you: by the mouth of two or three
witnesses shall every charge be established. (2)I have told you before,
and I repeat it, as when I was present the second time, and now absent,
I write to those who have sinned already, and to all the rest, that if
I come again, I will not spare you: (3)since ye demand a proof that
Christ speaketh in me, who to you-ward is not weak, but is mighty in
you. (4)For though he was crucified in weakness, yet he liveth by the
power of God: for we also are weak in him, but we shall live with him
by the power of God _displayed_ towards you.

(5)Examine yourselves, whether ye are in the faith; prove your
ownselves: know ye not your ownselves, that Jesus Christ is in you,
except ye be reprobate? (6)But I hope that ye shall know that we are
not reprobate. (7)Now I pray unto God that ye do no evil, not that we
should appear approved, but that you may do that which is laudable,
though we should be as reprobates. (8)For we can do nothing against the
truth, but for the truth. (9)For we rejoice when we are weak, but ye
are strong: and this also we pray for, even your perfect establishment.
(10)For this cause, though absent, I have written these things, that
when I am present I may not use severity, according to the power which
the Lord hath given me for edification, and not for destruction.

(11)Finally, brethren, rejoice: be perfectly united together, be
comforted, be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace
shall be with you. (12)Salute one another with a holy kiss. (13)All the
saints salute you. (14)The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love
of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all. Amen.

The second epistle to the Corinthians was written from Philippi, a city
of Macedonia, by Titus and Luke.



THE EPISTLE of PAUL the APOSTLE, TO THE GALATIANS.

CHAP. I.

PAUL the apostle (not _sent_ from men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ,
and our Father who raised him from the dead), (2)and all the brethren
with me, to the churches of Galatia: (3)grace unto you, and peace from
God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ; (4)who gave himself for our
sins, that he might pluck us out of this present wicked world,
according to the will of God and our Father: (5)to whom be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

(6)I marvel that ye are so quickly departed from him that called you,
by the grace of Christ into another gospel (7)which is not another; but
there are certain persons who trouble you, and desire to pervert the
gospel of Christ. (8)But though even we, or an angel from heaven,
preach unto you another gospel, different from that which we have
preached to you, let him be an anathema. (9)As we have before spoken,
and I now repeat it again, If any man preach a gospel different from
that ye have received, let him be anathema. (10)For do I now use
persuasions from men, or from God? or do I seek to please men? for if I
yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

(11)But I give you to understand, brethren, that the gospel which was
preached by me is not a merely human ministry. (12)For I neither
received it from man, nor was taught, but by immediate revelation from
Jesus Christ. (13)For ye have heard of my former manner of life, when I
professed Judaism, that in the most outrageous manner I persecuted the
church of God, and wasted it: (14)and signalized myself in Judaism
above many of those of my own age among my countrymen, being more
exceedingly a zealot for the traditions of my fathers. (15)But when it
pleased God, who selected me from my mother's womb, and called me by
his grace, (16)to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach the glad
tidings of him to the nations, immediately I conferred not with flesh
and blood, (17)nor went up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles
before me; but I went away into Arabia, and returned again unto
Damascus. (18)Afterwards at the expiration of three years I went up
unto Jerusalem to pay a visit to Peter, and I abode with him fifteen
days. (19)But I saw no other of the apostles except James, the Lord's
brother. (20)Now respecting the things which I write unto you, behold,
in the presence of God, I lie not. (21)Afterwards I went into the
regions of Syria and Cilicia; (22)and I was personally unknown to the
churches of Judea, which are in Christ: (23)only they had heard, that
he who persecuted us in time past, now preaches the faith which he once
laid waste. (24)And they glorified God on my behalf.

CHAP. II.

FOURTEEN years afterwards I again went up to Jerusalem with Barnabas,
taking Titus also along with us. (2)And I went up then by revelation,
and laid before them that gospel which I preach among the Heathen, but
in private conference with those who were of the first importance, that
haply I might not run, nor had run in vain. (3)And even Titus, who was
with me, though a Greek, was not compelled to be circumcised: (4)but
this I did because of false brethren artfully introduced, who came to
pry into our liberty which we hold in Christ Jesus, that they might
bring us into bondage: (5)to whom not even for an hour have we yielded
subjection, that the truth of the gospel might abide with you. (6)But
from those who appeared men of the greatest importance, (what sort of
men soever they were it maketh no difference to me: God accepteth not a
man's person;) for these important personages in conference added
nothing to me; (7)but contrariwise when they saw that I was entrusted
with the gospel to the uncircumcision, as Peter was to the
circumcision: (8)(for he that wrought powerfully by Peter in his
apostolic mission to the circumcision, wrought mightily also by me
among the Gentiles.) (9)And when they knew the grace which was bestowed
on me, James and Cephas and John, who appeared to be the pillars _of
the church_, gave unto me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship,
that we should go unto the Gentiles, and they to the circumcision:
(10)only desiring that we would remember the poor--the very thing which
I have also been diligent to perform.

(11)But when Peter came to Antioch I withstood him to his face, because
he was blameable. (12)For before certain persons came from James, he
did eat with the Gentiles, but when they were come, he withdrew, and
separated himself, fearing those of the circumcision. (13)And the other
Jews were guilty of the same dissimulation with him, so that even
Barnabas was carried away by their hypocrisy. (14)But when I saw that
they walked not directly according to the truth of the gospel, I said
to Peter before them all, If thou, being a Jew, livest as the Gentiles,
and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to judaize?
(15)We who are Jews by descent, and not sinners sprung from Gentiles,
(16)knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by
the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that
we might be justified by faith in Christ, and not by works of the law;
because by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified. (17)For if
seeking to be justified by Christ, we also ourselves should be found
sinners, is Christ then a minister of sin? God forbid. (18)For if I
build up again the very same things which I have pulled down, I stamp
myself a transgressor.

(19)For I through the law am dead to the law, that I should live unto
God. (20)I am crucified with Christ, yet I live; though no more I, but
Christ liveth in me: and my present life in the flesh, is a life by
faith in the Son of God, who hath loved me, and delivered up himself
for me. (21)I do not set at nought the grace of God; for if
righteousness came by the law, truly Christ hath died in vain.

CHAP. III.

O INFATUATED Galatians, who hath bewitched you that ye should not obey
the truth? To whom Jesus Christ has been described, as before your
eyes, crucified among you. (2)This only would I learn of you, Received
ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or from hearing of the faith?
(3)Are ye so senseless? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made
perfect in the flesh? (4)have ye suffered so many things in vain? if it
be yet in vain.

(5)He therefore who ministereth to you a supply of the Spirit, and
powerfully worketh miracles among you, doth he it by the works of the
law, or by the hearing of the faith? (6)as Abraham believed in God, and
it was imputed to him for righteousness. (7)Know then that they who are
of faith, these are the children of Abraham. (8)And the scripture
foreseeing that by faith God would justify the Gentiles, preached the
gospel before unto Abraham, saying, that "In thee shall all the nations
be blessed[108]." (9)Wherefore they who are of faith are blessed with
believing Abraham.

(10)For as many as are of the works of the law, are under a curse: for
it is written, "Cursed is every one who continueth not in all the
things written in the book of the law to do them[109]." (11)But that by
the law no man is justified before God is evident: because "The just by
faith shall live[110]." (12)Now the law is not by faith: but "The man
that doeth these things shall live by them[111]." (13)Christ hath
redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for
it is written, "Cursed is every one who is hanged on a tree[112]:"
(14)that unto the Gentiles the benediction pronounced on Abraham might
come by Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit
by faith.

(15)Brethren, I speak humanly; to use a similitude, a man's testament,
if it be passed in legal form, no man can vacate, or add thereunto.
(16)But to Abraham were the promises spoken, and to his seed. He saith
not, To seeds, as unto many persons; but as to an individual, and to
thy seed, which is Christ. (17)Now this I say, the covenant confirmed
of God to Christ, the law, which was given three hundred and thirty
years after, cannot disannul, so as to vacate the promise. (18)For if
the inheritance is of the law, it is no more by promise; but to Abraham
God gave it freely by promise.

(19)To what end then was the law given? It was given on account of
transgressions, until that seed should come to whom the promise was
made, being delivered through the ministry of angels into the hand of a
mediator. (20)But the mediator of the one _seed_ he is not, though God
is one.

(21)Is the law then contrary to the promises of God? God forbid. For if
there had been a law given which was capable of procuring life, verily
righteousness would have been by the law. (22)But the scripture hath
shut up all things under sin, that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ
might be given to those who believe.

(23)But before the faith came, we were in ward under the law, shut up
together for the faith that should be revealed. (24)Wherefore the law
was our conductor, as of children, to Christ, that we might be
justified by faith. (25)But when faith was come, we were no longer
under a paedagogue. (26)For ye are all the sons of God through faith in
Christ Jesus. (27)For as many of you as have been baptised into Christ,
have been invested with Christ. (28)There is no more Jew or Gentile,
there is no more slave or freeman, there is no more male or female: but
ye are all one in Christ Jesus. (29)But if ye are Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise.

CHAP. IV.

NOW I affirm, that as long as the heir is an infant, he differeth
nothing from a servant, though he be master of all; (2)but is under
tutors and trustees until the time fixed by his father. (3)So we also,
when we were infants, were in bondage under the first elementary
principles of the world: (4)but when the fulness of time was come, God
sent forth his Son born of a woman, born under the law, (5)that he
might redeem those who were under the law, that we might receive the
adoption of sons. (6)But because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father! (7)Therefore
thou art no more a slave, but a son, and if a son, an heir also of God
through Christ.

(8)But at that time when ye knew not God, ye served those who by nature
are not gods. (9)But now after having known God, or rather being known
of God, how turn ye back again to those weak and beggarly elements, to
which again a second time ye desire to be in bondage? (10)Ye observe
days, and months, and times, and years. (11)I am afraid for you, lest
haply I have bestowed on you labour in vain.

(12)Be as I am, for I also am as ye are, brethren--this is my request
to you: ye have not injured me in the least. (13)Ye know that with
infirmity of flesh I preached to you the gospel at the first. (14)And
my temptation, which was in my flesh, ye despised not, nor rejected
with disgust; but as an angel of God ye received me, even as Christ
Jesus himself. (15)What then was your blessedness, for I bear witness
to you that, if it were possible, ye would have plucked out your eyes,
and given them to me. (16)Am I therefore become your enemy because I
tell you the truth?

(17)They affect zeal for you, not honourably; but they wish to exclude
us, that you may be zealously attached to them. (18)It is good indeed
to be zealously affected in a good cause always, and not only when I am
present with you.

(19)My little children of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ
be formed in you, (20)I wish I could be with you now, and change my
address; for I am in doubt about you.

(21)Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the
law? (22)For it is written[113] that Abraham had two sons, the one by a
bondwoman, and the other by a free. (23)Now the son of the bond-maid
was born after the flesh, but that by the free woman was by promise.
(24)Which things are allegorical; for these are the two covenants, the
one from mount Sinai, gendering unto bondage, which is represented by
Agar. (25)For this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and corresponds with
Jerusalem that now is, and is in bondage with her children. (26)But the
Jerusalem above is free, which is the mother of us all. (27)For it is
written, "Rejoice, thou barren who bearest not, cry out and shout for
joy, thou that travailest not, for more are the children of her that
was desolate, than of her which had an husband[114]." (28)So we,
brethren, as Isaac, are the children of the promise. (29)But as then he
that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the
Spirit, even so is it now. (30)But what saith the scripture? "Cast out
the bond-woman and her son for the son of the bond-maid shall in no
wise inherit with the son of the free woman[115]." (31)So then,
brethren, we are not the children of the bondwoman, but of the free.

CHAP. V.

STAND fast therefore in the liberty with which Christ has made you
free, and be not again held under a yoke of bondage. (2)Behold, I Paul
declare to you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ will be of no
advantage to you. (3)And again, I testify to every man who is
circumcised, that he is under an obligation to keep the whole law.
(4)Ye have vacated all expectations from Christ, as many of you as are
justified by the law; ye are fallen from grace. (5)For we in spirit by
faith expect the hope of righteousness. (6)For in Christ Jesus neither
circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith exerting
its energy by love. (7)Ye were running well: who hath hindered you that
ye should not obey the truth? (8)This persuasion cometh not from him
who called you. (9)A little leaven leaveneth the whole mass. (10)I have
confidence in you through the Lord, that ye will be no otherwise
minded: but he that troubleth you shall bear condign punishment
whosoever he be.

(11)But I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision, why am I still
persecuted? then indeed the offence of the cross is at an end. (12)I
wish that they who trouble you were cut off from you. (13)For ye have
been called unto liberty, brethren; only use not that liberty as a
pretext for carnality, but in love be subject one to another. (14)For
the whole law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shalt love
thy neighbour as thyself. (15)But if ye bite and devour one another,
take heed that ye be not consumed by one another.

(16)But I say, Walk in the Spirit, and ye will not fulfil the lust of
the flesh. (17)For the flesh hath appetites contrary to the Spirit, and
the Spirit contrary to the flesh, and these act in opposition the one
to the other: so that ye do not the things which ye would. (18)But if
ye are under the conduct of the Spirit, ye are not under the law.

(19)Now the works of the flesh are evident, which are these: adultery,
whoredom, impurity, lasciviousness, (20)idolatry, magical charms,
enmities, strifes, jealousies, animosities, quarrels, divisions,
heresies, (21)envyings, murders, drunkenness, revels, and the like of
these, concerning which I tell you now, as I have told you already,
that they who live in such practices shall not inherit the kingdom of
God.

(22)But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
kindness, goodness, fidelity, (23)meekness, temperance; against such
there is no law. (24)But they who are Christ's have crucified the flesh
with its passions and irregular appetites. (25)If we live by the
Spirit, let us also walk by the Spirit. (26)Let us not be
vain-glorious, irritating one another, envying one another.

CHAP. VI.

BRETHREN, if a man also be surprised into any act of offence, ye that
are spiritual, replace such a one in the spirit of meekness; keeping an
attentive eye on thyself, lest thou also be tempted. (2)Bear ye one
another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ. (3)For if any man
conceits that he is something when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself.
(4)But let every man bring his own work to the test, and then shall he
have glorying in himself alone, and not _by comparison_ with another.
(5)For every man shall bear his own burden.

(6)Let him who is a learner of the word communicate to his instructor
in all good things. (7)Be not deceived; God is not to be trifled with:
for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. (8)For he that
soweth unto his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption, and he that
soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. (9)Let
us not then be weary of well-doing; for in due time we shall reap, if
we faint not. (10)Well then, whilst we have opportunity, let us do good
unto all men, but especially unto those who are of the household of
faith.

(11)Ye see in how many words I have written unto you with my own hand.
(12)As many as wish to make a fair appearance in the flesh, they compel
you to be circumcised, only that they may not suffer persecution for
the cross of Christ. (13)For even they who are themselves circumcised
do not keep the law, but desire you to be circumcised, that they may
glory in your flesh. (14)But God forbid that I should glory, save in
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto
me, and I unto the world, (15)For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision
availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creation. (16)And as
many as shall walk after this rule, peace be upon them, and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God.

(17)Henceforth let no man trouble me; for I bear the marks of our Lord
Jesus Christ in my body.

(18)The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brethren.
Amen.

To the Galatians, written from Rome.



THE EPISTLE of PAUL the APOSTLE, TO THE EPHESIANS.

CHAP. I.

PAUL, an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, to the saints
which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus: (2)grace be
unto you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

(3)Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath
blessed us with every spiritual blessing in heavenly things in Christ;
(4)as he hath elected us in him before the foundation of the world,
that we should be holy and blameless before him in love: (5)having
predestinated us for his adopted children by Jesus Christ unto himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will, (6)to the praise of the
glory of his grace, whereby he hath made us acceptable in that beloved
one; (7)in whom we have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace; (8)wherein
he hath abounded towards us with all wisdom and intelligence, (9)having
made known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good
pleasure, which he purposed in himself; (10)at the dispensation of the
fulness of the appointed times to gather together under one head all
things in Christ, whether they be things in heaven or things in earth,
in him: (11)in whom also we have obtained our inheritance,
predestinated according to the purpose of him who effectually worketh
all things according to the counsel of his own will: (12)that we should
be to the praise of his glory, who first had hope in Christ. (13)In
whom ye also _trusted_ after ye had heard the word of truth, the gospel
of your salvation; in whom also, having believed, ye have been sealed
with the holy Spirit of promise, (14)which is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the final redemption, acquired by him, come, to the
praise of his glory.

(15)For this cause I also, since I heard of your faith in the Lord
Jesus, and the love ye have to all saints, (16)have not ceased offering
up my praises for you, making mention of you in my prayers, (17)that
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, would give you
the spirit of wisdom and revelation by the knowledge of him; (18)the
eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that you may know what is
the hope to which he hath called you, and what the riches of the glory
of his inheritance for the saints, (19)and what the transcendent
greatness of his power in us, who believe, according to the energy of
his mighty strength (20)which he displayed in Christ when he raised him
from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly
regions, (21)far above all principality, and authority, and power, and
dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but
also in that which is to come; (22)and hath put all things under his
feet, and hath appointed him head over all to the church, (23)which is
his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all.

CHAP. II.

AND you hath he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins,
(2)wherein in times past ye walked after the fashion of this world,
after the prince of the power of the air, the spirit who now worketh
with energy in the children of disobedience: (3)among whom also we all
have had our conversation in time past, in the lusts of the flesh,
fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature
children of wrath, as well as the rest. (4)But God, being rich in
mercy, through the great love with which he hath loved us, (5)though we
were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye
are saved,) (6)and hath raised us up together with him, and made us sit
down together in the heavenly regions in Christ Jesus. (7)That he might
shew forth in the ages to come the transcendent riches of his grace, in
the kindness shewed to us in Christ Jesus. (8)For by grace ye are saved
through faith, and this not of yourselves; it is the gift of God:
(9)not by works, lest any man should boast; (10)for we are his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, for which God
hath before prepared us, that we should walk therein.

(11)Wherefore remember that ye in time past were Gentiles in the flesh,
who are called uncircumcision by that called circumcision made by hands
in the flesh; (12)that ye were at that time without Christ, alienated
from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of
promise, having no hope, and atheists in the world: (13)but now in
Christ Jesus, ye who formerly were far off, are become nigh by the
blood of Christ. (14)For he is our peace, who hath made both one, and
hath broken down the middle wall of separation, (15)destroying the
enmity in his flesh, even the law of precepts, in ordinances, that he
might from the two create in himself one new man, making peace, (16)and
might reconcile them both in one body to God by the cross, having slain
the enmity thereby; (17)and coming, hath preached peace to you who were
afar off, and to those who were nigh: (18)for through him we both have
access by one Spirit unto the Father. (19)So then ye are no more
strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of
the household of God; (20)built up on the foundation of apostles and
prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; (21)in
whom the whole building exactly cemented together groweth into a holy
temple in the Lord: (22)by whom also ye have been built up together for
an habitation of God through the Spirit.

CHAP. III.

FOR this cause _am_ I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you
Gentiles, (2)if so be, that ye have heard of the dispensation of the
grace of God which was given to me for you: (3)that by revelation he
made known unto me the mystery, as I wrote unto you before briefly;
(4)wherein when ye read, ye may be able to perceive my knowledge in the
mystery of Christ, (5)which in other generations was not made known to
the children of men, as it hath been now revealed to his holy apostles
and prophets by the Spirit; (6)that the Gentiles should be co-heirs,
and of the same body, and sharers with them of his promise in Christ by
the Gospel: (7)of which I am made a minister, according to the gift of
the grace of God, which was given unto me by the effectual working of
his power. (8)To me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this
grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable
riches of Christ; (9)and to make all men see what the communication of
that mystery means, which was hid from the beginning in God, who
created all things by Jesus Christ: (10)that now to the principalities
and powers in the heavenly regions, the manifold wisdom of God might be
made known by the church, (11)according to the purpose from
everlasting, which he formed in Christ Jesus our Lord: (12)in whom we
have boldness and access with confidence to God by the faith of him.

(13)Wherefore 1 beseech you, that ye faint not at my tribulations for
you, which is your glory. (14)For this end I bow my knees to the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, (15)of whom the whole family in heaven and
earth is named; (16)that he would give you according to the riches of
his glory, to be strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner
man; (17)that Christ may dwell by faith in your hearts; that rooted and
grounded in love, (18)ye may be strengthened to comprehend with all
saints, what is the breadth and length, and height and depth; (19)and
to know the love of Christ, transcendently surpassing knowledge, that
ye may be filled with all the fulness of God.

(20)Now to him that is able to do above all things, exceeding
abundantly, beyond what we ask or think, according to the power which
effectually worketh in us; (21)to him be glory in the church, in Christ
Jesus, unto all generations for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. IV.

I THEN, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you, that ye walk worthy of
the vocation with which ye are called, (2)with all humility and
meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one another in love;
(3)careful to preserve unity of spirit, in the bond of peace. (4)There
is one body, and one spirit, even as ye have been called to one hope of
your calling; (5)one Lord, one faith, one baptism, (6)one God, and
father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.

(7)But to every one of us hath the grace been given, according to the
measure of the gift of Christ. (8)Wherefore the Scripture saith, "When
he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto
men[116]." (9)Now this, that he ascended, what does it imply? but that
he also first descended into the more internal parts of the earth?
(10)He that descended is the same also, who ascended above all the
heavens, that he might fill all things.

(11)And he himself appointed, some indeed apostles, and some prophets;
and others preachers of the Gospel; and others pastors and teachers;
(12)for the perfecting the saints, for the work of the ministry, for
the edification of the body of Christ: (13)until we all attain in the
unity of the faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a state
of complete manhood, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of
Christ: (14)that we should be no longer infants, floating on the waves,
and carried about with every wind of novel doctrine, by the juggling of
men, by their craftiness after the delusive wiles of error; (15)but,
speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, who is
the head, even Christ: (16)From whom the whole body nicely joined
together, and firmly connected by every joint of exact proportion,
according to the energy exerted in the measure of every several part,
causeth the increase of the body unto the edification of itself in
love.

(17)This then I urge and testify in the Lord, that ye walk no more as
the other Gentiles walk in the vanity of their mind, (18)darkened in
understanding; alienated from the life of God through the ignorance
which is in them; through the blindness of their hearts: (19)who
insensible to remorse, have delivered themselves over in
lasciviousness, to the practice of all impurity, with insatiable
avidity. (20)But ye have not so learned Christ; (21)if indeed ye have
heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus:
(22)that ye put off respecting your former conversation the old man,
which is corrupt according to the deceitful passions; (23)but be
renewed in the spirit of your minds; (24)and put on the new man, which
is created godlike, in righteousness and true holiness.

(25)Wherefore putting away lying, speak truth, every one with his
neighbour: for we are members one of another.

(26)Are ye provoked; and do you not sin? let not the sun go down upon
your wrath: (27)nor give place to the devil.

(28)Let him that stole steal no more; but rather labour hard, working
with his hands that which is good, that he may have something to give
to him that is in want.

(29)Let no loose discourse proceed out of your mouth, but whatever is
good for useful edification, that it may communicate grace to the
hearers. (30)And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye have
been sealed unto the day of redemption. (31)Let all bitterness, and
wrath, and anger, and clamour, and scandal, be removed from you, with
all malice: (32)but be ye kind one to another, full of sensibility,
forgiving mutually, even as God in Christ hath forgiven you.

CHAP. V.

BE ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children; (2)and walk in
love as Christ also hath loved us, and given himself for us, an
oblation and sacrifice to God, for an odour of a sweet smell. (3)But
fornication and all impurity, or insatiable desire, let it not be
mentioned among you, as becometh saints; (4)or obscenity, or foolish
talk, or loose witticisms; things which become not _a Christian_, but
rather thanksgiving. (5)For this ye know, that no whoremonger, or
impure person, or avaricious, who is an idolater, hath an inheritance
in the kingdom of Christ and of God. (6)Let no man deceive you with
vain words: for because of these things, the wrath of God cometh on the
children of disobedience. (7)Be not ye therefore partakers with them.
(8)For ye were formerly darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord:
walk as children of light; (9)(for the fruit of the Spirit is in all
goodness and righteousness and truth;) (10)proving what is acceptable
to the Lord. (11)And have no society with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather rebuke them. (12)For it is scandalous but to
mention the things done of them in secret. (13)But all things which are
rebukeable are made manifest by the light; for it is the light, by
which every thing is made manifest. (14)Wherefore he saith, "Awake thou
that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light[117]."

(15)Take heed, then, that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise, (16)redeeming the time, because the days are evil. (17)Therefore
be not unwise, but intelligent concerning what is the will of the Lord.
(18)And be not drunk with wine, in which there is sottishness, but be
filled with the Spirit; (19)speaking one to another in psalms and
hymns, and spiritual canticles, singing and making melody in the heart
to the Lord; (20)giving thanks always for all things in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to God even the Father; (21)being subject one to
another in the fear of God.

(22)Wives, be in subjection to your own husbands, as to the Lord.
(23)For the husband is the head of the wife, as also Christ is the head
of the church; and is himself the saviour of the body. (24)As then the
church is subject to Christ, so also let the wives be to their own
husbands in every thing.

(25)Husbands, love your own wives, as Christ also loved the church, and
gave himself for it; (26)that he might sanctify it, purifying it in the
laver of water by the word, (27)that he might present it to himself a
glorious church, not having blemish, nor wrinkle, nor any such things;
but that it may be holy and unblameable. (28)So ought husbands to love
their own wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his own wife loveth
himself. (29)For no man ever hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and
cherisheth it, even as the Lord the church: (30)for we are the members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. (31)For this reason shall
a man forsake his father and mother, and shall cleave unto his wife,
and the two shall be as one flesh. (32)This mystery is great: but I am
speaking with regard to Christ, and with regard to the church.
(33)Nevertheless let every one of you individually see that each love
his own wife even as himself; but the wife that she stand in awe of the
husband.

CHAP. VI.

CHILDREN, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right. (2)"Honour
thy father and mother; (which is the first commandment with a promise;)
(3)that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest be long-lived
upon earth[118]." (4)And, ye fathers, exasperate not your children: but
educate them in the discipline and admonition of the Lord.

(5)Servants, be obedient to your masters after the flesh, with fear and
trembling, in simplicity of your heart as unto Christ; (6)not with
eye-service, as men-pleasers; but as servants of Christ, doing the will
of God from the soul; (7)with good will doing service as to the Lord,
and not unto men: (8)knowing that whatsoever good a man doeth, the same
shall he receive from the Lord, whether he be a bondman, or whether he
be free.

(9)And ye masters, do the same things to them, avoiding menacing
language: knowing that you also yourselves have a master in heaven; and
there is no respect of persons with him.

(10)Finally, brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might. (11)Be clothed in the panoply of God, that we may be able to
stand against the wiles of the devil. (12)For our conflict is not
merely against flesh and blood, but against principalities, and against
powers, and against the rulers of the darkness of this world, and
against wicked spirits in the aerial regions. (13)Therefore take the
whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day,
and having done all things to stand. (14)Stand therefore, girded about
your loins with truth, and putting on the breastplate of righteousness;
(15)and underneath your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of
peace; (16)and over all lifting up the shield of faith, with which ye
shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked one. (17)And
take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the
word of God: (18)praying at every opportunity with all prayer and
supplication in Spirit, and watching for this very purpose with
perseverance and intercession for all the saints; (19)and for me that
there may be given unto me utterance to open my mouth with boldness, to
make known the mystery of the gospel, (20)for which I am an ambassador
in bonds; that therein I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak.

(21)But that ye also may know the things which concern me, and what I
am doing, Tychicus will inform you of the whole, a beloved brother, and
faithful in the Lord: (22)whom I have sent unto you for this very
purpose, that ye may know our affairs, and that he might comfort your
hearts.

(23)Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ. (24)Grace be with all those who love our
Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.

Written to the Ephesians from Rome by Tychicus.



THE EPISTLE of PAUL the APOSTLE, TO THE PHILIPPIANS.

CHAP. I.

PAUL and Timothy, servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ
Jesus which are at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons: (2)grace be
unto you and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

(3)I give thanks to my God on every remembrance of you, (4)always in
every prayer of mine for you all, making request with joy, (5)for your
fellowship in the gospel from the first day even until now; (6)being
confident of this very thing, that he who hath wrought in you the good
work will perfect it until the day of Jesus Christ: (7)as it is right
for me to think this of you all, because I bear you on my heart, both
in my bonds and in my defence and the confirmation of the gospel, as
being all of you sharers in my grace. (8)For God is my witness, how
earnestly I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ. (9)And
this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge
and all understanding; (10)that ye may prove the things that are
excellent, in order that ye may be sincere and without offence unto the
day of Christ; (11)filled with fruits of righteousness, which by Jesus
Christ are to the glory and praise of God.

(12)Now I wish you, brethren, to know, that the things which have
befallen me have rather conduced to the progress of the gospel; (13)so
that my bonds are manifest in Christ through the whole palace, and all
other places; (14)and very many of our brethren in the Lord, assuming
confidence from my chains, are more abundantly bold, fearlessly to
preach the word. (15)Some indeed do it in a spirit of envy and strife;
but some also preach Christ with cordial good-will: (16)the one indeed
preach Christ out of contention, not with purity of intention, thinking
to add affliction to my bonds: (17)but the others of love, knowing that
I am exposed for the defence of the gospel. (18)What then? if Christ is
preached in whatever manner it be, whether in pretext or reality, even
in this do I rejoice, yea, and will rejoice. (19)For I know that this
shall issue in my salvation through your prayers, and the supply of the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, (20)according to my firm expectation and hope,
that I shall be confounded by no event, but that with all boldness, as
always hitherto, Christ shall now also be magnified in my body, whether
by my life or death. (21)For to me to live is Christ, and to die is
gain. (22)But if it be his will, that I should live in the flesh, this
is the fruit of my travail: and what to chuse I know not. (23)For I am
in a strait between the two, having an earnest longing to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ, for this is far, far better: (24)but to abide in
the flesh may be more necessary for you. (25)And being so persuaded, I
know that I shall stay and continue with you all for your progress and
joy of faith; (26)that your glorying may abound in Christ Jesus for me
by my coming again unto you.

(27)Only conduct yourselves worthily as becometh the gospel of Christ;
that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your
affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one soul wrestling
together in the faith of the gospel; (28)and not dismayed on any
occasion by your adversaries; which is indeed the proof of perdition to
them, but of salvation to you, and that from God. (29)For this favour
on the part of Christ is granted you, not only that ye should believe
on him, but also that ye should suffer for his sake; (30)experiencing
the same conflict which ye have seen in me, and now hear to be in me.

CHAP. II.

IF there be then any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if
any communion of spirit, if any bowels and compassions, (2)fulfil ye my
joy, that ye may be united in sentiment, having the same love, of one
soul, of one mind. (3)Let nothing be done contentiously or
vain-gloriously; but in humility reckoning others superior to
yourselves. (4)Let not each aim at their own particular interests, but
every man at those of others.

(5)Let the same sentiment of mind be in you, which was also in Christ
Jesus: (6)who being in the form of God counted it no usurpation to
claim equality with God: (7)but emptied himself, assuming the form of a
servant, made after the similitude of mortal men; (8)and found in
fashion as man, he humbled himself, becoming obedient to death, even to
the death of the cross. (9)Wherefore God also hath transcendently
exalted him, and bestowed on him a name which is above every name:
(10)that to the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of beings
celestial and terrestrial, and infernal; (11)and every tongue should
confess that the Lord Jesus _is_ Messiah, to the glory of God the
Father.

(12)Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always been obedient, not only
during my presence with you, but now much more in my absence, with fear
and trembling work out your own salvation. (13)For it is God who
worketh effectually in you both to will and to perform of his good
pleasure.

(14)Do all things without murmurings or disputes: (15)that ye may be
blameless and harmless, the children of God, inoffensive, in the midst
of an untoward and perverse generation, among whom ye shine as
luminaries in the world; (16)holding up the word of life, that I may
glory in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, nor laboured
in vain. (17)Yea, and should I become the victim, in the sacrifice and
service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all. (18)In like
manner do ye also joy and rejoice with me.

(19)But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy shortly unto you, that
I also may be refreshed in spirit, when I know your affairs. (20)For I
have no one like minded with him, who will genuinely care for your
affairs. (21)For all seek their own interests, not those of Christ
Jesus. (22)But ye have known the trial of him, that, as a son with a
father, he hath served with me in the gospel. (23)Him therefore I hope
to send immediately as soon as I see clearly what will become of me.
(24)But I have confidence in the Lord that I myself shall come shortly.
(25)But I have thought it necessary to send unto you Epaphroditus, my
brother, and fellow-labourer, and fellow-soldier, but your messenger,
and the minister who supplied my want. (26)For indeed he greatly longed
after you all, and was very sorry that ye had heard that he had been
sick. (27)For sick indeed he was, nigh unto death: but God had mercy on
him; and not on him only, but on me also, that I might not have sorrow
upon sorrow. (28)I have sent him therefore the more diligently, that
seeing him once more ye may rejoice, and I be less sorrowful.
(29)Receive him therefore in the Lord with all joy, and honourably
treat those that are such: (30)for in the work of Christ he was nigh
unto death indifferent about life, that he might afford me that service
which it was not in your power to render me.

CHAP. III.

MOREOVER, brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to
you, to me indeed is not irksome, but is safe for you. (2)Beware of
dogs, beware of the malicious labourers, beware of the concision.
(3)For we are the circumcision, who serve God in spirit, and glory in
Christ Jesus, and put no confidence in the flesh. (4)Though I too might
have confidence in the flesh; if any other man thinks that he may have
confidence in the flesh, I may claim more: (5)circumcised the eighth
day, of the race of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of
Hebrews; (6)respecting the law, a Pharisee; with regard to zeal,
persecuting the church; as touching the righteousness which is by the
law, blameless. (7)But what things were gain to me, these have I
counted loss for Christ. (8)Yea doubtless, and I count all things but
loss for the transcendently excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ my
Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and count them
but as offals of ordure, that I may gain Christ, (9)and be found in
him, not having mine own righteousness, which is by the law, but that
which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
faith: (10)that I may know him, and the virtue of his resurrection, and
communion with his sufferings, being conformed to his death; (11)if
haply I may attain unto the resurrection of the dead. (12)Not that I
have already attained, or am now perfect: but I pursue, that I may
overtake that for which also by his apprehension of me I am destined by
Christ Jesus.

(13)Brethren, I count not myself to have overtaken it; but this one
object I pursue, forgetting the things which are behind, and reaching
out to those which are before, (14)I press towards the mark for the
prize of the divine calling from on high in Christ Jesus.

(15)Let as many of us therefore as are perfect, be thus minded: and if
ye entertain any other sentiment, God also will unveil this unto you.
(16)Nevertheless, so far as we have advanced, be it our care to walk by
the same rule, to mind the same thing.

(17)Be ye imitators, brethren, of me, and eye attentively those who
walk so as ye have us for an example. (18)For many walk, whom I have
often mentioned to you, and now tell you even weeping, that they are
the enemies of the cross of Christ: (19)whose end is perdition, whose
God is their belly, and their glory in their shame, whose minds are
occupied with earthly things. (20)But our conversation is in heaven as
its citizens, from whence also we are expecting the Saviour, the Lord
Jesus Christ, (21)who shall transform our body of humiliation, that it
may be conformed to his body of glory, according to the effectual
working of him who is able to subdue even all things to himself.

CHAP. IV.

WHEREFORE, my brethren, beloved, and very dear to me, my joy and crown,
so stand fast in the Lord, O beloved.

(2)I beseech Euodias, and I beseech Syntiche to be of one mind in the
Lord. (3)And I beseech thee also, my genuine associate, assist those
women who laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and my
other fellow-labourers, whose names are in the book of life.

(4)Rejoice in the Lord always; again I say, Rejoice.

(5)Let your moderation be known unto all men.

The Lord is at hand. (6)Be not anxious about any thing, but in every
case by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your petitions
be made known unto God. (7)And the peace of God which surpasseth all
comprehension, shall guard your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.

(8)Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
serious, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are amiable, whatsoever things are laudable, if there
be any virtue, or any thing praise-worthy, pay attention to these
things. (9)Whatsoever things also ye have learned, and received, and
heard, and seen in me, these practise, and the God of peace shall be
with you.

(10)Now I rejoiced greatly in the Lord, that now once more your
thoughtful attention about me hath again sprung up, to which also your
mind had been disposed, but ye had not found the opportunity. (11)Not
that I mention this with a view to my indigence: for I have learned in
whatever circumstances I am, to be content. (12)I know how to be
abased, and I know how to abound; in every state and in all situations
I am instructed either to be full or famishing, either to enjoy
abundance, or to suffer want: (13)I am enabled for all things by Christ
who strengtheneth me. (14)Nevertheless ye have done nobly in your
communications to me during my affliction.

(15)But know also, Philippians, that at my first preaching the gospel,
when I went from Macedonia, no church communicated to me in the way of
giving and receiving but ye alone. (16)For in Thessalonica also ye sent
me once, yea twice, a supply for my want. (17)Not that I am anxious for
a gift; but I am anxious to see fruit abounding on your account.
(18)But I have now all things, and abound: I am full, having received
from Epaphroditus your bounty, an odour of sweet smell, an acceptable
sacrifice, well pleasing to God. (19)But my God will fully supply all
your want, according to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus. (20)Now
to God, even our Father, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

(21)Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren that are with me
salute you. (22)All the saints salute you, specially those who are of
Caesar's household.

(23)The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

Unto the Philippians, written from Rome by Epaphroditus.



THE EPISTLE of PAUL the APOSTLE, TO THE COLOSSIANS.

CHAP. I.

PAUL, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and Timothy a
brother, (2)to the saints at Colosse, and to the faithful brethren in
Christ: grace be unto you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord
Jesus Christ.

(3)We give thanks to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
always praying for you, (4)having heard of your faith in Christ Jesus,
and the love ye show to all the saints; (5)because of the hope laid up
for you in the heavens, which ye have heard before in the word of
truth, the gospel, (6)which is come unto you, as it is also unto all
the world; and beareth fruit, as also among you, from the day that ye
heard and knew the grace of God in truth; (7)even as ye have learned
from Epaphras our beloved fellow-labourer, who is a faithful minister
of Christ for you; (8)who also declared to us your love in the Spirit.
(9)For this cause we also from the day we heard it have not ceased
praying for you, and beseeching God that ye may be filled with the
knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding;
(10)that ye may walk worthy of the Lord, well pleasing him in all
things, in every good work fruitful, and increasing in the knowledge of
God; (11)strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power,
unto all patience and long-suffering with joy; (12)giving thanks to
God, even the Father, who hath made us meet for a portion in the
inheritance of the saints in light; (13)who hath plucked us out from
the dominion of darkness, and transferred us into the kingdom of the
Son of his love: (14)in whom we have redemption through his blood, and
forgiveness of sins. (15)Who is the image of the invisible God, the
prime author of all creation: (16)for by him were all things created,
celestial and terrestrial, visible or invisible, whether thrones, or
dominations, or principalities, or powers, all were created by him, and
for him: (17)and he is before all, and by him all things subsist.
(18)And he is the head of the body, the church; he is the beginning,
the first begotten from the dead, that he might be in all things
pre-eminent. (19)For it hath pleased the Father that in him all fulness
should dwell; (20)and by him to reconcile all things to himself, making
peace by the blood of his cross: by him, I say, whether they be things
on earth, or things in the heavens. (21)And you who in time past were
all aliens, and enemies in mind by wicked works, hath he now
reconciled, (22)by the body of his flesh, through death, to present you
holy, and blameless, and irreprehensible in his presence: (23)if ye
abide in faith grounded and firm, and never moved aside from the hope
of the gospel, which ye have heard, and which hath been preached to the
whole creation which is under heaven, of which I Paul am a minister.

(24)Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up in my flesh the
measure of afflictions for Christ which remains to be endured for his
body, which is the church, (25)of which I am a minister, according to
the dispensation of God, which was given me for you to fulfil the
ministry of the word of God--(26)the mystery which was hid from ages
and from generations, but is now unveiled to his saints; (27)to whom
God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery
among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory: (28)whom
we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom,
that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus; (29)for which
also I am labouring, conflicting in the energy of his might, which
worketh in me powerfully.

CHAP. II.

FOR I wish you to know how great a struggle I sustain for you, and
those at Laodicea, and as many as have not seen my face in the flesh;
(2)that their hearts may be comforted, firmly united together in love,
and unto all riches of full assurance of understanding, in the
knowledge of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ;
(3)in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

(4)Now this I say, lest any man pervert you with specious discourse.
(5)For though I am absent from you in person, yet I am present with you
in spirit, rejoicing and beholding your regular order, and the
stedfastness of your faith in Christ. (6)As therefore ye have received
Christ Jesus the Lord, walk in him: (7)rooted and built up on him, and
confirmed in the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with
thanksgiving. (8)Beware that no man make a prey of you by means of
philosophy and vain delusion, after the tradition of men, after the
principles of the world, and not after Christ: (9)for in him dwelleth
all the fulness of the Godhead bodily; (10)and ye are complete in him,
who is the head of all principality and power: (11)in whom also ye have
been circumcised with the circumcision not made with hands, by the
putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, through the circumcision
of Christ: (12)buried with him in baptism, in which also ye have been
raised up together with him by faith, the energy of God, who raised him
from the dead.

(13)And you, who were dead in sins and in the uncircumcision of your
flesh, hath he quickened with him, freely forgiving you all trespasses;
(14)and hath blotted out the handwriting in ordinances that was against
us, which was the obstacle to us, and took it from the midst, nailing
it to the cross; (15)spoiling principalities and powers, he exposed
them to view openly, triumphing over them on it. (16)Let no man
therefore judge you concerning what you eat, or what you drink, or the
observance of a feast, or new moon, or the sabbaths; (17)which are
_merely_ shadows of things to come: but the body is Christ's. (18)Let
no man juggle you out of your prize, voluntary in _his_ humility and
the worship of angels, intruding into things which he never saw, vainly
puffed up by his carnal imagination; (19)and not firmly attached to the
head, from which the whole body, by joints and ligaments, harmoniously
adjusted and closely compacted, increaseth with increase from God.

(20)If then ye have been dead with Christ from the rudiments of the
world, why, as though living in the world, are ye dogmatically taught,
(21)eat not, nor talk, nor touch, (22)(all which things tend to
corruption by abuse) according to the injunctions and doctrines of men?
(23)Which things indeed hold forth an appearance of wisdom in
will-worship, and humility, and bodily mortification, _though_ not of
any value, _but_ a gratification to the flesh.

CHAP. III.

IF ye then be risen with Christ, seek the things which are above, where
Christ is seated at the right hand of God. (2)Fix your minds on things
above, not on things on the earth. (3)For ye are dead, and your life is
hid with Christ in God. (4)When Christ shall appear, who is our life,
then shall you also with him be manifested in glory. (5)Mortify
therefore your members which are on the earth, fornication, impurity,
the vile passion, evil concupiscence, and insatiable desire, which is
idolatry: (6)for which things the wrath of God cometh upon the children
of disobedience; (7)in which ye also walked formerly when ye lived
among them: (8)but now ye have put away all these things, anger,
asperity, malice, scandal, obscenity, out of your mouth.

(9)Lie not one to another, seeing ye have put off the old man with his
practices; (10)and have put on the new man, which is renewed in
knowledge, after the image of him that created him. (11)Where there is
no difference whether a man be Greek or Jew, circumcised or
uncircumcised, barbarian or Scythian, slave or freeman: but Christ is
all and in all.

(12)Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of
mercies, kindness, humility, meekness, long-suffering; (13)forbearing
one another, and freely forgiving one another, if any man hath a
complaint against another: even as Christ hath freely forgiven you, so
also do ye. (14)But above all these things put on love, which is the
bond of perfection. (15)And let the peace of God set up its throne in
your hearts, whereunto also ye have been called in one body; and be ye
thankful.

(16)Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching
and admonishing yourselves in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual
canticles, singing with grace in your heart unto the Lord. (17)And
everything that ye do in word or in work, do all in the name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him.

(18)Wives be subject to your own husbands, as is fit in the Lord.

(19)Husbands, love your wives, and use no asperity against them.

(20)Children, be obedient to your parents in all things; for this is
well-pleasing to the Lord.

(21)Parents, irritate not your children, lest their spirit be broken.

(22)Servants, obey in all things your masters after the flesh, not with
eye-service as men-pleasers, but, in simplicity of heart, fearing God.
(23)And in every thing that ye do, labour from the soul, as for the
Lord, and not man; (24)knowing that from the Lord ye shall receive the
reward of the inheritance: for ye are servants to the Lord Christ.
(25)But he that is guilty of injustice shall receive punishment for the
wrong he hath done: and there is no respect of persons.

CHAP. IV.

MASTERS, afford to your servants that which is just, and an equivalent,
knowing that ye also have a Master in the heavens.

(2)Persevere in prayer, watching therein with thanksgiving; (3)praying
also at the same time for us, that God may open to us a door for the
word, that I may speak the mystery of Christ, for which I am also in
chains: (4)that I may make it evident, as I ought to speak.

(5)Walk wisely with regard to those without, redeeming the time. (6)Let
your discourse be always gracious, seasoned with salt, that ye may know
how ye ought to reply to every man.

(7)All my affairs will Tychicus make known unto you, a beloved brother,
and faithful minister, and fellow-servant in the Lord: (8)whom I have
sent unto you for this very purpose, that he might know your affairs,
and comfort your hearts; (9)with Onesimus, that faithful and beloved
brother, who is one of you: they will make known unto you all things
that have passed here.

(10)There salute you Aristarchus my fellow-prisoner, and Mark nephew to
Barnabas, concerning whom ye have received injunctions; if he come unto
you, receive him, (11)and Jesus, who is called Justus, who are of the
circumcision. These only are my fellow-labourers for the kingdom of
God, who have been a comfort to me.

(12)Epaphras, one of you, saluteth you, a servant of Christ, always
wrestling for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and complete in
all the will of God. (13)For I bear him witness that he hath great zeal
for you, and for those in Laodicea, and those in Hierapolis.

(14)Luke, the beloved physician, saluteth you, and Demas.

(15)Salute the brethren that are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the
church which is at his house. (16)And when this epistle hath been read
among you, cause that it also be read in the church of the Laodiceans,
and that ye also read that from Laodicea. (17)And say to Archippus,
Take heed to the ministry which thou hast received from the Lord, that
thou fulfil it.

(18)The salutation of Paul with mine own hand. Remember my chains.
Grace be with you. Amen.

Written to the Colossians from Rome by Tychicus and Onesimus.



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE, TO THE THESSALONIANS.

CHAP. I.

PAUL, and Silvanus, and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in
God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ: grace unto you, and peace
from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. (2)We give thanks to
God always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers;
(3)without ceasing calling to mind your work of faith, and labour of
love, and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, before our God and
Father; (4)knowing, brethren, beloved of God, your election. (5)For our
gospel came not unto you in word only, but in power, and in the Holy
Ghost, and in great fulness of assurance; as ye know what manner of men
we have been among you for your sakes. (6)And ye became imitators of
us, and of the Lord, receiving the word in much affliction, with joy of
the Holy Ghost; (7)so that ye became models for all that believe in
Macedonia and Achaia. (8)For from you sounded forth the word of the
Lord, not only into Macedonia and Achaia, but into every region also
your fidelity towards God is gone out, so that we have no need to say
any thing. (9)For they publish concerning you what manner of entrance
we had unto you, and how ye turned unto God from idols, to serve the
living and true God, (10)and to wait for his Son from the heavens, whom
he raised from the dead, even Jesus, who delivereth us from the wrath
to come.

CHAP. II.

FOR ye yourselves, brethren, know our entrance in to you, that it was
not in vain. (2)But though we had suffered before, and were infamously
treated, as ye know, at Philippi, we were bold in our God to preach
unto you the gospel of God amidst a great conflict. (3)And our
exhortation originated not from delusion, or impurity, or from guile;
(4)but as we have been approved of God to be entrusted with the gospel,
so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God, who trieth our hearts.
(5)For neither at any time used we insinuating language, as ye know,
nor a pretext for covetousness; God is witness: (6)not seeking glory
from men, neither from you, nor from others, though we might have been
burdensome, as apostles of Christ. (7)But we were gentle in the midst
of you, as a nurse cherisheth her own infants. (8)So, tenderly affected
towards you, we could with pleasure have imparted to you not the gospel
of God only, but our own lives also, because ye were beloved by us.
(9)For ye remember, brethren, our labour and toil: for night and day
working hard, that we might be no burden to any of you, we preached
unto you the gospel of God. (10)Ye are witnesses, and God also, how
holily, and justly, and faultlessly we conducted ourselves among you
that believe: (11)as ye know how _we treated_ every one of you, as a
father doth his children, exhorting you, and admonishing, and conjuring
you, (12)that ye should walk worthy of God, as calling you into his
kingdom and glory.

(13)For this cause do we also give thanks to God unceasingly, because
when ye received the word reported by us from God, ye received it not
as the word of man, but, as it is in truth, the word of God, which
worketh also effectually in you that believe. (14)For ye, brethren,
became imitators of the churches of God which are in Judea, in Christ
Jesus: for ye suffered the same things also yourselves from your own
countrymen, as they too have of the Jews; (15)who both murdered the
Lord Jesus and their own prophets, and have persecuted us, and please
not God, and are in opposition to all mankind; (16)forbidding us to
speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up the measure
of their iniquities always: but wrath is coming upon them to the
extremity.

(17)But we, brethren, bereaved of you for a short moment, in person,
not in heart, have more abundantly longed to see your face with great
desire. (18)Therefore we wished to have come unto you, even I Paul,
once and again; but Satan prevented us. (19)For what is our hope, or
joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord
Jesus Christ at his coming? (20)For ye are our glory and joy.

CHAP. III.

WHEREFORE when we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to be
left at Athens alone: (2)and sent Timothy our brother, and a minister
of God, and our fellow-labourer in the gospel of Christ, that he might
stablish you, and comfort you concerning your faith: (3)that no man
might be shaken by these tribulations; for ye yourselves know that
thereunto we are appointed. (4)For when we were with you, we told you
before that we were about to suffer tribulation; as also it came to
pass, and ye know. (5)For this cause also, when I could no longer
forbear, I sent to know your fidelity, lest by any means the tempter
had tempted you, and our labour should be in vain. (6)But now when
Timothy returned to us from you, and brought us the glad tidings of
your faith and love, and that ye retain a kind remembrance of us
always, earnestly desirous to see us, as we are also to see you: (7)for
this cause we have felt consolation, brethren, in you under all our
tribulation and distress, because of your fidelity. (8)For now we live,
if ye stand fast in the Lord. (9)For what sufficient thanks can we
render to God for you, for all the joy with which we rejoice on your
account before our God, (10)night and day most fervently praying that
we may see your face, and amply supply the deficiencies of your faith?

(11)Now God himself, and our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ direct
our way unto you. (12)And the Lord cause you to abound and overflow
with love one to another, and towards all men, as we also do to you:
(13)to the end that your hearts may be established blameless in
holiness before God and our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ with all his saints.

CHAP. IV.

FINALLY, brethren, we beseech you therefore, and conjure you by the
Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk, and
please God, so ye would abound more and more. (2)For ye know what
commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. (3)For this is the will of
God, even your sanctification, that you should abstain from whoredom;
(4)that every one of you may know how to possess his own vessel in
sanctification and honour, (5)not in the vile passion of lewdness, as
the Gentiles which know not God; (6)that no man transgress against, or
act dishonestly to his brother in this matter because the Lord is the
avenger of all such things, as we have told you before, and testified.
(7)For God hath not called us unto impurity, but unto holiness.
(8)Therefore he that despiseth, despiseth not man, but God, who hath
also given unto us his Holy Spirit.

(9)Now concerning brotherly love, I have no need to write unto you: for
ye yourselves are divinely taught to love one another. (10)And indeed
ye practise it towards all the brethren that are throughout Macedonia:
but we conjure you, brethren, to abound more and more; (11)and that you
make it your study to live peaceably, and to do your own business, and
to work with your own hands, even as we have enjoined you; (12)that ye
walk becomingly towards those without, and need no assistance from any
person.

(13)Now I would not have you ignorant, brethren, concerning those who
are fallen asleep, that ye be not afflicted, as the rest _of mankind_
who have no hope. (14)For if we believe that Jesus died, and rose
again, so also those that have fallen asleep for Jesus shall God bring
with him. (15)For this I say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we
who are alive, who are left unto the coming of the Lord, shall not
prevent those who are fallen asleep. (16)For the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and
with the trumpet of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first:
(17)then we who are alive, who remain, shall be caught up together with
them into the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we be
ever with the Lord. (18)Wherefore comfort one another with these words.

CHAP. V.

NOW concerning the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need
that I should write to you: (2)for yourselves know precisely that the
day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. (3)For when they
say, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction rusheth upon them, as
travail on a woman with child, and they shall in no wise escape. (4)But
ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that the day should overtake you as
a thief. (5)Ye are all the children of light, and the children of day:
we are not the children of night, nor of darkness. (6)Let us not then
sleep as do others; but let us watch and be sober. (7)For they who
sleep, sleep in the night, and they who are drunken, are drunken in the
night; (8)but let us who are of the day be sober, putting on the
breastplate of faith and love, and for a helmet the hope of salvation.
(9)For God hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation
through our Lord Jesus Christ, (10)who died for us, that whether we
sleep, or whether we wake, we may live together with him. (11)Wherefore
comfort one another, and edify one another, as also ye do.

(12)Now we entreat you, brethren, to know those who labour among you,
and preside over you in the Lord, and admonish you; (13)and to account
of them very highly in love for their work's sake. And live in peace
among yourselves.

(14)Now we conjure you, brethren, admonish the unruly, comfort the
feeble-minded, support the infirm, be patient with all men. (15)See
that no man return evil for evil to any man; but always pursue that
which is good, both towards one another, and towards all men.

(16)Rejoice evermore. (17)Pray without ceasing. (18)In every thing give
thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus to you-wards.
(19)Quench not the Spirit. (20)Despise not prophesyings. (21)Prove all
things; hold fast that which is good. (22)Abstain from all appearance
of evil.

(23)Now the God of peace himself sanctify you wholly; and may your
whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved faultless unto the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ. (24)Faithful is he that calleth you, who also
will do it.

(25)Brethren, pray for us. (26)Salute all the brethren with an holy
kiss.

(27)I conjure you by the Lord, that this epistle be read to all the
holy brethren.

(28)The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.

The first epistle to the Thessalonians was written from Athens.



THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE, TO THE THESSALONIANS.

CHAP. I.

PAUL, and Silvanus, and Timothy, to the church of the Thessalonians in
God our Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ: (2)grace unto you and
peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. (3)We are
bound to give thanks to God always for you, brethren, as it is fit,
because your faith groweth exceedingly, and the love of every one of
you all towards each other aboundeth: (4)so that we ourselves make our
boast of you among the churches of God, for your patience and fidelity
under all your persecutions and afflictions which ye endure: (5)which
is a manifest proof of the righteous judgment of God, that ye should be
counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer:
(6)seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you; (7)and to you who are troubled, rest with us, at
the revelation of the Lord Jesus Christ from heaven with his mighty
angels, (8)in a flame of fire, taking vengeance of them that know not
God, and obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: (9)who shall
receive punishment, even eternal perdition, from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power: (10)when he shall come to be
glorified in his saints, and to be admired by all those who believe;
because our testimony was believed among you in that day. (11)Wherefore
also we pray continually for you, that our God would count you worthy
of the calling, and fulfil all the good pleasure of his goodness, and
the work of faith with power: (12)that the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ may be glorified by you, and you by him, according to the grace
of our God and Lord, Jesus Christ.

CHAP. II.

NOW we entreat you, brethren, with regard to the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and our gathering together unto him: (2)that ye be not
hastily agitated with apprehension, nor troubled, neither by spirit,
nor by discourse, nor by letter, as coming from us, as though the day
of the Lord was instantly approaching. (3)Let no man deceive you in any
way: because that cannot be till the apostasy come first, and the man
of sin appear, the son of perdition, (4)who opposeth himself against,
and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or is the object of
adoration; so that he in the temple of God sitteth as God, exhibiting
himself in public that he is God. (5)Do ye not remember that when I was
yet with you, I told you these things? (6)And now ye know what
withholdeth, that he may be revealed in his own time. (7)For the
mystery of iniquity is already powerfully working; only he that
withholdeth hitherto, will do so till he is removed. (8)And then that
lawless person will appear, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit
of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming;
(9)whose appearing is known by fanatical energy, displayed in all
power, and signs, and lying miracles, (10)and in every unrighteous
delusion among those who perish: in consequence of which things they
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. (11)And
for this cause God shall send unto them the energy of delusion, that
they should believe a lie: (12)that they all might be damned who have
not believed the truth, but have taken pleasure in unrighteousness.
(13)But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, brethren,
beloved of the Lord, because God hath elected you from the beginning
unto salvation, by sanctification of the Spirit, and faith in the
truth: (14)whereunto also he called you by our gospel, in order to your
acquisition of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. (15)Therefore,
brethren, stand fast, and firmly hold the injunctions delivered to you,
as ye have been taught, whether by our discourse, or by letter.

(16)Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and our God, and Father, who
hath loved us, and given us everlasting consolation, and good hope
through grace, (17)comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good
word and work.

CHAP. III.

FINALLY, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may run, and
be glorified, even as among you; (2)and that we may be delivered from
unreasonable and wicked men: for there is not faith in all. (3)But the
Lord is faithful, who will stablish you, and keep you from the wicked
one. (4)But we have confidence in the Lord towards you, that the things
which we have enjoined you, ye both do, and will do. (5)And the Lord
direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patience of
Christ.

(6)Now we command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to withdraw yourselves from every brother who walketh disorderly, and
not according to the injunction which he hath received from us. (7)For
ye yourselves know how ye ought to imitate us; for we behaved not
ourselves disorderly among you, (8)neither did we eat bread with any
man unpaid for, but with labour and toil worked night and day, that we
might be burdensome to none of you: (9)not that we have not such power,
but that we might be ourselves an example for you to imitate. (10)For
when we were with you, this we enjoined you, that if a man would not
work, neither should he eat. (11)For we hear that there are some among
you who walk disorderly, doing no work, but being busy-bodies. (12)Now
such we command, and conjure, by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with
quietness they labour, and eat their own bread.

(13)But ye, brethren, be not weary of well doing. (14)And if any man
obey not our word by letter, mark that man, and maintain no society
with him, that he may be ashamed. (15)Yet regard him not as an enemy,
but admonish him as a brother. (16)And the Lord of peace himself give
you peace, by every means, in every situation.

The Lord be with you all.

(17)The salutation of Paul with my own hand, which is my sign in every
letter: so I write.

(18)The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

The second epistle was written to the Thessalonians from Athens.



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLE PAUL TO TIMOTHY.

CHAP. I.

PAUL, an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the order of God, our Saviour, and
Lord, Jesus Christ, who is our hope; (2)to Timothy, my genuine son in
faith: grace, mercy, and peace from God our Father, and Christ Jesus
our Lord.

(3)As I exhorted thee to abide at Ephesus when I went into Macedonia,
that thou mightest enjoin certain persons to introduce no different
doctrine, (4)nor to attend to fables and endless genealogies, which
give occasion to disputes rather than godly edification, which is by
faith; _so do_. (5)For the end of the commandment is love out of a
clean heart, and good conscience, and faith unfeigned: (6)from which
some, having swerved, have turned aside to vain babbling; (7)affecting
to be doctors of the law, though they underhand neither what they say,
nor whereof they affirm. (8)But we know that the law is good if a man
use it according to its institution; (9)knowing this, that the law is
not made for the just man, but for the lawless and disorderly, for the
ungodly and for sinners, for the unholy and profane, for murderers of
fathers and murderers of mothers, for men-slayers, (10)for
whoremongers, for sodomites, for stealers of men, for liars, for
perjured persons, and if there be any other thing which is contrary to
sound doctrine, (11)according to the glorious gospel of the blessed
God, with which I have been put in trust. (12)And I render thanks to
him who hath strengthened me, even to Christ Jesus our Lord, that he
hath counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry; (13)who was
before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and insolently violent, But I
was admitted to mercy, for I did it ignorantly in unbelief; (14)but the
grace of our Lord hath exceedingly abounded with faith and love, which
is in Christ Jesus. (15)It is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of
whom I am the chief. (16)But for this end obtained I mercy, that in me,
the chief, Jesus Christ might shew forth all long-suffering, for a
pattern to those who should after believe in him unto eternal life.
(17)Now to the king eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be
honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

(18)This commandment, son Timothy, I give thee, according to the
prophecies which were before delivered concerning thee, that by them
thou mightest war a good warfare; (19)holding faith and a good
conscience, which some having renounced, as touching the faith, have
been shipwrecked: (20)of whom are Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have
delivered over unto Satan, that they may be corrected, so as to
blaspheme no more.

CHAP. II.

I EXHORT therefore, first of all, that there be offered supplications,
prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings for the whole race of mankind:
(2)for kings, and all that are in a state of eminence, that we may lead
a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and seriousness. (3)For
this is becoming, and acceptable before God our Saviour; (4)who wills
all men to be saved, and come to the acknowledgment of truth. (5)For
there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus; (6)who gave himself a ransom for all, the testimony to be born
in his appointed times; (7)of which I am ordained a preacher and
apostle, (I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not,) a teacher of the
Gentiles in faith and truth.

(8)I will then that men pray in every place, lifting up holy hands
without wrath or doubting: (9)in like manner also that the women dress
themselves in decent apparel, with modesty and sobriety; not with
plaited tresses, or gold, or pearls, or very costly clothing, (10)but
as becometh women professing godliness, with good works.

(11)Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection: (12)for I
permit not a woman to teach in public, or to assume authority over the
man, but to abide in silence. (13)For Adam was first formed, Eve
afterwards. (14)And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being
deceived, by transgression fell. (15)But she shall be saved through
childbearing, if they abide in faith, and love, and holiness with
sobriety.

CHAP. III.

IT is a true saying, If a man seeks the office of a bishop, he desireth
a laudable employment. (2)A bishop then must be irreprehensible, the
husband of one wife, temperate, sagacious, respectable, hospitable,
well qualified for teaching; (3)not addicted to wine, not using hard
words or blows, not greedy of base gain; but gentle, not quarrelsome,
not a lover of money; (4)presiding over his own family with propriety,
having his children under subjection with all gravity of behaviour:
(5)for if a man knoweth not how to order his own family, how shall he
take proper care of the church of God? (6)Not a new convert, lest he be
puffed up, and fall into the devil's crime. (7)He must also have a fair
character from those who are without, that he may not fall into
reproach, and into the snare of the devil.

(8)The deacons also in like manner must be grave, not doubletongued,
not addicting themselves to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre;
(9)holding the mystery of the faith with a pure conscience. (10)And let
these also be first proved, and if found blameless, then let them enter
on the deacon's office.

(11)Their wives in like manner must be grave women, not addicted to
scandal, sober, faithful in all things.

(12)Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, ordering well their
children and their own families. (13)For they who discharge the office
of a deacon with propriety, acquire to themselves a respectable station
_in the church_, and great boldness in the faith which is in Jesus
Christ.

(14)These things I write to thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly:
(15)but should I be delayed, that thou mayest know how it behoveth thee
to conduct thyself in the house of God, which is the church of the
living God, the pillar and the pedestal of truth. (16)And confessedly
great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifested in the flesh,
justified by the Spirit, seen of angels, preached among the Gentiles,
believed on in the world, received up into glory.

CHAP. IV.

NOW the Spirit speaketh expresly, that in the latter days some will
apostatise from the faith, giving heed to spirits of delusion, and
doctrines of devils; (2)men who teach lies with hypocrisy; and have
their own consciences cauterised; (3)prohibiting marriage, and
enjoining abstinence from particular meats, which God created to be
received with thanksgiving by the faithful, and those who acknowledge
the truth. (4)For every creature of God is good, and none to be
rejected, if used with thanksgiving: (5)for it is sanctified by the
word of God and prayer. (6)If thou suggest these truths to the
brethren, thou shalt be a good minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up
in the words of faith and sound doctrine, whereunto thou hast attained.
(7)But profane and antiquated fables reject, but exercise thyself unto
godliness. (8)For bodily exercise is of little advantage, but godliness
is profitable for all things, having the promise of the life which now
is, and of that which is to come. (9)This is a faithful saying, and
deserving all acceptance. (10)For therefore do we labour and are
exposed to abuse, because we have hoped in the living God, who is the
Saviour of all men, especially of the faithful. (11)Announce and teach
these things. (12)Let no man despise thy youth; but be a pattern of the
faithful, in discourse; in conduct, in love, in spirit, in faith, in
purity. (13)Till I come, apply to reading, to exhortation, to teaching.
(14)Neglect not the gift which is in thee, which was given thee by
prophecy, with imposition of the hands of the presbytery. (15)Let these
things be thy care; be wholly devoted to them; that thy progress may be
evident to all men. (16)Take heed unto thyself, and to thy doctrine;
abide in them: for so doing thou shalt both save thyself, and those who
hear thee.

CHAP. V.

REBUKE not harshly an aged man, but admonish him as a father; the
younger men as brethren; (2)the aged women as mothers; the younger as
sisters, with all purity. (3)Honour the widows, that are widows indeed.
(4)But if any widow has children or grandchildren, let them learn as
their first duty to shew their piety towards their own family, and make
a grateful return to their progenitors: for this is becoming and
acceptable before God. (5)But she who is a widow indeed, and abandoned
to solitude, hopeth in God, and continueth in supplications and prayers
night and day. (6)But she who lives voluptuously is dead, though she
liveth. (7)And these things inculcate, that they may be blameless.
(8)But if any man provide not for his own relations, and especially for
those more immediately of his own family, he hath denied the faith, and
is worse than an infidel.

(9)Let no widow be put on the list under sixty years of age, who hath
been the wife of one husband, (10)bringing attestation of her good
works; that she hath well educated her children, that she hath been
hospitable to strangers, that she hath washed the saints feet, that she
hath assisted the afflicted, that she hath followed diligently every
good work. (11)But the younger widows reject: for when they give
themselves to wantonness contrary to Christ, they will marry;
(12)incurring censure, for having violated their former engagement.
(13)And at the same time also they learn to be idle, visiting about in
the houses; and not merely idle, but talkative and inquisitive,
speaking things they ought not. (14)I would therefore have the younger
widows to marry, bear children, govern their house, give no occasion to
the adversary to bring a reproach on them. (15)For some are already
turned aside after Satan. (16)But if any man or woman who believes hath
widows their relations, let him provide for them, and let not the
church be burdened; that there may be a sufficiency for the real
widows.

(17)Let the elders who preside properly be counted worthy of double
honour, especially those who are laborious in preaching and teaching.
(18)For the Scripture saith, "Thou shalt not muzzle the ox while he
treadeth out the corn[119]." And again, "The labourer is worthy of his
hire."

(19)Against a presbyter receive not an accusation, except it be from
two or three witnesses. (20)Those who sin rebuke before all, that the
rest also may tremble.

(21)I adjure thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect
angels, that thou observe these things without prejudice, doing nothing
by partiality.

(22)Lay hands hastily on no man, nor share another's sins: keep thyself
pure; (23)confine thyself no longer to water-drinking; but use a little
wine for thy stomach's sake, and thy frequent indispositions. (24)Some
men's sins are glaringly manifest, going before to judgment; and after
others also they follow _to detection_. (25)In like manner also the
good works _of some_ are previously manifest; and it is not possible
that what they have besides should be concealed.

CHAP. VI.

LET as many slaves as are under the yoke account their own masters
worthy of all honour, that the name of God and the doctrine be not
blasphemed. (2)But they who have believing masters, let them not think
less of them, because they are brethren; but serve them the rather,
because they are faithful and beloved, who have equally partaken of the
benefit. These things teach and enjoin. (3)If any man teach another
doctrine, and attend not to the sound words, which are those of Jesus
Christ our Lord, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness;
(4)he is conceited, knowing nothing, but delirious with disputes and
quarrels about words, from whence come wrath, contentions, evil
speakings, wrong suspicions, (5)perverse wranglings of men corrupt in
mind, and destitute of truth, who think to make gain of godliness;
depart from such men. (6)But godliness with contentment is great gain.
(7)For that we brought nothing into the world is evident, neither can
we carry any thing out of it. (8)Having then food and raiment, let us
be therewith content. (9)For they who will be rich fall into temptation
and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful passions, which sink men
in the abyss of destruction and perdition. (10)For the love of money is
the root of all evils, which some coveting, have wandered away from the
faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.

(11)But thou, O man of God, flee from these things; but pursue
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness. (12)Strain
every nerve in the noble conflict of faith, lay fast hold on eternal
life, unto which also thou hast been called, and hast confessed the
good confession before many witnesses.

(13)I conjure thee in the presence of God, who giveth life to all
things, and of Christ Jesus, who witnessed that noble confession before
Pontius Pilate; (14)that thou observe this injunction spotless,
irreproachable, unto the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: (15)which
in his own appointed times he will shew forth, who is the blessed and
only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords; (16)who alone
possesseth immortality, inhabiting light inaccessible, whom no man hath
seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and glory eternal. Amen.

(17)Charge the rich in this world not to be lifted up with pride, nor
to trust on the stability of wealth, but on the living God, who giveth
us richly all things for our enjoyment; (18)to do good, to be rich in
generous actions, to take pleasure in liberality, ready to distribute;
(19)laying up treasure for themselves a noble foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.

(20)O Timothy, guard the sacred deposit, avoiding profane trifling
talk, and antitheses of misnamed science: (21)which some affecting have
erred concerning the faith.

Grace be with thee.--Amen.

The first epistle was written from Laodicea, which is the metropolis of
Phrygia Pacatiana.



THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO TIMOTHY.

CHAP. I.

PAUL, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, according to the
promise of the life which is in Christ Jesus, (2)to Timothy, my beloved
son: grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our
Lord.

(3)I thank God, whom I serve from my forefathers with a pure
conscience, that I keep up a constant remembrance of thee in my prayers
night and day; (4)earnestly desiring to see thee, remembering thy
tears, that I might be filled with joy; (5)recalling to my memory the
unfeigned faith which was in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother
Lois, and in thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that _it is_ in thee
also. (6)For which cause I remind thee that thou fan into a flame the
divine gift, which is in thee by the imposition of my hands. (7)For God
hath not given us a spirit of fear; but of courage, and of love, and of
sobriety.

(8)Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of
me his prisoner: but suffer affliction with me in the gospel, supported
by the power of God; (9)who hath saved us, and called us with an holy
calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose
and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before time had a
beginning; (10)but is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour
Jesus Christ, who hath abolished death, and brought to light life and
immortality by the gospel: (11)whereunto I am appointed a preacher, and
an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles. (12)For which cause also I
suffer these things; but I am not ashamed: for I know on whom I have
placed my confidence, and am persuaded that he is mighty to guard my
deposit unto the great day.

(13)Model thy teaching according to the pattern of the sound
discourses, which thou hast heard from me, in faith and love which is
in Christ Jesus. (14)The glorious deposit committed to thy trust, guard
by the Holy Ghost who dwelleth in us.

(15)Knowest thou this, that all those of Asia have deserted me? among
whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes. (16)The Lord grant mercy unto the
household of Onesiphorus because he frequently was a refreshment to my
soul, and was not ashamed of my chain: (17)but, when he was at Rome, he
sought me out diligently, and found me. (18)The Lord grant that he may
find mercy with the Lord in the great day; and how liberally he
ministered to me at Ephesus, thou knowest better than any other person.

CHAP. II.

THOU therefore, my son, be mighty in the grace which is in Jesus
Christ. (2)And the things which thou hast heard of me before many
witnesses, these commit to faithful men, who shall be qualified to
teach others also. (3)Thou therefore endure hardships, as a brave
soldier of Jesus Christ. (4)No man who enters the army involves himself
with secular affairs; that he may please the person who hath enlisted
him. (5)And if a man contend in the public games, he is not crowned
victor, unless he contend according to the laws. (6)The husbandman who
toils is the first who ought to partake of the fruits. (7)Consider what
I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

(8)Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the
dead, according to my gospel: (9)for which I suffer affliction, even
unto chains as a malefactor; but the word of God is not bound.
(10)Therefore I endure all things for the sake of the elect, that they
also may obtain the salvation which is in Jesus Christ with eternal
glory.

(11)It is a faithful saying: for if we be dead with him, we shall also
live with him: (12)if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him:
if we renounce him, he also will renounce us: (13)if we are
unbelieving, he abideth faithful; he cannot contradict himself. (14)Put
them in mind of these things, adjuring them before the Lord not to
quarrel about words of no use, but tending to the perversion of the
audience.

(15)Be diligent to present thyself before God approved, a workman that
need not blush, rightly dividing the word of truth. (16)But profane
vain bablings avoid: for they will proceed to greater lengths of
impiety. (17)And their discourse will eat like as a gangrene; of whom
are Hymeneus and Philetus; (18)who with respect to the truth have
erred, saying that the resurrection hath been already; and pervert the
faith of some. (19)Nevertheless the stable foundation of God standeth
firm, having this seal, the Lord knoweth those who belong to him. And,
let every man who mentions the name of the Lord depart from
unrighteousness.

(20)But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver,
but also of wood and pottery; and some for an honourable use, and
others for baser service. (21)If therefore a man preserve himself pure
from these things, he shall be a vessel for honour, sanctified and
highly useful to the master, ready for every good work.

(22)But flee youthful passions, and pursue righteousness, faith, love,
peace, with those who call upon the Lord out of a pure heart. (23)But
foolish and uninstructive disputes avoid, knowing that they produce
quarrels. (24)And a servant of the Lord ought not to quarrel; but to be
gentle to all men, apt to teach, forbearing, (25)with meekness
correcting those who are opposers, if at last God may give unto them
repentance so as to submit to the conviction of the truth; (26)and that
they may escape out of the snare of the devil, who have been captured
by him for his will.

CHAP. III.

BUT this know, that in the last days distressing times will come.
(2)For men will be self-lovers, money-lovers, boasters, vainglorious,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, (3)unnatural,
implacable, slanderers, intemperate, inhuman, averse to goodness,
(4)treacherous, wilful, puffed up _with pride_, lovers of pleasure more
than lovers of God; (5)holding the form of godliness, but denying the
power of it: from these men turn with aversion. (6)For such are they
who insinuate themselves into houses, and captivate weak women laden
with accumulated sins, and actuated by a variety of passions, (7)always
learning, yet never able to attain unto the knowledge of truth. (8)But
in the same manner as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so do these
also set themselves in opposition to the truth; men corrupt in mind,
reprobate respecting the faith. (9)But they shall not proceed to the
uttermost; for their infatuation shall be evident to all men, as theirs
also was.

(10)But thou hast fully known my doctrine, conduct, purpose, faith,
long-suffering, love, patience, (11)the persecutions, the sufferings,
which beset me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I
endured, yet out of them all the Lord delivered me. (12)And all indeed
who will live godly in Christ Jesus will be persecuted. (13)But wicked
men and impostors will proceed from bad to worse, deceiving and
deceived. (14)But abide thou in the things which thou hast learned and
believed, knowing of whom thou hast learned them; (15)and that from a
child thou hast known the sacred writings, which are able to make thee
wise unto salvation through faith which is in Jesus Christ. (16)All
scripture is given by the inspiration of God, and advantageous for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness
(17)that the man of God may be properly furnished, fully qualified for
every good work.

CHAP. IV.

I ADJURE thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the living and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom;
(2)preach the word, be urgent, in season, out of season; reprove,
enjoin, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine. (3)For the time
will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own
inclinations will set up a herd of teachers for themselves, having the
itch of hearing; (4)and will turn away their ears from the truth, and
listen unto fables. (5)But watch thou in all things, endure hardship,
do the work of an evangelist, fully discharge thy ministry. (6)For I am
now ready to be sacrificed, and the time of my dissolution approaches.
(7)I have struggled hard in the honourable contest, I have finished the
race, I have kept the faith: (8)henceforth there is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give
me at that day: yet not to me only, but also to all who have loved his
appearing.

(9)Hasten to come to me shortly: (10)for Demas hath forsaken me, having
loved this present world, and is gone unto Thessalonica; Crescens to
Galatia; Titus to Dalmatia. (11)Luke alone is with me. Take Mark, and
bring him with thee; for he is very useful to me in the ministry.
(12)But Tychicus I have sent to Ephesus.

(13)The cloke which I left behind me at Troas with Carpus, when thou
comest bring, and the books, especially the parchments.

(14)Alexander the brazier did me many ill offices: the Lord repay him
according to his works: (15)against whom be thou also on thy guard, for
he hath greatly resisted our words.

(16)At my first apology no man stood by me, but all forsook me: (may it
not be imputed to them!) (17)but the Lord stood by me, and strengthened
me, that by me the preaching might be fully discharged, and that all
the Gentiles might hear; and I was snatched out of the lion's mouth.
(18)And the Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and preserve me
for his celestial kingdom: to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

(19)Salute Priscilla and Aquila, and the house of Onesiphorus.
(20)Erastus hath abode at Corinth: but Trophimus I left behind me at
Miletum sick.

(21)Hasten to come before winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens,
and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren.

(22)The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. Grace be with you. Amen.

The second epistle to Timothy, appointed the first bishop of the
Ephesian church, was written from Rome, when the second time Paul stood
before the Caesar Nero.



THE EPISTLE of PAUL the APOSTLE TO TITUS.

CHAP. I.

PAUL, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to
the faith of the elect of God, and the knowledge of truth which leads
to godliness; (2)in hope of life eternal, which God, who cannot lie,
hath promised before time had a being; (3)but hath manifested in his
own appointed season his word by the preaching, with which I have been
entrusted, according to the command of our Saviour God; (4)to Titus, my
genuine son after the common faith, be grace, mercy, peace, from God
the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour.

(5)For this purpose I left thee behind me at Crete, that thou mightest
direct the regulations which remained to be executed, and that thou
shouldest appoint presbyters in every city, as I charged thee to do:
(6)if there be a man blameless, the husband of one wife, having
children who believe, not under an accusation or debauchery, or
disorderly conduct. (7)For a bishop ought to be irreproachable, as the
steward of God; not self-willed, not irritable, not addicted to wine,
not quarrelsome, not greedy of filthy lucre; (8)but the stranger's
host, the good man's friend, grave, just, holy, temperate; (9)firmly
attached to the faithful word, according to the doctrine delivered,
that he may be able to exhort with sound instruction and to confute the
opposers. (10)For there are many disorderly persons vainly talkative,
and under a spirit of delusion, especially some of the circumcised;
(11)whose mouths ought to be muzzled, who pervert whole families,
teaching things which they ought not, for the sake of base gain.
(12)One of them, a poet of their own nation, hath said, The Cretans are
always liars, wicked beasts, slothful gluttons. (13)This testimony is
true. For which cause rebuke them with severity, that they may be sound
in the faith; (14)not attending to Jewish fables, and injunctions of
men, who have turned away from the truth. (15)All things indeed are
clean to the clean: but to the defiled and to the unbelievers there is
nothing clean; but their very mind and conscience are defiled. (16)They
profess to know God; but in works deny him, being abominable and
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate.

CHAP. II.

BUT speak thou the things which become sound doctrine: (2)that the
elder men be sober, grave, discreet, sound in faith, in love, in
patience. (3)That the elder women also be sacredly becoming in their
behaviour, not slanderers, not enslaved by much wine, teachers of
propriety; (4)that they instruct the young women to be discreet, to
love their husbands, to love their children, (5)to be sober, domestic,
good, obedient to their own husbands, that the word of God be not ill
reported of. (6)The younger men in like manner exhort to be sober
minded. (7)In all things approving thyself as a pattern of good works:
in thy teaching, shewing integrity, gravity, incorruptibility, (8)sound
discourse, incapable of confutation; that he who is in opposition may
be confounded, having nothing faulty to say of you.

(9)Let servants be subject to their own masters, in all things to be
agreeable to them; not contradicting; (10)not embezzling their
property, but demonstrating all good fidelity; that they may adorn the
doctrine of God our Saviour in all things.

(11)For the grace of God which leads to salvation hath appeared unto
all men, (12)instructing us, that denying ungodliness and worldly
affections, we should live soberly and righteously, and godly in the
present day; (13)expecting the blessed hope, and glorious appearing of
our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ; (14)who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works. (15)These things speak and
enjoin, and reprove with all authority. Let no man despise thee.

CHAP. III.

REMIND them to be subject to princes and those invested with authority,
to obey magistrates, to be ready for every good work, (2)to slander no
man, to be inoffensive, gentle, shewing all meekness to all men. (3)For
we ourselves also in time past were thoughtless, disobedient,
erroneous, enslaved by various passions and pleasures, living in malice
and envy, hateful, hating one another. (4)But even then the kindness
and love of God our Saviour to man shone forth, (5)not for works of
righteousness which we had done, but according to his mercy he saved
us, by the laver of regeneration, and by renovation of the Holy Spirit;
(6)which he poured out upon us richly through Jesus Christ our Saviour;
(7)that justified by his grace, we might become heirs in hope of
eternal life.

(8)Faithful is the saying, and of these things I wish thee firmly to
testify, that they who have believed in God be careful to be
pre-eminent in good works. These are becoming and advantageous to men.
(9)But foolish disquisitions, and genealogies, and disputes, and
contentions about the law avoid; for they are unprofitable and vain.

(10)An heretical person after a first and second admonition reject;
(11)knowing that such a one is perverted, and sinneth, being
self-condemned.

(12)When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or Tychicus, hasten to come to
me unto Nicopolis: for there I have determined to pass the winter.

(13)Send forward diligently Zenas the lawyer and Apollos, that nothing
may be wanting for them. (14)And let those who belong to us learn also
to be pre-eminent in good works for all necessary calls, that they be
not without fruits.

(15)All that are with me salute thee. Salute those who love us with
fidelity.

Grace be with you all. Amen.

This epistle was written to Titus appointed by suffrage first bishop of
the church of Crete, from Nicopolis in Macedonia.



THE EPISTLE of PAUL the APOSTLE, TO PHILEMON.

PAUL, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy a brother, to Philemon
the beloved, and our fellow-labourer, (2)and to Apphia the beloved, and
to Archippus our fellow-soldier, and to the church at thy house:
(3)grace be to you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ.

(4)I thank my God always, making mention of thee in my prayers,
(5)hearing of thy love and faith which thou hast towards the Lord
Jesus, and unto all the saints; (6)that there may be an operative
communication of thy faith made known by every good thing, which is in
you towards Jesus Christ. (7)For we have great joy and consolation in
thy love, because the bowels of the saints have been refreshed by thee,
brother. (8)Wherefore, though I have in Christ great liberty to enjoin
thee what is becoming, (9)I rather for love's sake entreat, being such
as Paul the aged, and now also a prisoner for Jesus Christ. (10)I
entreat thee for my son, whom I have begotten during my bonds,
Onesimus: (11)who in time past hath been an unprofitable servant to
thee, but now very profitable to thee and to me: (12)whom I have sent
back; thou therefore receive him, even as my own bowels: (13)whom I
wished to detain about myself, that in thy stead he might have waited
upon me during my bonds for the gospel: (14)but without thy consent
would I do nothing; that this good deed of thine might not be as of
necessity, but from thy own choice. (15)For to this end perhaps was he
separated from thee for a season, that thou mightest receive him for
ever; (16)no longer as a slave, but above a slave, as a brother
beloved, especially by me, but how much more by thee, both in the
flesh, and in the Lord? (17)If therefore thou holdest me a sharer with
thee, receive him as myself. (18)If he hath injured thee or oweth thee
ought, put that to my account; (19)I Paul have given it under my own
hand, I will repay it, not to say to thee, that thou owest even thine
own self unto me. (20)Yea, brother, I wish to have joy in thee in the
Lord: refresh my bowels in the Lord. (21)Having confidence in thy
obedience, I have written unto thee, knowing that thou wilt do more
than I say. (22)But at the same time prepare me also a lodging: for I
hope that through your prayers I shall be given unto you.

(23)There salute thee Epaphras, my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus;
(24)Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, Luke, my fellow-labourers.

(25)The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. Amen.

Written to Philemon from Rome, by Onesimus one of his household.



THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS.

CHAP. I.

GOD, who spake to the fathers of old at various times, and in different
manners by the prophets, (2)in these last days hath spoken to us by a
Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made
the worlds; (3)who being the splendour of his glory, and the very
impress of his substance, and upholding all things with his powerful
word, by himself having effected the cleansing of our sins, he sat down
at the right hand of Majesty on high; (4)made as much superior to the
angels, as he hath inherited a more distinguished name than they.
(5)For to which of the angels ever said he, "My Son art thou, I have
to-day begotten thee[120]?" And again, "I will be to him a Father, and
he shall be to me a Son[121]?" (6)And again, when he introduces the
first-begotten into the world, he saith, "Let all the angels of God
also worship him[122]." (7)And concerning the angels indeed he thus
speaks: "Who maketh his angels spirits, and his ministering servants a
flame of fire[123]." (8)But to the Son, "Thy throne, O God, is unto
eternity; a sceptre of rectitude is the sceptre of thy kingdom. (9)Thou
hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God, thy God,
hath anointed thee with the oil of exultation above those who partake
with thee[124]." (10)"And thou from the beginning, O Lord, hast founded
the earth, and the heavens are the works of thine hands. (11)They will
be destroyed, but thou remainest; and they all will grow old as a
garment, (12)and as a cloak thou wilt wrap them up, and they will
undergo a change: but thou art the same, and thy years will never
end[125]." (13)Unto which indeed of the angels said he ever, "Sit at my
right hand until I put thine enemies for a footstool of thy feet[126]?"
(14)Are they not all ministerial spirits, sent to perform service on
account of those who are about to inherit salvation?

CHAP. II.

FOR this reason we ought to attend more diligently to the things which
have been heard, lest by any means we let them flow by us. (2)For if
the discourse spoken by angels was confirmed, and every transgression
and disobedience received a just punishment as its due, (3)how shall we
escape if we neglect so great salvation, which, commencing at the
beginning to be spoken by the Lord, was confirmed unto us by those who
had heard him; (4)God superadding his testimony with them, by signs,
and wonders, and various miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost,
according to his own will?

(5)For he hath not subjected the future world, of which we are
speaking, to the angels. (6)But one in a certain passage testifieth,
saying, "What is man, that thou rememberest him, or a son of man, that
thou regardest him?" (7)"Thou hast made him for a little while lower
than angels, thou hast crowned him with glory and honour, and hast
placed him over the works of thy hands: (8)thou hast subjected all
things under his feet[127]." Now in subjecting all things to him, he
left nothing unsubjected to him; but at present we see not yet all
things subjected to him. (9)But we see Jesus for a little while made
lower than angels, by the suffering of death, crowned with glory and
honour, that, by the grace of God, he might taste of death for every
one.

(10)For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to perfect the Author of
their salvation by sufferings. (11)For both he that sanctifies, and
they who are sanctified, are all of one. For which cause he is not
ashamed to call them brethren, (12)saying, "I will declare thy name to
my brethren, in the midst of the church I will sing hymns to
thee[128]." (13)And again, "I will place my confidence in him[129]."
And again, "Behold! Here am I, and the children which God hath given
me[130]."

(14)Seeing therefore that the children have partaken of flesh and
blood, he also himself, in exact resemblance, partook of the same, that
by death he might destroy him who held the power of death, that is, the
devil; (15)and deliver those, even as many as through their whole life
were subjects of bondage to the fear of death. (16)For he verily took
not on him the angelic nature, but assumed that of the seed of Abraham.
(17)Wherefore he ought in all things to be made like to his brethren,
in order to become a merciful and faithful high-priest in those things
which relate to God, to make a propitiation for the sins of the people:
(18)for inasmuch as he hath himself suffered, having been tempted, he
is able to succour those who are tempted.

CHAP. III.

WHEREFORE, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling,
contemplate the apostle and high-priest whom ye confess, Jesus Christ;
(2)who was faithful to him who appointed him, as Moses also was in all
his house. (3)For this personage hath been counted worthy of higher
glory than Moses, inasmuch as he who built it, hath greater honour than
the house. (4)For every house is built by some person; but he who is
the architect of all things is God. (5)And Moses indeed was faithful in
all that house of his as a servant, to bear testimony of the things
which should be after spoken; (6)but Christ as a son over his own
house: whose house are we, if we hold firmly the confidence and
glorying of hope stedfast unto the end. (7)Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost
saith[131], To day if ye will hear his voice, (8)harden not your
hearts, as in that bitter provocation, at the day of the temptation in
the wilderness; (9)when your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my
works during forty years. (10)Wherefore I was provoked against that
generation, and said, They are always deluded in heart, and they have
not known my ways: (11)so I swore in my wrath that they shall not enter
into my rest. (12)Take heed, brethren, that there be not in any one of
you a wicked heart of infidelity, _evident_ in departure from the
living God: (13)but exhort one another daily, whilst to-day remains,
that no one of you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. (14)For we
are partakers with Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence
firm unto the end; (15)while it is said, To-day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts as in the provocation. (16)For some,
though they had heard, provoked him; yet not all who came out of Egypt
by Moses. (17)But against whom was he incensed forty years? Was it not
against those who had sinned, whose corpses fell in the wilderness?
(18)And to whom did he swear that they should not enter into his rest,
but to those who did not believe? (19)So we see that they could not
enter in because of unbelief.

CHAP. IV.

LET us fear then lest, though a promise be left of entering into his
rest, any one of you should appear to fail of obtaining it. (2)For we
are hearing the same gospel preached as they did; but the word heard
did not profit them, not being incorporated by faith with those who
heard it. (3)For we who have believed, have entered into the rest, even
as he said, "So, I sware in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my
rest;" and that notwithstanding the works were done from the foundation
of the world. (4)For he said in a certain passage concerning the
seventh day to this purport, "And God rested on the seventh day from
all his works[132]." (5)And in this passage again, "They shall not
enter into my rest." (6)Forasmuch therefore as it remaineth for some to
enter into it, and they who first had the gospel preached to them
entered not in because of unbelief; (7)again he limiteth a certain day,
saying by David, To-day, after so long a time; as it is said, "To-day
if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts." (8)For if Joshua had
given them the rest, he would not afterwards have spoken of another
day. (9)A sabbatical rest then still remaineth for the people of God.
(10)For he that is entered into his rest, he also hath rested from his
works, as God did from his own. (11)Let us then earnestly endeavour to
enter into that rest, lest any person fall after the same example of
unbelief. (12)For the word of God is quickening, and energetic, and
sharper than every two-edged sword, and piercing through and through,
so as to divide both soul and spirit, both joints and spinal marrow,
and critically judges the thoughts and intents of the heart. (13)Even
creation is not invisible before him, but all things are naked, and
fully displayed before his eyes, to whom we must give our account.

(14)Having then a great high-priest passed through the heavens, Jesus
the Son of God, let us hold fast the confession. (15)For we have not an
high-priest incapable of a fellow-feeling with our infirmities, but one
tempted in all points, in exact resemblance with ourselves, sin
excepted. (16)Let us therefore approach with boldness the throne of
grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace for seasonable help.

CHAP. V.

FOR, every high-priest taken from among men, is constituted on behalf
of men for those services which relate to God, that he should offer
both gifts and sacrifices for sins: (2)being able to feel tenderly for
the ignorant and erroneous; forasmuch as he is himself encompassed with
infirmity. (3)And on this account he ought, as for the people, so also
for himself, to offer sacrifice for sins. (4)And no man assumes to
himself this honour, but he who is called of God, even as Aaron was.
(5)So Christ also did not himself assume the glory to become
high-priest, but he _gave it_ who spake to him, "Thou art my Son; I
have this day begotten thee." (6)As he saith also in another passage,
"Thou art priest forever after the order of Melchisedec[133];" (7)who
in the days of his flesh, with strong crying and tears, having offered
up prayers and supplications to him who was able to save him from
death, and being heard for his reverential awe, (8)though he was a son,
he learned obedience from the things which he suffered: (9)and complete
himself, he became the author of eternal salvation to all who obey him;
(10)publicly proclaimed of God high-priest after the order of
Melchisedec.

(11)Concerning whom we have much to discourse, and of difficult
interpretation to explain, seeing ye are dull of hearing. (12)For
though ye ought for the time to be teachers of others, ye have again
need that some one teach you the leading principles of the oracles of
God; and are become as those who need milk, and not solid food. (13)For
every one who useth milk is inexperienced in the word of righteousness:
for he is an infant. (14)But solid nourishment is proper for grown men,
even as many as by habit have their organs of perception exercised for
the discernment both of good and evil.

CHAP. VI.

WHEREFORE, desisting from initiatory discourse respecting Christ, let
us advance towards perfection; not again laying a foundation of
repentance from dead works, and faith in God, (2)of the doctrine of
ablutions, and of imposition of hands, and of the resurrection of the
dead, and of eternal judgment. (3)And so we will do, if God permit.
(4)For it is not possible to renew again unto repentance those who have
been once illuminated, and have tasted the celestial gift, and have
been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, (5)and have tasted the good word
of God, and the powers of the world to come, (6)and yet have fallen
away: for they crucify again to themselves the Son of God, and expose
him to public infamy. (7)For the earth which imbibes the rain which
often falls upon it, and bringeth forth herbage suitable for those by
whom it is cultured, receiveth a blessing from God; (8)but if it
produceth thorns and thistles, it is abandoned, and near the curse _of
barrenness_, whose end will be for burning.

(9)But, beloved, we are persuaded concerning you that things are
better, and connected with salvation, though we thus speak. (10)For God
is not unjust, to forget your work and labour of love, which ye have
demonstrated in his name, having ministered assistance to the saints,
and still ministering. (11)But we earnestly desire that every one of
you do manifest the same diligence, in order to obtain the full
assurance of hope unto the end: (12)that ye be not slothful, but
imitators of those who, by faith and long suffering, are inheriting the
promises. (13)For God when he gave the promise to Abraham forasmuch as
he had nothing greater to swear by, sware by himself, (14)saying,
"Verily, blessing, I will bless thee, and multiplying, I will multiply
thee[134]." (15)And so after long patient waiting he obtained the
promise. (16)For men indeed swear by something greater than themselves;
and an oath for confirmation is with them conclusive in all disputes.
(17)And thus God, designing more abundantly to demonstrate to the heirs
of promise the immutability of his will, pledged himself by oath,
(18)that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to
lie, we might have strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay
hold on the hope set before us; (19)which, as an anchor for our soul,
we hold both sure and stedfast, and entering into the sanctuary within
the vail, (20)into which the forerunner for us is entered, even Jesus,
made after the order of Melchisedec an high-priest for ever.

CHAP. VII.

FOR this Melchisedec, king of Salem, a priest of God most high, who met
Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him;
(2)to whom also Abraham gave a tenth share of all the spoil: being, as
the interpretation of his name imports, first, King of righteousness,
and then also King of Salem, that is, King of peace: (3)without father,
without mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor
end of life, but in exact resemblance with the Son of God, abideth a
priest for ever. (4)Now observe how great is this _Melchisedec_, to
whom even Abraham the patriarch gave the tenth of the spoils. (5)For
they indeed of the sons of Levi, who are admitted to priesthood, have
an order to receive tithes from the people according to the law, that
is, of their brethren, though also sprung from the loins of Abraham.
(6)But he who derived not his genealogy from them, received tithes from
Abraham, and blessed him who had the promises; (7)but without all
dispute the inferior receives benediction from the superior. (8)And
here indeed dying men receive the tithes, but there he hath a testimony
borne to him that he liveth. (9)And, if I may so say, through Abraham
even Levi, who receiveth tithes, paid tithes. (10)For he was as yet in
the loins of his father when Melchisedec met him. (11)If therefore
there was perfection by the Levitical priesthood (for under that the
people had the law given to them), what farther need was there that
another priest should arise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be
called after the order of Aaron? (12)For the priesthood being
transferred, there is of necessity an abrogation of the law also.
(13)For he to whom these things are spoken belonged to another tribe,
in which no man approached the altar. (14)For it is evident that our
Lord sprang from Judah; to which tribe Moses spake nothing concerning
the priesthood; (15)and it is yet more abundantly evident, that there
should arise another priest after the likeness of Melchisedec, (16)who
was not made such by the law of a carnal commandment, but by the power
of a life indissoluble. (17)For the testimony is, Thou art a priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedec. (18)For there is indeed an
abrogation of the preceding command, because of its weakness and
inutility. (19)For the law led to no perfection, but was an
introduction to a better hope, by which we draw nigh unto God.

(20)Moreover, forasmuch as he was not _made priest_ without an oath,
(21)(for they indeed were made priests without an oath; but he with an
oath, by him who said unto him, "The Lord hath sworn, and will not
repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec:")
(22)by so much is Jesus become the surety of a better testament.

(23)And they indeed are many who were made priests, because by death
they were prevented from abiding _in their office_: (24)but this
person, because he abideth for ever, hath a priesthood that passeth not
over to another. (25)Wherefore also he is able to save to the uttermost
those who come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make
intercession for them. (26)For such an high-priest was suitable to us,
holy, inoffensive, spotless, separate from sinners, and made higher
than the heavens: (27)who hath not daily need, as the high-priests,
first, to offer sacrifice for their own sins, afterwards, for those of
the people: for this he did once for all, when he offered up himself.
(28)For the law constitutes men high-priests, though they have
infirmity; but the word of the oath, which is since the law,
constitutes the Son, unto eternity completely perfect.

CHAP. VIII.

NOW the summary of the things spoken is this: we have such an
high-priest, who hath taken his seat at the right hand of the throne of
Majesty in the heavens; (2)a minister of the holies, and of the true
tabernacle which the Lord hath pitched, and not man. (3)For every
high-priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices: wherefore
it is necessary that this person also have somewhat to offer. (4)For if
he were on earth, he would not be a priest, there being priests who
offer gifts according to the law; (5)who perform the service after the
figure and shadow of things in the heavens, as Moses was divinely
instructed, when he was about to finish the tabernacle. "For see,"
saith God, "that thou make all things according to the model shewed
thee on the mount[135]." (6)But now hath Christ obtained a more
excellent ministry, inasmuch as he is the mediator of a better
covenant, which hath been established on better promises.

(7)For if that first covenant had been faultless, there would have been
no place sought for a second. (8)For finding fault with them, he saith,
"Behold, the days are coming, saith the Lord; and I will accomplish for
the house of Israel and for the house of Judah a new covenant: (9)not
according to that covenant which I made with their fathers, in the day
when I laid hold upon their hand to lead them up out of the land of
Egypt; because they continued not in my covenant, and I took no longer
care of them, saith the Lord. (10)For this is the covenant which I will
make with the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord; giving
my laws to their understanding, even on their hearts will I inscribe
them: and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people.
(11)And they shall no more teach every man his neighbour, and every one
his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know me from the mean
man of them unto the great among them. (12)For I will be placable to
their unrighteousnesses and their sins, and their iniquities I will
never more remember[136]." (13)In calling it a new covenant, he hath
made the first antiquated. Now what is antiquated and grown aged, is
near evanescence.

CHAP. IX.

THEN also the first tabernacle had indeed regulations for the divine
service, and a sanctuary furnished. (2)For the tabernacle was prepared;
the first part, in which was both the candlestick, and the table, and
the shew-bread, which is called the holy. (3)But behind the second vail
was the tabernacle, called the holy of holies: (4)having the golden
censer, and the coffer of the covenant, overlaid with gold within and
without, in which were the golden urn containing the manna, and Aaron's
rod which had budded, and the stone tables of the covenant; (5)and
above, over it the cherubim of glory, overshadowing the propitiatory.
(6)Now when these things were thus disposed, the priests entered
continually into the first tabernacle indeed, performing the divine
services: (7)but into the second once in every year entered the
high-priest alone, not without blood, which he offered for his own
inadvertencies, and for those of the people: (8)the Holy Ghost thus
signifying, that the way into the holies was not yet made manifest,
whilst the first tabernacle held its station; (9)which figurative
representation _continues_ unto the present time, according to which
both gifts and sacrifices are offered, which cannot, with respect to
conscience, make him perfect who performs the services, (10)as they
consist only of meats, and drinks, and different ablutions, and
corporal services, until the appointed time of perfect reformation.

(11)But Christ becoming the high-priest of future good things, through
a better and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is, not
of this creation; (12)nor by the blood of goats and of calves, but by
his own blood, he entered once for all into the holies, having obtained
eternal redemption.

(13)For if the blood of bulls, and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer
sprinkling the defiled sanctifieth to corporal purification, (14)how
much more shall the blood of Christ, who, by the eternal Spirit,
offered up himself in sacrifice without blemish to God, cleanse our
conscience from dead works, that we may perform divine service to the
living God?

(15)And for this cause he is the mediator of the new testament, that,
death being suffered for the redemption of transgressions committed
against the first testament, they who are called might receive the
promise of an eternal inheritance. (16)For where a testament is, of
necessity the death of the testator is implied. (17)For a testament is
valid when men are dead; for else it is of no efficacy whilst the
testator is alive. (18)Wherefore also that first testament was not
consecrated without blood. (19)For when every command according to the
law had been spoken by Moses to all the people, taking the blood of
calves and of goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, he
sprinkled both the book itself and all the people, (20)saying, This is
the blood of the testament which God hath enjoined unto you. (21)And
the tabernacle also, and all the vessels employed in the divine
service, he in like manner sprinkled with blood. (22)And almost all
things are purified by blood according to the law, and without effusion
of blood there is no remission of sin. (23)There was a necessity
therefore that the representations of the things in heaven should be
purified by these; but the celestial things themselves with better
sacrifices than these. (24)For Christ is not entered into the holies
made with hands, the antitypes of the true; but into heaven itself, now
to appear before the presence of God for us: (25)and not that he should
often offer up himself in sacrifice, as the high-priest enters every
year into the holies with blood not his own, (26)(for in that case he
must have suffered often since the foundation of the world:) but now
once for all at the consummation of the ages hath he been manifested
for the abolishing sin by the sacrifice of himself. (27)And forasmuch
as it is appointed to men once to die, but after this the judgment,
(28)so Christ having been once offered in sacrifice to bear the sins of
men, will appear the second time without sin, to those who expect him,
for their salvation.

CHAP. X.

NOW the law, having a shadow of the good things which were to come, not
the very substance of the things, cannot possibly, by the same
sacrifices which they offer year by year continually, make those
perfect who approach _God_; (2)else they would have discontinued to
make the offering, because they who performed the service being once
made clean, would have had no more sense of sins on their conscience.
(3)But in these _sacrifices_ there is a commemoration of sins every
year. (4)For it is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should
take away sin. (5)Wherefore, coming into the world, he saith,
"Sacrifice and oblation thou hast not chosen, but thou hast exactly
fashioned a body for me: (6)thou hast had no delight in whole
burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin: (7)then I said, Here am I; (in
the volume of the book it is written of me) I come to do thy will, O
God[137]." (8)Having said before that sacrifice, and oblation, and
whole burnt-offerings and sin-offerings thou hast not chosen, nor
takest pleasure in, (which are offered according to the law,) (9)he
then added, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. He abolishes the first
that he may establish the second. (10)By the which will we are
sanctified through the oblation of the body of Jesus Christ, once for
all.

(11)And every priest standeth indeed daily performing the divine
service, and frequently offering the same sacrifices, which cannot
possibly take away sins: (12)but this person, having offered one
sacrifice for sins, for ever hath seated himself at the right hand of
God; (13)henceforth waiting till his enemies be put as a footstool for
his feet. (14)For by one oblation he hath made those perfect for ever
who are sanctified.

(15)Now the Holy Ghost also beareth this testimony to us: for after
declaring before, (16)"This is the testament which I will appoint to
them after those days, saith the Lord; giving my laws to their hearts,
even on their minds will I inscribe them;" (17)_he adds,_ "and their
sins and their iniquities I will in no wise remember any more." (18)Now
where there is remission of these, no more offering for sin _is
needed_.

(19)Having therefore, brethren, entire liberty of entrance into the
holies by the blood of Jesus--(20)a way, which he hath consecrated for
us, newly opened, and giving life, through the vail, that is, his
flesh; (21)and having a great priest over the house of God, (22)let us
come to him with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and the body washed with pure
water: (23)let us hold fast the profession of hope unwavering, (for he
who promises is faithful.) (24)and let us attentively observe one
another, to excite an ardour of love and of good works: (25)not
deserting the assembling of ourselves together, as is the custom with
some, but exhorting to it; and so much the more, as ye see the day
approaching.

(26)For if we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the
truth, no more sacrifice for sins remaineth; (27)but a certain terrible
expectation of judgment, and a burning indignation, ready to devour
these enemies.

(28)Any man who treated the law of Moses with neglect, was put to
death, without mercy, on the deposition of two or three witnesses:
(29)by how much, think ye, shall he be counted worthy of more condign
punishment who hath trampled on the Son of God, and regarded the blood
of his testament, by which he was sanctified, as an unclean thing, and
hath treated the gracious Spirit contumeliously? (30)For we know him
who declares, "Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord[138]."
And again, "The Lord will judge his people." (31)It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God.

(32)But remember the past days in which, after ye had been illuminated,
ye endured a great conflict of sufferings; (33)partly while publicly
exposed to revilings and tribulations, partly as being in communion
with those who were treated in this manner. (34)For ye have been
fellow-sufferers with my bonds, and received with joy the plundering of
your properties, knowing in yourselves that you have in the heavens a
better substance, and permanent.

(35)Recede not therefore from your boldness of profession, which brings
a great recompence of reward. (36)For ye have need of patience, that
after ye have done the will of God, ye may receive the promise. (37)For
yet a little, very little while, and he that is coming will come, and
will not delay. (38)"The just man then will live by faith[139];" and if
he draw back, my soul shall have no delight in him. (39)But we are not
of those who turn back unto perdition; but of those who believe to the
salvation of the soul.

CHAP. XI.

NOW faith is the realizing confidence of the things hoped for, and the
demonstration of things unseen: (2)for thereby the ancients obtained a
testimony of approbation.

(3)By faith we understand that the worlds were exactly formed by the
word of God, so that the visible objects were not made out of things
which now appear.

(4)By faith Abel offered unto God a sacrifice of more excellence than
Cain, by which he received a testimony that he was a righteous man, God
bearing witness upon his gifts: and by this, though dead, he still
speaketh.

(5)By faith Enoch was translated, so as not to see death; and was not
found, because God had translated him: for before his translation he
was recorded to have been acceptable to God. (6)But without faith it is
impossible to be acceptable; for he must believe, who cometh unto God,
that he exists, and is a rewarder of those who diligently seek him.

(7)By faith Noah, being divinely warned respecting things not yet seen,
filled with reverential awe, prepared an ark for the salvation of his
household, by which he condemned the world, and became heir of the
righteousness which is by faith.

(8)By faith Abraham, called to go forth unto a place which he should in
future obtain as an heritage, obeyed; and he went forth, not knowing
whither he was going. (9)By faith he sojourned in the land of promise,
as a foreign land, dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the co-heirs
of the same promise. (10)For he expected a city having foundations, of
which God is the planner and architect.

(11)By faith also that very Sarah, who was barren, received ability for
the conception of seed, and past the usual time of life brought forth a
child, because she accounted that he who promised it, would be true to
his promise. (12)Wherefore even from one person, and he become dead in
respect to these matters, there sprang a race, as the stars of heaven
for multitude, and as the sand, which is on the shore of the sea,
innumerable. (13)All these died in faith, not having received the
promises, but beholding them at a great distance, though believing and
embracing them, and confessing that they were strangers and sojourners
in the land. (14)Now they who speak thus, shew evidently that they are
in earnest search of their native country. (15)And if indeed they had
fixed their minds on that from whence they had gone forth, they might
have had opportunity to go back to it again. (16)But now their longing
desires are after a better country, that is, the heavenly one:
wherefore God is not ashamed of them to be called their God: for he
hath prepared a city for them.

(17)By faith Abraham, when tried, offered up Isaac; and he who had
received the promise, presented in sacrifice his only begotten son,
(18)unto whom it had been said, "That by Isaac shall there be a seed
bearing thy name[140]:" (19)reasoning that God was able to raise him up
again, even from the dead; from whence also figuratively he had
received him.

(20)By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau with regard to future things.

(21)By faith, dying Jacob blessed each of the sons of Joseph, and bowed
down in adoration upon the top of his staff.

(22)By faith Joseph, approaching his end, made mention of the children
of Israel's departure thence; and gave a charge respecting his bones.

(23)By faith Moses, after he was born, was hid three months by his
parents, because they saw the child singularly beautiful; and they were
not intimidated by the command of the king.

(24)By faith Moses, when he became a grown man, refused to be called
the son of Pharaoh's daughter; (25)choosing rather to suffer
afflictions with the people of God, than to have a temporary fruition
of sin; (26)esteeming the reproach of Christ riches greater than the
treasures of Egypt: for he looked earnestly to the recompence of
reward. (27)By faith he forsook Egypt, not intimidated by the wrath of
the king: for he boldly persisted, as seeing the invisible _Jehovah_.
(28)By faith he kept the passover, and the sprinkling of the blood,
that the destroyer of the first-born might not touch them.

(29)By faith they passed through the Red sea, as on dry ground; which
the Egyptians attempting to do were swallowed up.

(30)By faith the walls of Jericho fell, after being circled round seven
days.

(31)By faith Rahab the harlot perished not with those who were
infidels, having received the spies in peace.

(32)And what more shall I say: for the time would fail me if I should
make a narration concerning Gideon, and Barac, and Sampson, and
Jephtha, and David, and Samuel, and the prophets: (33)who by faith
vanquished kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped
the mouths of lions, (34)extinguished the force of fire, escaped the
edge of the sword, they were made strong out of weakness, became mighty
in battle, routed the armies of aliens. (35)Women received by a
resurrection their dead: but others were tortured, not accepting a
release; that they might obtain a better resurrection: (36)and others
had trials of mockeries and whippings, yea and farther of chains and
imprisonment: (37)they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, they
experienced the severest trials, they were slain by the edge of the
sword: they went about wrapped in skins of sheep and goats, destitute
of all things, pressed down with afflictions, suffering all kind of
misery; (38)of whom the world was not worthy: they wandered up and down
in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and caverns of the earth.
(39)And these all though having obtained a testimony by faith, received
not the promise: (40)God having provided for us something better, that
without us they should not attain to perfection.

CHAP. XII.

THEREFORE also seeing we have so great a cloud of witnesses surrounding
us, laying aside every weight, and that most easily besetting sin, let
us run with patience the race lying before us, (2)earnestly looking up
to Jesus the author and the finisher of faith; who, for the joy set
before him, endured the cross, despising shame, and hath sat down at
the right hand of the throne of God. (3)Consider then attentively him
that endured from sinners such opposition against himself, that ye be
not wearied out, fainting in your souls. (4)As yet ye have not resisted
unto blood, struggling against sin. (5)And have you forgotten the
exhortation which is addressed to you, as children, "My son, count not
lightly of the Lord's childlike correction, nor faint when under his
rebuke: (6)for whom the Lord loveth he correcteth, and scourgeth every
son whom he receiveth[141]." (7)If ye patiently endure correction, God
carries himself towards you as his children: for who is the son whom
the father doth not correct? (8)If then ye are without correction, of
which all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not children.

(9)If then we have had the fathers of our flesh for correctors, and
reverenced them; shall we not much more be under subjection to the
Father of spirits, and live? (10)For they indeed for a few days as
seemed proper to themselves corrected us; but he for our own advantage,
that we might be partakers of his holiness. (11)Now all correction at
the moment seemeth not to be cause for joy, but for sorrow; but after a
while it produceth peaceable fruit of righteousness to those who have
thereby been disciplined.

(12)Wherefore stretch out again the hands that hang down, and the
paralytic knees; (13)and make strait paths for your feet, that what is
halting may not be turned out of the way; but that it may rather be
healed.

(14)Earnestly seek peace with all men, and holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord: (15)carefully observing lest any of you fail of
attaining the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up
trouble you, and by it many be defiled; (16)lest there be any
fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of bread
parted with his birthrights. (17)For ye know, that when afterwards he
wished to inherit the blessing, he was rejected: for he found no place
for a change of _his father's_ mind, though he sought it earnestly with
tears. (18)For ye have not approached the mountain that could only be
groped for, and that burned with fire, and the thick cloud, and the
darkness, and the tempest, (19)and the sound of a trumpet, and the
voice of words, which they who heard, earnestly begged that the
discourse might not be directed to them: (20)for they could not bear
the charge given, and "If but a beast touch the mountain he shall be
stoned, or shot through with a dart[142]:" (21)and so terrible was the
appearance, that Moses said, I am exceedingly afraid and trembling:
(22)but ye are come unto mount Sion, and to the city of the living God,
to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to myriads of angels, (23)and to the
general assembly and church of the first-born registered in the
heavens, and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men
perfected, (24)and to Jesus the mediator of the new testament, and to
the blood of sprinkling, which speaketh better things than that of
Abel.

(25)Beware that ye reject not him that speaketh: for if they escaped
not, who rejected him, that upon earth spake by divine influence, much
more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him who speaks from
heaven: (26)whose voice then shook the earth, but now he hath promised,
saying, "Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also the
heaven[143]." (27)Now this word yet once more manifests the removal of
the things shaken, as of things formed, that the things not shaken may
endure.

(28)Wherefore receiving a kingdom that cannot be shaken, may we hold
fast the grace, by which we can offer to God acceptably divine service,
with reverence and pious awe: (29)for our God is a devouring fire.

CHAP. XIII.

LET brotherly love continue. (2)Forget not to exercise hospitality: for
thereby some have entertained angels unawares.

(3)Remember those who are in chains, as in chains with them; and those
who are suffering afflictions, as being yourselves also in the body.

(4)Marriage is honourable for all persons, and the marriage bed
undefiled: but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.

(5)Let the tenor of your life be divested of the love of money; content
with your present possessions: for he hath said, "I will in no wise
leave thee, neither will I in any case forsake thee[144]." (6)So that
we may with confidence say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear
what man shall do unto me.

(7)Remember your presidents, who have spoken to you the word of God:
the ultimate issue of whose conduct attentively observing, be imitators
of their fidelity.

(8)Jesus Christ _is_ the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever. (9)Be
not tossed about by various and strange doctrines: for it is good to
have the heart firmly established by grace, not by meats, in which
observances they who have walked have found no manner of advantage.
(10)We have an altar, of which they have no right to eat, who perform
the service in the tabernacle. (11)For the bodies of those beasts are
burnt without the camp, whose blood for a sin offering is brought into
the holy of holies by the high-priest. (12)Wherefore Jesus also, that
he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the
gate.

(13)Therefore let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his
reproach. (14)For we have not here an abiding city, but we earnestly
seek that which is to come. (15)By him therefore let us offer a
sacrifice of praise perpetually to God, that is the fruit of our lips
confessing his name. (16)But of beneficence, and liberal distribution,
be not unmindful: for such sacrifices God accepts with delight.

(17)Obey your presidents, and be subject to them: for they are vigilant
for your souls, as being to render an account, that they may do it with
joy, and not groaning: for that would be disadvantageous for you.

(18)Pray for us: for we have confidence that we maintain a good
conscience, in all things desirous to conduct ourselves with
propriety.--(19)But I entreat you the rather to do this, that I may the
more speedily be restored to you.

(20)Now the God of peace, who brought again from the dead our Lord
Jesus, the great pastor of the sheep, by the blood of the everlasting
testament, (21)make you fit for every good work to do his will,
producing in you that which is acceptable in his sight, through Jesus
Christ; to whom be glory unto the everlasting ages. Amen.

(22)But I entreat you, brethren, suffer the word of exhortation; for I
have written to you in few words.

(23)Know that our brother Timothy is set at liberty; with whom, if he
come shortly, I will see you.

(24)Salute all your presiding ministers, and all the saints. They of
Italy salute you.

(25)Grace be with you all.--Amen.

Written to the Hebrews from Italy by Timothy.



THE EPISTLE GENERAL OF JAMES THE APOSTLE.

CHAP. I.

JAMES, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve
tribes which are dispersed, greeting.

(2)My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into various trials;
(3)knowing that the proof of your faith produceth patience. (4)But let
patience have its work perfected, that ye may be perfect and complete,
deficient in nothing. (5)But if any man of you be deficient in wisdom,
let him ask it of God, who giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth
not and it shall be given him. (6)But let him ask in faith, harbouring
no doubt: for he who is doubtful is like a wave of the sea, driven by
the wind, and in constant agitation. (7)For let not that man think that
he shall receive any thing from the Lord. (8)A double-minded man is
unsteady in all his ways.

(9)Let the brother low in station rejoice in his elevation: (10)but the
rich, in his abasement: for as the flower of grass he shall pass away.
(11)For the sun arose with fervour, and burnt up the grass, and the
flower of it fell off, and the beauty of its appearance was lost: just
so the rich man in his course of life shall wither away. (12)Blessed is
the man who patiently supports temptation: for when he is proved, he
shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to those
who love him. (13)Let no man under temptation say, I am tempted of God:
for God is incapable of temptation from evils, and he tempteth no man:
(14)but every person is tempted, when by his own peculiar passion he is
born away, and ensnared. (15)Then passion impregnated, bringeth forth
sin, and sin reaching its consummation, bringeth forth death. (16)Be
not deceived, my beloved brethren.

(17)Every good gift, and every perfect gift, is from above, descending
from the father of illuminations, with whom there is no variableness,
nor shadow of change. (18)Of his own choice he produced us by the word
of truth, that we might be a sort of first fruit of his
creatures.--(19)Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift
to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath. (20)For the wrath of man worketh
not the righteousness of God. (21)Wherefore laying aside all vicious
pollution, and the abundance of iniquity, receive with meekness the
ingrafted word, which hath power to save your souls. (22)But be ye
doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves by false
reasoning. (23)For if any man be a hearer of the word, and not a doer,
he is like a man that looks at his natural face in a glass; (24)for he
beheld himself, and went away, and immediately forgot what sort of
person he was. (25)But he that looketh into the perfect law of liberty,
and perseveres, this man not being a forgetful hearer, but a doer of
the work, he shall be blessed in his practice.

(26)If any man thinks he is a religious character among you, and
bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man's
religion is vain. (27)Pure religion and undefiled with God even the
Father is this, To pay diligent attention to the orphans and widows in
their affliction, and to preserve himself spotless from the world.

CHAP. II.

MY brethren, hold not the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus shewing a
respect for persons. (2)For if there come into your congregation a man
with a gold ring, and in splendid apparel, and there come in also a
poor man in a sordid garb; (3)and ye fix your eyes upon him who bears
the splendid robe, and say to him, Sit thou here in an honourable
place; and ye say to the poor man, Stand thou there, or sit here under
my footstool: (4)are you not thus partial among yourselves, and form
your decision from bad reasonings? (5)Hear me, my beloved brethren.
Hath not God elected the poor of this world to be rich in faith, and
heirs of the kingdom which God hath promised to those who love him;
(6)but ye have put contempt on the poor man? Do not the rich men
tyrannize over you? and they drag you to the tribunals. (7)Do they not
blaspheme that honourable name by which ye are called? (8)If indeed ye
fulfil the royal law according to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself, ye do well: (9)but if ye have respect of persons,
ye commit sin, and are convicted by the law as transgressors. (10)For
whosoever shall keep the whole law, but offendeth in a single
particular, he is chargeable with the breach of all. (11)For he that
said, Thou shalt not commit adultery, said also, Thou shalt not commit
murder. Now if thou dost not commit adultery, yet dost commit murder,
thou art a transgressor of the law.

(12)So speak, and so act, as those who shall be judged by the law of
liberty. (13)For judgment without mercy shall be on him who shewed no
mercy, and mercy glorieth against judgment.

(14)What is the advantage, my brethren, if a man profess to have faith,
but hath not works; can faith save him? (15)Now if a brother or sister
be naked, and destitute of daily food, (16)and should one of you say to
them, Go in peace, be warm, be replenished with food: yet if ye give
them not the necessaries for their body; what doth it avail? (17)So
also faith, if it hath not works, is dead itself.

(18)Perhaps a man will say, Thou hast faith, and I have works: shew me
thy faith by thy works, and I will shew thee by my works my faith.
(19)Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils
also believe and tremble. (20)But wilt thou know, O vain man, that
faith without works is dead? (21)Was not our father Abraham justified
by works, when he offered up Isaac his son upon the altar? (22)Thou
seest that faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith
consummated. (23)And the scripture was fulfilled, which saith, "Abraham
believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness[145];" and he
was called "the friend of God[146]." (24)Observe therefore that by
works a man is justified, and not by faith merely. (25)But was not
Rahab the harlot in like manner justified by works, when she
entertained the messengers, and sent them away by a different road?
(26)For as the body without breath is dead, so faith without works is
dead also.

CHAP. III.

MY brethren, be not many teachers, knowing that we shall receive a
severer judgment. (2)For in many things we all offend. If any man
offend not in word, he is a perfect man, and capable of reining in the
whole body. (3)Behold, we put bits into the horses' mouths, that they
may obey us, and we turn about their whole body. (4)Behold also the
ships, though so great, and driven by tempestuous winds, are turned
about by the smallest rudder, whithersoever the inclination of the
pilot pleaseth. (5)So also the tongue is a little member, and proudly
vaunts. Behold how great a pile of wood, a little fire kindleth! (6)And
the tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity: in such manner is the tongue
placed among our members, that it defileth all the body, and setteth on
fire the circle of nature; and is set on fire of hell. (7)For every
species of wild beasts, and also of birds, of reptiles, and even of
fishes, is tamed, and hath also been tamed by human ingenuity: (8)but
the tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly evil, full of deadly
poison. (9)With it we bless God even the Farther; and with the same we
curse men, though after the likeness of God. (10)Out of the same mouth
goeth forth blessing and cursing. These things, my brethren, ought not
to be thus. (11)Doth a fountain from the same aperture spout forth
sweet water and bitter? (12)Can a fig-tree, my brethren, produce
olives; or a vine figs? so also can no fountain send forth salt water
and sweet.

(13)Who is a wise man and intelligent among you, let him shew in a
becoming conduct his works with the meekness of wisdom. (14)But if ye
have bitter envy and contention in your heart, boast not, and lie not
against the truth. (15)This is not the wisdom which cometh from above,
but is earthly, sensual, diabolical. (16)For where envy and contention
dwell, there is tumult and every vile deed. (17)But the wisdom from
above is first pure, then peaceable, meek, easily persuadable, full of
mercy and good fruits, impartial, and void of dissimulation. (18)But
the fruit of righteousness in peace is sown for those who are
peacemakers.

CHAP. IV.

FROM whence come wars and conflicts among you? spring they not from
hence, even from your passions, which war in your members? (2)Ye
eagerly covet, yet have not: ye murder, and are envious, yet cannot
obtain _your object_; ye wage war, but have not, because ye pray not.
(3)Ye ask, and receive nothing, because ye ask vilely, in order to
consume it on your sensual appetites.

(4)Ye adulterers and adultresses, know ye not that friendship with the
world is enmity against God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of
the world is set down an enemy to God. (5)Think ye that the scripture
saith without meaning, The spirit which dwelleth in you strongly urges
to envy? (6)But he giveth mightier grace. Wherefore he saith, "God sets
himself against the proud, but giveth grace to the lowly[147]."

(7)Be in subjection then to God. Resist the devil, and he will fly from
you. (8)Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Make clean your
hands, ye sinners; and purify your hearts, ye double-minded. (9)Be
bitterly afflicted and lament, and let your tears run down; let your
laughter be converted into mourning, and your joy into dejection.
(10)Be humbled in the presence of God, so he will exalt you.

(11)Traduce not one another, brethren. He that traduceth his brother,
and judgeth his brother, traduceth the law, and judgeth the law: but if
thou judgest the law, thou art not a doer of the law, but as judge.
(12)There is one lawgiver, who can save or destroy: who art thou that
judgest another man?

(13)Come now, ye that talk, To-day or to-morrow we will go to such a
town, and do business there during one year, and traffic, and make
great profits: (14)though ye know nothing of what shall be to-morrow.
For what is your life? It is but a vapour which appeareth for a little
while, and then vanishes away. (15)Instead of your saying, If the Lord
pleases, and we are alive, then we will do this or that thing. (16)But
now ye glory in your proud boastings: all such glorying is wicked.
(17)Therefore if a man knoweth how to act properly, and doth not, he is
criminal.

CHAP. V.

COME now, ye rich men, let your tears run down, howling over your
miseries which are coming upon you. (2)Your wealth is corrupted, and
your robes are moth-eaten. (3)Your gold and silver is cankered with
rust; and the rust upon them is a testimony against you, and shall eat
into your flesh as fire. Ye have heaped up treasures in the last days.
(4)Behold, the wages of the workmen who have mowed down your fields,
which is kept back by you from them, crieth out: and the loud moans of
the reapers are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth.

(5)Ye have gormandized upon the earth, and lived in every luxury: ye
have pampered your hearts, as in a day of feasting on the victim slain.
(6)Ye have falsely condemned, ye have murdered the just man; nor doth
he resist you. (7)Be patient therefore, brethren, until the coming of
the Lord. See, the husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the
earth, in patient expectation for it, till it receives the former and
the latter rain. (8)Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts; for the
coming of the Lord is at hand.

(9)Grudge not one against another, brethren, lest be ye condemned: lo!
the judge standeth at the gates. (10)My brethren, take a pattern for
suffering affliction, and patience from the prophets, who have spoken
to you in the name of the Lord.

(11)Behold, we esteem those blessed who patiently endure. Ye have heard
of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; for the Lord
is full of bowels of mercy, and tenderly compassionate.

(12)But above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven,
nor by earth, nor by any other oath: but let your yea be yea, and your
no, no; that ye fall not under condemnation.

(13)Is any man among you under afflictions? let him pray. Is any man
happy in mind? let him sing psalms. (14)Is any man sick among you? let
him send for the presbyters of the church; and let them pray over him,
anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: (15)and the prayer of
faith shall recover the sick man, and the Lord will raise him up; and
if he hath committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.

(16)Confess your offences one to another, and pray for one another,
that ye may be healed. The energetic prayer of a righteous man is
mightily prevalent. (17)Elias was a man of like feelings with us, and
he prayed fervently that it should not rain; and there fell no rain on
the earth during three years and six months. (18)And he prayed again,
and the heavens gave rain, and the earth shot up its fruit.

(19)Brethren, if any man among you should have erred from the truth,
and one convert him; (20)let him know, that he that converteth a sinner
from the error of his way will save a soul from death, and will cover a
multitude of sins.



THE FIRST EPISTLE GENERAL OF PETER THE APOSTLE.

CHAP. I.

PETER, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the sojourners, dispersed through
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, (2)elect according to
the foreknowledge of God the Father, by sanctification of the Spirit,
that they might be brought to the obedience, and sprinkled with the
blood of Jesus Christ: grace unto you and peace be multiplied.

(3)Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto an
animating hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
(4)for an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and unfading,
reserved in the heavens for you, (5)who are guarded by the omnipotence
of God, through faith to obtain the salvation which is ready to appear
at the last time. (6)Wherein ye exult, though yet for a little space,
(if it must be so,) ye are in sorrow through various trials: (7)that
the test of your faith (much more precious than that of gold, which is
of a perishing nature, though proved by fire) may be found unto praise
and honour and glory at the revelation of Jesus Christ: (8)whom though
ye have not seen, ye love; on whom, though ye have not as yet gazed,
yet believing, ye exult with joy unutterable and glorious: (9)receiving
the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls. (10)Concerning
which salvation the prophets eagerly sought and diligently inquired,
who prophesied of the grace which is come to you: (11)investigating to
what time and to what conjuncture the Spirit of Christ in them pointed,
when predicting the sufferings coming upon Christ, and the glories
subsequent thereto. (12)To whom it was revealed, that not for
themselves, but for us were their ministrations employed in the things
which are now declared unto you by those who have preached the gospel
unto you by the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven; on which things the
angels bending forwards eagerly desire to gaze.

(13)Wherefore girding up the loins of your mind, vigilant, wait with
assured hope for the grace, which shall be brought unto you at the
revelation of Jesus Christ; (14)as obedient children, not conformed to
the former passions of the days of your ignorance: (15)but as he who
hath called you is holy, be ye holy also in all your conduct:
(16)because it is written, "Be ye holy; for I am holy[148]." (17)And if
ye invoke him as Father, who without respect of persons judgeth
according to every man's work, conduct yourselves during the time of
your sojourning with _jealous_ fear: (18)knowing that ye have not been
redeemed out of your vain manner of life, derived traditionally from
your fathers, by the corruptible things, silver and gold, (19)but by
the precious blood of Christ, as the unblemished and spotless lamb:
(20)who was indeed predestined before the foundation of the world, but
manifested in these last times for us, (21)who by him believe in God,
that raised him from the dead, and gave him glory; that your faith and
hope might be in God. (22)Having purified your souls by obedience to
the truth through the Spirit unto fraternal affection undissembled,
love each other intensely out of a pure heart: (23)born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the quickening word of God,
and which abideth for ever. (24)"For all flesh is as grass, and all the
glory of man, as the flower of grass. The grass withereth, and the
flower of it falleth off[149]:" (25)but the word of the Lord abideth
for ever. And this is the word which by the gospel is preached unto
you.

CHAP. II.

WHEREFORE putting far away wickedness of every kind, and all deceit,
and hypocrisies, and envyings, and all backbitings, (2)as new-born
babes desire earnestly the unadulterated milk of the word, that ye may
grow thereby: (3)if so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious.
(4)Whom approaching, as the living stone, rejected indeed of men, but
elect of God, and honourable, (5)ye also, as living stones, are built
up, a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual
sacrifices, well pleasing to God through Jesus Christ. (6)Wherefore
also it is contained in the scripture, "Behold, I lay in Sion a
cornerstone, elect, precious, and the believer on him shall never be
confounded[150]." (7)By you therefore who believe is he honoured: but
respecting the disobedient, "the stone which the builders rejected,
this very stone is become the head of the corner, (8)and a stone of
stumbling, and rock of offence[151]," to those who stumble at the word,
disobedient; whereunto also they were appointed. (9)But ye are an elect
race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people acquired by purchase;
that ye should publish abroad the excellencies of him, who hath called
you out of darkness into his marvellous light: (10)who in time past
were not a people, but are now the people of God; who had not obtained
mercy, but are now the objects of mercy.

(11)Beloved, I exhort you, as strangers and sojourners, Abstain from
carnal lusts, which war against the soul; (12)having your conduct
ornamental among the Gentiles: that, whereas they malign you as wicked
doers, they may, being eye-witnesses of your good works, glorify God in
the day when he visits them.

(13)Be subject therefore to every human constitution for the Lord's
sake; whether to a king as the supreme magistrate; (14)or to governors,
as sent by him for the punishment of wicked doers, but the praise of
those who do well. (15)For such is the will of God, that by well doing
ye hold under restraint the ignorance of foolish men: (16)as free, yet
not using liberty as a cloak for wicked practices; but as being
servants of God. (17)Honour all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God.
Honour the king.

(18)Servants, be in subjection to your masters with all fear, not only
to the good and gentle, but even to the froward. (19)For this is
gracious conduct, if for conscience towards God, any man undergo
sorrows, suffering wrongfully. (20)For what glory would there be, if
committing faults, and being buffeted, ye suffered patiently? but if,
when ye behave well, yet suffer, ye bear it patiently, this is
graciously accepted of God. (21)For hereunto have ye been called,
because Christ also hath suffered for you, leaving you a pattern, that
ye should follow his steps; (22)who did no sin, neither was guile found
in his mouth: (23)who, when reviled, reviled not again; when he
suffered, he used no menaces; but referred himself to him who judgeth
righteously: (24)who himself bore our sins in his own body on the tree,
that we, being dead unto sins, might live unto righteousness; "by whose
stripes, _even_ his, ye were healed[152]." (25)For ye were as sheep
wandering astray; but are now returned unto the pastor and bishop of
your souls.

CHAP. III.

LIKEWISE, ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands; that, even
if some obey not the word, by their wives' conduct without the word,
they may be won over; (2)being eye-witnesses of your chaste behaviour
with timidity. (3)Whose adorning let it not be that exterior one of
braided locks, and golden trimmings, and dresses put on with nicety;
(4)but let it be the hidden man of the heart, with that incorruptible
ornament of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God
highly valuable. (5)For so in times of old the holy women also, who
hoped in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection to their own
husbands; (6)as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord: whose children
ye are, if ye do well, and are not affrighted with any terror.

(7)Ye husbands, in like manner dwell with them discreetly, putting
respect on the dear woman as being the weaker vessel, and as co-heirs
of the grace of life, so that your prayers may meet no interruption.

(8)Finally, be all like-minded, sympathizing, loving fraternally,
compassionate, friendly hearted, (9)not returning evil for evil, or
railing for railing; but, contrariwise, wishing men every blessing;
knowing that hereunto ye have been called, that ye should inherit the
_divine_ benediction. (10)"For he that would love life, and see good
days, let him restrain his tongue from evil, and his lips from speaking
guile. (11)Let him depart from every wicked thing, and do good; let him
seek peace, and pursue it[153]." (12)For the eyes of the Lord are upon
the just, and his ears open to their prayers: but the face of the Lord
is against those who practise wicked things. (13)And who will do you
harm if ye be imitators of him that is good? (14)But if ye should even
suffer for righteousness, blessed are ye: be not afraid of their
terror, neither be troubled, (15)but sanctify the Lord God in your
hearts: and be always ready with your reply to every man who demands a
reason respecting the hope which is in you with meekness and fear:
(16)keeping a good conscience; that whereas they malign you, as evil
doers, they may be confounded who take pleasure in ridiculing your good
conduct in Christ. (17)For it is better (if it be God's will) to suffer
as well doers than as evil doers. (18)For Christ also suffered once for
sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, put to
death indeed in the flesh, but raised to life by the Spirit: (19)by
which also he went and preached to those spirits imprisoned; (20)who in
time of old were disobedient, when the long suffering of God in the
days of Noe waited, while the ark was preparing, in which a few, that
is, eight persons, were preserved through the water. (21)The antitype
to which baptism now saveth us (not the mere removal of filth from the
flesh, but the engagement of a good conscience to God), by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ: (22)who is at the right hand of God, gone
into heaven, angels and dominations and powers being put in subjection
under him.

CHAP. IV.

CHRIST then having suffered for us in the flesh, be ye also in mind
armed for the same conflict: for he that hath suffered in the flesh
hath ceased from sinning; (2)that he might not spend the remaining
space of life in the flesh after human passions, but the divine will.
(3)For the time past of life is enough for us to have wrought the will
of the heathen, when we walked in all impurities, lewd appetites,
excess of wine, revels, drinking-bouts, and abominable idolatries;
(4)wherein they think it a strange thing, that you are not running with
them into the same gulph of profligacy, spreading every scandalous
report of you: (5)who shall give an account to him, who holds himself
ready to judge the living and the dead. (6)For to this end was the
gospel preached to those that are dead, that they might be judged
indeed in the flesh according to the will of men, but live in spirit
according to the will of God.

(7)But the end of all things is near: be ye therefore sober-minded, and
vigilant in prayers. (8)But above all things have fervent love towards
each other: for love will conceal a multitude of faults.

(9)Exercise hospitality one towards another without grudgings. (10)Let
every one, according as he hath received a gift, minister it to others,
as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. (11)If any man speak,
let it be agreeably to the oracles of God; if any man act as a deacon,
let it be from the strength which God supplieth: that in all things God
may be glorified through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory and might for
ever and ever. Amen.

(12)Beloved, be not amazed at the fiery trial among you which is to
bring you to the test, as though something strange happened to you;
(13)but as ye share in the sufferings of Christ rejoice, that at the
revelation of his glory also ye may hail him with exultations. (14)If
ye suffer reproach for the name of Christ, blessed are ye; for the
spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you: by them indeed he is
blasphemed, but by you he is glorified. (15)Let no one of you then
suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or an evil-doer, or a meddler in
other persons' business. (16)But if any man suffer as a Christian, let
him not be ashamed; but let him give glory to God on this very account.
(17)For now is the time when judgment is commencing at the house of
God; and if it begin with us, what will be the end of those who obey
not the gospel of God? (18)And if the righteous man is hardly saved,
where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? (19)Wherefore let those
who suffer according to the will of God commit their souls to him in
well-doing as to the faithful Creator.

CHAP. V.

THE presbyters among you I exhort, who am a co-presbyter and a witness
of the sufferings of Christ, and a partaker of the glory which shall be
revealed: (2)feed the flock of God which is among you, exercising your
pastoral office not of necessity, but of choice, not for base gain, but
with alacrity of mind; (3)not as domineering over your allotted
congregations, but as being examples of the flock. (4)And when the arch
Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that will
never fade away.

(5)In like manner, ye who are younger persons, be in subjection to your
elders: but all of you be subject one to another, and be clothed from
head to foot with humility: for God sets himself in opposition to the
proud, but he giveth grace to the lowly. (6)Humble yourselves therefore
beneath the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due season:
(7)casting all your anxiety upon him; for he careth for you. (8)Be
sober, be vigilant; for your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion,
prowleth around, seeking whom he may devour: (9)against whom stand
fast, firm in the faith, knowing that the very same sufferings are
fully endured by the brotherhood which is in the world. (10)But the God
of all grace, who hath called us to his eternal glory by Christ Jesus,
when ye have suffered a little while, himself perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you. (11)To him be glory and might for ever and
ever. Amen.

(12)By Silvanus, a faithful brother as I think, I have written to you a
few words, exhorting, and testifying that this is the true grace of God
wherein ye are standing fast. (13)She who is co-elect at Babylon,
saluteth you, and my son Mark.

(14)Salute one another with a kiss of love. Peace be with you all that
are in Christ Jesus. Amen.



THE SECOND GENERAL EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLE PETER.

CHAP. I.

SIMON Peter, the servant and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have
obtained with us the same precious faith by the righteousness of our
God and Saviour Jesus Christ: (2)grace unto you and peace be multiplied
through the knowledge of God, even Jesus our Lord, (3)as his divine
power hath freely given us all things tending to life and godliness,
through the acknowledgment of him who hath called us to glory and
fortitude: (4)whereby superlatively great and precious promises are
freely given to us: that by these ye might become partakers of a divine
nature, having fled far away from the corruption that is in the world
through inordinate concupiscence.--(5)And for this very purpose
employing the greatest diligence, lead up in the train of your faith
courage; and with courage intelligence; (6)and with intelligence
moderation; and with moderation patience; and with patience piety;
(7)and with piety fraternal affection; and with fraternal affection
love. (8)For if these things are in your possession, and abounding,
they will render you neither inactive nor unfruitful in the knowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ. (9)But he that hath no possession of these
things, is blind, dim-sighted, sinking into oblivion of his
purification from the sins of his former days. (10)Wherefore the
rather, brethren, give diligence to make sure your calling and
election: for by doing these things, ye shall never at any time
stumble: (11)but an entrance will thus be richly afforded you into the
eternal kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.

(12)Wherefore I will not be negligent continually to remind you of
these things, though ye know them, and are established in the present
truth. (13)Indeed, I think it right, as long as I am in this frail
tabernacle, to rouse up your attention by reminding you: (14)knowing
that the deposition of this frail tabernacle of mine is hastily
approaching, as our Lord Jesus Christ hath made evident to me. (15)I
will endeavour then that even after my decease, ye may always have
wherewith to preserve the remembrance of these things. (16)For we have
not followed artfully devised fables, when we made known to you the
power and advent of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye-witnesses of
his majesty. (17)For he received from God the Father honour and glory,
when such a voice was sent forth to him from the transcendently
magnificent glory, This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.
(18)And this voice we heard coming out of heaven, when we were with him
on the holy mountain. (19)And we hold the prophetic word more
confirmed, to which ye do well to attend, as to a lamp shining in a
dark passage, until the day dawn, and the morning-star arise upon your
hearts. (20)Knowing this in the first place, that all scriptural
prophecy is not from any man's own suggestions. (21)For prophecy in old
time came not by the will of man: but the holy men of God spake under
the impulse of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. II.

BUT there were false prophets among the people, as there will be false
teachers also among you, who wickedly introduce damnable heresies, and
deny the sovereign Lord who bought them, bringing on themselves swift
destruction. (2)And many will go out of the way after their fatal
errors; by means of whom the way of truth will be injuriously reviled.
(3)And with plausible speeches will they avariciously make gain of you
whose condemnation from of old lingereth not, and their perdition doth
not slumber. (4)For if God spared not the angels when they sinned, but
casting them bound in chains of darkness into hell, delivered them to
be kept fast until the judgment; (5)and spared not the old world, but
guarded safely Noah the eighth person, the preacher of righteousness,
when he brought a deluge on the world of the ungodly: (6)and reducing
the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah to ashes, condemned them to final
destruction, making them an example for all who in future should live
ungodly; (7)but righteous Lot, afflicted grievously with the infamously
impure conduct of those lawless men, he plucked out: (8)for by seeing
and hearing, that righteous man whilst sojourning among them, suffered
torment day by day in his righteous soul from their lawless doings;
(9)the Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptation, but to
reserve the wicked unto the day of judgment to be punished:
(10)especially such as walk after the flesh in the eager pursuit of
defilement, and despise government. Daring, self-sufficient, they
tremble not at dignities, railing against them. (11)Whereas the angels,
though so much greater in might and power, bring not a reviling
accusation against them before the Lord. (12)But these men, as the
naturally irrational brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed,
speaking evil of the things of which they are ignorant, will perish by
their own corruption; (13)receiving the recompence of iniquity,
counting daily luxury their pleasure; spots and blemishes, when they
feast together with you; riotously indulging in their own delusions:
(14)having eyes full of adultery, and insatiable of sin; ensnaring
souls of no stability; having a heart practised in all the wiles of
covetousness; children for a curse: (15)who forsaking the strait road
are gone out of the way, following the path of Balaam the son of Bosor
who loved the wages of iniquity. (16)But received a reproof for his
peculiar transgression: the dumb ass articulating with a human voice
restrained the perverseness of the prophet.

(17)These are fountains without water, clouds driven by a hurricane;
for whom the blackness of darkness for ever is reserved. (18)Uttering
pompous discourses of inanity, ensnaring by the lusts of the flesh, by
lascivious impurities, those who had truly escaped from such as live in
a course of delusion. (19)Preaching liberty to them, while they
themselves are the slaves of corruption: for by whatever a man is
overcome, by that also he is enslaved. (20)For if having escaped from
the defilements of the world by the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ, they are again enveloped by them and overcome, their last
deeds are worse than the first. (21)For it had been better for them
never to have been acquainted with the way of righteousness, than,
after knowing it, to have turned aside from the holy commandment
delivered unto them. (22)But the true proverb is verified in them, The
dog hath returned to his own vomit; and the sow which was washed to its
wallowing in the mire.

CHAP. III.

THIS second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you; in both which I
rouse up your sincere mind by awakening your recollection (2)to
remember the words, that have been spoken aforetime by the holy
prophets, and the injunction of us the apostles of the Lord and
Saviour: (3)knowing this principally, that in the last of the days
there will come scoffers, walking after their own lewd passions, (4)and
saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for ever since the fathers
fell asleep, all things continue in the same state as from the
beginning of the creation. (5)For this they chuse to keep out of sight,
that by the word of God the heavens were created of old, and the earth
rising out of the water and subsisting amidst the water; (6)whence the
world then existing, being deluged by water, was destroyed; (7)but the
present heavens and earth by the same word are treasured up, reserved
for fire at the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men.

(8)But let not this particular be concealed from you, beloved, that one
day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one
day. (9)The Lord doth not delay the promise (as some count it delay);
but is longsuffering towards us, not willing that any should perish,
but that all should have space for repentance. (10)But the day of the
Lord will come as a thief by night; in which the heavens shall pass
away with a rushing noise, and the first principles of matter in flames
dissolve, and the earth and all the works upon it be burnt up.
(11)Seeing then that all these things must be dissolved, what manner of
persons ought we to be in a course of holy conduct and acts of piety,
(12)expecting and hastening towards the coming of God's day, at which
the heavens on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements in flames be
melted as wax? (13)But we expect according to his promise new heavens
and a new earth in which dwelleth righteousness. (14)Wherefore,
beloved, seeing ye are expecting these things, be diligent to be found
of him in peace, spotless and blameless. (15)And account the long
suffering of our Lord conducive to salvation; as our beloved brother
Paul also, according to the wisdom given to him, hath written unto you;
(16)as also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these things, of
which some are difficult to be understood, which the uninstructed and
the unstable torture, as indeed they do the rest of the scriptures unto
their own destruction. (17)Ye therefore, beloved, knowing this before,
be on your guard, that ye be not carried away with the delusion of
these lawless men, and fall from your own stedfastness. (18)But grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To
him be glory now and unto the day of eternity. Amen.



THE FIRST GENERAL EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLE JOHN.

CHAP. I.

THAT which was from the beginning, which we have seen with our eyes,
which we have gazed upon, and our hands have handled of the word of
life; (2)(for the life was manifested, and we have beheld it, and bear
testimony, and declare unto you that life eternal, which was with the
Father, and was manifested to us;) (3)that which we have seen and
heard, declare we to you, that ye also may have communion with us: and
indeed our communion is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
(4)And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be complete.

(5)And this is the promise which we have heard from him, and declare
unto you, that God is light, and that darkness in him there is none.
(6)If we say that we have communion with him, and walk in darkness, we
lie, and practise not the truth: (7)but if we walk in the light, as he
is himself in the light, we have communion with each other, and the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin. (8)If we say
that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
(9)If we confess our sins, faithful is he and righteous to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. (10)If we say
that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

CHAP. II.

MY dear children, these things I write to you, that ye should not sin.
And if any of us sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous: (2)and he himself is the propitiatory victim for our
sins: and indeed not for ours only, but for the whole world. (3)And
hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments. (4)He
that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar,
and in him the truth is not. (5)But whosoever keepeth his word, verily
in him is the love of God perfected: by this we know that we are in
him. (6)He who saith that he abideth in him, ought as he walked, even
so himself to walk.

(7)Brethren, I write not a new commandment unto you, but an old
commandment which ye had from the beginning: the old commandment is the
word which ye have heard from the beginning.

(8)Again, a new commandment I write unto you, which is a true thing in
him, and in you, because the darkness is past, and the true light is
now shining. (9)He who saith, that he is in the light, yet hateth his
brother, is in darkness even until now. (10)He that loveth his brother
is in the light, and occasion of stumbling in him there is none.
(11)But he that hateth his brother is in darkness, and walketh in
darkness, and knoweth not whither he is departing, because the darkness
hath blinded his eyes.

(12)I write unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven
you for his name's sake. (13)I write unto you, fathers, because ye have
known him that is from the beginning. I write unto you, young men,
because ye have overcome the wicked one. I write unto you, little
children, because ye have known the Father. (14)I have written unto
you, fathers, because ye have known him, who is from the beginning. I
have written unto you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word
of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one.

(15)Love not the world, neither the things which are in the world. If
any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. (16)For
every thing which is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust
of the eyes, and the pomp of life, is not of the Father, but is of the
world. (17)And the world is passing away, and the lust thereof, but he
who doeth the will of God abideth for ever.

(18)My dear children, it is the last hour; and as ye have heard that
antichrist is coming, even now there are many antichrists: by which we
know it is the last hour. (19)They went out from us, but they were not
of us; for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us;
but they departed, that they might be made manifest that they are not
all of us: (20)though ye have an unction from the Holy One, and know
all things. (21)I have not written to you because ye know not the
truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth. (22)Who
is the liar, but he that denieth that Jesus is the Messiah? This man is
the antichrist, who denieth the Father and the Son. (23)Every one that
denieth the Son, neither doth he hold the Father; but he that
acknowledgeth the Son, holdeth the Father also. (24)Let that abide in
you therefore which ye have heard from the beginning. If that abide in
you which ye heard from the beginning, ye also shall abide in the Son
and in the Father. (25)And this is the promise which he hath promised
to us, even life eternal.

(26)These things have I written unto you concerning those who are
leading you astray. (27)But the unction which ye have received from him
abideth in you; and ye need not that any person should instruct you.
But as the same unction teacheth you concerning all things, and is
true, and is no lie; and as it hath taught you, abide in him. (28)And
now, my dear children, abide in him; that when he shall appear, we may
have confidence, and not be put to shame by him at his coming. (29)If
ye know that he is righteous, know that every one who practises
righteousness is born of him.

CHAP. III.

BEHOLD, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we
should be called children of God! therefore the world knoweth us not,
because it knew him not. (2)Beloved, now are we the children of God,
and it is not yet evident what we shall be: but we know that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him; because we shall see him as he is.
(3)And every one who hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as
he is pure.

(4)Every one who committeth sin, committeth also a transgression of the
law: for sin is the transgression of the law. (5)And ye know that he
was manifested, that he might take away our sins; and in him there is
no sin. (6)Every one who abideth in him, doth not sin; every one who
sinneth hath not seen him, nor known him. (7)My dear children, let no
man deceive you: he who doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is
righteous: (8)he that practises sin is of the devil; for from the
beginning the devil sinneth. For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil. (9)Every one
who is born of God, doth not practise sin, because his seed abideth in
him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. (10)By this the
children of God are manifestly seen, and the children of the devil.
Every one that doth not practise righteousness, is not of God, and he
that loveth not his brother.

(11)For this is the commandment which ye have heard from the beginning,
that we should love one another. (12)Not as Cain, who was of the wicked
one, and slew his brother: and wherefore did he slay him? Because his
own works were wicked, and those of his brother righteous.

(13)Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you. (14)We know that we
are passed out of _a state of_ death into life, because we love the
brethren: he that loveth not his brother abideth in death. (15)Every
one who hateth his brother is a murderer; and ye know that no murderer
hath life eternal abiding in him.

(16)By this we have known the love _of Christ_, because for us he laid
down his own life: and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.
(17)But whosoever hath worldly abundance, and seeth his brother under
necessity, and shutteth his bowels of compassion against him, how
dwelleth the love of God in him? (18)My dear children, let us not love
in word and in tongue, but in deed and in truth; (19)and hereby we know
that we are of the truth, and in his presence have this persuasion in
our hearts. (20)For should our heart condemn us, God is greater than
our heart, and knoweth all things. (21)Beloved, if our heart condemn us
not, we have confidence towards God. (22)And whatsoever we ask, we
receive from him, because we keep his commandments, and do the things
which are pleasing in his sight. (23)And this is his commandment, that
we should believe in the name of his Son, Jesus Christ, and love one
another, as he gave us commandment. (24)And he that keepeth his
commandments abideth in him, and he in him; and by this we know that he
abideth in us, from the Spirit which he hath given us.

CHAP. IV.

BELOVED, believe not every pretender to inspiration, but bring these
spirits to the trial whether they are of God; because many false
prophets are gone forth into the world. (2)By this ye know the Spirit
of God: every spirit who confesseth that Jesus the Messiah is come in
the flesh, is from God. (3)And every spirit who confesseth not that
Jesus the Messiah is come into the world, is not from God: and this is
that spirit of antichrist which ye have heard that it is coming, and
now is already in the world. (4)Ye are of God, my dear children, and
have overcome them; because he that is in you is greater than he that
is in the world. (5)They are of the world, therefore speak they as of
the world, and the world heareth them. (6)We are of God: he that
knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth us not. By this
we know the spirit of truth and the spirit of delusion.

(7)Beloved, let us love one another; because love is from God, and
every one who loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. (8)He that loveth
not, never knew God; for God is love. (9)By this was the love of God
manifested to us, that God sent his only begotten Son into the world,
that we might have life by him. (10)Herein is love, not that we have
loved God, but that he hath loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiatory sacrifice for our sins. (11)Beloved, if God so loved us,
we ought also to love one another.

(12)No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God
abideth in us, and his love is perfected in us. (13)By this we know
that we abide in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his own
Spirit. (14)And we have seen and bear testimony, that the Father sent
the Son to be the Saviour of the world.

(15)Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God abideth
in him, and he in God. (16)And we have known and believed the love
which God hath towards us. God is love; and he that abideth in love,
abideth in God, and God in him. (17)By this is his love towards us
perfected, that we might have confidence at the day of judgment;
because as he is, so are we in this world. (18)Fear is not in this
love; but the perfect love casteth out fear: for fear hath anguish. He
that is afraid is not made perfect in love.

(19)We love him, because he first loved us. (20)If any person say, I
love God, yet hateth his brother, he is a liar; for he who loveth not
his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love the God whom he hath not
seen? (21)So this commandment have we from him, that he who loveth God
love also his brother.

CHAP. V.

EVERY one who believeth that Jesus is the Messiah, is born of God; and
every one who loveth him that begat, loveth him also who is begotten by
him. (2)Hereby we know that we love the children of God, when we love
God, and keep his commandments. (3)For this is the love of God, that we
should keep his commandments: and his commandments are not burdensome.
(4)Because every one that is born of God overcometh the world: and this
is the victory which overcometh the world, our faith. (5)Who is he that
overcometh the world, except he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of
God?

(6)This is he who came by water and blood, Jesus the Messiah; not by
the water only, but by the water and the blood: and the Spirit is the
witnessing person, because the Spirit is the truth. (7)For they are
three who bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Spirit, and these, even the three, are one. (8)And there are three
which bear witness upon earth, the spirit, and the water, and the
blood, and the three are for the same one object.

(9)If we receive the testimony of man, the testimony of God is
stronger: for this is the testimony of God which he testified
concerning his Son. (10)He that believeth on the Son of God, hath the
testimony in himself; he that believeth not God, hath made him a liar,
because he hath not believed on the testimony which God testified of
his Son. (11)And this is the testimony, that God hath given life
eternal to us; and this life is in his Son. (12)He that hath the Son,
hath this life; and he that hath not the Son of God, hath not this
life. (13)These things have I written to you who believe on the name of
the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have life eternal, and that ye
may believe on the name of the Son of God. (14)And this is the
confidence that we have towards him, that whatsoever we ask according
to his will, he heareth us. (15)And if we know that he heareth us,
whatsoever we ask, we know that we receive the petitions, which we have
requested, from him.

(16)If any person see his brother committing a sin not unto death, he
shall request, and God will grant him life for those that sin not unto
death. There is a sin unto death: I say not that he should request for
that. (17)All unrighteousness is sin; and there is sin not unto death.

(18)We know that every one who is born of God sinneth not; but he that
is born of God preserveth himself, and the wicked one toucheth him not.
(19)We know that we are of God, and the whole world is under the power
of that wicked one. (20)But we know that the Son of God hath come, and
hath given to us understanding, that we might know the true God; and we
are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus the Messiah. HE is the true
God, and the life eternal.

(21)My dear children, guard yourselves against idols. Amen.



THE SECOND EPISTLE GENERAL OF THE APOSTLE JOHN.

THE presbyter to the elect lady and her children, whom I love in the
truth; and not I only, but also all who have known the truth:
(2)because of the truth which abideth in us, and shall be with us for
ever: (3)grace, mercy, peace be with you from God the Father, and from
the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.

(4)I rejoiced greatly that I found thy children walking in truth, as we
have received commandment from the Father. (5)And now I beseech thee,
lady, not as writing to thee a new commandment, but that which we have
had from the beginning, that we should love one another. (6)And this is
love, that we should walk after his commandments. This is the
commandment, as ye have heard from the beginning, That ye should walk
in it. (7)For many deceivers are gone out into the world, who do not
confess Jesus the Messiah as come in the flesh. Such a one is a
deceiver and an antichrist.

(8)Take heed to yourselves that we lose not the things which we have
wrought, but receive a full reward. (9)Every one that transgresseth and
abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God: he that abideth in
the doctrine of Christ, this man holdeth both the Father and the Son.
(10)If any person come unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive
him not into the house, nor say to him, Welcome. (11)He that biddeth
him welcome, takes part in his wicked works.

(12)Having many things to write unto you, I would not do it with paper
and ink; but I hope to come unto you, and speak mouth to mouth, that
our joy may be complete.

(13)The children of thy elect sister salute thee. Amen.



THE THIRD GENERAL EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLE JOHN.

THE presbyter to the beloved Gaius, whom I love in the truth.
(2)Beloved, above all things I pray that thou mayest prosper, and be in
sound health of body, even as thy soul prospereth.

(3)I rejoiced greatly when the brethren came, and bore witness to thy
truth, even as thou walkest in the truth. (4)I have no greater joy than
these tidings, that I hear my own children are walking in the truth.

(5)Beloved, thou doest faithfully whatsoever services thou performest
for the brethren, and for strangers; (6)who have borne testimony to thy
love before the church; to whom thou wilt perform a good act of service
in forwarding them on their journey, in a manner worthy of God. (7)For
on account of his name they went forth, receiving nothing from the
heathen. (8)We therefore ought to assist such men, that we may become
fellow-labourers in the truth.

(9)I wrote unto the church: but Diotrephes, who affects pre-eminence
over them, receiveth us not. (10)Therefore if I come I will remember
his works which he doth, with wicked words prating against us; and not
content with these things, neither doth he himself receive the
brethren, and those who are willing he hindereth, and casteth them out
of the church. (11)Beloved, be not an imitator of what is evil, but of
that which is good. He that doeth good is of God, but he that doeth
evil hath not seen God.

(12)Demetrius hath a good testimony from all men, and from the truth
itself: and we also bear our testimony, and ye know that our testimony
is true.

(13)I had many things to write; but I would not write to thee with ink
and pen: (14)but I hope shortly to see thee, and we shall speak mouth
to mouth.

Peace be to thee. The friends salute thee. Salute the friends by name.



THE EPISTLE GENERAL OF THE APOSTLE JUDE.

JUDE a servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to those who are
sanctified in God the Father, and preserved by Jesus Christ, the
called: (2)mercy unto you, and peace and love be multiplied.

(3)Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you concerning the
common salvation, I held it necessary to write unto you, exhorting you
to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered unto the saints.
(4)For certain men have craftily introduced themselves, who were from
of old proscribed for this condemnation, ungodly men, changing the
grace of God into impurity, and denying our only sovereign God and
Lord, Jesus Christ. (5)But I would remind you, though ye once knew
this, that the Lord, though he delivered the people out of the land of
Egypt, afterwards destroyed those who believed not. (6)And the angels
who preserved not their own primitive state, but deserted their proper
abode, hath he reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day. (7)As Sodom and Gomorrha and the surrounding
cities, in like manner with them abandoned to whoredom, and going after
other flesh, are set forth an example, suffering the judicial
punishment of eternal fire.

(8)In like manner also do these men, even when they dream, defile
indeed the flesh, despise sovereignty, and revile dignities. (9)Though
Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil, he disputed
about the body of Moses, dared not to produce a railing accusation, but
said, The Lord rebuke thee. (10)But these men speak evil even of the
things of which they have no knowledge: but such things as they know
naturally, as the brute beasts, in these they corrupt themselves.

(11)Wo unto them! for they have walked in the way of Cain, and have
eagerly run in Balaam's erroneous path of hire, and have perished in
opposition, like Corah. (12)These are in your feasts of love, as sunken
rocks; though joining in your banquet, they feed themselves fearlessly;
clouds without water carried about by the winds; trees untimely
withering, fruitless, twice dead, rooted up; (13)raging billows of the
sea foaming out their own infamies; stars wandering from their courses,
for whom the blackness of darkness for ever is reserved.

(14)Now Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied also of these men,
saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with myriads of his saints, (15)to
execute judgment against all men, and to convict all the ungodly of all
their deeds of ungodliness which they have impiously committed, and of
all the bitter words which impious offenders have spoken against him.
(16)These men are murmurers, complainers at their lot in life, walking
after their own corrupt passions; and their mouth utters hyperbolically
pompous expressions, pretending high personal admiration, in order to
make their advantage.

(17)But ye, beloved, remember the words which have been spoken before
by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, (18)how they told you that in
the last time there will be scoffers, walking after their own ungodly
passions. (19)These are the men who separate themselves, sensual,
destitute of the Spirit.

(20)But ye, beloved, building yourselves up on your most holy faith,
praying by the Holy Ghost, (21)preserve yourselves in the love of God,
waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.
(22)And of some have compassion, distinguishing their case; (23)and
others save with trembling, snatching them out of the fire; though
hating even the garment spotted by the flesh.

(24)Now to him who is able to guard you from stumbling, and to present
you blameless before the presence of his glory with exultation, (25)to
the only wise God our Saviour, be glory and majesty, might and
dominion, both now and unto all eternity. Amen.



THE REVELATION OF JOHN THE THEOLOGIAN.

CHAP. I.

THE revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to shew to his
servants the things which must shortly come to pass; and sending by his
angel, he shewed them to his servant John: (2)who was a witness for the
word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ, and for the things
which he saw. (3)Blessed is he that readeth, and they who hear the
words of this prophecy, and observe the things which are written
therein: for the time is at hand.

(4)John to the seven churches which are in Asia: Grace be with you, and
peace from him, who is, and who was, and who is coming; and from the
seven spirits which are before the throne of God, (5)and from Jesus
Christ, the faithful witness, and first-born from the dead, and the
prince of the kings of the earth: to him who loved us, and washed us
from our sins by his blood, (6)and made us kings and priests to his God
and Father; to him be glory and might for ever and ever. Amen.

(7)Behold! he is coming with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and
they also who pierced him; and all the tribes of the earth shall lament
bitterly, smiting their bosoms, because of him: even so! Amen.

(8)I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, saith the Lord, who
is, and who was, and who is coming--the Almighty.

(9)I John, your brother and companion also with you in the tribulation,
and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the island
which is called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of
Jesus Christ. (10)I was _rapt_ in spirit on the Lord's day, and heard
behind me a great voice as of a trumpet, (11)saying, I am the Alpha and
the Omega, the first and the last; and what thou seest write in a book,
and send to the churches which are in Asia: to Ephesus, and to Smyrna,
and to Pergamos, and to Thyatira, and to Sardis, and to Philadelphia,
and to Laodicea. (12)And I turned to see what voice spake to me. And
when I turned round I saw seven lamps of gold; (13)and in the midst of
the seven lamps one like unto a son of man, clothed to the very feet,
and girded about the breasts with a golden zone; (14)his head and
flowing locks white as a white fleece of wool, even as the snow; and
his eyes as a flame of fire; (15)and his feet resembled molten brass,
as though they glowed in the furnace; and his voice was as the roar of
many waters. (16)And he held in his right hand seven stars; and out of
his mouth proceeded a sharp two-edged sword; and his countenance was as
when the sun shineth in his meridian lustre. (17)And when I beheld him,
I fell at his feet as dead: and he laid his right hand upon me, saying
to me, Fear not; I am the first and the last, (18)and I am the living
one, though I was dead and lo! I am alive for evermore, Amen; and I
hold the keys of hell and of death. (19)Write the things which thou
seest, and the things which are, and the things which shall be in
future after these, (20)the mystery of the seven stars which thou seest
in my right hand, and the seven golden lamps. The seven stars are the
angels of the seven churches, and the seven lamps which thou seest are
the seven churches.

CHAP. II.

TO the angel of the Ephesian church write; These things saith he who
grasps the seven stars in his right hand, who walketh round in the
midst of the seven golden lamps; (2)I know thy works, and thy travail,
and thy patience, and that thou canst not bear the wicked; and hast
tried those who give themselves out as apostles, yet are not, and hast
found them liars; (3)and hast borne, and hast exercised patience, and
for my name sake hast endured great toil, and hast not fainted. (4)Yet
have I a charge against thee, that thou art gone back from thy first
love. (5)Remember then from whence thou hast fallen, and repent, and
practise thy first works; but if not, I am coming to thee quickly, and
I will remove thy lamp out of its place, except thou repent. (6)But
this thou holdest, that thou abhorrest the deeds of the Nicolatans,
which I also abhor. (7)He that hath ears, let him hear what the Spirit
saith to the churches, To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the
tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God.

(8)And to the angel of the church of the Smyrnians write, These things
saith the first and the last, who was dead, and is alive: (9)I know thy
works, and thy tribulation, and thy poverty (though thou art rich), and
the calumnies of those who say they are Jews, yet are not, but are
Satan's synagogue. (10)Fear nothing from the things which thou shalt
suffer: lo! the devil will cast some of you into prison, that ye may be
tried; and ye shall have a ten day's tribulation: be thou faithful
until death, and I will give thee a crown of life. (11)He that hath an
ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. He that
overcometh shall receive no injury from the second death.

(12)And to the angel of the church at Pergamos write, These things
saith he who holdeth the sharp two-edged sword; (13)I know thy works
and where thou hast thy abode, even where Satan's throne _is erected_:
and thou holdest fast my name, and hast not denied my faith, even in
those days when Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was put to death
among you, where Satan dwelleth. (14)Yet I have a few things against
thee, that thou hast there some who hold the doctrine of Balaam, who
taught Balac to lay a stumbling-block before the children of Israel, to
eat of idol sacrifices, and to commit whoredom. (15)Thou hast also some
who hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which I abhor. (16)Repent!
but if not, I am coming to thee quickly, and will war against them with
the sword of my mouth. (17)He that hath an ear, let him hear what the
Spirit saith unto the churches, To him that overcometh will I give to
eat of the hidden manna, and I will give him a white pebble, and upon
the pebble a new name inscribed, which no man knoweth except the person
who receiveth it.

(18)And to the angel of the church which is at Thyatira write, These
things saith the Son of God, who hath his eyes as a flame of fire, and
his feet like the molten brass; (19)I know thy deeds, and thy love, and
thy charity to the poor, and thy faith, and thy patience, and thy
works, and that the last are more abundant than the first. (20)Yet I
have a few things against thee, because thou hast suffered that woman
Jezabel, calling herself a prophetess, to teach, and to lead my
servants into error, to commit whoredom, and eat the idol sacrifices.
(21)And I gave her a space that she should repent of her whoredom, and
she hath not repented. (22)Behold, I am about to cast her on a bed, and
those who commit adultery with her into great tribulation, unless they
repent of their deeds. (23)And I will slay her children by death; and
all the churches shall know that I am he who searcheth the reins and
the hearts: and I will give to you, even to every one, according to
your works. (24)But to you I say, and to the rest that are at Thyatira,
as many as do not hold this doctrine, and who have not known the depths
of Satan, as they speak, I will lay upon them no other burden.
(25)Nevertheless that which you have, hold fast till I come. (26)And he
who overcometh, and perseveres in my works unto the end, to him will I
give authority over the nations; (27)he shall rule them with a rod of
iron; as a potter's vessels they shall be broken in pieces, even as I
have received authority from my Father: (28)and I will give him the
star of the morning. (29)He that hath an ear, let him hear what the
Spirit saith unto the churches.

CHAP. III.

AND to the angel of the church in Sardis write, These things saith he
that hath the seven spirits of God, and the seven stars; I know thy
works, and that thou hast a name, as though thou wert alive, yet art
dead. (2)Be vigilant and strengthen the things which remain, which are
ready to die; for I have not found thy works complete before God.
(3)Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and observe,
and repent. If then thou art not found watching, I will come upon thee
as a thief, and thou shalt in no wise know at what hour I will come
upon thee. (4)Thou hast a few names even in Sardis, which have not
defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white robes, for
they are worthy. (5)He that overcometh, this man shall be clothed in
white robes; and I will in no wise blot his name out of the book of
life, and I will confess his name before my Father, and before his
angels. (6)He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto
the churches.

(7)And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write, These things
saith the Holy One, he that is true, who hath the key of David, who
openeth, and none shutteth, and shutteth, and no man openeth. (8)I know
thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can
shut it; because thou hast but little strength, yet hast thou kept my
word, and hast not denied my name. (9)Behold, I give thee out of
Satan's synagogue those who say they are Jews, yet they are not, but do
lie. Lo! I will make them that they shall come and prostrate themselves
at thy feet, and they shall know that I have loved thee. (10)Because
thou hast keep the word of my patience, I also will preserve thee from
the hour of temptation, which is coming upon the whole habitable globe
to try the dwellers upon earth. (11)Behold, I come quickly: hold fast
that thou hast, that no man take thy crown. (12)He that overcometh, I
will make him a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall never more
go out from thence: and I will write upon him the name of my God, and
the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which cometh down
out of heaven from my God, and my own new name. (13)He that hath an ear
to hear, let him ear what the Spirit saith unto the churches.

(14)And to the angel of the church of the Laodiceans write, These
things saith the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the origin of the
creation of God; (15)I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor
hot: (16)I wish thou wert cold or hot. So because thou art lukewarm,
and neither cold nor hot, I will vomit thee out of my mouth:
(17)because thou sayest, I am rich, and wallow in wealth, and have no
want unsupplied; yet thou knowest not that thou art wretched, and
pitiable, and poor, and blind, and naked. (18)I advise thee to buy of
me gold purified by the fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white
robes, that thou mayest be completely clothed, and that the shame of
thy nakedness may not appear; and anoint thine eyes with a collyrium,
that thou mayest see. (19)As many as I love, I rebuke and correct: be
zealous then, and repent. (20)Lo! I stand at the door, and knock: if
any person hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and
I will sup with him, and he with me. (21)He that overcometh, I will
give to him to sit on my throne, as I also have overcome, and have sat
down with my Father on his throne. (22)He that hath an ear, let him
hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches.

CHAP. IV.

AFTER these things I beheld, and, lo! a door was opened in heaven, and
a voice, the first which I heard, as of a trumpet, speaking to me,
said, Come up hither, and I will shew thee what things will be after
these. (2)And immediately I was _rapt_ in spirit: and, lo! a throne was
placed in heaven, and upon the throne a person sitting. (3)And he that
sat was in appearance like a stone of jasper and sardine: and a rainbow
encircled the throne, like in hue to an emerald. (4)And around the
throne were twenty-four thrones; and upon these thrones I saw
twenty-four presbyters seated, clothed in white robes; and they had on
their heads golden crowns. (5)And out of the throne issued forth
lightnings, and thunder, and loud voices; and seven lamps of fire
burned before the throne, which are the seven spirits of God. (6)And
before the throne was a sea of glass like crystal: and in the midst of
the throne, and within the circle of the throne, were four living
beings full of eyes before and behind. (7)And the first living being
was like a lion, and the second living being was like a calf, and the
third living being had a face as a man, and the fourth living being was
like an eagle with wings expanded. (8)And the four living beings had
each for himself six wings encircling him, and within they were full of
eyes; and they never cease day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy,
Lord God Almighty, who was, and who is, and who is coming. (9)And when
these living beings give glory, and honour, and thanksgiving to him
that sitteth on the throne, to him who liveth for ever and ever,
(10)the four and twenty presbyters prostrate themselves before him who
is Seated on the throne, and worship him who liveth for ever and ever,
and cast their crowns before the throne, saying, (11)Worthy art thou, O
Lord, to receive glory, and honour, and power; for thou hast created
all things, and by thy will they exist, and were created.

CHAP. V.

AND I saw on the right hand of him who was seated on the throne a
_volume of a_ book written within, and on the back sealed with seven
seals. (2)And I saw mighty angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is
worthy to open the book, and to break the seals thereon? (3)And no man
was able in heaven, nor upon earth, nor under the earth, to open the
book, nor to look into it.

(4)And I wept much because no man was found worthy either to open or
read the book, or even to look upon it. (5)And one of the presbyters
said unto me, Weep not: behold the lion who is of the tribe of Judah,
the root of David, hath prevailed, to open the book, and to break the
seven seals upon it. (6)And I beheld, and lo! in the midst of the
throne, and of the four living beings, and in the midst of the
presbyters, stood a lamb as just slaughtered, having seven horns and
seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God that are sent forth into
all the world: (7)and he came and took the book out of the right hand
of him that was seated upon the throne. (8)And when he had taken the
book, the four living beings and the four and twenty presbyters
prostrated themselves before the lamb, having each harps, and vases of
gold, full of perfumes smoaking, which are the prayers of the saints.
(9)And they sung a new song, saying, Worthy art thou to take the book,
and to open the seals thereon; because thou hast been slaughtered, and
hast redeemed us for God by thy blood, out of every tribe, and tongue,
and people, and nation; (10)and hast made us for our God kings and
priests, and we shall reign upon the earth.

(11)And I looked, and heard the voice of many angels around the throne,
and the living beings, and the presbyters, and their number was myriads
of myriads and thousands of thousands, (12)crying with a loud voice,
Worthy is the slaughtered lamb to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and might, and honour, and glory, and blessing. (13)And every
creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and
those who are on the sea, and all things which are therein, heard I,
saying, To him who is seated on the throne, and to the lamb, be
blessing, and honour, and glory, and might for ever and ever. (14)And
the four living beings said, Amen. And the four and twenty presbyters
prostrated themselves, and worshipped him that liveth for ever and
ever.

CHAP. VI.

AND I saw when the lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard one of the
four living beings, saying, as with a voice of thunder, Come, and see.
(2)And I looked, and lo! a white horse; and he who sat on it held a
bow, and a crown was given to him, and he went forth conquering and to
conquer.

(3)And when he opened the second seal, I heard the second living being
say, Come and see. (4)And there went out another horse flame-coloured;
and to him who sat thereon there was power given to take peace from the
earth, and that men should kill each other; and there was given to him
a great sword.

(5)And when he opened the third seal, I heard the third living being
say, Come and see. And I saw, and lo! a black horse; and he that sat
upon it had a pair of scales in his hand. (6)And I heard a voice from
amidst the four living beings saying, A choenix[154] of wheat for a
denarius[155], and three choenixs of barley for a denarius; yet to the
oil and the wine do no injury.

(7)And when he opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth
living being saying, Come and see. (8)And I looked, and lo! a pale
coloured horse, and one sat on it, whose name was Death, and the grave
followed after him: and power was given to them to kill the fourth part
of the earth with the sword, and with famine, and with death, and with
the wild beasts of the earth.

(9)And when he opened the fifth seal I saw underneath the altar the
souls of those who had been slain for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they maintained. (10)And they cried with a loud voice,
How long will it be, O sovereign, the holy one and the true, ere thou
judge and avenge our blood on those who dwell on the earth? (11)And to
each of them were given white robes, and it was told them that they
should wait yet a little longer space, until the number of their
fellow-servants and their brethren, who should be slain as well as
they, should be completed.

(12)And I saw when he opened the sixth seal, and lo! there was a great
earthquake, and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon
became as blood; (13)and the stars of heaven fell to the earth, as the
fig-tree sheddeth her early ripe figs when shaken by a mighty wind:
(14)and the heaven was removed away as a volume rolled up and every
mountain and island were removed out of their places: (15)and the kings
of the earth, and the grandees, and the rich, and the military
commanders, and the men in power, and every slave, and every free man,
hid themselves in the caves, and in the rocks of the mountains; (16)and
said to the mountains and to the rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from
the face of him who sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb: (17)for the great day of his wrath is come, and who is able to
stand?

CHAP. VII.

AND after these things I saw four angels standing at the four corners
of the earth, to hold back the four winds of the earth, that the wind
should not blow on the earth, neither on the sea, nor on any tree.
(2)And I saw another angel ascending from the rising of the sun, having
the seal of the living God; and he cried with a loud voice to the four
angels to whom power was given for them to hurt the earth and the sea,
(3)saying, Hurt not the earth, nor the sea, nor the trees, until we
have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads. (4)And I heard
the number of those who were sealed; one hundred and forty and four
thousand were sealed out of every tribe of the children of Israel.
(5)Of the tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of
Reuben were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed
twelve thousand. (6)Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand.
Of the tribe of Nephtalim were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of
Manasseh were sealed twelve thousand. (7)Of the tribe of Simeon were
sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Levi were sealed twelve
thousand. Of the tribe of Issachar were sealed twelve thousand. (8)Of
the tribe of Zebulon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of
Joseph were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Benjamin were
sealed twelve thousand.

(9)After these things I looked, and beheld a great multitude, which no
man could number, out of every nation, and tribe, and people, and
tongue, standing before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed in
white robes, and palm branches in their hands (10)and crying with a
loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God that sitteth on the throne,
and to the Lamb. (11)And all the angels stood in a circle about the
throne, and the presbyters and the four living beings, and fell on
their faces before the throne, and worshipped God, (12)saying, Amen:
blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and
power, and might be to our God for ever and ever. Amen.

(13)And one of the presbyters addressed me, saying, Who are these
persons who are clothed in white robes? and from whence came they?
(14)And I said to him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, These are
persons who are come out of great tribulation, and have washed their
robes, and made their robes white in the blood of the Lamb.
(15)Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and
night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell
among them. (16)They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more;
neither shall the sun scorch them, nor any burning heat. (17)Because
the Lamb who is in the midst of the throne will feed them, as a
shepherd, and lead them unto living fountains of waters; and God shall
wipe away every tear from their eyes.

CHAP. VIII.

AND when he opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven about
half an hour. (2)And I saw the seven angels which stood before God, and
there were given to them seven trumpets. (3)And another angel came, and
stood by the altar, holding a golden censer; and there were given to
him many perfumes, to offer with the prayers of all the saints upon the
golden altar which was before the throne. (4)And the smoke of the
perfumes went up with the prayers of the saints, out of the angel's
hand before God. (5)And the angel took the censer, and filled it from
the fire of the altar, and cast it upon the earth: and there were
voices, and thunders, and lightnings, and an earthquake.

(6)And the seven angels holding the seven trumpets prepared themselves
to sound.

(7)And the first angel blew the trumpet, and there were hail and fire
mingled with blood, and they were cast on the earth; and a third part
of the trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.

(8)And the second angel sounded, and there was cast into the sea as it
were a vast mountain burning with fire: and the third part of the sea
became blood; (9)and a third part of the creatures having life, which
are in the sea, died; and a third part of the ships was destroyed.

(10)And the third angel blew the trumpet, and there fell from heaven a
great star, burning as a torch, and it fell upon the third part of the
rivers, and upon the fountains of water; (11)and the name of the star
is called Wormwood: and the third part of the waters was turned into
wormwood, and multitudes of men died of the waters, because they were
made bitter.

(12)And the fourth angel sounded, and a third part of the sun was
smitten, and a third part of the moon, and a third part of the stars;
so that a third part of them was darkened, and the day had no light
during a third part of it, and the night likewise.

(13)And I saw and heard one angel flying in the mid-heavens, saying
with a loud voice, Wo, wo, wo, to the dwellers upon earth, because of
the remaining blasts of the trumpet of the three angels, which are
ready to sound.

CHAP. IX.

AND the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star fall from heaven to the
earth; and to him was given the key of the pit of the abyss _of hell_.
(2)And he opened the pit of the abyss; and a smoke ascended out of the
pit like the smoke of a vast furnace; and the sun and the air were
darkened by the smoke of the pit. (3)And out of the smoke came forth
locusts upon the earth; and power was given to them, such power as the
scorpions of the earth possess. (4)And it was told them, Hurt not the
grass of the earth, nor any herb, nor any tree, but only those men who
have not the seal of God in their foreheads. (5)And it was given them
in charge that they should not kill these men outright, but that they
should be tormented five months: and their torment is as the torment of
a scorpion when he striketh a man. (6)And in those days shall men seek
death, and shall not find it; and shall earnestly desire to die, and
death shall fly from them. (7)And the figures of the locusts were like
horses equipped for war; and upon their heads there were as crowns,
like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men. (8)And they had
hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were like the teeth of
lions. (9)And they had breastplates, as breastplates of iron: and the
sound of their wings was as the rumbling of chariots of many horses
rushing to battle. (10)And they had tails like scorpions, and there
were stings in their tails: and they had power to hurt men five months.
(11)And they had over them a king, the angel of the abyss _of hell_,
whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek he is called Appollyon.
(12)One woe is past; and, behold, there are coming yet two woes after
these.

(13)And the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a great voice from the
four horns of the altar of gold which is before God, (14)saying to the
sixth angel who held the trumpet, Loose the four angels which are bound
at the great river Euphrates. (15)And the four angels were loosed, who
were ready at the hour, and day, and month, and year, to kill the third
part of mankind. (16)And the number of the armies of cavalry was two
myriads of myriads and I heard the number of them. (17)And in this
manner saw I the horses in the vision, and those who were mounted upon
them, having breastplates of the colour of fire, and jacinth, and
sulphur; and the horses' heads were as the heads of lions; and out of
their mouths proceeded fire and smoke and brimstone. (18)By these three
were slain the third part of mankind, by the fire, and by the smoke,
and by the sulphur, which proceeded out of their mouths. (19)For their
powers are in their mouth, and in their tails; for their tails are like
serpents, having heads, and with them they do hurt. (20)And the residue
of mankind, who were not slain by these plagues, repented not of the
works of their hands, that they should not worship demons, and idols of
gold, and of silver, and of brass, and of wood, and of stone: which can
neither see nor hear, nor walk: (21)and they repented not of their
murders, nor of their magical arts, nor of their whoredom, nor of their
thefts.

CHAP. X.

AND I saw another mighty angel descending from heaven, clothed with a
cloud; and a rainbow on his head, and his countenance as the sun, and
his feet as pillars of fire: (2)and he held in his hand a little book
open; and he placed his right foot on the sea, and his left on the
land, (3)and cried with a loud voice, as a lion roareth: and when he
had cried, the seven thunders uttered their voices. (4)And when the
seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write: and I
heard a voice from heaven saying to me, Seal up the things, which the
seven thunders have spoken, and write them not down.

(5)And the angel which I saw standing upon the sea and upon the land
lifted up his hand towards heaven, (6)and he swore by him that liveth
for ever and ever, who created the heaven and the things which are
therein, and the earth and the things which are in it, and the sea, and
the things which are therein, that time shall be no longer: (7)but that
in the days of the blast of the seventh angel, when he shall sound,
then shall the mystery of God be completed, as he spake by his own
servants the prophets.

(8)And the voice which I heard out of heaven again spoke to me, and
said, Go take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel
that standeth upon the sea and upon the land. (9)And I went up to the
angel, saying unto him, Give me that little book. And he saith to me,
Take it, and eat it up; and it will make thy belly bitter, though in
thy mouth it will be sweet as honey. (10)And I took the little book out
of the angel's hand, and ate it up; and it was in my mouth as honey
sweet; yet when I had eaten it, my belly was made bitter. (11)And he
said to me, Thou must prophesy again before many people, and nations,
and tongues, and monarchs.

CHAP. XI.

AND there was given me a cane like a measuring staff; and the angel
stood by, saying, Arise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar,
and those who worship therein. (2)But the exterior court of the temple
leave out, and measure it not; because it is given to the Gentiles: and
they shall trample under foot the holy city forty-two months. (3)And I
will give charge to my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a
thousand two hundred and sixty days, clothed in sackcloth. (4)These are
the two olive trees, and the two lamps which stand before the face of
the God of the earth. (5)And if any person attempts to hurt them, fire
proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if any
person attempts to injure them, he must thus be slain. (6)These have
power to shut up the heaven, that no rain water the earth during the
days of their prophecy: and they have power over the waters to turn
them into blood, and to smite the earth with every plague, as often as
they will. (7)And when they shall have finished their testimony, the
beast which ascendeth out of hell shall make war with them, and shall
overcome them, and put them to death. (8)And their corpses shall be
exposed in the streets of the great city, which is called spiritually
Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. (9)And they of the
people and tribes and tongues and nations will look upon their corpses
three days and half, and they will not permit their corpses to be laid
in sepulchres. (10)And the dwellers upon earth will rejoice over them,
and be very glad, and will send gifts to each other; because these two
prophets were a torment to those who dwell on the earth. (11)And after
three days and half, the spirit of life from God entered into them, and
they stood up on their feet; and great terror fell on those who beheld
them. (12)And they heard a great voice out of heaven, saying unto them,
Ascend up hither. And they ascended into heaven in a cloud: and their
enemies beheld them. (13)And in the same hour there was a great
earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and there were slain
in the earthquake seven thousand men of note: and the rest were
affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven. (14)The second woe is
past; behold the third woe is coming quickly.

(15)And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices in
heaven, saying, The kingdoms of the world are become our Lord's, and
his Messiah's, and he shall reign for ever and ever. (16)And the four
and twenty presbyters, who were seated before God upon their thrones,
fell upon their faces, and worshipped God, (17)saying, We give thanks
to thee, Lord the Almighty God, who is and who was, and who is coming,
because thou hast assumed thy great power, and hast set up the throne
of thy kingdom. (18)Though the nations were incensed, yet thy wrath
came, and the time of the dead to be judged, and to give the reward to
thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, and to all who fear thy
name, to the small and to the great; and to destroy those who have
destroyed the earth.

(19)And the temple of God was opened in the heaven, and there appeared
the ark of his covenant in his temple: and there were lightnings, and
voices, and thunders, and earthquake, and a great hail.

CHAP. XII.

AND there appeared a great sign in the heaven; a woman clothed with the
sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve
stars: (2)and being with child, she cried out in travailing pain, and
in anguish to be delivered.

(3)And there appeared another sign in the heaven; and lo! a great fiery
dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his heads seven
crowns. (4)And his tail drew a third part of the stars of heaven, and
cast them on the earth: and the dragon placed himself before the woman
who was ready to be delivered, that when she should bring forth, he
might devour her babe. (5)And she brought forth a male child, who
should rule the nations with an iron sceptre: and her infant was caught
up to God, and his throne. (6)And the woman fled into the wilderness,
where she hath a place prepared of God, that she might there be fed
during a thousand two hundred and sixty days.

(7)Then was there war in the heaven: Michael and his angels warred
against the dragon; and the dragon warred and his angels, (8)and they
could not prevail; neither was there any more place found for them in
the heaven. (9)And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, who
is called the Devil, and Satan, who deceiveth the whole world: he was
cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. (10)And
I heard a great voice saying in the heaven, Now is come the salvation,
and the power, and the kingdom of our God, and the authority of his
Christ; because the accuser of our brethren is cast down, who accused
them before our God day and night. (11)And they have vanquished him by
the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they
loved not their lives unto death. (12)Therefore be exceeding glad ye
heavens, and ye who dwell in them. Wo to the inhabitants of the earth
and the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath,
knowing that he hath but a short time.

(13)And when the dragon saw that he was cast out into the earth, he
persecuted the woman which had brought forth the male child. (14)And
there were given to the woman two wings of a great eagle, that she
should fly into the wilderness, unto her place, where she is supported
there for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the
serpent. (15)And the serpent cast out after the woman, from his mouth
water, as a river, that he might sweep her away with the flood. (16)And
the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed up the river which the dragon cast out of his mouth. (17)And
the dragon was incensed against the woman, and went forth to make war
against the remnant of her seed, who keep the commandments of God, and
hold the testimony of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XIII.

AND I stood upon the sand of the sea, and I saw a beast rising up out
of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon the horns ten
diadems, and upon the heads a title of blasphemy. (2)And the beast
which I saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a
bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and the dragon gave him his
power, and his throne, and great authority. (3)And I saw one of his
heads as if wounded unto death; and his deadly wound was healed: and
all the earth wondered after the beast. (4)And they worshipped the
dragon who had given authority to the beast: and they worshipped the
beast, saying, Who is like to the beast? who is able to wage war with
him? (5)And there was given to him a mouth speaking great things and
blasphemies; and there was given to him authority to make war forty-two
months.

(6)And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his
name, and his tabernacle, and those who dwell in heaven. (7)And it was
given to him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them: and
authority was given to him over every tribe, and tongue, and nation.
(8)And all the inhabitants who dwell upon the earth shall worship him,
whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from
the foundation of the world. (9)He that hath an ear, let him hear.
(10)If any person leads _others_ into captivity, he shall be led into
captivity; if any person kills with the sword, he must be slain by the
sword. Here is the patience and the faith of the saints.

(11)And I saw another beast rising up out of the earth, and he had two
horns like a lamb, though he spake as the dragon. (12)And he exerciseth
all the authority of the first beast before him, and causeth the earth,
and those who inhabit therein, to worship the first beast whose deadly
wound was healed. (13)And he performeth great signs, so that he even
causeth fire to come down from heaven to the earth, in the sight of
men, (14)and deceiveth the inhabitants of the earth by the signs, which
he is enabled to perform before the beast, saying to the dwellers upon
the earth, that they should make an image for the beast who had the
stroke of the sword, and survived. (15)And he is enabled to impart life
to the image of the beast that even the image of the beast should
speak, and cause as many as will not worship the image of the beast to
be put to death. (16)And he causeth all the small and the great, the
rich and the poor, the freemen and the slaves, to receive a brand upon
their right hand, and upon their foreheads: (17)and that no man may buy
or sell, but he that hath the mark impressed, or the name of the beast,
or the number of his name. (18)Here is wisdom. Let him that hath
understanding calculate the number of the beast: for it is the number
of a man; and his number is six hundred sixty-six.

CHAP. XIV.

AND I saw, and lo, a lamb stood upon the mount Zion, and with him an
hundred forty-four thousand, having the name of his Father inscribed on
their foreheads. (2)And I heard a voice from heaven, as the sound of
many waters, and as the roar of loud thunder; and I heard the sound of
harpers harping on their harps: (3)and they sang as it were a new song
before the throne, and before the four living beings, and the
presbyters: and no person could learn that song, but the hundred
forty-four thousand, who were redeemed from the earth. (4)These are
they who have not defiled themselves with women; for they are virgins:
these are they who follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth: these have
been redeemed among men, as first-fruits to God, and to the Lamb.
(5)And in their mouth no guile is found; for they are blameless before
the throne of God.

(6)And I saw another angel flying in the midst of heaven, having the
everlasting gospel to preach the glad tidings to the inhabitants of the
earth, to every nation, and tribe, and tongue, and people, (7)saying
with a loud voice, Fear God, and give him glory; for the hour of his
judgment is come; and worship him that made the heaven and the earth,
and the sea, and the fountains of waters.

(8)And another angel followed, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen,
that great city, because all nations have been made to drink of the
wine of the wrath of her whoredom.

(9)And a third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If any
person worship the beast, and his image, and receive the brand upon his
forehead, and upon his right hand, (10)he also shall drink of the wine
of the fury of God, which is mixed undiluted with water in the cup of
his wrath; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the
presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: (11)and
the smoke of their torment ascendeth for ever and ever: and they have
no respite day nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and
whosoever receiveth the brand of his name. (12)Here is the patience of
the saints: here are they who keep the commandments of God, and the
faith of Jesus. (13)And I heard a voice from heaven saying to me,
Write, Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord, from henceforward:
yea, saith the Spirit, that they may have rest from their labours; but
their works follow after them.

(14)And I saw, and, lo! a white cloud, and upon the cloud sat one like
to a son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a
sharp sickle. (15)And anther angel came forth out of the temple, crying
with a loud voice to him that sat upon the cloud, Put in thy sickle,
and reap: for the hour is come for thee to reap; because the harvest of
the earth is fully ripe. (16)And he who sat on the cloud thrust in his
sickle upon the earth, and the earth was reaped.

(17)And another angel came forth out of the temple which is in heaven,
having also himself a sharp sickle. (18)And another angel came forth
from the altar, having authority over fire; and he cried with a loud
voice to him who held the sharp sickle, saying, Put in thy sharp
sickle, and gather the bunches of the vine of the earth; for her
clusters are ripe. (19)And the angel thrust in his sickle upon the
earth, and gathered the grapes of the vine of the earth, and cast them
into the great winepress of the wrath of God. (20)And the wine-press
was trodden without the city, and blood issued from the wine-press, as
high as the horses' bridles, for the space of a thousand and six
hundred furlongs.

CHAP. XV.

AND I saw another sign in the heaven, great and wonderful, seven angels
having the seven last plagues because by them is the wrath of God
completely executed. (2)And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled
with fire; and those who had obtained the victory over the beast, and
over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name
standing upon the sea of glass, holding the harps of God. (3)And they
sung the sacred ode of Moses the servant of the Lord, and the song of
the Lamb, saying, Great and marvellous are thy works, O Lord God
Almighty; righteous and true are thy ways, O King of saints. (4)Who
should not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? because thou only
art holy: for all nations shall come and worship before thee, because
thy righteous judgments are made evident. (5)And after these things I
beheld, and, lo! the temple of the tabernacle of witness in heaven was
opened: (6)and the seven angels having the seven plagues came forth out
of the temple, clothed in linen white and shining, and girded about the
breasts with golden girdles. (7)And one of the four living beings gave
unto the seven angels seven golden vases full of the wrath of God, who
liveth for ever and ever. (8)And the temple was filled with smoke from
the glory of God, and from his power; and no person was able to enter
into the temple, until the seven plagues of the seven angels were
completely executed.

CHAP. XVI.

AND I heard a loud voice out of the temple, saying to the seven angels,
Go and pour out the vases of the wrath of God upon the earth. (2)And
the first angel went, and poured out his vase upon the earth; and there
came an ulcer malignant and painful upon the men that had the brand of
the beast, and upon those who worshipped his image.

(3)And the second angel poured his vase upon the sea and it became
blood as of a dead man: and every living creature died in the sea.

(4)And the third angel poured out his vase upon the rivers and upon the
fountains of waters; and they became blood. (5)And I heard the angel of
the waters saying, Righteous art thou, O Lord, who art, and who wast,
even the holy one, because thou hast judged these things. (6)For they
have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them
blood to drink; for they are worthy. (7)And I heard another angel from
the altar saying, Yea, Lord God Almighty, true and just are thy
judgments.

(8)And the fourth angel poured out his vase upon the sun; and there was
given to it a charge to burn men with fire. (9)And the men were
scorched with a fierce heat, and they blasphemed the name of God, who
had power over these plagues: and they repented not, to give him glory.

(10)And the fifth angel poured out his vase upon the throne of the
beast; and his kingdom was full of darkness, and they gnawed their own
tongues from anguish, (11)and they blasphemed the God of heaven, in the
midst of their anguish, and of their ulcers, and repented not of their
works.

(12)And the sixth angel poured out his vase upon the great river
Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the
kings who come from the rising of the sun might be prepared.

(13)And I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the
mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three
unclean spirits like frogs. (14)For they are the spirits of demons
doing wonders, which go forth unto the kings of the earth, and of the
whole habitable globe, to gather them together unto the battle of that
great day of God Almighty. (15)Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he
who watcheth, and keepeth his garments, that he walk not about naked,
and men see his shame. (16)And he gathered them together into a place
called in the Hebrew, Armageddon.

(17)And the seventh angel poured out his vase into the air; and a loud
voice come out from the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It
is done. (18)And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and
there was a great earthquake, such as was not from the day that men
were upon the earth, an earthquake of such a kind, and so great.
(19)And the great city was cleft into three parts, and the cities of
the nations fell: and Babylon the great came in remembrance before God,
to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fury of his wrath. (20)And
every island fled, and the mountains were no more found. (21)And a
great storm of hail, each about a talent weight, fell from heaven upon
men: and men blasphemed God for the plague of hail: for great was the
plague of it, exceedingly great.

CHAP. XVII.

AND one of the seven angels who had the seven vases, came to me, and
talked with me, saying to me, Come hither, I will shew thee the
judgment of the great harlot, who sitteth upon many waters: (2)with
whom the kings of the earth have committed whoredom, and all the
inhabitants of the world have intoxicated themselves with the wine of
her whoredom. (3)And he bore me away in spirit into the wilderness: and
I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet beast, full of names of blasphemy,
having seven heads, and ten horns. (4)And the woman was clothed in
purple and scarlet, and all over decked with gold, precious stones, and
pearls, holding a golden cup in her hand, full of abominations and of
the impurity of her whoredom. (5)And upon her forehead was there a name
written, Mystery, Babylon the great, the mother or harlots, and of the
abominations of the earth. (6)And I saw the woman drunk with the blood
of saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw
her, I wondered with great amazement. (7)And the angel said unto me,
Wherefore dost thou wonder? I will tell thee the mystery of the woman,
and of the beast which carrieth her, which hath seven heads and ten
horns. (8)The beast which thou seest was, and is not; and shall come up
out of the abyss _of hell_, and shall go into perdition: and the
dwellers upon earth will wonder, (whose names are not written in the
book of life from the foundation of the world,) when they shall see the
beast which was, and is not, though he is. (9)Here is the mind that
hath wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains, where the woman is
seated even upon them. (10)And these are seven kings: five have fallen,
and the one exists, the other is not yet come; and when he cometh, he
must abide but a little while. (11)And the beast which was, and is not,
though he is himself the eighth, yet is of the seven, and shall go away
into perdition. (12)And the ten horns which thou sawest, are ten kings,
who have not yet received their kingdoms; but will receive authority as
kings for one hour with the beast. (13)They hold one sentiment, and
will give their own power and authority to the beast. (14)They shall
make war against the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: because he
is Lord of lords, and King of kings and they that are with him, are
called, and elect, and faithful. (15)And he saith to me, The waters
which thou sawest, on which the whore sat, are people, and multitudes,
and nations, and tongues. (16)And the ten horns which thou sawest upon
the beast, they shall hate the whore, and make her desolate and naked,
and shall eat her flesh, and shall burn her up with fire. (17)For God
hath put it into their hearts to do his will, to perform one purpose,
even to give their kingdom to the beast, until the words of God are
fulfilled. (18)And the woman which thou sawest is the great city, which
holds dominion over the kings of the earth.

CHAP. XVIII.

AND after these things I saw an angel descending from heaven, having
great authority; and the earth was enlightened by his glory. (2)And he
cried mightily with a great voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen,
is fallen, and is become the habitation of demons, and the hold of
every impure spirit, and the cage of every unclean and hateful bird.
(3)Because all nations have drunk of the wine of the rage of her
whoredom, and the kings of the earth have committed whoredom with her,
and the merchants of the earth have been enriched by the excess of her
profligate luxury.

(4)And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come forth out of
her, my people, that ye have no share in her sins, and that so ye may
not receive of her plagues. (5)For her sins have reached unto heaven,
and God hath remembered her iniquities. (6)Render to her as she also
hath done to you, and repay her double according to her works; in the
cup which she hath mingled mingle for her double. (7)As much as she
hath glorified herself, and rioted in luxury, so much torment and
sorrow give her: because she hath said in her heart, I sit a queen, and
am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. (8)Therefore in one hour shall
all her plagues come, death, and mourning, and famine: and she shall be
consumed with fire; because mighty is the Lord God, who judgeth her.

(9)And the kings of the earth who have committed whoredom with her, and
shared in her luxuries, shall bewail her, and lament bitterly over her,
when they see the smoke of her burning, (10)standing afar off through
terror of her torment, saying, Alas, alas, that great city Babylon,
that strong city! how in one hour is thy judgment come upon thee!

(11)And the merchants of the earth wept and wailed over her: because no
man buyeth their merchandise any more: (12)the merchandise of gold and
of silver, and of precious stones, and of pearl, and of fine linen, and
of purple, and of silk, and of scarlet, and every sweet scented wood,
and every ivory vessel, and every vessel of most precious wood, and of
gold, and of iron, and of marble, (13)and cinnamon, and perfumes, and
myrrh, and libanum, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and
cattle, and sheep, and of horses, and of chariots, and of bodies, and
the souls of men. (14)And the delicate autumnal fruit of thy soul's
earner longing is gone from thee, and all things that are dainty and
that are splendid are departed from thee, and never shalt thou find
them any more.

(15)The merchants of these things who enriched themselves by her, shall
stand afar off through terror of her torment, weeping and wailing,
(16)and saying, Alas, alas, the great city, which was clothed in fine
linen, and purple, and scarlet, and overlaid with gold, and precious
stones, and pearls! how in one hour is so great wealth laid waste!

(17)And every pilot, and all the crew in the ships, and the mariners,
and as many as exercise their labours on the sea, stood afar off,
(18)and cried when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, What is
like that great city! (19)And they cast dust upon their heads, and
cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that great city, by
which all who occupied ships on the sea were enriched from her
opulence! how in one hour is she made desolate!

(20)Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye the holy apostles and
prophets, for God hath adjudged her to punishment, for the judgment
inflicted on you by her. (21)And a mighty angel took up a stone as a
great milestone, and cast it into the sea, saying, So with rapidity
shall the great city Babylon be hurled into the deep, and never shall
be found more. (22)And the sound of harpers, and musicians, and flute
players, and trumpeters, shall never be heard in thee more; and no
artificer of whatever trade shall be found in thee any more; and the
sound of a milstone shall be heard in thee no more; (23)and never shall
the light of a lamp shine in thee any more; and the voice of the
bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard in thee no more: because thy
merchants were the grandees of the earth; because all nations were
deluded by thy magical incantation. (24)And in her was found the blood
of prophets, and holy men, and of all who have been slaughtered upon
the earth.

CHAP. XIX.

AND after these things I heard a loud sound as of a vast multitude in
heaven, saying, Hallelujah: Salvation, and glory, and honour, and power
be to the Lord our God: (2)because true and righteous are his
judgments; for he hath judged the great harlot, that corrupted the
earth with her whoredom, and hath avenged the blood of his servants
shed by her hand. (3)And the second time they said, Hallelujah. And her
smoke ascended up for ever and ever. (4)And the four and twenty
presbyters fell prostrate, and the four living beings, and they
worshipped God who was seated on the throne, saying, Amen; Hallelujah.

(5)And there came a voice out of the throne, saying, Praise our God,
all ye servants of his, and all that fear him, both the small and the
great. (6)And I heard as it were the voice of a vast multitude, and as
the noise of many waters, and as the roar of mighty thunderings,
saying, Hallelujah: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth. (7)Let us
rejoice and exult, and give him glory: because the marriage of the Lamb
is come, and his bride hath made herself ready. (8)And it was granted
her to be clothed in fine linen, clean and splendid: for the fine linen
is _the emblem of_ the righteousness of the saints. (9)And he said to
me, Write, Blessed are they that are invited to the marriage supper of
the Lamb. And he said to me, These are the true sayings of God.

(10)And I fell down before his feet to worship him: and he said unto
me, See thou dost not so: I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren
who hold the testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the spirit of
prophecy is the testimony of Jesus.

(11)And I saw heaven opened, and lo a white horse; and he that sat upon
it, is called Faithful and True, and with righteousness doth he judge
and make war. (12)And his eyes were as a flame of fire, and upon his
head were many diadems; and he hath a name inscribed which no man
knoweth but himself. (13)And he was clothed in a garment dipt in blood,
and his name is styled the word of God. (14)And the hosts which are in
heaven followed him on white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and
clean. (15)And out of his mouth proceeded a sharp sword, that therewith
he may smite the heathen and he will rule them with an iron sceptre:
and he will tread the wine-press of the fury and of the wrath of God
Almighty. (16)And he hath upon his vesture and upon his thigh this name
written, king of kings, and lord of lords.

(17)And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud
voice, saying to all the fowls which fly in the midst of heaven, Come
hither and flock together unto the supper of the great God: (18)that ye
may eat the carcasses of kings, and the carcasses of military
commanders, and the carcasses of mighty men, and the carcasses of
horses, and of those who ride upon them, and the carcasses of all,
freemen and slaves, both small and great.

(19)And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies,
gathered together to make war with him that was sitting upon the horse,
and with his army. (20)And the beast was seized upon, and with him the
false prophet who performed the wonders before him, by which he
deceived those who received the brand of the beast, and those who
worshipped his image. They were both hurled alive into the lake of fire
which burneth with brimstone. (21)And all the rest were slain with the
sword of him that sat upon the horse, which issued from his mouth: and
all the fowls were gorged with their carcasses.

CHAP. XX.

AND I saw an angel descending from heaven, having the key of the abyss
_of hell_, and a great chain in his hand: (2)and he seized on the
dragon, the old serpent, which is the devil and Satan, and bound him a
thousand years, (3)and cast him into the abyss, and shut him up, and
put a seal upon it, that he might deceive the nations no more until the
thousand years are completed: and after that he must be loosed a short
time. (4)And I saw thrones, and persons were seated upon them, and
authority to judge was given to them: and I saw the souls of those who
had been beheaded for the testimony of Jesus, and for the word of God,
and who had not worshipped the beast, nor his image, and had not
received the brand in their foreheads, and upon their right hand; and
they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. (5)But the rest of
the dead lived not again until the thousand years are completed. This
is the first resurrection. (6)Blessed and holy is he that hath part in
the first resurrection; over these the second death hath no dominion:
but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and they shall reign
with him a thousand years. (7)And when the thousand years shall be
completed, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison; (8)and he shall go
forth to deceive the nations that are in the four corners of the earth,
Gog, and Magog, to gather them together to battle, whose number is as
the sand of the sea. (9)And they went up on the breadth of the earth,
and encircled the camp of the saints, and the beloved city: and there
came down fire from God out of heaven, and devoured them up. (10)And
the devil who deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and they shall be
tormented day and night for ever and ever.

(11)And I saw a great white throne, and one sat upon it, from whose
presence fled the earth and the heaven, and no place was found for
them. (12)And I saw the dead, small and great, standing before God, and
the books were opened; and another book was opened, which is the book
of life: and the dead were judged out of the things written in the
books according to their works. (13)And the sea gave up the dead that
were in it, and death and the grave gave up the dead that were in them;
and every one was judged according to his works. (14)And death and the
grave were cast into the lake of fire: this is the second death.
(15)And if any one was not found inscribed on the book of life, he was
cast into the lake of fire.

CHAP. XXI.

AND I saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the
first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea. (2)And I John
saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem, descending from God out of
heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. (3)And I heard a
loud voice from heaven saying, Behold the tabernacle of God is with
men, and he shall pitch his tent with them, and they shall be his
people, and God himself shall be with them, their own God. (4)And God
shall wipe away every tear from their eyes, and death shall be no more;
nor shall mourning, nor crying, nor toil be any more: because the
former things are passed away. (5)And he that sat upon the throne said,
Lo! I make all things new: and he said unto me, Write that these
sayings are true and faithful. (6)And he said to me, It is done. I am
the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end; I will give to him
that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely. (7)He that
overcometh shall inherit all things, and I will be to him a God, and he
shall be to me a son. (8)But to those who shrink back through fear, and
to the infidels, and to the abominable, and to murderers, and to
whoremongers, and to those who use magical incantations, and to
idolaters, and to all liars, is their portion _appointed_ in the lake
which burneth with fire and brimstone; which is the second death.

(9)And there came to me one of the seven angels who held the seven
vases full of the seven last plagues, and he talked with me, saying,
Come hither, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb's wife. (10)And he
bore me away in spirit unto a great and exceeding high mountain, and
shewed me the great city, the holy Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven
from God, (11)having the glory of God: and her brilliance was like the
most precious gem, as a jasper stone, transparent as crystal; (12)and
she had a great wall and lofty, having twelve gates, and at the gates
twelve angels, and names inscribed on them, which are those of the
twelve tribes of the children of Israel. (13)From the east three gates;
from the north three gates; from the south three gates; from the west
three gates. (14)And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and
on them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. (15)And he that
talked with me held a golden cane to measure the city, and the gates
thereof, and the wall thereof. (16)And the city is a quadrangle, and
the breadth of it is just as much as the length of it; and he measured
the city with the cane, twelve thousand furlongs: the breadth, and the
length, and the height of it, are exactly proportioned. (17)He measured
also the wall of it a hundred and forty-four cubits, according to the
measure of a man, for such is that of an angel.

(18)The structure of the wall of it was jasper, and the city pure gold,
like clear glass. (19)And the foundations of the walls of the city were
adorned with every precious stone: the first foundation a jasper; the
second a sapphire; the third a chalcedony; the fourth an emerald;
(20)the fifth a sardonyx; the sixth a sardius; the seventh a
chrysolite; the eighth a beryl; the ninth a topaz; the tenth a
chrysoprasus; the eleventh a jacinth; the twelfth an amethyst. (21)And
the twelve gates were twelve several pearls; every one of the gates was
of one pearl; and the street of the city was pure gold, as transparent
glass.

(22)And I saw no temple therein; for the Lord God Almighty is the
temple thereof, even the Lamb. (23)And the city had no need of the sun,
neither of the moon to shine upon it: for the glory of God illuminates
it, and the Lamb is the lamp thereof. (24)And the nations of those that
are saved shall walk about in the light thereof; and the kings of the
earth shall bring their glory and their honour into it; (25)and her
gates shall be never shut by day (for there is no night there); (26)and
they shall bring the glory and the honour of the nations into it.
(27)And there shall no more enter into it any thing unclean, or that
practises abomination and lying; but only those who are written in the
book of life of the Lamb.

CHAP. XXII.

AND he shewed me a clear river of water of life, bright as crystal,
proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb. (2)In the midst of
the street of it, even on this side, and on that of the river, grew the
tree of life, producing twelve crops of fruit, and ripening its fruit
in succession every month; and the leaves of the tree are for the
healing of the nations.

(3)And no accursed thing is there any more; and the throne of God and
of the Lamb are in it, and his servants will pay divine worship to him.
(4)And they shall see his face; and his name shall be on their
foreheads. (5)And there shall be no night there, and they have no need
of a lamp, or the light of the sun; because the Lord God illumines
them: and they shall reign for ever and ever.

(6)And he said to me, These words are faithful and true. And the Lord
God of the holy prophets hath sent his angel to shew to his servants
the things which must shortly come to pass. (7)Behold, I come quickly!
blessed is he that observeth the words of the prophecy of this book.

(8)And I John saw and heard these things. And when I had heard and
seen, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel who shewed me
these things. (9)And he said to me, See thou do it not; for I am a
fellow-servant of thine, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of those
who observe the words of this book: worship God. (10)And he said to me,
Seal not up the words of the prophecy of this book; for the time is at
hand. (11)He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he that is
filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is righteous, let him be
righteous still; and he that is holy, let him be holy still. (12)And
behold, I come quickly: and my reward is with me, to give to every man
as his work shall be. (13)I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning
and the end, the first and the last. (14)Blessed are they who keep his
commandments, that they may have authority to approach unto the tree of
life, and that they may enter in by the gates into the city. (15)But
without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and
idolaters, and every one who loveth and maketh a lie.

(16)I Jesus have sent my angel to testify unto you these things in the
churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, the bright and
morning star. (17)And the spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him
that heareth say, Come. And let him who is athirst come: and whosoever
is desirous, let him take of the water of life freely. (18)For I
testify to every one who heareth the words of the prophecy of this
book, If any man add to these things, God will lay upon him the plagues
that are written in this book: (19)and if any take away from the words
of the book of this prophecy, God will take away his part from the book
of life, and from the holy city, and from the things which are written
in this book.

(20)He that testifieth these things saith, Verily, I come quickly.
Amen. Yea come, Lord Jesus!

(21)The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen

THE END.



FOOTNOTES

[1] Isa. vii. 14

[2] Micah, v. 2

[3] Hos. ii. 1

[4] Jer. xxxi. 15

[5] Isa. xl. 3

[6] Deut. viii. 3

[7] Psal. xci. 11, 12

[8] Deut. vi. 16

[9] Deut. vi. 13

[10] Isa. ix. 1, 2

[11] Mal. iii. 1. Isa. xl. 3.

[12] Isa. xxix. 13.

[13] Exod. xx. 52.

[14] Levit. xx. 9.

[15] Equal to sixty shekels, above seven of our pounds.

[16] Isaiah, lvi. 7.

[17] Psalm cxviii. 22.

[18] Deut. xxv. 5.

[19] Exod. iii. 6.

[20] Psalm cx. 1.

[21] Isa. liii. 12.

[22] Their day commenced at sun-set.

[23] Psalm lxix. 25.

[24] Psalm cix. 8.

[25] Joel, ii. 28, 32.

[26] Psalm xvi. 8-11.

[27] Psalm cx. 1.

[28] Deut. xviii. 18, 19.

[29] Gen. xii. 3.

[30] Psalm cxviii. 22.

[31] Psalm ii. 1, 2.

[32] Gen. xi. 31.

[33] Gen. xv. 13, 14.

[34] Exod. iii. 6.

[35] Exod. iii. 5-10.

[36] Deut. xviii. 15.

[37] Amos, v. 25-27.

[38] Isaiah, lxvi. 1.

[39] Isaiah, liii. 7, 8.

[40] Sam. xiii. 14.

[41] Psalm ii. 7.

[42] Isa. lv. 3.

[43] Psalm xvi. 10.

[44] Isa. xxix, 34.

[45] Isa. xlix. 6.

[46] Amos, ix. 11, 12.

[47] Exod. xxii. 28.

[48] Isaiah, vi, 9. 10.

[49] Habb. ii. 4.

[50] Isaiah, lii. 5.

[51] Psalm, li. 4.

[52] Psa. xiv. 1-3. Psa. v. 9.

[53] Gen. xv. 6.

[54] Psa. xxxii. 1, 2.

[55] Gen. xvii. 5.

[56] Gen. xv. 5.

[57] Psalm, xliv. 22.

[58] Gen. xxv. 23.

[59] Mal. i. 2, 3.

[60] Exod. xxxiii. 19.

[61] Exod. ix. 16.

[62] Hos. i. 10.

[63] Isa. x. 22, 23.  [64] Isa. i. 9.

[65] Isa. viii. 14.

[66] Lev. xviii. 5.

[67] Deut. xxx. 12-14.

[68] Isa. xxviii. 16.

[69] Joel, ii. 32.

[70] Isa. lii. 7, 8.

[71] Isa. liii. 1.

[72] Psa. xix. 4.

[73] Deut. xxxii. 21.

[74] Isa. lxv. 1, 2.

[75] 1 Kings, xix. 14.

[76] Isa. xxix. 10.

[77] Psa. lxix. 22.

[78] Isa. lix. 20.

[79] Deut. xxxii. 35.

[80] Isaiah, xlv. 23.

[81] Psa. lxix. 9

[82] Psa. xviii. 49.

[83] Deut. xxxii, 43.

[84] Psa. cxvii. 1.

[85] Isaiah, xi. 10.

[86] Isaiah, lii. 15.

[87] Isa. xxix. 14.

[88] Jerem. ix. 24.

[89] Isa. lxiv. 4.

[90] Job. v. 13.

[91] Ps. xciv. 11.

[92] Gen. ii. 24.

[93] Deut. xxv. 4.

[94] Exod. xxxii. 6-19.

[95] Num. xxv. 1-9.

[96] Num. xxi. 16.

[97] Num. xiv 37.

[98] Psalm xxiv. 1.

[99] Isa. xxviii. 11.

[100] Gen. iii. 16.

[101] Psalm cxvi. 10.

[102] Isaiah, xlix. 8.

[103] Lev. xxvi. 12.

[104] Isai. lii. 11.

[105] Jerem. xxxi. 1.

[106] Exod. xvi. 18.

[107] Psalm cxii. 9.

[108] Gen. xii. 3.

[109] Deu. xxvii. 26.

[110] Habb. ii.4.

[111] Lev. xviii. 5.

[112] Deut. xxi. 23.

[113] Gen. xvi. 15.

[114] Isa. liv. 1.

[115] Gen. xxi. 10.

[116] Psa. lxviii. 18.

[117] Isaiah, lx. 1.

[118] Exod. xx. 12.

[119] Deut. xxvi. 14.

[120] Psa. ii. 7.

[121] 2 Sam. vii. 14.

[122] Psa. xcvii. 7.

[123] Psa. civ. 4.

[124] Psa. xlv. 6, 7.

[125] Psa. cii. 26.

[126] Psalm cx. 1.

[127] Psalm viii. 4.

[128] Psalm xxii. 22.

[129] Psalm xviii. 2.

[130] Isai. viii. 18.

[131] Psalm xcv. 7.

[132] Gen. ii. 2.

[133] Psalm cx. 4.

[134] Gen. xxii. 16.

[135] Exod. xxv. 40.

[136] Jerem. xxxi. 31-34.

[137] Psalm xl. 7.

[138] Deut. xxxii. 35, 36

[139] Habb. ii. 3.

[140] Gen. xxi. 12.

[141] Prov. iii. 11, 12.

[142] Exod. xix. 12, 13.

[143] Haggai, ii. 6.

[144] Joshua, i. 5.

[145] Gen. xv. 6.

[146] Isa. xli. 8.

[147] Prov. iii. 34.

[148] Levit. xi. 44.

[149] Isaiah, xl. 6.

[150] Isa. xxviii. 16.

[151] Psa. cxviii. 22.

[152] Isa. liii. 4. 6.

[153] Psalm xxxiv. 12, 13.

[154] About ten ounces.

[155] About ten ounces.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Translation of the New Testament
from the original Greek, by T. Haweis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRANSLATION OF NEW TESTAMENT ***

***** This file should be named 31829.txt or 31829.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/8/2/31829/

Produced by Keith G Richardson

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
