The Project Gutenberg EBook of Illustrations of Exotic Entomology, Volume 3, by 
Dru Drury

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Illustrations of Exotic Entomology, Volume 3

Author: Dru Drury

Editor: John Obadiah Westwood

Release Date: December 23, 2014 [EBook #47601]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ILLUSTRATIONS OF EXOTIC ENTOMOLOGY, V.3 ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)





Transcriber's note:

The copy on which this edition is based was bound with the 3 volumes of
text in one physical volume and the plates in another. They have been
reordered into 3 separate projects with the plates inserted adjacent to the
related text - other copies are known to have been bound in this fashion.

Page numbers enclosed by curly braces (example: {25}) have been
incorporated to facilitate the use of the Index.

Images of the original plates are available through Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/illustrationsofe12drur

Project Gutenberg has the other two volumes of this work.
      Volume I: see http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/47599.
      Volume II: see http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/47600.

       *       *       *       *       *


ILLUSTRATIONS

OF

EXOTIC ENTOMOLOGY,

CONTAINING

UPWARDS OF SIX HUNDRED AND FIFTY

FIGURES AND DESCRIPTIONS

OF

FOREIGN INSECTS,

INTERSPERSED WITH

REMARKS AND REFLECTIONS ON THEIR NATURE AND PROPERTIES.

BY DRU DRURY.

----

A NEW EDITION,

BROUGHT DOWN TO THE PRESENT STATE OF THE SCIENCE,
WITH THE SYSTEMATIC CHARACTERS OF EACH SPECIES, SYNONYMS, INDEXES,
AND OTHER ADDITIONAL MATTER.

BY J. O. WESTWOOD, F.L.S.

SOC. CÆS. NAT. CUR. MOSQ. SOC.
ETC. ETC.

----

VOL. III.

----

LONDON:

HENRY G. BOHN, 4, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

MDCCCXXXVII.

{iii}MR. DRURY'S PREFACE

TO THE FIRST EDITION.

----

VOL. III.


Grateful for the favourable reception the two preceding volumes of this
work have met from the lovers of Natural History, it is with pleasure that
I now present them, though late, with this my third and last volume, which
has been completed in opposition to greater disadvantages and
disappointments than attended either of the others.

It may not be superfluous to inform my readers, that this publication is
the result of such leisure hours only as could be spared from an
indispensable assiduity to immediate business, and a necessary attention,
at that time, to an impaired constitution.

This being taken into consideration, little apology will be required for
the length of time I have been in bringing it out, by those who know what
trouble we must necessarily have with the various artists, who are employed
in executing the different parts of such a work, and with what scrupulous
exactness and care every minute part ought to be examined and corrected.
This unavoidable delay, however, has been productive of another
circumstance, which compels me to entreat all their candour and indulgence.

I have always made it a rule of my conduct to promote Natural History by
every method in my power. My cabinet has therefore been open to all those
gentlemen, from whatever part of the world they came, who made Entomology
their study. In consequence of this permission, descriptions of many of the
insects now published have got abroad some time since, and even figures of
several of them have made their appearance. This I did not expect, as many
of my plates were entirely finished some months, and even years, before
those above-mentioned could have got forth. This will account for the
seeming contradiction in many places, upon comparing the descriptions with
the Index, where many insects are described and mentioned as _new_ ones,
but in the Index have their synonyms given in various authors. The truth
is, the descriptions were made about the year 1775, between which time and
the present those authors published their respective works.

But who can foresee disappointments, or avoid their effects? It may be
urged, that these plates might have been omitted, and others substituted.
In so doing, however, I could {iv}not have been justified, either to the
purchasers of the former volumes, or to myself. Many of them, there is no
doubt, would not have the figures of those insects alluded to, unless in
this work; and, as to my part, without considering the loss, neither my
business, my health, nor my leisure, would have enabled me to supply their
place. This very circumstance I have mentioned in the Preface to my last
volume, wherein I bespoke the candour of my readers for an _anticipation_
of a similar kind, which got abroad before I could bring out that volume.
In the present case, I have the greatest reason to request the same
indulgence from a motive still stronger, which is, that almost all the
figures given by other authors, and which I have quoted in the index, were
taken from specimens originally in my possession. As it is, I hope, the
novelty, the beauty, and the curiosity of the other insects herein
published, will, by affording large gratification to the inquisitive
naturalist, make some amends, and that the nature of my situation will
procure me a full acquittal from any kind of premeditated imposition.

In regard to the manners and economy of the insects now published, I have
been able to get little information. There are very few, even of those who
collect abroad, who will give themselves the trouble of making
observations; and such as do not want inclination or ability, and even
travel expressly for the purpose, find great, and to us almost
inconceivable impediments.

Mr. Smeathman, who has been many years in Africa and the West Indies, has
furnished me with a few remarks on this subject, together with observations
on some particular insects, published in the preceding volumes as well as
this. These observations, I am of opinion, will afford information and
entertainment to my readers, and, at the same time, throw some light on the
nature, qualities, or dispositions of many kinds of insects, of which,
hitherto, we know nothing more than the external figure. He informs me,
that in hot climates, especially such as are not well settled, the
difficulties attending every kind of study, and every species of
collecting, are infinitely greater than those who have not visited them can
possibly suppose. In those countries, either from the scarcity and high
price of the materials, or the dearness of labour, the traders or settlers
are obliged to calculate for little more than necessary house-room, with
such conveniences only as are absolutely necessary for their different
occupations and pursuits; in which they are, from these circumstances,
frequently much cramped and embarrassed. If this is the case with those who
have all the best means in their power of providing for themselves, how
must it be with transient persons and speculative travellers, who are
seldom profitable visitors, and whose studies consequently meet with little
partiality from such as are assiduously engaged in the sole pursuit of
wealth or power?

As to the breeding of insects, and observing their changes and dispositions
with care and circumspection, it seems almost impossible in the nature of
things to be practised, except, comparatively speaking, with a very few.

(The ravages of the tropical ants and cock-roaches are then detailed from
the {v}information given by Mr. Smeathman, which I have thought it more
interesting to introduce with the descriptions of those insects in the
second volume.)

The _termites_ are another genus of insects, which some time or other
injure the traveller, and at least add to the number of his cares. These
wonderful creatures were little known till Mr. Smeathman developed their
extraordinary history. They were generally supposed to be a species of ant,
and in consequence so frequently confounded with the natural history of
that great genus of insects, that it has thrown much obscurity into both.

The ravages of these insects are so insidious, that travellers frequently
suffer irreparable damage before they are aware of them. When they are
previously informed, the depredations of those insects may be greatly
prevented; but constant care and caution are required, which is no small
addition to the number of cares that a collector must always have upon his
mind. I shall not pretend to go any further into the history of this genus
of insects, as I must necessarily borrow it from my ingenious friend's very
entertaining account of them, published last year in the seventy-first
volume, Part I. of the Philosophical Transactions, to which I refer my
reader.

To these obstacles, Mr. Smeathman adds others, some of which we can have
little idea of in these climates. The _Norway rats_ are so numerous and so
bold, that they will come and feed by the side of the table at supper, and
during the still hours of night, search every corner for plunder, making a
continual uproar, and often, in a kind of furor, carry away small utensils,
and other articles, which they can turn to no advantage either for food or
shelter. They are very mischievous to the naturalist's collection of plants
and seeds, tearing them and the books, in which they are kept, to pieces,
as it were in wantonness, and carrying away such as are edible, in which
they are often assisted by the land-crabs. These amphibious insects
frequently make holes for themselves, or use those made by the rats under
ground, and enter through the floors of the negroes' cottages.

In the rainy seasons many small animals are apt to take shelter in the
thatch; among others, _various species of snakes_, who most probably get
there in pursuit of the rats. Mr. Smeathman when on the African shore
observed, that the former were very harmless; and, as he found the latter
very mischievous and destructive, he would not suffer the snakes to be
killed or hunted out. The patient natives there, it seems, as well as the
rational travellers, are not without consolation amidst this heterogeneous
crowd of inmates. They see with pleasure the spiders always on the watch
for the wasps and cock-roaches, the last of which are intolerable. The
_lizards_, again, attack all sorts of insects, the large Tarantula, as it
is called, not excepted. The lizards not unfrequently fall a prey to the
_fowls_, and the rats to the snakes. Hence lizards, rats, snakes, and
land-crabs occasionally serve as delicious repasts to the improvident
inhabitants, who thus "thrive under evil."

Sometimes indeed the land-crab becomes, as in the West Indies, a part of
the stock of the provident and luxurious inhabitants, who inclose a small
piece of ground in the manner {vi}of a yard, and feed them with fruit,
herbs, Indian corn, and other grain, on which they fatten exceedingly, and
stewed in any manner are most delicious eating.

Thus a speculative man can find few opportunities of securing his
collections, or of making observations, while surrounded by the hospitable
chief, the trader, the planter, and their families, who scarce finding room
enough in their houses for themselves, think all time lost that is not
spent in lucrative business, active pleasures, or social festivity. If to
this we add frequent sickness, the want of boats or cattle for conveyance
in cases where moving without is impracticable; the want of information, of
guides, of assistance, the means of transporting things, of candlelights,
or even a table to write on, it will not be surprising we have so little
knowledge of the uncultivated tropical regions. Even travellers, who go
expressly to make observations, have other great difficulties to encounter.
They are sometimes obliged to pass much of their time in providing the mere
necessaries of life, and some in securing themselves from danger, while
their industry is always exposed to the avarice, the neglect, or the
ill-will of ignorant people, whose services, though poor, are not to be
easily dispensed with.

Sometimes the cottages have no windows, and the larger houses, which they
contrive to form in such manner as to receive the breezes, are generally
without glass; so that the student frequently has his subject, his pen, or
his paper blown away, with various other disappointments and vexations too
numerous and too trivial to mention, but altogether distressing, and in
many instances insurmountable.

As this is the case, we have not much reason to wonder that our accounts of
some foreign countries, and their natural productions, are so short and
imperfect. We must content ourselves with slight sketches, which, repeated
and corroborated by various travellers, may at last amount to one great
descriptive and useful work, of which those contained in this Preface are
offered only as so many scattered seeds.

(The various observations upon the economy of different species figured in
these Illustrations, and inserted in this Preface, have been respectively
introduced under the species to which they belonged.)

{1}ILLUSTRATIONS

OF

EXOTIC ENTOMOLOGY.

----


PLATE I.

[Illustration]

PAPILIO ANTIMACHUS.

Plate I.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna, _Latr._ FAMILY: Papilionidæ,
  _Leach_.

  GENUS. PAPILIO, _Linn._ (Section Equit. Troj.) _&c._

  PAPILIO ANTIMACHUS. Alis nigris, anticis elongatis maculis fulvis,
  posticis subdentatis disco radiato rufo, nigro punctato; apice nigro
  lunulis marginalibus fulvis. (Expans. Alar. 8½ unc.)

  SYN. Papilio Antimachus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ 3.
  _pt._ 1. _p._ 11. _No._ 31. _Donov. Nat. Repos._ _pl._ 100. _&_ 101.
  _God. and Latr. Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 28. _No._ 8. _Esper. Aus. Schm._
  _t._ 22. _f._ 2. _Boisd. Hist. Nat. Lep._ 1. _p._ 188.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone (_Drury_).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ brown. Head black, with eight whiteish spots on the
  top. Thorax black, with four white spots at the base of the anterior
  wings. Abdomen black at the base and at top, clay-coloured on the sides
  and extremity. Anterior wings black at the base, but at the extremities
  more of a brown colour, with eighteen different shaped marks and spots;
  those next the body dark orange, the others yellow clay-coloured, some
  being so faint as to be hardly discernible. Posterior wings slightly
  dentated, the inner scollops being edged with clay-coloured crescents.
  These wings, next the body, are of a dark orange; the remainder
  clay-coloured, with a broad black border running round each wing, from
  the upper corners to the abdominal ones; the inner sides being deeply
  indented, and the outer ones scolloped, with eight roundish black spots
  near the middle of each wing, one of which is supposed to be hid in the
  figure.

  _Under Side._ Head black, with two white spots in front. Palpi scarcely
  discernible. Breast and sides black, spotted with yellow. Abdomen
  clay-coloured. The middle of the superior wings has a black patch, on
  which are three orange-coloured spots, answering to three on the upper
  side; a long angular dark orange mark joins the anterior edges next the
  body, close to which are two roundish black spots; the extreme parts of
  these wings are of a dark greyish ash colour, the ribs being black.
  Posterior wings clay-coloured, with eight black spots, answering to those
  on the upper side: the black border being narrower on this side, and the
  inner edges much deeper indented.

{2}This magnificent butterfly is so exceedingly rare that M. Boisduval,
whose knowledge of the European Collections is very extensive, questions
whether there exists any other specimen than that originally figured by
Drury. Mr. Jones also, whose splendid Collection of Drawings are so
frequently quoted by Fabricius, copied this insect, figuring both the upper
and under sides, which figures have been lately published by Mr. Donovan in
his Naturalist's Repository. Mr. Donovan also adds, that from the
manuscripts of Mr. Drury, "we find that he received this insect in 1775,
from Mr. Smeathman, an assiduous and very intelligent naturalist stationed
at Sierra Leone."

"From the observations of Mr. Smeathman it may be imagined that this insect
is not unfrequent in that particular part of Africa, but that its capture
is attended with considerable difficulty, as well from the manner of its
flight, as the time when it appears on the wing; it is seen only in
mid-day, when every exertion under the direct influence of a vertical sun
must be painful to an European. Its flight is also remarkable for its
velocity, and to increase the difficulty of taking it, the insect frequents
only the upper branches of the trees, from whence it darts and glances from
one branch to another, and never descends nearer to the ground than the
height of eight feet. Mr. Smeathman observes also, that it turns its head
about instantly to the glade or path, and will not suffer any person to
approach within 'striking distance' of it, but will dart away on the least
motion of the body; if the naturalist however exerts his patience, it will
at last become more familiar and careless, and is then to be caught upon
some particular branch, to which it will appear more attached than to
another."

Mr. Donovan however suggests, that the insect must be not only exceedingly
local, but also of great rarity.


PLATE II.

[Illustration]

HEPIALUS CRASSUS.

Plate II. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Hepialidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. HEPIALUS, _Fabr._ Hepiolus, _Illiger_. Phalæna (Noctua), _Drury_.

  HEPIALUS CRASSUS. Alis anticis albis, fusco, cinereo, badioque variis,
  apice irregulariter albo, lunulâ magnâ fuscâ; posticis
  griseo-fuscantibus. (Expans. Alar. 7 unc.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Noctua) crassa, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ filiform, whiteish at the base, black at the tips.
  Head whiteish, small. Thorax whiteish, having two black tufts of hair on
  the shoulders, and two next the abdomen; upper part yellowish brown.
  Abdomen dark brown, almost black, being ringed and edged with dark grey.
  Anterior wings whiteish, intermixed with many patches and irregular spots
  of grey and dark brown. Posterior wings darkish grey brown, but lighter
  along the posterior edges.

  _Under Side._ All the parts on this side are of a dark yellow brown, of
  the same colour with the upper side of the inferior wings. Abdomen rather
  lighter, with a dark brown line running along its middle from the thorax
  to the anus.


{3}SPHINX IDRIEUS.

Plate II. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Crepuscularia. FAMILY: Sphingidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. SPHINX, _Linn._

  SPHINX IDRIEUS. Corpore alisque anticis viridibus, posticis fulvis
  margine nigro. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc.)

  SYN. Sphinx Idrieus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. (1783.)

  Sphinx Medea, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 363. _No._ 23. (1793.)

  HABITAT: Africa (_Drury_). "Africa æquinoctiali" (_Fabr._).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ yellow brown. Head olive green, with a
  cream-coloured stripe running on each side to the wings. Thorax and
  abdomen olive green; the latter having six small cream-coloured spots on
  each side near the anus. Anterior wings entirely olive green. Posterior
  orange-coloured, edged with black.

  _Under Side._ Tongue spiral. Sides, breast, and abdomen paler green than
  on the upper side. Wings next the shoulders dark orange, but green at the
  extremities. Posterior wings greenish and mottled, the fringes being
  yellow.


ÆGERIA? PLUMIPES.

Plate II. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Crepuscularia? FAMILY: Ægeriidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. ÆGERIA, _Fabr._? Sesia, _Latr._ Sphinx, _Drury_.

  ÆGERIA? PLUMIPES. Alis cyaneis, abdomine fulvo-cingulato, apice barbato;
  pedibus fulvis, femorum posticorum apice plumoso. (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 9
  lin.)

  SYN. Sphinx plumipes, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Africa.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black, smallest at the tips. Eyes grey and shining.
  Palpi black. Head and thorax black. Abdomen black, with orange-coloured
  rings; the extremity being very small and long, and furnished with a tuft
  of hairs expanding like a star.

  _Under Side._ Tongue spiral. Head and palpi orange. Breast black. Legs
  orange, furnished with long tibial spurs; the two hinder thighs having
  tufts of black hairs issuing from the tips above. Abdomen orange, sides
  black.


PLATE III.

[Illustration]

COSSUS LAOCOON.

Plate III. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Hepialidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. COSSUS, _Fabr._ Phalæna (Bombyx), _Linn._

  COSSUS LAOCOON. Alis rufo-badiis, apice obscurioribus maculâ mediâ
  albidâ, nigro punctatâ, lunulisque submarginalibus pallidis. (Expans.
  Alar. 6 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Attacus) Laocoon, _Drury_. _Cramer_, _pl._ 117. B.?

  HABITAT: Rio Janeiro, Brazil.

  {4}_Upper Side._ Antennæ brown, and filiform. Head brown, with two white
  spots beneath the antennæ. Thorax cream-coloured, with a red-brown spot
  arising at the head. Abdomen red-brown, with cream-coloured rings. Wings
  red-brown; the anterior ending along the external edges in a greyish
  brown, where there is a row of faint cream-coloured crescents; at the
  shoulders there is also a round cream-coloured spot, and in the middle,
  near the anterior edges, is another large patch of that colour, with
  darker marks thereon; several other spots are likewise dispersed on these
  wings. Posterior wings, along the external edges, grey brown; but next
  the body cream-coloured, with a row of faint cream-coloured crescents
  along the bottom, and two small spots on the abdominal edges.

  _Under Side._ Breast and legs red-brown; the two fore legs having two
  cream-coloured spots on the fore joints. Abdomen red-brown, and cream
  intermixed. Wings, next the body, cream-coloured, but towards their
  extremities red-brown, more strongly marked than on the upper side.
  Margins of the wings entire.


ARCTIA? MENEA.

Plate III. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Arctiidæ, _Stephens_.

  GENUS. ARCTIA? _Schrank_. Callimorpha, _Latr._? Phalæna (Noctua),
  _Drury_.

  ARCTIA? MENEA. Flava, alis anticis basi, fasciâ latâ mediâ apiceque
  margineque postico posticarum nigris. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Noctua) Menea, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ filiform and black. Head, thorax, and abdomen
  yellow. Wings yellow and black. Anterior having two round black spots at
  the shoulders, and two long ones at the tips. Posterior having a broad
  black border, beginning at the abdominal corners and running round the
  wings, crossing the fore wings and ending at the anterior edges.

  _Under Side._ Palpi and tongue black. Legs black. Breast and abdomen
  yellow. Wings coloured as on the upper side. Margins of the wings entire.


CALLIMORPHA? MOPSA.

Plate III. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Arctiidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. CALLIMORPHA? _Latr._ Phalæna (Noctua), _Drury_.

  CALLIMORPHA? MOPSA. Alis anticis fuscis fasciâ rectâ subapicali; posticis
  sanguineis, basi, fasciâ mediâ undatâ margineque nigris. (Expans. Alar. 1
  unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Noctua) Mopsa, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 2.

  HABITAT: Madras.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ filiform and black. Thorax and abdomen chocolate,
  the latter edged with red. Anterior wings entirely of a dun chocolate
  colour, having a lemon-coloured streak crossing them from the lower
  corners to near the middle of the anterior edges. Posterior wings next
  the body almost {5}black; the remainder carmine, with a waved black line
  crossing them from the upper to the abdominal corners.

  _Under Side._ Palpi grey. Breast red, with two black spots on each side.
  Legs grey. Wings coloured as on the upper side; the red colour on the
  inferior ones reaching to the body. Margins of the wings entire.


PLATE IV.

[Illustration]

VANESSA ANACARDII.

Plate IV. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains_.

  GENUS. VANESSA, _Fabricius_, _Latr. God._ Hamadryades, _Hübn._ Papilio
  (Nymph. Gemmat.) _Drury_. (Dan. Cand.) _Linn._

  VANESSA ANACARDII. Alis subdentatis; suprà margaritaceis extimumque
  versùs nigro punctatis, anticis falcatis, posticis extùs caudatis
  ocelloque ad angulum ani notatis. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Dan. Cand.) Anacardii, _Linn. Syst. Nat._ 11. 758. _No._
  74.? _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ 1. _p._ 183. 567.?

  Papilio (Nymph. Gemm.) Parrhasius, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Papilio Æthiops, _Pal. Beauv. Lep._ _pl._ 3. _fig._ 1. 2.

  Papillon Opale, _Pal. Beauv. texte._ _p._ 22.

  Vanessa Aglatonice, _Latr. God. Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 299. 8.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone (_Drury_). "In Anacardio Americes," (_Linn._) an
  recte?

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen dark green, the sides
  being white. Wings of a beautiful changeable colour, exhibiting,
  according to the direction in which the light falls upon them, a purple,
  red, blue, green, and white, the two latter being the predominant
  colours. Anterior wings, along the external edges, black, with two pale
  blueish spots thereon near the tips, and two round black spots on the
  light part of the wings near the lower corners. Posterior wings with two
  tails, and edged with a border of a brownish blue running from the upper
  to the abdominal corners, having thereon a row of small black angular
  marks placed between the tendons; three round black spots are also placed
  near the upper corners, the lowest being the smallest; and at the
  abdominal corners is a small eye, whose pupil is red, and iris black.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, breast, legs, and abdomen white. The beautiful
  changeable colour is not seen on this side, all the wings being of a pale
  green. The anterior having two small eyes, the pupil being red, the iris
  white; the smallest of which is placed near the tips, the other lower,
  and towards the middle of the wing. A round black spot is also placed on
  these wings near the body, which in the figure is hid. A shade of a
  darker green, resembling a line, rises on these wings near the middle,
  and, crossing the inferior ones, meets below the abdomen. Posterior wings
  with two little eyes, placed near the upper and abdominal corners, having
  a faint resemblance of a border of a brighter green placed along the
  external edges. Wings angulated.

Linnæus appears to have confounded this African insect with an American
butterfly, figured by Mad. Merian, giving the name to the African species,
with the additional habits of the American one. The copy of Drury's work,
which belonged to Linnæus, late in the library of Sir J. E. Smith (by whom
the collections of the great Swede were purchased), and now in that of the
Linnæan Society, contains a pencil note, by its late possessor, of
reference of this figure to the Anacardii of Linnæus.


{6}PLATE V.

[Illustration]

CALLIMORPHA? CAFRA.

Plate V. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Arctiidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. CALLIMORPHA? _Latr._ Phalæna (Noctua), _Drury_.

  CALLIMORPHA? CAFRA. Alis albis, anticis strigis duabus transversis, unâ
  humerali alterâ mediâ, apiceque marginali nigricantibus, posticis lunulis
  punctisque submarginalibus atris. (Expans. Alar. 4 unc.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Bombyx) Cafra, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ deeply pectinated and brown. Head white. Thorax and
  abdomen yellowish grey. Anterior wings white, edged with a dull blackish
  colour, and a large patch of the same at the tips, with two streaks also
  running from the anterior edges almost across the wings; one near the
  shoulders, the other in the middle, both narrowing as they go, and ending
  in points. A little group of spots is also placed at the lower corners.
  Posterior wings white, but next the body yellow, with a very irregular
  dark border running along the external edges, on which are several white
  spots unevenly dispersed, and of various forms.

  _Under Side._ Palpi white, tipped with black. Fore legs red underneath,
  and black above, the ends being black: the other legs grey, the tips
  black. Breast and abdomen yellow grey. Wings coloured as on the upper
  side, but fainter. Margins of the wings entire.


CALLIMORPHA? NERINA.

Plate V. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Arctiidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. CALLIMORPHA? _Latr._ Phalæna (Noctua), _Drury_.

  CALLIMORPHA? NERINA. Alis anticis nigris, nervis basalibus luteis,
  fasciis duabus punctisque submarginalibus albidis, posticis
  fulvo-brunneis apice nigro, punctis submarginalibus albis. (Expans. Alar.
  3 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Bombyx) Nerina, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ strongly pectinated and brown. Head brown, the
  front being white. Thorax brown, with two white streaks along it. Abdomen
  brown. Wings black, streaked with light brown from the shoulders along
  the tendons, and two light yellowish patches, almost crossing the wings
  from the anterior edges, with a row of white coloured spots placed along
  the external edges. Posterior wings dark yellow, with a deep black border
  running along the external edges from the upper to the abdominal corners.

  _Under Side._ Palpi black. Mouth white. Neck and breast yellow. Legs
  brown, and yellow at top, and white beneath. Abdomen white, streaked
  longitudinally with brown. Anus yellow. Wings coloured as on the upper
  side, but brighter. Margins of all the wings entire.


{7}PLATE VI.

[Illustration]

NYMPHALIS DECIUS.

Plate VI. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Gemmat.), _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS DECIUS. Alis supra fuscis, fasciâ communi albâ; posticis
  caudatis, ad angulum ani rufis ocellis duobus. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 3
  lin.)

  SYN. Papilio Decius, _Cram._ _pl._ 114. A. B. _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1.
  _p._ 67. _No._ 210. _Herbst._ _tab._ 56. _f._ 112. Nymphalis D., _Enc.
  Méth._ ix. _p._ 363. _Donovan Nat. Repos._ 4. 109.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone (_Drury_). Interior, near the Gold Coast
  (_Donovan_).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Eyes, head, thorax, and abdomen brown.
  One-third of the superior wings next the body brown; apical half brownish
  black. These two colours divided by a white band or bar, which, beginning
  at the anterior edges, crosses these wings, and runs half way down the
  posterior ones, being edged with blue. Posterior wings furnished with two
  tails, the lower part of them being of a dark orange; next the body
  brown, and next the upper corners almost black. There are also two small
  eyes on these wings; one near the abdominal corners, the other at the
  middle of the external edges.

  _Under Side._ Palpi and tongue yellow brown. Breast and abdomen brown.
  Legs next the body brown, the extreme joints almost white. Wings next the
  body brown for about half an inch, when they suddenly become white, and
  gradually alter in colour to a blueish, and then to a dark brown all
  along their external edges, where the inferior wings have several small
  spots and eyes. Wings dappled with an innumerable quantity of small
  streaks. Wings angulated.

Mr. Smeathman states that this species was taken at a considerable distance
from the coast, and that it is exceedingly scarce.


NYMPHALIS EUPALE.

Plate VI. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Gemmat.), _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS EUPALE. Alis supra argenteo-virescentibus, apice saturatiore,
  subtùs gramineis, punctis marginalibus nigris ocellatis. (Expans. Alar. 2
  unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Pleb. Urbic.) Eupale, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. (1783.)

  Papilio (Nymph.) Amasia, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 136. _No._ 419.
  (1793). _Encyclop. Méth._ ix. _p._ 389. (Nymphalis A.)

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Head and thorax dark greenish brown. Abdomen
  light green. Half the anterior wings next the body pea-green, the other
  half much darker green. The posterior wings also pea-green, but next the
  body paler, with a row of small different shaped brown spots placed along
  the external edges.

  _Under Side._ Palpi white. Tips black. Tongue green. Legs, breast, and
  abdomen white. Wings beautiful pea-green, with some different shaped
  silver spots, very small and dispersed over {8}different parts,
  particularly two near the tips. Abdominal groove white. These wings are
  slightly dentated. The anterior ones are entire.

Mr. Smeathman states, that this species was obtained at a considerable
distance from the coast, and that it is frequently seen in company with the
groups of Nymph. Erithonius described in vol. ii. pl. 15. fig. 1.


NYMPHALIS CAMILLUS.

Plate VI. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Gemmat.), _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS CAMILLUS. Alis albis, fasciis fulvis nigro-marginatis, posticis
  bicaudatis angulo ani fulvo, punctis nigris albo marginatis. (Expans.
  Alar. 2 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio N. Camillus, _Fabr. Spec. Ins._ _tom._ 2. _p._ 11. _No._ 42.
  (1781). _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 361. _No._ 39. (Nymphalis C.)

  Papilio (Eq. Ach.) Pantheus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 2. (1783.)

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen brown, streaked with
  white. Wings white, edged with black. Anterior ones having a yellow
  streak next the shoulders, edged with black. Two others a little broader
  also rise at the anterior edges, and crossing these wings, are continued
  down the posterior ones almost to the abdominal corners, where they end
  in points; tips of these wings brown, edged with black, forming six
  square white spots. Posterior wings having two tails, abdominal corners
  yellow, with two round extensions of the wings like tails, with a
  singular group of small, black, white, and blue spots prettily
  contrasted.

  _Under Side._ Palpi yellow above, and white beneath, tipped with black.
  Breast, abdomen, and legs white. Wings nearly coloured as on the upper
  side; posterior having two remarkable oval black velvety spots at the
  abdominal corners. Wings dentated.


PLATE VII.

[Illustration]

NYMPHALIS ISIS.

Plate VII. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Gemmat.), _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS ISIS. Alis fusco-nigris, anticis integris utrinque maculâ disci
  chermesinâ; posticis dentatis, suprà strigâ marginali albidâ. (Expans.
  Alar. 2 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Dan. Fest.) Isis, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. (1783.)

  Papilio N. Isis, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 124. _No._ 377. (1793.)
  _Donovan Ins. India_, _pl._ 7. _fig._ 1. 2.

  HABITAT: Rio Janeiro.

  _Under Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen brownish black. Wings
  very dark brown; the anterior having a large triangular patch of carmine
  red situated near the posterior and external edges. The posterior have
  also a narrow white streak at the abdominal corners.

  {9}_Upper Side._ Palpi black above, white beneath. Breast, abdomen, and
  legs ash-coloured. Wings lighter brown than on the upper side; a pale
  flesh-coloured bar crossing the wings from the anterior to the external
  edges, being about half an inch broad, between which and the body are
  several small bloody spots and streaks. Anterior wings entire, the
  posterior dentated.

It is by mistake that Donovan has introduced this Brazilian species into
his work upon the Insects of India.


NYMPHALIS ANTIOCHUS.

Plate VII. fig. 3, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Gemmat.), _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS ANTIOCHUS. Alis supra holosericeo-nigris, fasciâ communi nitidè
  aurantiâ; anticarum abbreviatâ. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Dan. Fest.) Antiochus, _Linn. Mant._ 1. 537. _Drury_, _App.
  vol._ 3. _Fabricius Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 44. _No._ 134. _Don. Ins.
  China_, _pl._

  Papilio Eupalemon, _Cramer_, _tab._ 143. _fig._ B. C. _Le Velonté
  Daubenton pl. Eulum_. 68. _f._ 3. 4.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ, head, thorax, and abdomen black. Wings fine
  velvety black. An orange-coloured bar, about one-fourth of an inch broad,
  rises in the middle of the superior wings, running circularly and
  crossing the inferior ones, meeting about the middle of the abdominal
  edges.

  _Under Side._ Palpi white. Tongue brown. Breast and legs white. Abdomen
  yellow-brown. Wings shining brown, exhibiting various shades of
  changeable colours; the tips terminating in an ash colour. Wings scarcely
  dentated.

Donovan has, in like manner, introduced this species into his work on the
insects of China.


HIPPARCHIA CLUENA.

Plate VII. fig. 5, 6.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. HIPPARCHIA, _Fabr._ Satyrus, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Phal.),
  _Drury_.

  HIPPARCHIA CLUENA. Alis teneris, cinerascenti-violaceis, posticis
  dentatis utrinque ocellis quinque atris, subtùs lineis tribus fasciâque
  brunneis a costâ anticarum deductis. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph. Phal.) Cluena, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Papilio (Satyrus) Clueria, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 229. _No._
  716. _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 492.

  HABITAT: Brazil. "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ brown. Thorax and abdomen grey-brown. Wings blueish
  grey-brown, with two narrow dark lines crossing the anterior ones from
  the anterior to the posterior edges; one in the middle of the wings, the
  other near the thorax; the posterior ones having five oval eyes placed
  near the external edges, the pupil being white, the iris dark, almost
  black.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, legs, breast, and abdomen grey. Wings blueish
  flesh-colour, with a line crossing them, rising at a small distance from
  the tips, ending a little above the abdominal corners, {10}the external
  part of it being brown. A small eye is placed near the tips of the
  superior ones, having a black and yellow iris and white pupil. Five eyes
  of the same kind are also placed on the inferior ones along the external
  edges. Margins of the wings slightly dentated.


PLATE VIII.

[Illustration]

NYMPHALIS ARETHUSA.

Plate VIII. fig. 1, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Gemmat.), _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS ARETHUSA. Alis integris suprà nitidè atris, virescenti-coeruleo
  multimaculatis; posticis subtùs punctis baseos angulique ani rubris
  [male]. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio Arethusa, _Cramer_, _pl._ 77. E. F. ([male].) _pl._ 130.
  _fig._ A. ([female] Pap. Laodamia.) _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 43.
  _No._ 130.

  Nymphalis Arethusus. _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 427. _Donovan Nat. Repos._ 2.
  _pl._ 48. _fig. super._

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen black, spotted with light
  blue. Wings black, having a great number of small light blue spots
  sprinkled over every part, and variously shaped.

  _Under Side._ Palpi black, with a white streak on each. Tongue, legs, and
  breast black, the latter with bloody streaks on the side. Abdomen dark
  brown. Wings reddish dark brown; the anterior ones having two faint blue
  spots near the lower corners; and the posterior having a little group of
  bloody spots at the shoulders, with a row of the same coloured spots
  (five in all) placed along the external edges near the abdominal corners.
  Margins of the wings entire.


ERYCINA JARBAS.

Plate VIII. fig. 2.

  ORDER. Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Lycænidæ? _Steph._

  GENUS. ERYCINA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Dan. Fest.), _Drury_.

  ERYCINA JARBAS. Alis integerrimis atris, coeruleo micantibus singulis
  utrinque fasciâ fulvâ, transversali, mediâ. (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Dan. Fest.) Jarbas, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. (1783.)

  Hesperia (rur.) Perditus, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 323. _No._ 222.

  Erycina Perditus, _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 590. _No._ 127.

  HABITAT: Brazil. "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen nearly black. Wings
  brownish black. An orange-coloured bar, about a quarter of an inch broad,
  crosses the anterior wings from the middle of the anterior edges to the
  lower corners, from whence another of half that breadth crosses the
  posterior wings, meeting just below the anus.

  _Under Side._ Tongue, legs, breast, and abdomen dark brown, the latter
  having a small orange streak on each side. Wings coloured as on the upper
  side. Margins of the wings entire.


{11}ERYCINA MENETAS.

Plate VIII. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Lycænidæ? _Steph._

  GENUS. ERYCINA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Dan. Fest.), _Drury_.

  ERYCINA MENETAS. Alis chermesinis, limbo tenuissimo nigro, margine antico
  et externo anticarum latiori, flavoque maculato, posticis triangularibus.
  (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Pleb. urb.) Menetas, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. (1783.)

  Hesperia R. Tacitus, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 308. 168. (1793.)

  Erycina Tacitus, _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 588. _Donovan Nat. Reposit._ 4.
  134.

  HABITAT: "Brazil, Mr. Bonifas, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.). Surinam
  (_Fabricius_).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Front of the head yellow. Thorax black, with
  two yellow streaks at the base of the wings. Abdomen dark brown. Half of
  the superior wings black, beginning at the shoulders, and running to the
  external edges, on which are seven cream-coloured spots variously shaped.
  The other half of these wings is scarlet, without any marks. Posterior
  wings entirely scarlet, edged with black.

  _Under Side._ Palpi cream-coloured. Breast and abdomen light yellow. Legs
  black, but underneath pale yellow. Wings coloured as on the upper side.
  Margins of the wings entire.

Mr. Donovan has lately published figures of the upper and under side of
this butterfly (which closely resemble each other) in his Naturalist's
Repository. These figures do not however represent the peculiar character
of the posterior pair of wings, neither is the author correct in his
chronological account of this species, as Drury's account and figure were
published ten years previous to the Entomologia Systematica, in which work
alone of Fabricius is the species mentioned. I have consequently retained
the specific designation imposed by Drury, and adopted by the authors of
the Encyclopédie Méthodique.


PLATE IX.

[Illustration]

PAPILIO ASCANIUS.

Plate IX. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Papilionidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. PAPILIO, _Auct._ Papilio (Equit. Troj.), _Linn._

  PAPILIO ASCANIUS. Alis nigris, fasciâ communi albâ, posticarum rubro
  inquinatâ; his caudatis, maculis marginalibus chermesinis. (Expans. Alar.
  4 unc.)

  SYN. Papilio Ascanius, _Cramer_, _pl._ 14. _fig._ A. _Fabricius Spec.
  Ins._ _tom._ 2. _p._ 2. _No._ 6. _Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 3. _No._ 8.
  _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 73. _Boisduval Hist. Nat. Lepid._ 1. 306. 141.

  HABITAT: Brazil. "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Head, thorax, and abdomen black, the latter
  tinged with orange. Anterior wings sootty black, having a broad white bar
  rising near the middle of the anterior edges, which crossing them and the
  anterior ones, meets just below the abdomen. These wings are furnished
  with two tails, and scolloped, the scollops being white. All the lower
  part of these wings is of a fine deep black, whereon are placed five red
  streaks between the tendons, running along the external edges. This black
  margin is separated from the white bar before mentioned by a carmine red
  one, and the space between the white bar and the shoulders is of a soot
  black.

  {12}_Under Side._ Palpi reddish. Tongue and legs black. Breast black,
  with red spots on the sides. Abdomen black, with the sides and anus red.
  Wings on this side coloured as on the upper side, but rather more
  brilliant.


ERYCINA AMPYX.

Plate IX. fig. 2, 3.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Lycænidæ? _Steph._

  GENUS. ERYCINA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Dan. Fest.), _Drury_.

  ERYCINA AMPYX. Alis subintegris supra fuscis, anticarum maculis duabus
  flavis; subtus omnibus flavis, maculis ferrugineis auro-pupillatis.
  (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Pl. urb.) Ampyx, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Erycina Ampyx, _Latr. & God. Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 586. _No._ 105.

  HABITAT: Brazil. "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ white, brown at their extremities. Thorax, abdomen,
  and wings brown; the anterior wings having two oval straw-coloured spots
  placed near the middle, and the anterior edges of the posterior ones
  streaked with the same colour.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, breast, legs, and abdomen straw-coloured. Wings
  straw-coloured, being spotted and streaked with red brown, each of these
  markings appearing to have a gold spot or streak in its centre, forming a
  very beautiful and singular appearance. Margins of the anterior wings
  entire, but of the posterior ones a little dentated.


PAPILIO AGAVUS.

Plate IX. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Papilionidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. PAPILIO, _Auct._ Papilio (Equit. Troj.), _Linn._

  PAPILIO AGAVUS. Alis atris concoloribus; anticis fasciâ, posticis disco,
  albidis; his caudatis lunulis marginalibus anguloque anali chermesinis.
  (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Eq. Achiv.) Agavus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Stoll. Suppl.
  Cram._ _pl._ 32. 1. 1. A. _Latr. & God. Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 73. _Boisd.
  Hist. Nat. Lep._ 1. _p._ 306. 142.

  Papilio Lysander? _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 9.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Neck red. Thorax, abdomen, and wings black.
  A narrow straw-coloured bar runs from the anterior edges of the superior
  ones near the tips, and, crossing the posterior edges, terminates in a
  large spot of the same colour on the posterior wings, situated near the
  shoulders. Posterior wings furnished with two short and two longer tails,
  and having two large carmine-coloured spots placed near the abdominal
  corners, and three others, that are smaller, along the external edges.

  _Under Side._ Palpi and tongue black. Breast the same, the sides having
  streaks of red on them. Abdomen black, and the sides streaked with red.
  Wings nearly the same colour as on the upper side; the red spots on the
  posterior ones being more numerous, and those at the abdominal corners
  not so large.


{13}PLATE X.

[Illustration]

NYMPHALIS (CHARAXES) ETESIPE.

Plate X.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera, _Linn._ SECTION: Diurna, _Latr._ FAMILY: Nymphalidæ,
  _Swainson_.

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Eq. achiv.) _Linn. Drury._ Papilio
  Nymphalis, _Fabr._ (SUBGENUS: Charaxes, _Boisduval_.)

  NYMPHALIS (CHARAXES) ETESIPE. Alis supra atro-coeruleis, subtus albo
  griseo nigro ferrugineoque marmoratis; utrinque fasciâ albâ, mediâ,
  anticarum interruptâ. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Nymphalis Etesipe, _Latr. & God. Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 355. _No._ 19.

  Papilio (Nymph. Phal.) Etheocles, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. (nec
  _Fabricius_.)

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen nearly black. The
  external part of the wings black, but next the body of a blueish cast. A
  blueish white bar, about a third of an inch in breadth, rises in the
  superior wings, and, crossing the inferior, meets just below the abdomen.
  At the tips of the former are five small oblong whiteish spots, and two
  larger, placed close to the forementioned bar, but separated from it by
  the tendons of the wing. Posterior wings furnished with four short tails
  of equal length, having four small white spots at the abdominal corners,
  and a small yellow crescent about the middle of the external edge.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, legs, and breast white. Abdomen brown. Anterior
  wings next the body of a blueish ash-colour, which becomes darker as it
  approaches the external edges. Half these wings next the body, is adorned
  with many differently shaped spots of a dirty red, verged with black. A
  range of not less than seven oblong black spots is situated along the
  external edges, and the whiteish bar, visible on the upper side, is here
  to be seen, but not so regular. The ground of the posterior wings is the
  same colour as the anterior, with several reddish spots differently
  shaped, and verged with black. Anterior edges white, and along the
  external edges are a number of small black spots and streaks not to be
  distinctly described.

The name of Etheocles, which Drury applied to this insect, without any
reference to Fabricius, had been previously employed by that author for a
distinct but nearly allied species, which he indeed regarded as identical
with Drury's insect. The distinctions between the two species were first
pointed out in the Encyclopédie Méthodique, in which work the name adopted
above was given to Drury's insect.


PLATE XI.

[Illustration]

NYMPHALIS (CHARAXES) BERENICE.

Plate XI. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera, _Linn._ SECTION: Diurna, _Latr._ FAMILY: Nymphalidæ,
  _Swainson_.

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Eq. achiv.) _Linn. Drury._ Papilio
  Nymphalis, _Fabr._ (SUBGENUS: Charaxes, _Boisduval_.)

  NYMPHALIS (CHARAXES) BERENICE. Alis supra nigris, fasciâ communi rufâ,
  disco nigro maculato; posticis subtus albo, flavo ferrugineoque
  maculatis. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph. Phal.) Berenice, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. (1783.)
  _Fabr. Mant. Ins._ 2. _p._ 48. _No._ 471. (1787.)

  Papilio Zingha, _Cramer_, _pl._ 315. _fig._ B. C. _Herbst._ _t._ 151.
  _fig._ 3. 4. _Donovan Nat. Repos._ 3. 107.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  {14}_Upper Side._ Antennæ black, with four white spots at the base and
  four on the sides of the neck. Thorax and abdomen yellow brown. Wings
  black, like velvet; anterior having the middle occupied by a large
  triangular space of a deep orange, crossing the posterior ones, and
  meeting at the body: on the anterior edges of this orange division are
  two distinct black spots, and a third very faint, situate in the middle
  of these wings. Posterior wings having two projections at the abdominal
  corners, like the rudiments of tails, with four yellow spots, and two
  very small white ones above them. A range of red spots, some of them very
  small, runs along the external edges of these wings, reaching from the
  upper to the abdominal corners.

  _Under Side._ Palpi yellow. Breast black, with yellow and white streaks
  and spots on its side and front. Fore legs very short and black, the tips
  being white. Anterior wings along the anterior edges of a dark yellowish
  grey, the tendons being black; posterior parts of these wings reddish,
  verged with black, and having a number of different shaped black spots on
  them. Posterior wings black, but along the anterior edges cream-coloured,
  with five distinct round black spots on each; the remaining parts of
  these wings being beautifully adorned with a variety of different colours
  running among each other. Wings dentated.


BIBLIS ARIADNE?

Plate XI. fig. 3, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. BIBLIS, _Fabr. Latr. God._

  BIBLIS ARIADNE? Alis denticulatis, anticarum apice truncato, griseis,
  strigis nigris undulatis; subtus rufescenti-fuscis nigro variis, anticis
  apice puncto costali albo. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 5 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph.) Ariadne, _Linn. Syst. Nat._ 2. 778? _Fabr. Ent.
  Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 383.?

  Papilio Coryta, _Cramer_, _pl._ 86. E. F.

  Papilio Merione, _Cramer_, _pl._ 144. G. H.?

  Biblis Ariadne, _Enc. Méth._ ix. 327.

  HABITAT: Coromandel, Java (_Enc. Méth._). "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman,
  1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen grey brown. Wings grey,
  and appearing mealy, shaded with blackish brown, particularly the
  anterior ones along the external edges, and next the body along the
  anterior margin. Posterior ones also strongly shaded along the external
  edges.

  _Under Side._ Palpi rather long, and dark brown, almost black. Breast,
  legs, and abdomen dark brown. Wings dark reddish brown, faintly shaded
  with streaks and marks of a darker brown, having two small white spots at
  the anterior edges of the anterior wings near the tips. Wings dentated.

Drury refers this insect to the Linnæan Ariadne, which is from Java. It is
therefore with doubt that I give it the preceding synonyms, especially as
Lepidopterists have neglected to cite Drury's figures.


{15}PLATE XII.

[Illustration]

NYMPHALIS ELEUS.

Plate XII. fig. 1, 2.

  _Order_: Lepidoptera. _Section_: Diurna. _Family_: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Gemmat.), _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS ELEUS. Alis utrinque testaceis, apice suprà æneo, anticarum
  fasciâ, posticarum punctis in simplici serie, albis. (Expans. Alar. 3
  unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph. Phal.) Eleus,_ Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Fabr. Ent.
  Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 51. _No._ 156. _Encycl. Méth._ ix. 391.

  Nymphalis Eleus, _Donovan Natur. Repos._ 4. 113.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1774" (_Drury's_ MSS.). "America"
  (_Fabricius_ incorrectly).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black, with two small white spots at the base.
  Thorax and abdomen black, spotted with two rows of white spots, in pairs,
  from the neck to the anus; those on the abdomen being the least. Half the
  superior wings next the tips black, with two white streaks thereon placed
  obliquely; the other half next the body dirty orange, the anterior edges
  being black. Posterior wings dirty orange, bordered along the external
  edges with black, whereon is a row of seven oval white spots on each
  wing, placed at equal distances.

  _Under Side._ Palpi and breast orange. Fore legs orange, the rest white.
  Wings on this side dark orange-coloured. The white streaks near the tips
  of the anterior ones are very plain. Anterior edges of the posterior
  wings white, and the row of white spots along the external edges are here
  very conspicuous, each being verged with black.

Mr. Donovan has satisfactorily proved, from information derived both from
Jones and Drury's MSS., that Fabricius erroneously gave America as the
habitat of this insect.


ERYCINA BAUCIS.

Plate XII. fig. 3, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Lycænidæ? _Steph._

  GENUS. ERYCINA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Pleb. rur.), _Drury_.

  ERYCINA BAUCIS. Alis anticis fuscis, ocello minuto apicali, fasciâ
  communi abbreviatâ albâ, posticis caudatis ocello auriformi externo.
  (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Pleb. rur.) Baucis, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ, thorax, and abdomen black. Anterior wings next the
  body nearly black, a third next the tips greyish brown, with a circular
  eye thereon; the iris being black and yellow, the pupil blue. A white
  streak rises on these wings, which crossing the posterior edges, ends at
  the middle of the posterior ones in a sharp point. Posterior wings
  blackish brown, the upper corners being greyish brown, where is a yellow
  mark, not unlike a human ear, the inner part being tinged with a shining
  blue colour. These wings are furnished with two broad tails, which
  suddenly become narrow and short, the tips white, and along the edges
  streaked with blue.

  {16}_Under Side._ Palpi wanting. Feet yellow. Breast white. Anterior
  wings lighter coloured than on the upper side. The white streaks are very
  conspicuous, and near the tips is another streak of ash-colour. The eye
  at the tips is very discernible. Posterior wings lighter coloured on this
  side, being chiefly ash-colour, with a brown streak longitudinally
  placed, verged at the bottom with yellow and blue streaks. The ear-like
  mark is also very plain on this side.


PLATE XIII.

[Illustration]

ACRÆA HYPATIA.

Plate XIII. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Heliconiidæ.

  GENUS. ACRÆA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Helicon.), _Drury_.

  ACRÆA HYPATIA. Alis oblongis integerrimis fulvis, punctis plurimis
  margineque externo nigris, posticarum eodem margine supra immaculato,
  subtus flavo maculato. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Helic.) Hypatia, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Fabr. Ent. Syst._
  III. 1. _p._ 163. _No._ 504. _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 232. (Acræa H.)

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Head yellowish. Thorax and abdomen brown;
  the former having two white spots near the neck, and two more at a little
  distance. The latter having several white spots, placed in pairs down to
  the anus. Wings fine flesh-coloured; anterior tipped with black, and
  verged with the same colour along their anterior and external edges. They
  are also clouded with black next the body, and have eleven distinct black
  spots on each, one of which next the tips is very long. Posterior wings
  having a broad black fringe along the external edges, and eleven distinct
  black spots on each, some of which are very small.

  _Under Side._ Palpi yellow brown. Legs black and yellow. Breast black,
  spotted with white on its side. Wings nearly coloured as on the upper
  side; the anterior being not quite so brilliant, nor so strongly tipped
  with black. All the black spots on the outside of these wings are also
  seen here; but the black clouds next the body are wanting. Posterior
  wings next the body tinged with orange, and the black spots are much
  larger and more distinct and numerous than on the outside. Black fringe
  on the external edges, with seven white spots placed regularly, close to
  each other.

According to Mr. Smeathman, this butterfly and that represented in figures
3 and 4 of this plate, and indeed all the "Heliconii," are found in great
numbers in those places where they breed, and are observed to bask and
sport as much as possible in the sunshine, retiring towards sunset in great
crowds to particular bushes. They breed chiefly in recent plantations, and
near towns in general, so that, comparatively speaking, few of them are
found in the ancient forests. Such however as inhabit them fly about the
tops of the highest trees, seeking the honey from their flowers, and are
seldom seen below.


{17}ACRÆA MENIPPE.

Plate XIII. fig. 3, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Heliconiidæ.

  GENUS. ACRÆA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Helicon.), _Drury_.

  ACRÆA MENIPPE. Alis oblongis integerrimis, anticis suprà fuscis
  nigro-punctatis; ad apicem fasciâ abbreviatâ maculisque marginalibus
  albidis; posticis fasciâ fulvâ latâ transversâ. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 3
  lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Helic.) Menippe, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Stoll. Suppl.
  Cram._ _pl._ 28. _fig._ 1. _Herbst._ _tab._ 81. _f._ 4. 5.

  Papilio H. Zetes? _Linn. Syst. Nat._ 2. 766. _No._ 110.

  Acræa Zethea, _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 236.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone, and other parts of the Western Coast of Africa.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax black, with a row of four faint white
  spots next the neck. Abdomen at the base black, with yellow spots on the
  sides, the extremity being yellowish. Anterior wings very dark brown,
  almost black, clouded with faint dark orange marks and dark yellow spots,
  particularly along the external edges. Posterior wings deep orange,
  clouded with black next the body, and a deep black border along the
  external edges, with a row of eight small red spots running along the
  middle of it: these wings have also seven, eight, or more black spots on
  them.

  _Under Side._ Palpi yellowish. Breast black, spotted with white on its
  sides. Anterior wings dusky orange-brown along the external edges,
  whereon is a row of dark orange oval spots, a whiteish cloud next them,
  and several different shaped black spots on the other part of the wings.
  Posterior wings cream-coloured, verged along the external edges with
  black, whereon is a row of white spots, and above it a row of small and
  very faint red ones: these wings next the body have a patch of a deep
  black, spotted with white, and verged with faint orange, and also several
  black spots.

This insect has been regarded as the Zetes of Linnæus; it does not appear
however to agree with the Linnæan description, in which the anterior wings
are said to be "nebulosis, punctatis:" nor with the habitat "in Indiis"
given of that species.


HELICONIA GAZORIA.

Plate XIII. fig. 5, 6.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Heliconiidæ.

  GENUS. HELICONIA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Helicon.), _Linn. &c._

  HELICONIA GAZORIA. Alis oblongis integerrimis, dimidiatim flavis
  hyalinisque margine exteriori fusco, posticis subtus ([female]) maculâ
  baseos aurantiacâ. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc.)

  SYN. Heliconia Gazoria, _Latr. & God. Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 214. _No._ 35.

  Papilio (Hel.) Euritæa, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. (exclus. Syn. Crameri.)

  HABITAT: Rio Janeiro, Brazil.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Head black, with small white spots. Neck
  orange. Thorax black, with grey marks. Abdomen black at top, and grey on
  the sides. Wings yellowish white, verged and tipped with black, without
  any marks or spots on them.

  _Under Side._ Palpi and breast grey. Legs black. Abdomen white. Anus
  yellowish. Wings coloured as on the upper side.


{18}PLATE XIV.

[Illustration]

BIBLIS HIARBAS.

Plate XIV. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. BIBLIS, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Nymphal. Phal.), _Drury_.

  BIBLIS HIARBAS. Alis dentatis, fuscis; fasciâ utrinque communi albâ,
  posticarum latiore, anticarum abbreviatâ. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph. Ph.) Hiarbas, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Donovan Ins.
  India_, _pl._ 3. _fig._ 3. _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 128. _No._
  391.

  Biblis Hiarba, _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 824. 2.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone (_Drury_). Cape of Good Hope (_J. O. W._).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ, head, thorax, and abdomen black. Wings deep brown,
  almost black: a white bar rises on the anterior ones near the tips, and
  running parallel with the external edges crosses the posterior ones, and
  ends just below the abdomen, gradually widening. Posterior wings at the
  abdominal corners tipped with orange, and having a double row of narrow
  white crescents along the external edges; the anterior wings having only
  a single row.

  _Under Side._ Palpi white. Breast and legs grey-brown. Abdomen yellowish.
  The white bar and row of crescents nearly as on the upper side, but all
  the brown parts are prettily spotted and variegated with red-brown spots
  of different shapes; the general colour of the wings being a greyish
  brown. Wings dentated.

Fabricius cites Drury's collection alone for this species, incorrectly
giving India as its habitat. Drury had previously stated it to have been
received from Sierra Leone. Donovan, relying upon the former rather than
the latter, figured the insect in his "Epitome of the Insects of India."


NYMPHALIS SEMIRE.

Plate XIV. fig. 3, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Gemmat.), _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS SEMIRE. Alis subdentatis fuscis, fasciâ utrinque viridi
  interruptâ, posticis ad angulum ani ferrugineo maculatis; subtus omnibus
  basi luteis, nigro punctatis. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (N.) Semire, _Fabr. Spec. Ins._ _tom._ 2. _p._ 88. _Ent.
  Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 114. _No._ 351. _Cramer_, _pl._ 194. _fig._ B. C.

  Papilio (N. Ph.) Hippolyte, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Nymphalis Semire, _Latr. & God. Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 392.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen yellowish brown. Wings
  dusky greenish brown, and spotted with round black spots at the base.
  Anterior having ten distinct spots of a pea-green, of different sizes and
  forms. Posterior wings with a large central patch of pea-green, which
  being divided by the tendons appear like six distinct long spots; below
  this patch is a row of faint reddish triangular spots.

  _Under Side._ Palpi and legs pale yellow. Breast grey. Abdomen yellowish.
  Wings with the {19}black spots much stronger, and the green spots more
  distinct than on the upper side. The general colour of the wings is much
  lighter, with a broadish cream-coloured bar running along the external
  edges, which, being separated by the tendons of the wings, appear like
  distinct streaks. Wings dentated.


VANESSA DELIUS.

Plate XIV. fig. 5, 6.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. VANESSA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Hamadryades, _Hübn._ Papilio (Nymph.
  Phal.) _Drury_.

  VANESSA DELIUS. Alis dentatis suprà fulvis basi extimoque fuscis, anticis
  apice strigâ punctorum alborum; posticis maculâ discoidali oblongâ
  ocellisque duobus analibus nigris, his extus caudatis, illis falcatis.
  (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 5 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph. Phal.) Delius, _App. vol._ 3. (1783.)

  Papilio N. Eurocilia, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 79. _No._ 247.
  (1793.)

  Vanessa Demonica, _Latr. & God. Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 301. _No._ 14.
  (1819.)

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone, with the two preceding (_Drury_). "In Indiis"
  (_Fabr._). America? (_Enc. Méth._).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen red-brown. Anterior wings
  nearly black at the base, and also half of them next the tips, whereon
  are five small white spots, the middle of them being of a dark orange.
  Posterior wings also black at the base; each of them is furnished with
  two tails, the outward ones the longest; the external edges being
  bordered with dark brown, almost black, and all the middle part of the
  wing is dark orange.

  _Under Side._ Palpi and legs yellowish. Breast dark brown. Abdomen
  yellowish. Wings with blackish and dark brown spots and marks, not to be
  distinctly described. Anterior wings with a broad yellowish bar crossing
  them from the anterior edges to the lower corners; while the posterior
  are also remarkable for a blueish patch placed between the outer tails
  and the abdominal corners.

The locality given by our author is evidently correct, because he was
furnished with information respecting its habits by Mr. Smeathman, who
stated that it breeds chiefly near open and cultivated spots, or in recent
plantations, and sports in the sun like the Acrææ.


PLATE XV.

[Illustration]

MORPHO LAERTES.

Plate XV. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. MORPHO, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Equit. Achiv.), _Drury_.

  MORPHO LAERTES. Alis subdentatis, utrinque margaritaceo-albis, anticarum
  fasciâ costali nigrâ, posticis subtus strigâ ocellorum lunulisque
  marginalibus. (Expans. Alar. 6 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Eq. Achiv.) Laertes, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Esper Pap.
  Exot._ _tab._ 43. _f._ 2. _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 84. _No._ 262.
  _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 444. (Morpho L.)

  Papilio Epistrophus, _Fabr. Ind. Alphab. to Ent. Syst._ _p._ 124.
  _Donovan Nat. Repos._ 4. 143.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ white. Thorax and abdomen whiteish. Wings blueish
  white; anterior tipped with dark brown, with half the front edges next
  the body verged with dark brown, which, at the extremity, {20}joins to a
  streak about three-fourths of an inch long, running from these edges
  towards the centre of the wing, near to which is placed two darkish round
  spots. Posterior wings having a row of dark crescents placed along the
  external edges, which becomes double near the abdominal corners; and a
  row of faint whiteish streaks crossing them from the anterior to the
  abdominal edges, meeting about an inch below the body.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, legs, breast, and abdomen white. Wings coloured as
  on the upper side. The two round spots on the anterior ones are black;
  and the row of faint-coloured streaks crossing the posterior ones are
  here very strong; each streak being white, and placed on a brown ground,
  edged with yellow. Margins of the wings slightly dentated.

Fabricius, in the Entomologia Systematica, described two butterflies under
the name of Papilio (N.) Laertes, No. 226. from Surinam figured by Cramer,
and No. 262, from South America, figured by Drury. As the former species
had the priority in point of date, Fabricius, in the alphabetical index to
that work, altered the name of Drury's insect to Epistrophus. By the
establishment, however, of the genus Morpho, comprising the insect figured
by Drury, the difficulty is obviated, and as the species is universally
known under the name of Laertes, it does not appear requisite to adopt the
name of Epistrophus.


NYMPHALIS (CATAGRAMMA) HYDASPES.

Plate XV. fig. 2, 3.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr. God._ Papilio (Nymphalis), _Fabr._ SUBGENUS:
  Catagramma, _Boisduval_.

  NYMPHALIS (CATAGRAMMA) HYDASPES. Alis subdentatis, nigris, basi suprà
  nitidè cyaneis, anticis utrinque fasciâ chermesinâ abbreviatâ; posticis
  subtùs annulis duobus flavis punctisque quatuor ocellaribus. (Expans.
  Alar. 1 unc. 10 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Pleb. rur.) Hydaspes, _Fabr. MSS._ cited by _Drury_, _App.
  vol._ 3. (1783.) nec _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 54. _No._ 167.
  (1793.)

  Nymphalis Hydaspes, _Latr. & God. Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 424. (nec Cat.
  Hydaspes, _Boisd. Hist. Nat. Lep._ 1. _pl._ 9. _f._ 2., _Donovan Nat.
  Repos._ _vol._ 2. _pl._ 60.)

  Biblis Hesperia, _Perty Delect. Anim. art. Bras._ _pl._ 30. _f._ 4. a. b.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Eyes, thorax, and abdomen dark brown, nearly
  black. Anterior wings black, but of a fine shining blue at the base. A
  streak of a beautiful red colour crosses these wings from the middle of
  the anterior edges to the lower corners, stopping at a little distance
  therefrom. Posterior wings black, with a most beautiful blue patch on
  them next the body.

  _Under Side._ Palpi black. Mouth white. Tongue and breast black. Abdomen
  white. Anterior wings nearly coloured as on the upper side, but next the
  body verged with white. A white streak also crosses them near the tips;
  and at a small distance from the body is placed a small round spot of a
  most beautiful red colour. Posterior wings black, with white lines
  running along the abdominal and outer edges. The centre is adorned with
  four small round spots, three blue, one white, surrounded by a white line
  in a oval form. Wings slightly dentated.

{21}Drury referred this insect to the then unpublished Papilio Hydaspes, on
the authority of Fabricius's handwriting, (his specimen having most
probably been thus labelled by that author.) The authors of the
Encyclopédie Méthodique also cite Drury's figure under Hydaspes. Fabricius,
however, cites only the Banksian Cabinet, and Mr. Donovan's figure taken
from the Banksian specimen, and published in the Naturalist's Repository,
Vol. 2. Pl. 60. convinces us that Drury's insect is specifically distinct
from that described by Fabricius, although evidently identical with the
insect described as Hydaspes in the Encyclopédie Méthodique. Under these
circumstances I have considered it most advisable to retain the name of
Hydaspes for Drury's insect, under which name it was known for the space of
ten years before the publication of the Fabrician Hydaspes, to which a new
specific name must be applied. As there are several other nearly allied
Brazilian species, it is not impossible that Fabricius, from recollection
alone, applied the name of Hydaspes to Drury's specimen, having previously
described the insect from the Banksian Cabinet, the under surface of which
especially is very different from that figured by Donovan.


PLATE XVI.

[Illustration]

NYMPHALIS HIPPONA.

Plate XVI. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr. God._ Papilio (Nymphalis), _Fabr._

  NYMPHALIS HIPPONA. Alis suprà nigris, anticis fulvo flavoque variis:
  posticis caudatis basi fulvo apice nigro strigâ marginali punctorum
  alborum. (Expans. Alar. 4 unc.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph.) Hippona, _Fabr. Sp. Ins._ 2. _p._ 54. _No._ 258.
  _Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 180. _No._ 559. _Donovan Ins. India_, _pl._ 35.
  _fig._ * _Encycl. Méth._ ix. _p._ 362.

  Papilio (Nymph. Phal.), _Cramer_, _pl._ 90. _fig._ C. D. _Stoll Suppl.
  Cramer_, _pl._ 2. _fig._ 1. & 1. A. B. C. _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Brazil (_Drury_). Guiana, Antilles (_Enc. Méth._).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black at the base, but yellow at the extremities.
  Thorax and abdomen greenish brown. Anterior wings angulated, and black,
  but orange-brown at the base; posterior edges verged with black. An
  irregular indented yellow bar crosses them from the middle of the
  anterior edges to the middle of the external ones; and near the tips are
  placed two white spots, one large, of an oval shape, and a small round
  one. Posterior wings with two tails, chiefly of a yellow-brown colour,
  but having a black circular patch placed along the external edges, and
  reaching nearly from the abdominal to the upper corners, whereon are
  placed three white crescents and a small round spot.

  _Under Side._ Palpi yellowish. Tongue dark brown. Legs yellowish. Breast
  dark brown. Abdomen yellowish. Wings ornamented with such a variety of
  soft colours, as renders it impossible to describe them minutely.

The transformations of this curious species have been figured by Stoll in
his supplementary volume to Cramer. The caterpillar is of a dark green,
with a black dorsal line and lateral spots of the same colour. The head is
black, with two yellow spots, and furnished with two short obtuse spines.
It lives upon a plant called "poirvier," feeding {22}only by night,
remaining during the day concealed in a kind of case, which it forms by
rolling up a leaf. The chrysalis is short, and thick, without angular
prominences, of a grey colour, with black dots. It attaches itself by the
tail to the stem of the plant upon which it feeds.

Fabricius erroneously gives India as the habitat of this species, whence
Donovan has introduced it into his work upon the insects of that country.


NYMPHALIS ORSIS [male].

Plate XVI. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr. God._ Papilio (Nymphalis), _Fabr._

  NYMPHALIS ORSIS. Alis nigris, (in mare coeruleo-micantibus) strigis
  tribus macularibus albis, prima et secunda corpus secantibus. (Expans.
  Alar. 2 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph. Phal.) Orsis, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Papilio (N.) Oisis, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 124. _No._ 378.
  ([male].) _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 381. _No._ 102. (Nymphalis O.)

  Papilio N. Blandina, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 129. ([female].)
  _Donovan Ins. India_, _No._ 2. _pl._ 1. _f._ 3.

  HABITAT: Brazil (_Drury, &c._). In Indiis (_Fabr._). East India
  (_Donovan_, erroneously).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ, thorax, and abdomen brown, the latter having six
  spots on it. Wings very dark changeable blue; anterior having a pale
  streak crossing them a little way on each side the thorax, with several
  other small ones on other parts.

  _Under Side._ Palpi very small, hairy, and white. Thorax, legs and
  abdomen white. Wings pale red-brown, having a shade of darker colour
  running along their external edges, and on the anterior ones are placed
  two faint-coloured streaks, running from the external edges towards the
  middle of the wings. Margins of the wings angulated and dentated.


CASTNIA THAIS.

Plate XVI. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: ----? (hesperi-sphinges, _Latr._) FAMILY:
  Castniidæ.

  GENUS. CASTNIA, _Fabr. Latr. God. Dalm._ Papilio (Dan. Festiv.), _Drury_.

  CASTNIA THAIS. Alis anticis supra fusco-viridibus, nitidis, basi
  fasciisque duabus carneo-griseis; posticis rubris fasciis duabus
  margineque nigris. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Dan. Festiv.) Thais, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Castnia Thalaira, _Latr. God. Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 800. _No._ 14.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ brown. Thorax, abdomen, and anterior wings
  red-brown; the latter having two streaks or bars of a lighter colour
  crossing them from the anterior edges to the posterior and external ones;
  one crossing the middle of the wing, the other nearer the tips. Posterior
  wings orange; the lower part black along the external edge, whereon are
  placed a row of square orange-coloured {23}spots, those next the upper
  corners reaching to the edge; a black line also crosses these wings,
  beginning just below the body, and running almost across to the upper
  corner.

  _Under Side._ Palpi and thorax red-brown. Abdomen yellowish. Anterior
  wings yellowish clay-coloured, with three black lines crossing them
  transversely, the middle one being the broadest. Posterior wings
  orange-brown, with a small white spot placed near the centre. Margins of
  the wings plain.


PLATE XVII.

[Illustration]

HESPERIA OPHION.

Plate XVII. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Hesperiidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. HESPERIA, _Fabr. Latr._ Erinnys P. _Schr._ Papilio (Pleb. Urb.),
  _Drury_.

  HESPERIA OPHION. Alis fuscantibus, anticis utrinque punctis quinque
  discoidalibus alterisque tribus subapicalibus albis; posticis subtùs
  albis margine antico nigro 3-maculato serieque punctorum submarginalium.
  (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 10 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Pleb. Urb.) Ophion, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Stoll Suppl.
  Cram._ _pl._ 26. _f._ 4.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Head with five small white spots. Thorax,
  abdomen, and wings dark greyish brown; anterior wings having a cluster of
  five small oval transparent white spots placed near the middle of the
  wings, and three very small round spots of the same kind nearer the tips.
  Several faint dark spots are also dispersed on these and the inferior
  wings.

  _Under Side._ Palpi above brown, beneath white. Breast, legs, and abdomen
  white. Anterior wings coloured as on the upper side. Posterior white, but
  along the anterior edges brown, where are three black spots placed on
  each wing. A row of brown spots is also placed along the external edges,
  and another row of very small ones above them. Margins of the wings
  entire.

The African species of Hesperiidæ (according to Mr. Smeathman), including
those represented in these and the two following figures, sport in the sun,
and are remarkable for their very sudden and rapid short flights from bush
to bush.


HESPERIA (EUDAMUS) ORION.

Plate XVII. fig. 3, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Hesperiidæ.

  GENUS. HESPERIA, _Latr. Fabr._ Thymele P. _Fabr._ (syst. Gl.)
  Heteropterus, _Duméril._ SUBGENUS: Eudamus, _Swains. Boisd._

  HESPERIA (EUDAMUS) ORION. Alis nigro fuscis, anticis fasciâ tenui
  maculari subbifidâ punctisque subapicalibus; posticarum limbo externo
  caudisque albis. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc.)

  SYN. Papilio Orion, _Fabr. Mant. Ins._ 2. _p._ 85. _No._ 774. _Cramer_,
  _pl._ 155. _f._ A. B. _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Papilio (Pleb. Urb.) Proteus, var. [Greek: b]. _Linn. Mus. Lud. Ulr._
  _p._ 333. _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 729. _No._ 4. (Hesp. O.)

  Eudamus Doryssus, _Swains. Zool. Illustr. N. Ser._ _pl._ 48.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone (_Drury_, correctly?). Brazil, Surinam (_Fabr. Enc.
  Méth. &c._).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax, abdomen, and wings dark olive brown.
  Anterior wings having a small narrow transparent white line crossing them
  from the anterior edges to the lower corners, {24}intersected by the
  brown tendons of the wings. Posterior wings terminating in two white,
  short, and broad tails.

  _Under Side._ Palpi white. Breast, abdomen, and wings coloured as on the
  upper side; the posterior differing merely in having their outward edges
  bordered with white.

This insect belongs to the subgenus Eudamus proposed by Mr. Swainson, in
the new series of his beautiful Zoological Illustrations, and appears in no
respect to differ from that which he has figured under the name of Eudamus
Doryssus. He observes that the type of this group is the Hesperia Proteus
Fabr.; that all the species, of which there are nearly thirty, are from
America; that their flight is exceedingly rapid in the morning and evening,
and that they rest with their wings perpendicular. Drury, on the other
hand, gives Sierra Leone as the habitat, and adds, moreover, on the
authority of Mr. Smeathman, that this species, like the last, sports in the
sun, and is remarkable for the very rapid short flights it takes from bush
to bush, so as to be caught with great difficulty. In his manuscripts,
however, I find this species marked as being from "Madras, Mr. Skeene,
1772."


NYMPHALIS JANAIS.

Plate XVII. fig. 5, 6.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurua. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr. God._ Papilio (Nymphalis), _Fabr._

  NYMPHALIS JANAIS. Alis subdentatis, nigris; anticis utrinque
  albo-punctatis; posticis supra disco rubro, subtus basi flavo et nigro,
  punctato. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph. Phal.) Janais, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Nymphalis J., _Latr. et God. Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 392. _No._ 146.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone" (_Drury_, in text). "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas,
  1776" (_Drury's MSS._).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ, thorax, abdomen, and anterior wings black, the
  latter with a number of small white spots dispersed over different parts
  of the wings. Posterior wings black; the middle part fine carmine red,
  the scolloping next the abdominal corners being verged with white.

  _Under Side._ Palpi black. Legs brown. Breast and abdomen black. Anterior
  wings coloured as on the upper side. Posterior wings as on the upper
  side, but next the body having a large patch of a yellow colour, on which
  are several small black spots. The red part of these wings is surrounded
  by a row of small white spots, placed on the black ground.


PLATE XVIII.

[Illustration]

ACRÆA UMBRA.

Plate XVIII. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Heliconiidæ.

  GENUS. ACRÆA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Heliconii), _Fabr._ olim.

  ACRÆA UMBRA. Alis oblongis integerrimis brunneis, extimo suprà latè
  fusco, posticis subtùs ad basin nigro punctatis. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 9
  lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Dan. Fest.) Umbra, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Papilio (Hel. U.), _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 172. _No._ 535. _Enc.
  Méth._ ix. _p._ 236. (Acræa U.)

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  {25}_Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax black, with several white spots.
  Abdomen black, with five dark yellow spots on each side, and five rings
  of the same colour placed between them. Apical half the anterior wings a
  very dark brown, almost black; basal half, dark yellow-brown. One-third
  of the posterior wings, next the outer edges, almost black; the remainder
  of a dark yellow-brown. The black spots described on the under side are
  discernible on this side.

  _Under Side._ Palpi black above, but whiteish underneath. Legs the same.
  Breast nearly black, with white spots. Abdomen yellowish. Anterior wings
  a very dark brown of a yellowish tinge; the posterior having a number of
  small black spots (about 18) situate near the body. Margins of the wings
  nearly entire.

The minute black spots at the base of the posterior wings, described by
Drury and Fabricius, are not represented in the figure.


ACRÆA DICE.

Plate XVIII. fig. 3, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Heliconiidæ.

  GENUS. ACRÆA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Helicon.), _Fabr._ olim.

  ACRÆA DICE. Alis oblongis integerrimis concoloribus, anticis
  hyalino-cinerascentibus; posticis fulvis nigro-punctatis, margine
  exteriori latè hyalino. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 1½ lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Helicon.) Dice, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. (1783.)

  Papilio (H.) Quirina, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 159. _No._ 492.
  (1793.) _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 231. _No._ 2. (Acræa Q.)

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.). Madras
  (_Fabricius_).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ, eyes, thorax, and abdomen black; the latter having
  a row of white spots on each side, extending to the anus. Anterior wings
  thin and diaphanous; with a red streak along their posterior edges,
  reaching to the body from the lower corners, whereon is a small black
  line close to the body, with a small black round spot just below it.
  Posterior wings red, having a diaphanous border running along the
  external edges from the upper to the abdominal corners. These wings next
  the body are dark brown, and on the red are dispersed several small black
  spots, varying in number.

  _Under Side._ Palpi brown. Fore legs yellow; the others yellow and brown.
  Breast spotted black and white. Abdomen ringed with yellow. Wings
  coloured as on the upper side, but the red is fainter; the dark brown
  part on this side is grey, and the black spots larger and more distinct.
  Margins of the wings entire.


{26}ACRÆA CIRCEIS.

Plate XVIII. fig. 5, 6.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Heliconiidæ.

  GENUS. ACRÆA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Heliconii), _Fabr._ olim.

  ACRÆA CIRCEIS. Alis oblongis integerrimis; anticis hyalinis, nervis
  margineque fuscis, posticis fuscis fasciâ flavescenti, transversâ mediâ,
  his subtus basi cinereis nigroque punctatis. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc.)

  SYN. Papilio Circeis, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Herbst. Pap._ _tab._ 81.
  _fig._ 6. 7.

  Papilio (Parnass.) Mandane, _Fabr. Syst. Ent._ III. 1. _p._ 183. _No._
  565. _Encycl. Méth._ ix. _p._ 239. 29. (ACRÆA M.)

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen black, the latter spotted
  with white. Anterior wings diaphanous, the edges bordered with brown.
  Posterior wings russet brown, having a broad yellow bar crossing them
  about the middle of the abdomen, and reaching almost from one upper
  corner to the other; above the bar, next the body, are a number of black
  spots.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, legs, and abdomen yellowish. Breast brown. Anterior
  wings coloured as on the upper side. Posterior wings grey in those parts
  where they are brown on the upper side; the yellow bar being fainter, but
  the black spots stronger, and amounting to ten in number. Margins of the
  wings entire.

Here, as in many places elsewhere, I have reverted to Drury's name, which
Fabricius unwarrantably changed in the subsequently published Entomologia
Systematica, and which in most cases the authors of the Encyclopédie
Méthodique have adopted.


PLATE XIX.

[Illustration]

SATURNIA ALINDA.

Plate XIX.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Bombycidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. SATURNIA, _Schrank_. Attacus, _Germar_. Bombyx p., _Ochs_. Phalæna
  (Attacus), _Drury_.

  SATURNIA ALINDA. Alis rufo-brunneis margine saturatioribus signisque
  nonnullis undulatis obscuris, anticis maculâ discoidali fenestratatâ;
  posticis ocello magno centrali. (Expans. Alar. 7 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna Attacus Alinda, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Oliv. Enc. Méth._
  5. _p._ 26. 10. (Bombyx A.)

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ pectinated. Neck buff-coloured. Thorax and abdomen
  brownish red, the centre of the former being grey. Anterior wings
  brown-red, darkest along the external edges, with two faint dark indented
  lines crossing them from the anterior to the posterior edges. A
  transparent spot is placed near the middle of the wings, about a quarter
  of an inch from the anterior edges, without any iris of a different
  colour. Posterior wings brown-red, and darkest along the external edges,
  having a few faint waved lines. Near the middle is a small transparent
  spot, edged with buff at the bottom, surrounded by a dark brown border,
  and which is also encircled by another quite black.

  _Under Side._ Breast red-brown. Legs, abdomen, and wings entirely of a
  dark buff. All the faint waved lines, hardly discernible on the other
  side, are here very conspicuous. Close to the transparent spots, on the
  anterior wings, are two of a dark brown, and two larger are also placed
  close to the transparent ones in the posterior wings, without any of the
  circular ones which are on the upper side. Margins of the wings entire.


{27}PLATE XX.

[Illustration]

NYMPHALIS ALTHEA.

Plate XX. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr. God._ Papilio (Nymphalis), _Fabr._

  NYMPHALIS ALTHEA. Alis dentatis suprà fuscis, fasciâ strigâque
  angulato-dentatis albis; subtùs flavescentibus lituris atris fasciâ
  strigisque iisdem. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (N.) Althea, _Fabr. Spec. Ins._ 2. _p._ 88. _No._ 389. _Ent.
  Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 113. _No._ 347. _Cramer_, _pl._ 89. _fig._ E. F.

  Nymphalis A., _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 383. _No._ 111.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ brown. Thorax, abdomen, and wings dark brown; a row
  of ash-coloured crescents cross the latter from the middle of the
  posterior to the anterior edges, uniting with a bar of the same colour,
  which crosses the posterior wings, meeting below the abdomen: another row
  of ash-coloured marks, like beards of arrows, are placed between the
  above-mentioned row and the external edges, which are bordered with some
  faint lightish marks. Posterior wings with an additional row of light
  arrow beards running along the external edges, which are also bordered
  with faint lightish marks like the anterior.

  _Under Side._ Palpi white. Breast and legs light clay-coloured. Wings
  paler than on the upper side, being greyish brown. The light-coloured
  bar, crossing the wings and meeting below the abdomen, is very
  conspicuous on this side. The markings are much the same as on the upper.
  Margins of the wings dentated.


VANESSA AMESTRIS.

Plate XX. fig. 3, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. VANESSA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Hamadryades, _Hübn._ Papilio (Nymph.
  Phal.), _Drury_.

  VANESSA AMESTRIS. Alis dentatis, anticis falcatis posticis rotundatis;
  omnibus suprà fuscis ad extimum fasciis tribus macularibus transversis,
  intermediâ ferrugineâ, (ad apicem maculis duabus albis) cæteris
  coerulescentibus subtus marmoratis. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (N. P.) Amestris, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Papilio (N.) Amestris, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 116. 360.

  Papilio (N.) Zingha, _Fabr. loc. cit. No._ 358.

  Vanessa Erinna, _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 315.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.). "In
  Indiis, Dom Drury" (_Fabr._ sub P. N. Amestris, incorrectly).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen very dark. Anterior wings
  dark brown, with a row of red crescents inverted, placed near the
  external edges; above them are several blueish marks and dashes. Two
  square reddish spots are placed near the shoulders, having blueish
  borders. Two small round white spots are situated near the tips of each
  wing, and along the external edges are several blueish spots. Posterior
  wings nearly corresponding with the anterior. The row of red crescents is
  continued along these wings, and meets below the abdomen. The rows of
  blueish spots are also continued along the borders.

  {28}_Under Side._ Breast and legs dark brown. Wings very dark brown,
  variegated with many brown markings, in such manner as not to be
  described. A single white spot is situate at the tips of the anterior
  ones, and a series of small round spots run along the borders of all the
  wings. Margins of the wings deeply dentated.


PLATE XXI.

[Illustration]

NOCTUA TRISTIS.

Plate XXI. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Noctuidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. NOCTUA, _Auct._ SUBGENUS ----?

  NOCTUA TRISTIS. Alis fuscis nigro-atomosis, dimidio basali saturatiori
  strigàque ad angulum internum anticarum nigrâ. (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 10
  lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Noctua) Tristis, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: "Cape of Good Hope" (_Drury_, in text). "Jamaica" (_Drury's_
  MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ brown and setaceous. Thorax and abdomen grey-brown.
  Anterior wings grey-brown, having a small streak of a very dark colour
  placed near the lower corners, and two smaller ones at the tips; a large
  patch of the same colour occupies the middle of the wings, extending some
  way towards the shoulders. Posterior wings greyish-coloured, without any
  marks.

  _Under Side._ Tongue not observed. Legs, breast, and abdomen greyish.
  Anterior wings darker on this side than on the upper; the anterior edges
  being white, and the dark streak at the lower corners very observable.
  Posterior wings coloured as on the upper side, and having two
  dark-coloured marks placed near the middle of the wings. Margins of the
  wings entire.


GNOPHRIA? COLLARIS.

Plate XXI. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Lithosiidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. GNOPHRIA? _Steph._ Lithosia p., _Fabr._ Phalæna (Noctua), _Drury_.

  GNOPHRIA? COLLARIS. Alis nigris, anticarum maculâ pone medium albâ,
  collari sanguineo. (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Noctua) Collaris, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Brazil. "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black and setaceous. Thorax, abdomen, and wings
  blueish black, immaculate, except an oval white spot placed on the
  anterior ones, about a quarter of an inch from the tips.

  _Under Side._ Palpi black. Tongue and neck yellow. Legs, breast, and
  abdomen grey. Anus yellow. Wings black, the anterior having a small white
  longitudinal streak near the shoulders, and the oval spot seen on the
  upper side. Posterior wings also fringed with white. Margins of the wings
  entire.


{29}CALLIMORPHA CÆNEA.

Plate XXI. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Arctiidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. CALLIMORPHA, _Latr._ Phalæna (Noctua), _Drury_.

  CALLIMORPHA CÆNEA. Alis nigris, anticis fasciâ latâ transversâ,
  margineque antico posticarum flavescentibus. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 9
  lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna Noctua Cænea, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Drury (incorrectly?) states that he received this insect both
  from Madras and Brazil. "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1775" (_Drury's_
  MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black and setaceous. Thorax and abdomen nearly
  black. Wings deep brown, nearly black; the anterior having a yellow band
  crossing them from the anterior edges to the lower corners; and the
  posterior having a broad yellow streak on the anterior edges.

  _Under Side._ Coloured as on the upper side. Margins of the wings entire.


GEOMETRA (PÆCILOPHASIA) FULVATA.

Plate XXI. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Geometridæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. GEOMETRA, _Steph._ (SUBGENUS: Pæcilophasia? _Steph._)

  GEOMETRA (PÆCILOPHASIA) FULVATA. Alis fulvescentibus fasciâ latâ communi
  dilutiori, anticarum puncto subdiscoidali. (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 7 lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Geometra) fulvata, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Africa. "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ setaceous and yellow. Thorax and abdomen yellow.
  Wings deep straw-coloured, the anterior having a small black spot placed
  near the middle of the anterior edges. A small narrow line of a silverish
  colour runs along the external edges of these wings, beginning near the
  tips, and continuing along the edges of the posterior ones, ends at the
  abdominal corners.

  _Under Side._ Breast, legs, and abdomen whiteish. Wings coloured as on
  the upper side, but dappled with minute reddish streaks. Margins of the
  wings entire.


NOCTUA (CALYPTRA) LUGUBRIS.

Plate XXI. fig. 5.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Noctuidæ.

  GENUS. NOCTUA, _Auct._ SUBGENUS: Calyptra, _Ochs._ Gonoptera, _Latr._

  NOCTUA (CALYPTRA) LUGUBRIS. Alis anticis dentatis subfalcatis,
  brunneo-fuscis basi saturatioribus, maculis dentatis submarginalibus.
  (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 7½ lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Noctua) lugubris, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Madras.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ brown and setaceous. Thorax ash-coloured. Abdomen
  and wings rusty iron, without marks, except the anterior, which have some
  faint blueish marks close to the external edges.

  _Under Side._ Tongue not noticed. Breast, legs, and abdomen dark red.
  Wings redder-coloured than on the other side, without marks: anterior
  wings dentated, the posterior entire.


{30}NOCTUA (ACONTIA) MARGARITATA.

Plate XXI. fig. 6.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Noctuidæ.

  GENUS. NOCTUA, _Auct._ SUBGENUS: Acontia, _Ochs. Steph. Curtis._ Phalæna
  (Noctua), _Drury_.

  NOCTUA (ACONTIA) MARGARITATA. Argenteo-alba, alis anticis pone punctum
  ordinarium fuscis, maculâ magnâ albâ costali margineque postico albo,
  lunulis punctisque nigricantibus, posticarum margine fusco. (Expans.
  Alar. 1 unc. 5 lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna Noctua Margaritata, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: New York.

  _Upper Side._ Antennae brown and setaceous. Thorax and abdomen silvery
  white. Anterior wings at the shoulders silvery white, the remainder being
  of a shining red-brown, with the edges fringed with white; a large spot
  of silver colour is situate near the tips, on the anterior edges.
  Posterior wings silvery white, but along the external edges darker
  coloured.

  _Under Side._ Tongue not noticed. Breast, legs, and abdomen white.
  Anterior wings silvery grey, being edged and fringed with yellow.
  Posterior wings coloured as on the upper side, without markings. Margins
  of the wings entire.


PLATE XXII.

[Illustration]

NOCTUA GUTTATA.

Plate XXII. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Noctuidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. NOCTUA, _Auct._ (SUBGENUS: ----?)

  NOCTUA GUTTATA. alis griseis punctis nonnullis discoidalibus strigisque
  apicalibus obscurioribus. (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 7½ lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Noctua) Guttata, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: "Brazil" (_Drury_, in text). "Cape of Good Hope, Mr. Foster,
  1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ setaceous. Thorax and abdomen grey. Anterior wings
  light-coloured, almost grey, the middle having some dark spots on them,
  and a few dark streaks near the tips. Posterior wings darker coloured,
  without spots.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, breast, and abdomen grey. Anterior wings coloured as
  on the upper, immaculate. Posterior wings lighter-coloured than on the
  upper side. Margins of the wings entire.


NOCTUA? HESIONE.

Plate XXII. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Noctuidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. NOCTUA? _Auct._ (SUBGENUS: ----?)

  NOCTUA? HESIONE. Alis anticis brunneis strigâ longitudinali subcostali
  luteâ, fasciâque transversali dilutâ, strigis undulatis nigris
  marginatis, angulis posticis productis; posticis fulvis margine latè
  nigro. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Noctua) Hesione, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Brazil, "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ brown and setaceous. Thorax clay-coloured. Abdomen
  reddish. Anterior wings reddish-brown, with two darker bands crossing
  them; the anterior edges pale clay-coloured; a {31}small narrow
  clay-coloured line rises near the posterior edges close to the shoulders,
  and extends in a circular manner to the anterior edges: the lower corners
  of these wings are remarkably prominent. Posterior wings deep yellow,
  deeply bordered from the upper to the abdominal corners, with black.

  _Under Side._ Palpi orange, remarkably long. Tongue spiral. Legs, breast
  and abdomen clay-coloured. Anterior wings dark-brown as on the upper
  side, the anterior edges yellow. Posterior wings paler yellow than on the
  upper side, and the black border not so distinct. Margins of the wings
  entire.

This insect is evidently the type of a distinct genus from any hitherto
described, especially distinguished by the lively colours of the wings, the
produced posterior angle of the anterior pair, and the form of the palpi.


ENDROMIS RHODOPE.

Plate XXII. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Bombycidæ.

  GENUS. ENDROMIS, _Ochs. Germar._ Dimorpha, _Hübn._ Phalæna (Bombyx),
  (_Drury_.)

  ENDROMIS RHODOPE. Alis albis pellucidis; strigis duabus undulatis
  parallelis submarginalibus, maculisque nonnullis discoidalibus anticarum
  virescentibus. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Bombyx) Rhodope, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Brazil, "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ pectinated. Thorax and abdomen dark-brown, with
  some faint whiteish marks. Wings transparent white, having two rows of
  greenish crescents running along the external edges, the anterior wings
  having some faint marks of the same kind in the middle also. The anterior
  edges are of a yellow hue.

  _Under Side._ Palpi white. Tongue not observed. Legs, breast, and abdomen
  white. Anus dark-brown. Wings coloured as on the upper side; the
  posterior ones having two brown spots on each near the abdominal corners.
  Margins of the wings entire.


CALLIMORPHA? DIAPHANA.

Plate XXII. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Arctiidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. CALLIMORPHA? _Latr._ Phalæna (Noctua), _Drury_.

  CALLIMORPHA? DIAPHANA. Alis diaphanis, marginibus anticis et externis
  strigâque transversâ e margine antico ad angulum posticum ductâ, nigris.
  (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Noctua) Diaphana, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Brazil, "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1774" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ pectinated. Thorax brown. Abdomen black, brown
  above. Wings diaphanous, the edges being bordered with black, a black
  band also crosses the anterior, from the anterior edges to the lower
  corners.

  _Under Side._ Tongue spiral. Breast and legs black. Abdomen grey. Anus
  yellowish. Wings coloured on this side as on the upper. Margins of the
  wings entire.


{32}CALLIMORPHA? PHILETA.

Plate XXII. fig. 5.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Arctiidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. CALLIMORPHA? _Latr._ Phalæna (Noctua), _Drury_.

  CALLIMORPHA? PHILETA. Alis anticis oblongis fuscis, fasciâ transversâ
  pone medium albâ, posticis fulvis margine externo nigro, thorace
  sanguineo. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Noctua) Phileta, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black and setaceous. Thorax red, spotted, and
  striped with black. Abdomen yellow, with black streaks crossing it.
  Anterior wings sooty black, with a white band crossing each from the
  anterior edges to the lower corners. Posterior wings yellow, with a black
  border running along the external edges.

  _Under Side._ Head and neck red. Legs streaked black and white. Breast
  and abdomen yellow, the latter spotted with black on each side. Wings
  coloured as on the upper side. Margins of the wings entire.


CALLIMORPHA? EUCHARIS.

Plate XXII. fig. 6.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Arctiidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. CALLIMORPHA? _Latr._ Phalæna (Noctua), _Drury_.

  CALLIMORPHA? EUCHARIS. Alis sulphureis, margine postico lato punctoque
  medio anticarum fuscis. (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Noctua) Eucharis, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ setaceous. Thorax and abdomen brown. Anterior wings
  greyish yellow, with a single spot placed near the middle, almost close
  to the anterior edge. Posterior wings of the same colour as the anterior,
  and like them surrounded with a deep black border.

  _Under Side._ Tongue spiral. Legs, breast, and abdomen grey. Wings
  coloured as on the upper side, the borders being fainter. Margins of the
  wings entire.


PLATE XXIII.

[Illustration]

NYMPHALIS (CHARAXES) TIRIDATES.

Plate XXIII. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera, _Linn._ SECTION: Diurna, _Latr._ FAMILY: Nymphalidæ,
  _Swainson_.

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Eq. achiv.) _Linn. Drury._ Papilio
  Nymphalis, _Fabr._ (SUBGENUS: Charaxes, _Boisduval_.)

  NYMPHALIS (CHARAXES) TIRIDATES. Alis supra atro-coeruleis, margine
  postico lunulis ochraceis, omnium dimidio apicali punctis
  coerulescentibus. (Expans. Alar. 4 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (N.) Tiridates, _Fabr. Spec. Ins._ 2. _p._ 11. _No._ 43.
  _Cramer_, _pl._ 162. _f._ A. B. _Herbst. Pap._ _tab._ 62. _f._ 3. 4.
  _Donovan Ins. India_, 3. _pl._ 2. _f._ 3.

  Nymphalis T., _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 354. 14.

  HABITAT: Amboyna, Java (_Fabr. & Enc. Méth._). Brazil (_Drury_, in text).
  "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1766" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  {33}_Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Head dark brown, with four white spots
  on the crown. Thorax and abdomen dark brown. Wings fine dark blue, with a
  number of small light blue spots sprinkled on each wing. The anterior
  being edged with a row of yellow spots. Posterior wings furnished with
  four short tails and deeply scolloped, each scollop being edged with
  yellow.

  _Under Side._ Palpi and abdomen clay-coloured. Breast and legs light
  hair-coloured. Anterior wings hair-coloured, with several small waved and
  irregular black lines half crossing them, from the anterior edges to the
  middle of the wing, each line being edged with blue. A black
  kidney-shaped spot is also situate next the lower corners, being also
  edged with blue. Posterior wings coloured as the anterior, and furnished
  with four short tails, having several irregular black lines on them near
  the body, which are edged with blue as on the anterior ones.


NYMPHALIS PYRAMUS [male].

Plate XXIII. fig. 3, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Pleb. rur.), _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS PYRAMUS. Alis nigris (in mare supra violaceo-micantibus)
  anticis utrinque fasciâ latâ miniatâ: posticis subtus irroratis strigâque
  marginali coerulescenti. (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 7½ lin.)

  SYN. Papilio Pyramus, _Fabr. Sp. Ins._ 2. 130. 590. _Ent. Syst._ III. 1.
  _p._ 323. 223.

  Papilio (Pleb. rur.) Pyramus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Stoll Suppl.
  Cramer_, _pl._ 32. _f._ 3. 3e. _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 422. (Nymphalis P.)
  _Donovan Nat. Repos._ 1. _t._ 3. _f._ 2. 2.

  HABITAT: Brazil, "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1774" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ brown. Thorax and abdomen dark brown. Anterior
  wings at the extremities black, but next the body red-brown, the middle
  being occupied by a band which crosses them of a beautiful red, extending
  to the middle of the posterior ones, the remaining parts of which are of
  a fine blueish purple.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, legs, breast, and abdomen white. Anterior wings next
  the body yellowish brown, the tips the same. The red band is not so
  strong on this side as on the upper, neither does it extend to the
  inferior wings, but is bordered with black on that side near the tips.
  Posterior wings yellowish brown, prettily variegated with very small
  lighter marks and spots, with a small faint blueish indented line running
  along the external borders.

The original Fabrician description of this insect is stated to have been
derived from an insect from Cayenne in the collection of Mr. Yeats; and in
the Fabrician detailed description, we find the wings characterized
thus--"macula magna, _in medio_, fulva, anticæ subtus concolores." It
appears, however, from the observations of Donovan that the celebrated
iconographer Jones had made a drawing of Yeats's specimen, from which
drawing Donovan published his illustration of the species in the
Naturalist's Repository, with the following observations:--"There was a
variety of this insect pretty nearly, but not exactly, according with this
in the collection of an old and well-known entomologist, a figure of which
appeared shortly after the publication of the Fabrician writings as the
true Papilio {34}Pyramus. It was not precisely the same as it appeared to
us from an inspection of the specimen in the Cabinet of Mr. Drury." Making
due allowance for Donovan's over-charged colouring, there is still
considerable difference between the figures of Drury and Donovan; in the
former the fore-wings being almost entirely red on the under side, whilst
in the latter, the upper side of same wings is red, except at the tips. In
both these particulars, as will at once be seen from the above quotation of
Fabricius, Drury's figure perfectly agrees with the character given of
Yeats's specimen; whilst Donovan's differs in each respect. The female of
this species is destitute of the purple gloss on the upper surface of the
wings, and the red band does not run into the posterior pair.


PLATE XXIV.

[Illustration]

SATURNIA PHÆDUSA.

Plate XXIV.  and XXV.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Bombycidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. SATURNIA, _Schrank._ Attacus, _Germ._ Phalæna (Attacus), _Drury_.

  SATURNIA PHÆDUSA. Alis griseo-fuscis, anticis strigis tribus transversis
  saturatioribus maculâque-parvà triangulari fenestratâ mediâ; posticis
  obscurioribus ocello magno nigro, margine carneo-rufo cincto. (Expans.
  Alar. 7 unc. 9 lin.)

  _Syn._ Phalæna (Attacus) Phædusa, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Bombyx Saturnus, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 409. _Oliv. Enc. Méth._
  5. 27. 11.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone (_Drury_). "In Indiis" (_Fabricius_).

  _Upper Side._ PLATE XXIV. Antennæ broad in the middle and strongly
  pectinated, terminating in a point both at the base and extremity, the
  latter being like a thread. Head dark brown. The neck surrounded with a
  white collar. Thorax and abdomen greyish clay-coloured. Anterior wings
  the same, but towards their extremities becoming darker; the tips are
  angulated, and the edges a little scolloped; a dark line rises near the
  tips, which running across the wings ends near the middle of the
  posterior edges, but is there much fainter than at the tips. A small
  triangular transparent spot is situate near the centre of these wings,
  about three-eighths of an inch from the anterior edges. Posterior wings a
  little scolloped, being the same colour with the anterior next the
  abdomen, but darker towards the external edges. In the middle of these
  wings is a large eye, the pupil being black like velvet, surrounded with
  a narrow circle of a dark orange, round which is another cream-coloured
  circle, and this likewise is surrounded by a large border of a fine
  red-brown.

  _Under Side._ PLATE XXV. Tongue not noticed. Thighs of the fore legs dark
  brown, the other legs lighter. Breast and abdomen light clay-coloured.
  Anterior wings the same, being next the body paler than towards the
  extremities; along the external edges is a pale indented border, running
  from the tips to the lower corners. Two dark brown spots are placed next
  the transparent one mentioned in the preceding description, and the dark
  line there mentioned is conspicuous on this side. Posterior wings
  coloured as the anterior, becoming darker towards the external edges. A
  pale indented border runs along the external edges, similar to that on
  the anterior wings. On the middle of these wings are four dark brown
  spots, two small and two large, being placed opposite to the eyes
  observed on the upper side; and just below them a dark line runs across
  from the upper corners to the middle of the abdominal edges.

{35}PLATE XXV.

[Illustration]



In Mr. Drury's manuscripts I find the insect referred to these two figures
is stated to have been obtained from the Duchess of Portland's Museum, and
to be an inhabitant of New York.


PLATE XXVI.

[Illustration]

NYMPHALIS LAODICE.

Plate XXVI. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Pleb. rur.) _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS LAODICE. Alis supra atro-coeruleis, limbo postico serie
  lunularum coerulescentium; subtus fascià mediâ communi saturatiori,
  posticis punctis marginalibus albis. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph. Phal.) Laodice, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. (1783.)

  Papilio Lycurgus, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 67. _No._ 209. _Enc.
  Méth._ ix. _p._ 364. _No._ 49.

  Nymphalis Lyc., _Paul. Beauv. Ins. d'Afr. et d'Amer. Lep._ _pl._ 4. _f._
  2.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax black. Abdomen dark brown. Wings very
  dark blue, almost black, the edges being dark brown; the anterior ones
  are angulated, and the posterior ones furnished with two short tails. A
  row of blue crescents, forming a line, runs along the posterior wings
  near the external edges, extending along part of the anterior ones, which
  also have two small oval blue spots, almost joined together, placed at
  the middle of the anterior edges, and one single one near the tips.

  _Under Side._ Palpi not noticed. Legs brown above, and white beneath.
  Breast and abdomen dark brown. Wings soft brown, with some irregular and
  indented bands of a darker colour crossing them, particularly the
  posterior ones, which have a rather broad one running from the upper to
  the abdominal corners. These wings have also seven very small white spots
  placed along the external edges.


THECLA PHALEROS [male].

Plate XXVI. fig. 3, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Lycænidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. THECLA, _Fabr._ (Syst. Gloss.) Polyommatus, _Latr. God._ Hesperia
  p. _Fabr._ (olim.) Papilio (Pleb. rur.), _Drury_.

  THECLA PHALEROS. Alis [male] violaceo-coeruleis nitidis, [female] albidis
  apice fusco, subtus albis fasciis transversis margineque nigris ad
  angulum ani conjunctis. (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Pleb. urb.) Phaleros, _Linn. Syst. Nat._ 2. _p._ 796. _No._
  272. _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 628. (Polyomm. Ph.)

  Hesperia R. Chiton, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 262. _Donovan Ins.
  India_, 1. _pl._ 3. _f._ 1.

  Papilio Silenus, _Cram._ _pl._ 282. E.

  Papilio Agis, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Brazil (_Drury_, in text). "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1775"
  (_Drury's_ MSS.). Surinam (_Enc. Méth._). India (_Linn. Fabr. Donov._).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen dark blue. Wings blue,
  without marks. Posterior furnished with four small black tails, the tips
  of which are white. The abdominal corners are also edged with white.

  _Under Side._ Palpi long, thin, and black, white at the base, as is the
  neck. Legs brown above and white beneath. Breast yellow. Abdomen blue.
  Wings yellow; the anterior having some brown, {36}irregular, and uneven
  lines crossing them from the anterior to the posterior edges. The
  external edges are also verged with brown, and at the lower corners have
  an orange-coloured patch. Posterior wings with three dark brown lines
  crossing them from the anterior edges to the abdominal corners, and
  externally edged with dark brown.


PLATE XXVII.

[Illustration]

VANESSA PELARGA.

Plate XXVII. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. VANESSA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Hamadryades, _Hübn._ Papilio (Nymph.
  Phal.) _Drury_.

  VANESSA PELARGA. Alis anticis falcatis, posticis intùs subcaudatis,
  omnibus suprà fuscis, fasciâ coerulescenti-albâ, nigro-punctatâ,
  extrorsumque fulvo inductâ; subtùs xerampelinis lineâ fuscâ communi
  mediâ. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (N.) Pelarga, _Fabr. Syst. Ent._ _p._ 513. _No._ 296.
  _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Stoll Suppl. Cram._ _pl._ 27. _f._ 2.

  Vanessa P., _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 313. _No._ 37.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ brown. Thorax and abdomen dark brown. Wings at the
  base dark olive brown; the anterior having two red and one blue crooked
  lines, a quarter of an inch long, placed near the anterior edges, which
  are also red. A white bar encircles all the brown part, beginning at the
  anterior edges, meeting just below the anus; the lower part of it being
  tinged with red or orange, on which are eight small round black spots,
  three on the anterior and five on the posterior wings. The external edges
  of all the wings are deeply bordered with olive brown, and near the tips
  are placed three small white spots, one larger than the rest. Abdominal
  groove orange. A few blue streaks are placed at the abdominal corners.

  _Under Side._ Palpi long and white, but reddish above. Legs white. Breast
  and abdomen orange. Wings dark reddish brown, with very little
  variegations. The three white spots near the tips of the anterior wings
  are observable, and the five black spots on the posterior ones are
  faintly seen. Wings deeply angulated. The under side varies considerably
  in different specimens.


NYMPHALIS MELEAGRIS.

Plate XXVII. fig. 3, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Pleb. rur.), _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS MELEAGRIS. Alis suprà olivaceo-fuscis, subtùs lutescentibus;
  utrinque albo, in triplici serie, multipunctatis. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc.
  4½ lin.)

  SYN. Papilio Meleagris, _Cramer_, _pl._ 66. _f._ A. B. _Herbst._ _t._
  145. _f._ 1. 2. _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._
  128. _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 387. (Nymphalis M.)

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone" (_Drury_, in text). "Brazil, Mr. Skeene, 1772"
  (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ brown. Thorax, abdomen, and wings olive-brown,
  spotted with a number of round white spots edged with black; the anterior
  wings having twenty-five, the posterior eighteen, besides those placed on
  the external edges.

  {37}_Under Side._ Palpi white. Legs white. Breast yellowish. Abdomen
  olive-brown. Wings dusky orange; the white spots described on the upper
  side being here very discernible with the addition of a few others next
  the body. Margins of the wings entire.


NYMPHALIS (CHARAXES) ANTICLEA.

Plate XXVII. fig. 5, 6.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera, _Linn._ SECTION: Diurna, _Latr._ FAMILY: Nymphalidæ,
  _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Eq. achiv.), _Linn. Drury._ Papilio
  Nymphalis, _Fabr._ (SUBGENUS: Charaxes, _Boisduval_.)

  NYMPHALIS (CHARAXES) ANTICLEA. Alis suprà fuscis fasciâ terminali fulvâ,
  in anticis maculari et abbreviatâ, in posticis ocellis 4, anali
  sesquialtero. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph. Phal.) Anticlea, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Nymphalis Ant., _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 353. _No._ 9.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone (_Drury_, in text). "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas,
  1766" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen dark brown. Anterior
  wings chocolate-coloured; the lower corners being tipped with orange, to
  the upper part of which joins a spot of the same colour, and another
  small one is placed nearer the tips. The basal parts of the posterior
  wings chocolate, the apical parts orange; they are doubly angulated, and
  at the abdominal corners have a black ocellus with two white pupils, and
  a small orange spot below them; three other small eyes are also placed
  along the external edges.

  _Under Side._ Palpi and legs buff-coloured. Breast russet. Abdomen dark
  orange. Wings russet-coloured, with bands of lighter and darker shades
  running from the anterior edges of the anterior wings, and ending below
  the body on the abdominal edges, some of the bands being verged with
  black. Anterior wings having three small black spots placed near the
  shoulders, and the posterior with two small white spots at the abdominal
  corners, and four others placed along the external edges, growing fainter
  as they approach the upper corners, till at length they are quite lost.


PLATE XXVIII.

[Illustration]

ACRÆA HORTA.

Plate XXVIII. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Heliconiidæ.

  GENUS. ACRÆA, _Fabr. Latr._ Papilio (Heliconii), _Fabr._ olim.

  ACRÆA HORTA. Alis oblongis integerrimis, supra fulvis; anticis ad extimum
  hyalino-cinerascentibus, posticis utrinque nigro punctatis subtusque
  albidis. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 7½ lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Helic.) Horta, _Linn. Syst. Nat._ 2. _p._ 755. _No._ 54.
  _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Cramer, Pap._ _pl._ 298. _fig._ F. G. _Herbst.
  Pap._ _tab._ 83. _f._ 1. 2. _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 231. 1.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.). Cape of
  Good Hope, and other parts of Africa (_Enc. Méth._).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ, thorax, and abdomen black, the latter spotted on
  its sides. Anterior wings, next the body dark orange, but at the tips
  about two-fifths are pellucid. Near the middle, towards the anterior
  edge, is a small black spot, and a streak of the same colour. Posterior
  wings dark orange, black at the base, with a narrow border of orange and
  black running along the external edges, and a group, consisting of
  fifteen different shaped black spots, occupying the middle.

  {38}_Under Side._ Palpi hairy and light coloured. Legs and breast black.
  Abdomen light brown. Anterior wings very glossy, the marks on the upper
  side being so faint as to be scarcely discernible. Posterior wings
  cream-coloured, with the same number of black spots, but stronger and
  more distinct than those on the upper side. The external edges bordered
  with orange, within which is a small narrow black border, with light
  cream spots. Margins of the wings entire.


ACRÆA GEA [male].

Plate XXVIII. fig. 3, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Heliconiidæ.

  GENUS. ACRÆA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Heliconii), _Fabr._ Olim.

  ACRÆA GEA. Alis oblongis integerrimis, anticis utrinque fuscis, fasciis
  duabus fulvis aut albidis, unâ versus apicem, alterâ connexâ disco
  posticarum, his subtùs rufescentibus, basi nigro-punctatis, postea
  striatis. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc.)

  SYN. Papilio (Hel.) Gea, _Fabr. Spec. Ins._ 2. _p._ 32. _No._ 136.
  [male]. _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 238. (Acræa G.)

  Papilio (H.) Jodutta, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 175. _No._ 554.
  [female].

  Papilio (Hel.) Hirce, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Papilio Epæa, _Cramer_, _pl._ 230. _f._ B.C.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone (_Drury_). "Calabar, in Africa, Capt. Parker, 1771"
  (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax black, with four white spots on each
  side. Abdomen dark orange, spotted on the sides with black, and a black
  streak running along the top. Anterior wings fine dark brown, almost
  black. A large patch of dark orange is placed at the middle of the
  posterior edges, and between that and the tips is a streak of the same
  colour, divided into three parts by the tendons of the wings. Near the
  body are six round black spots hardly discernible, on one of which,
  nearest the body, is a very small white one. Posterior wings near the
  body orange, but along the edges black, the space between being covered
  with rays, composed of those two colours. Next the body are ten round
  black spots, some larger than others, on one of which is a small white
  one, as on the upper wings.

  _Under Side._ Palpi orange. Thorax black, spotted with white. Legs black
  above and white beneath. Abdomen orange. Anterior wings much lighter on
  this side than on the upper, the orange-coloured marks being, on this
  side, of a dark yellow. All the black spots on this side are more
  distinct than on the other, as is that with the small white one on it.
  Posterior wings next the body orange, from whence to the edges issue rays
  of a dusky yellow and black, there being no black border. The black spots
  next the body are also very strong. The edges of the posterior wings are
  a little dentated.


NYMPHALIS HOSTILIA.

Plate XXVIII. fig. 5, 6.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera, _Linn._ SECTION: Diurna, _Latr._ FAMILY: Nymphalidæ,
  _Swainson_.

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Eq. achiv.), _Linn. Drury_. Papilio
  Nymphalis, _Fabr._

  NYMPHALIS HOSTILIA. Alis dentatis subconcoloribus, fulvis, basi
  nigro-maculatis; anticarum apice fusco punctis flavescentibus. (Expans.
  Alar. 2 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Dan. Fest.) Hostilia, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Fabr. Ent.
  Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 130. _No._ 399.

  Nymphalis H., _Latr. God. Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 393.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  {39}_Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen dark brown. Anterior
  wings next the body dark tawny orange, but next the tips dark brown,
  almost black, the darkest part of the wings having several dusky yellow
  spots, while the orange part has a number of black ones. Posterior wings
  dark orange, and next the body streaked with black, and a black zigzag
  border running along the external edges.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, neck, legs, and breast pale yellow. Abdomen orange.
  Anterior wings much lighter than on the upper side, being, next the body,
  cream colour; the part next the tips dark russet. All the spots are very
  discernible on this side, the yellow ones being here much lighter.
  Posterior wings cream-coloured, having the black border and streaks
  equally as strong and discernible as on the upper side. Margins of the
  wings entire.


PLATE XXIX.

[Illustration]

SATURNIA ARGUS.

Plate XXIX. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Bombycidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. SATURNIA, _Schrank._ Attacus, _Germ._ Phalæna (Attacus), _Drury_.

  SATURNIA ARGUS. Alis pallidè testaceo-albidis punctis ocellaribus
  fenestratis numerosis, caudis longissimis. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 5 lin.)

  SYN. Bombyx Argus, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 414. _No._ 24.
  _Donovan Nat. Repos._ 5. 173. _Oliv. Enc. Méth._ 5. 29. 22.

  Phalæna (Bombyx) brachyura, _Cramer Ins._ _tab._ 29. _f._ 1. _Drury_,
  _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ almost black, and pectinated. The neck and head
  flesh-coloured. Thorax ash-coloured. Abdomen pale flesh-coloured. Wings
  dingy flesh-coloured, the anterior ones having five or six small
  transparent spots situated in the centre of them. The posterior ones
  furnished with two long tails about two inches and three-quarters long,
  the extremities being cream-coloured, the upper part red-brown; with five
  small yellowish round spots, edged with black, placed in the centre of
  the wings.

  _Under Side._ Palpi brown. Tongue concealed. Legs red-brown. Breast,
  sides, and abdomen cream. Wings coloured as on the upper side.

I have adopted the Fabrician specific name, notwithstanding its subsequent
date, that proposed by Cramer being exceedingly inapplicable. Drury states,
on the authority of Mr. Smeathman, that this curious insect was found on
the island of Banana. Its flight is exceedingly slow, and its tails seem
rather to impede it. Mr. Donovan states that several specimens of this
insect had been received from Sierra Leone (which habitat is given by Drury
in the body of his work, but corrected as above in the observations
communicated to him by Mr. Smeathman) and that he is not aware of the
species having occurred in any other part of Africa, neither had he
understood that any other collector since Mr. Smeathman had met with the
species. Of the original specimens a pair belonged to Mr. Drury, which came
into the hands of Mr. Donovan, who also mentions a fine specimen as
existing in the Banksian Cabinet at the Linnæan Society; adding, that some
few other specimens passed into different continental Cabinets, all of
which, however, were those collected by Mr. {40}Smeathman. The late Mr.
Haworth, however, (the sale of whose magnificent collection by public
auction lasted for ten days,) possessed four specimens of this rare moth, a
pair of which were purchased by W. Swainson, Esq., and the remaining pair
by myself.


CALLIMORPHA EPIMENIS.

Plate XXIX. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Arctiidæ.

  GENUS. CALLIMORPHA, _Latr._ Phalæna (Noctua), _Drury_.

  CALLIMORPHA EPIMENIS. Alis nigris, anticis maculá magná pone medium
  albidâ, posticis basi nigris apice fulvis margine atro. (Expans. Alar. 1
  unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Noctua) Epimenis, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: "Virginia, Mr. Abbot, 1774" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black and setaceous. Eyes, head, thorax, abdomen,
  and anterior wings black, the latter with a large straw-coloured patch
  placed near the ends, and reaching across the wings from the anterior
  edges almost to the lower corners. Posterior wings nearly black, with a
  large orange-coloured patch, occupying one-third of the wings, and placed
  along the external edges.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, head, legs, breast, sides, and abdomen, black. Wings
  coloured as on the upper side, with the addition of two small
  straw-coloured spots placed between the large ones and the shoulders; the
  colours being also rather brighter. Margins of the wings entire.


LITHOSIA? INO.

Plate XXIX. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Lithosiidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. LITHOSIA? _Fabr._ Phalæna (Noctua), _Drury_.

  LITHOSIA? INO. Alis albidis, anticis punctis duobus humeralibus
  maculisque duabus magnis nigris (scil. ante et pone medium); thorace
  nigro punctato. (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Noctua) Ino, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: "Madras, Mr. Skeene, 1772" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ brown and setaceous. Head cream-coloured. Neck
  black. Thorax and abdomen cream-coloured, the former having some black
  spots on it. Anterior wings cream-coloured, with a large triangular black
  spot placed at the tips, another on the middle of the wings, extending
  across from the anterior edges almost to the lower corners. There are
  also two small ones next the shoulders. The external edges have a row of
  small black spots placed thereon. Posterior wings cream-coloured,
  tinctured with red, with a faint black border, rising at the upper
  corners where it is broadest, and running half-way to the abdominal ones,
  gradually narrowing.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, breast, legs, sides and abdomen cream-coloured.
  Wings reddish cream, without any marks; the black marks, &c. on the upper
  side being faintly perceived. Margins of the wings entire.


{41}CALLIMORPHA? HELCITA.

Plate XXIX. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Arctiidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. CALLIMORPHA? _Latr._ Phalæna (Noctua), _Drury_.

  CALLIMORPHA? HELCITA. Alis testaecis apice nigris, fasciâ maculari albâ.
  (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 5 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Dan. Cand.) Helcita, _Linn. Syst. Nat._ 2. 763. 94.

  Phalæna fascelis, _Linn. Mus. Ulr._ 390. _No._ 25.

  Phalæna (Noctua) H., _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Phalæna macularia, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 2. _p._ 140. _No._ 40.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.). "In
  Indiis" (_Linn._). India (_Fabr._ incorrectly).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black and setaceous. Head, thorax, and abdomen
  black, the two last having a row of white spots running along the middle,
  and another on each side down to the anus. Wings fine dark red. Almost
  half the anterior next the tips being black, with five oval white spots
  thereon; three of which being the largest are joined together, the other
  two, being small and behind, are at a little distance apart. Posterior
  wings with a broad black border running from the upper to the abdominal
  corners, whereon are placed eight oval white spots at equal distances,
  two, being the outermost, very small and close together.

  _Under Side._ Palpi yellow. Tongue spiral. Legs, breast, and sides black,
  spotted and streaked with white. Abdomen yellow. Wings coloured and
  marked as on the upper side. Margins of the wings entire.

Mr. Smeathman states that this insect is found in the savannahs. It is a
sluggish creature, and easily taken. A specimen of this very rare insect
was sold in the collection of the late Mr. Stothard, on the 18th May, 1835;
and was purchased by Thomas Norris, Esq. M.E.S. at the price of fourteen
shillings.


PLATE XXX.

[Illustration]

NYMPHALIS (CHARAXES) POLLUX.

Plate XXX. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera, _Linn._ SECTION: Diurna, _Latr._ FAMILY: Nymphalidæ,
  _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Phal.), _Drury_. (SUBGENUS:
  Charaxes, _Boisduval_.)

  NYMPHALIS (CHARAXES) POLLUX. Alis supra fulvis, limbo postico latè nigro,
  subtus ad basin ferrugineis, annulis fasciâque albis. (Expans. Alar. 3
  unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio Pollux, _Cram._ _pl._ 37. _fig._ C. D. _Herbst. Pap._ _t._
  63. _f._ 3. 4.

  Papilio (N.) Castor, _Fabr. Gen. Ins. Mant._ _p._ 251. _Donovan Nat.
  Repos._ 4. 116.

  Papilio (Nymph. Ph.) Camulus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennae black. Thorax and abdomen red-brown. Anterior
  wings brown-orange, with a small round black spot near the middle, and
  another fainter and smaller a little beneath it. Along the anterior edges
  are several black marks and patches joining together; these wings are
  bordered with black, having along the external edges some small faint
  orange-brown spots. Posterior wings corresponding exactly with the
  anterior, and furnished with four short tails.

  {42}_Under Side._ Palpi yellow, bordered with white. Breast dark brown,
  with white streaks. Legs brown. Abdomen red-brown. The ground of the
  anterior wings next the body is a light chocolate, which is separated
  from a dusky brown border running along the external edges by a white and
  orange band, which, being the chief colours on this side, are continued
  along the posterior wings. The base is adorned with black streaks,
  surrounded with white, placed along the anterior edges, and others of
  different forms on the middle of the wings. Along the external edges, on
  the dusky border, is placed a row of black triangular spots, which at the
  lower corners are doubled. Posterior wings of the same colour as the
  anterior, the chocolate ground having a number of small black marks and
  streaks, bordered with white, in a very irregular manner. At the lower
  corner is placed a dark grey eye, with a black iris and a white
  longitudinal streak in the centre, two rows of small black spots, some
  being edged with white, of different forms, are also placed along the
  dusky border.

We learn, from the observations of Smeathman and Drury, that this is the
insect noticed in the observation upon Charaxes Jason, as possessing
exceedingly strong powers of flight. Vide Vol. I. Pl. 1. fig. 1.


PLATE XXXI.

[Illustration]

NYMPHALIS VARANES.

Plate XXXI. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Gemmat.), _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS VARANES. Alis supra basi albis immaculatis, apice ferrugineis
  fulvo et fusco punctatis. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (N.) Varanes, _Fabr. Sp. Ins._ 2. _p._ 14. _No._ 55.

  Papilio (Nymph. Gemm.) Varanes, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Papilio V., _Cramer_, _pl._ 160. D. E. [male]. _pl._ 388. A. B. [female].

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.). Caffraria
  (_Enc. Méth._). India (_Fabr._ incorrectly).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax greenish. Abdomen white, spotted on
  the upper part with black. Basal half of the wings ash-coloured, and
  bordered with deep red-brown. Anterior wings having a row of six orange
  spots along the external edges, and two oval ones near the middle of the
  anterior edges; two black spots, shaped like the beards of arrows, are
  situated in the centre. Posterior wings angulated and furnished with two
  short tails, having a row of five black spots running parallel with the
  external edges. Wings not indented.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, breast, and legs buff-coloured. Abdomen white. Wings
  next the body dark ash-coloured, but along the tips and external edges
  darker. A narrow line of a brown colour rises from the posterior edges of
  the anterior wings, and, bending towards the tips, is lost in the general
  colour of that part of the wings. A row of small faint black spots runs
  parallel with the external edges, being situated between them and the
  fore-mentioned dark line; the inner divisions of these and the posterior
  wings have a number of small black marks, like Hebrew characters,
  regularly dispersed on them. Posterior wings with a dark narrow line
  rising on the anterior edges, which crosses the wings, meeting below the
  abdomen. A small black eye, with a white pupil, is placed near the middle
  of the anterior edges, and a row of faint oval dark spots runs parallel
  with the external edges, ending at the abdominal corners.

{43}This insect, like the last, flies exceedingly swift, and is observed
sometimes to settle upon human excrement, a peculiar habit which is also
adopted by other species of insects belonging to different orders.


PLATE XXXII.

[Illustration]

PIERIS EUDOXIA.

Plate XXXII. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Papilionidæ, _Leach._

  GENUS. PIERIS, _Schrank_. Papilio (Dan. Cand.), _Linn. &c._

  PIERIS EUDOXIA. Alis rotundatis, anticis diluté fulvis posticis albis;
  omnium limbo communi nigro maculato. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Dan. Cand.), _Cramer_, _pl._ 213. _fig._ C. _Herbst. tab._
  107. _f._ 1. 2. _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._
  199. 620. _Boisduval Hist. Nat. Lepid._ 1. 510. _No._ 105.

  Papilio (D. C.) Rhodope, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 196. _No._ 609.
  _Donovan Nat. Repos._ 3. _pl._ 86.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen grey-brown. Anterior
  wings dark yellow, shaded along the anterior edges with dark brown; a
  black border occupies the tips and external edges of these wings, whereon
  is a row of dark yellow spots of an oblong form. Posterior wings entirely
  white, with a row of black spots placed along the external edges.

  _Under Side._ Palpi grey. Breast, legs, and abdomen white. Anterior wings
  yellow, but next the body orange-coloured, with a row of triangular black
  spots placed along the external edges. Posterior wings white, but orange
  next the body, having a row of black round spots placed on the external
  edges, corresponding with the anterior wings. Margins of the wings
  entire.


PIERIS CHLORIS.

Plate XXXII. fig. 3, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Papilionidæ, _Leach._

  GENUS. PIERIS, _Schrank._ Papilio (Dan. Cand.), _Linn. &c._

  PIERIS CHLORIS. Alis suboblongis, integerrimis, teneris, albis apice
  nigro, subtùs anticis basi calthaceâ, posticis luteo radiatâ, his limbo
  latè nigro. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (D. C.) Chloris, _Fabr. Syst. Ent._ 473. _No._ 129. _Drury_,
  _App. vol._ 2. _Herbst._ _tab._ 99. _f._ 1. 4. _Latr. et God. Enc. Méth._
  ix. _p._ 160. _Boisduval Hist. Nat. Lepid._ 1. 516.

  Papilio Thermopylæ, _Cramer_, _pl._ 207. _fig._ F. G.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1774" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Eyes dark brown. Thorax and abdomen dark
  grey. Anterior wings entirely white, with a black patch at the tips, the
  anterior edges being also black. Posterior wings also white, with a black
  border running along the external edges from the upper to the abdominal
  corners.

  _Under Side._ Palpi grey. Legs, breast, abdomen, and anterior wings
  white; the latter black at their tips, as on the upper side, but next the
  body tinged with red. Posterior wings yellow, but one-half next the
  external edges is black; and on the upper part, next the body, having a
  streak of fine red. Margins of the wings entire.


{44}PIERIS HYPATIA.

Plate XXXII. fig. 5, 6.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Papilionidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. PIERIS, _Schrank._ Papilio (Dan. Cand.), _Linn. &c._

  PIERIS HYPATIA. Alis rotundatis integerrimis, suprà nigris, fasciâ albâ
  communi sinuatâ, subtus anticis maculâ apicali albidâ, posticis basi
  fulvo radiatis. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Pap. (Dan. Cand.) Hypatia, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Papilio Epaphia, _Cramer_, _pl._ 207. _fig._ D. E.

  Pieris Higinia, _Latr. et God. Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 135. _No._ 45.

  Pieris Saba, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 201. 627. _Latr. God. loc.
  cit._ _No._ 46.

  Pieris Malatha, _Boisd. Faun. Madagascar_, _pl._ 1. _f._ 4, 5.

  Pieris Orbona, _Boisd. loc. cit._ _pl._ 1. _f._ 3.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen black. Anterior wings
  sooty black, having a white indented bar rising at the middle of the
  anterior edges, which crosses them, and ends on the middle of the
  posterior ones; at the tips are two small white spots. Posterior wings
  white and black, the upper half being white and the lower one black.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, legs, breast, and abdomen white. Anterior wings
  tinged with yellow next the body, the white bar being the same on this
  side as on the upper; the black colour on this side partaking more of a
  brown, and at the tips having a white patch instead of the two spots seen
  on the upper side. Posterior wings marked as on the upper side. Margins
  of the wings entire.


PLATE XXXIII.

[Illustration]

NYMPHALIS (CHARAXES) EUDOXUS.

Plate XXXIII. fig. 1, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera, _Linn._ SECTION: Diurna, _Latr._ FAMILY: Nymphalidæ,
  _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Phal.), _Drury_. (SUBGENUS:
  Charaxes, _Boisduval_.)

  NYMPHALIS (CHARAXES) EUDOXUS. Alis supra fasciâ mediâ maculisque
  marginalibus fulvis, subtùs ad basin ferrugineis annulis argenteis;
  posticis tantùm fasciâ albâ. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Equ. Ach.) Eudoxus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Papilio (N.) Eudoxus, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 65. _No._ 203.
  _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 352. _No._ 6.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Eyes, head, thorax, and abdomen red-brown.
  Anterior wings dark chocolate, red-brown at the base; a row of brown
  orange-coloured spots is placed on the external edges of these wings,
  those next the tips being smallest; a brown-orange bar also rises on the
  anterior edges near the tips, and crossing these and the posterior wings
  meets at the extremity of the abdomen, increasing in width as it
  approaches the abdominal corners. Posterior wings likewise dark
  chocolate, but next the body red-brown. Each of them is furnished with
  two tails, and has an indented line of brown-orange running along the
  external edges, from the upper to the abdominal corners.

  _Under Side._ Palpi and breast orange. Feet ash colour. Sides and abdomen
  red-brown. One half of the superior wings next the body is chocolate, but
  next the external edges brown-orange, with a large black streak at the
  lower corners, and three others of different shapes in the middle of the
  wings; {45}the chocolate division is adorned with a number of black
  streaks and marks, margined with fine silver white. Posterior wings
  chocolate, with an indented line of brown-orange placed along the
  external edges, verged at top with black; these wings are marked with a
  number of silvery white lines and streaks, placed against each other in
  different directions. Two small white spots, joined together, are placed
  on a black-ground at the abdominal corners.


HESPERIA HELOPS.

Plate XXXIII. fig. 2, 3.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Hesperiidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. HESPERIA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Pleb. Urb.), _Linn. Drury,
  &c._

  HESPERIA HELOPS. Alis anticis fuscis maculis hyalinis (tribus minutis)
  subapicalibus; posticis suprà flavis, fasciâ submarginali atrâ arcuatâ,
  subtùs fuscis disco albo. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 2 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Pleb. Urb.) Helops, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Hesperia (U.) Ennius, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 337. _No._ 283.
  _Enc. Méth._ ix. 749. _No._ 54. _Donovan Ins. Ind._ II. _pl._ 3. _fig._
  1.

  HABITAT: Brazil, "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.). "In
  Indiis" (_Fabr._). India (_Donovan_).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Head, thorax, and abdomen greenish brown.
  Anterior wings very dark brown, but next the body lighter, and having
  four diaphanous spots of different shapes on each wing; and also two
  yellow triangular ones, situated at the middle of the posterior edges.
  Posterior wings nearly black, with a large yellow patch on the middle of
  the wings, and two other yellow spots at the abdominal corners.

  _Under Side._ Palpi ash-coloured. Legs yellow-brown. Breast and abdomen
  brown. Anterior wings dark brown, the lower parts along the posterior
  edges being lighter coloured; the diaphanous spots conspicuous, and the
  tips prettily tinged with red-brown. Posterior wings dark brown, the
  middle being occupied by a large silver white patch; the edges next the
  abdominal corners yellow, the other parts of the wings marked by paler
  and different coloured tints. Margins of the wings entire.


PLATE XXXIV.

[Illustration]

SATURNIA LUCINA.

Plate XXXIV. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Bombycidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. SATURNIA, _Schrank._ Attacus, _Germ._ Phalæna (Attacus), _Drury_.

  SATURNIA LUCINA. Alis albido-griseis fusco multi-rivulosis, strigis
  undulatis submarginalibus, anticis maculis nonnullis mediis ocelloque
  parvo apicali nigris. (Expans. Alar. 6 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Attacus) Lucina, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Oliv. Enc. Méth._
  5. 31. 27.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ yellow and pectinated. Thorax and abdomen brown.
  Wings russet-brown and cream-colour, disposed in a great variety of
  different shaped marks. Anterior wings next the body with a number of
  angulated lines following each other in a regular succession; the middle
  being composed of another succession of undulated lines crossing the
  wings from the anterior to the posterior edges: a black oval spot is
  placed at the tips, and a row of different sized oval marks runs along
  the external {46}edges. Posterior wings next the body dark brown, the
  middle and bottom having a series of undulated lines crossing them in
  regular succession from the anterior to the abdominal edges, while a row
  of light and dark oval marks is placed along the external edges.

  _Under Side._ Palpi brown. Legs cream-coloured. Breast, sides, and
  abdomen brown. Tongue not observed. Wings differing but slightly from the
  upper side; the general manner of marking being still preserved here. On
  the upper part of the posterior wings, next the body, is a triangular
  cream spot, the inner space being brown. Margins of the wings entire.


THECLA ORCAS.

Plate XXXIV. fig. 2, 3.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Lycænidæ, _Steph._

  GENUS. THECLA, _Fabr._ (Syst. Gloss.) Polyommatus, _Latr. God._ Hesperia
  p. _Fabr._ (olim.) Papilio (Pleb. rur.), _Drury_.

  THECLA ORCAS. Alis suprà virescenti-coeruleis, limbo maculisque nonnullis
  subcostalibus anticarum nigris; subtùs ferrugineo-fuscis maculis
  numerosis argenteis. (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Pleb. Rur.) Orcas, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Enc. Méth._ ix.
  645. 102. (Polyomm. O.)

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ brown and thickest at their extremities, where they
  are white. Head black, but between the eyes white. Thorax and abdomen
  dark blue, almost black. Wings golden blue, bordered and fringed with
  black; the anterior having along the anterior edges three small black
  marks, besides the border. Posterior wings furnished with four tails, and
  having two singular red spots placed at the abdominal corners.

  _Under Side._ Palpi and legs white. Sides, breast, and abdomen red and
  white. Wings fine red-brown, almost as deep as chocolate, adorned with a
  variety of different shaped silver spots; the anterior having eight,
  placed all over the wings, and the posterior eleven; the latter having an
  orange mark at the abdominal corners. Margins of the anterior wings
  entire, but of the posterior slightly dentated.


PLATE XXXV.

[Illustration]

PAPILIO THYASTES.

Plate XXXV. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Papilionidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. PAPILIO, _Auct._ Papilio (Eq. Ach.), _Drury, Fabr._

  PAPILIO THYASTES. Alis caudatis nigris, fasciâ maculisque flavis, angulo
  ani sanguineo, posticis subtus lineâ sanguineâ. (Expans. Alar. 4 unc.)

  _Syn._ Papilio (Eq. Ach.) Thyastes, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Fabr. Ent.
  Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 26. _No._ 77. _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 54. _Boisduv.
  Hist. Nat. Lepid._ 1. _p._ 349. 191.

  HABITAT: Brazil, "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Head, thorax, abdomen, and wings
  black-brown; the anterior wings having the middle occupied by a
  triangular yellow space, continued to the middle of the posterior ones;
  four yellow spots are placed at the tips, and several others along the
  anterior edges. Posterior wings furnished with two black tails, edged and
  tipped with yellow, and having four yellow marks {47}situated along the
  external edges; they have also three blue crescents at the roots of the
  tails, and above them a square yellow spot on the abdominal edges, and
  three small red ones placed above it.

  _Under Side._ Palpi not observed. Legs black. Breast and abdomen yellow.
  Wings paler brown than on the upper side, marked in the same manner as
  above, the yellow colour being here of a paler and greener hue. The
  posterior wings having the same marks here as above, with the addition of
  a row of short straight red lines placed along the external edges, but at
  a little distance from them.


HIPPARCHIA NEREIS [male].

Plate XXXV. fig. 2, 3.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. HIPPARCHIA, _Fabr._ Satyrus, _Latr. God._ Papilio (Helic. Parn.),
  _Drury_.

  HIPPARCHIA NEREIS. Alis fuscis subhyalinis, vittâ communi albâ; posticis
  ad apicem fulvis, ocellis duobus atris. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc.)

  SYN. Papilio (Hel. Parn.) Nereis, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Herbst. Pap._
  _tab._ 84. _f._ 1. 2. _Stoll Suppl. Cramer_, _pl._ 26. _f._ 3. _Fabr.
  Ent. Syst._ III. 1. 184. _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 483. (Satyrus N.)

  HABITAT: Brazil, "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Head, thorax, and abdomen grey-brown.
  Anterior wings grey-brown, thin, and slightly diaphanous, with a small
  light-coloured bar running from the anterior edge near the tips to the
  posterior. Posterior wings having one-third next the body grey-brown,
  divided by a line drawn across the wings from the anterior to the
  abdominal edges; next to this is an angulated white patch, the rest of
  these wings being orange-coloured, with two black eyes, having white
  centres, placed one at the upper, the other at the abdominal corners, the
  former having a small white spot joining to its upper part. The edges of
  these wings are bordered with dark brown.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, legs, breast, and abdomen cream-coloured. Anterior
  wings next the tips tinged with red-brown; the remainder of the wings
  being of the same colour as on the upper side. Posterior wings next the
  body pale clay, which occupies half the wings; below which is a white
  bar, the remainder of the wings being dark orange: the two black eyes are
  very small on this side, and the white spot above them not so distinct.
  These wings are larger than is generally observed among insects of this
  tribe, and are dentated, the anterior ones being entire.


PAPILIO ASIUS.

Plate XXXV. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Papilionidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. PAPILIO, _Auct._ Papilio (Eq. Achiv.), _Drury, Fabr._

  PAPILIO ASIUS. Alis nigris fasciâ communi flavescenti-albâ; posticis
  caudatis, his subtus basi anguloque ani chermesino maculatis. (Expans.
  Alar. 3 unc.)

  SYN. Papilio (Eq. Troj.) Asius. _Fabr. Spec. Ins._ 2. _p._ 5. _No._ 17.
  _Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 8. _No._ 21. _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 55. _No._
  84. _Boisduv. Hist. Nat. Lepid._ 1. _p._ 309. 146.

  Papilio (Eq. Tr.) Astyagas, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Papilio Manlius, _Perty Del. An. Art. Braz. Ins._ _pl._ 29. _f._ 1.

  HABITAT: Brazil, "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  {48}_Upper Side._ Antennæ, thorax, and abdomen black. Wings raven-black,
  having a pale yellow bar rising at the anterior edges near the tips of
  the superior wings, and crossing these and the inferior ones, meeting
  even with the abdomen, becoming wider gradually. Posterior wings
  furnished with two tails, and along the external edges having four small
  yellow crescents, and another at the abdominal corners; above which are
  two long square red spots, and another yellow crescent on the abdominal
  edges.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, legs, and breast black. Abdomen black, with a white
  longitudinal stripe on each side. Wings marked nearly as on the upper
  side; the posterior having several red spots and streaks more than on the
  upper side, and placed next the body from the shoulders to the abdominal
  corners.


PLATE XXXVI.

[Illustration]

NYMPHALIS AFER.

Plate XXXVI. fig. 1, 2.

  _Order_: Lepidoptera. _Section_: Diurna. _Family_: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Gemmat.), _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS AFER. Alis supra violaceo-coeruleis margine externo nigro,
  anticis utrinque strigâ apicali punctorum alborum, posticis fusco
  nebulosis. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 1½ lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph. Phal.) Afer, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Stoll Suppl.
  Cramer_, _pl._ 27. _fig._ 3.

  Papilio (N.) Æthiopa, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 136. _No._ 420.
  _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 385. _No._ 119. (Nymph. Æth.)

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax and abdomen blueish black. Wings,
  when viewed in a particular direction, fine shining light blue; but in
  any other are blueish brown. The anterior ones with six small white spots
  placed near the tips, the four uppermost being the smallest, and placed
  in a zigzag direction, parallel with the external edges, and with a few
  faint shadows. Posterior wings having, like the superior, only some faint
  shadows.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, legs, and breast clay-coloured. Abdomen brown. Wings
  having a variety of soft brown tints, of a light grey and dark brown
  colour, gradually softening into each other in a most agreeable manner.
  The six white spots in the superior wings are observable on this side;
  but there are no other marks either in the anterior or posterior wings
  sufficient to be regarded as characters. Margins of all the wings
  slightly dentated; the inferior ones being angulated.

We learn from Mr. Smeathman that this butterfly is found in the gloomy
paths of the forests on the continent of Africa.


NYMPHALIS ALPHÆA.

Plate XXXVI. fig. 3, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Gemmat.) _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS ALPHÆA. Alis lutescentibus strigis undulatis communibus fuscis,
  puncto dilutiori anticarum subapicali, subtùs brunneis fasciis
  nigricantibus. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph.) Alphæa, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  {49}_Upper Side._ Antennæ, head, thorax, and abdomen dark brown. Wings
  clay-coloured, with only a light spot on the anterior ones near the tips,
  and a number of small faint waved lines crossing the wings from the
  anterior to the posterior and abdominal edges.

  _Under Side._ Palpi long, grey brown. Breast and abdomen the same. Wings
  rather darker than on the upper side, being of a reddish brown. The two
  spots on the anterior wings are more conspicuous on this side than the
  other; and the waved lines here become bars in the posterior wings of a
  darker colour than the general ground, having two conspicuous ones, the
  lowest being the broadest. Margins of the wings slightly dentated.


NYMPHALIS DORICLÆA.

Plate XXXVI. fig. 5, 6.

  _Order_: Lepidoptera. _Section_: Diurna. _Family_: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Gemmat.), _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS DORICLÆA. Alis lutescenti-fuscis suprà strigis duabus punctorum
  nigrorum, posticis subtus puncto baseos atro. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 3
  lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph. Phal.) Doriclæa, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Fabr. Ent.
  Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 248. _No._ 772. _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 386. 124.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ brown. Thorax and abdomen dark brown. Wings dark
  clay-coloured. The anterior ones having three black marks placed at the
  middle of the anterior edges, being about a quarter of an inch long, and
  a few very faint dark marks at the external edges. Posterior wings with
  only two rows of small faint dark crescents placed along the external
  edges.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, legs, breast, abdomen, and anterior wings light
  clay-coloured; the latter having two black streaks placed close to the
  anterior edges, near the middle, and a shade of dark brown along the
  external edges. Posterior wings along the upper part light clay; but
  towards the abdominal corners are darker. A dark-coloured narrow band
  rises at the middle of the anterior edges, which runs circularly towards
  the abdominal groove, but is lost in the general colour of the wing
  before it reaches that part. About the middle of this inner compartment
  is a small round black spot, being the only one either on the upper or
  under side. Margins of the wings entire, the posterior being slightly
  angulated.


PLATE XXXVII.

[Illustration]

PIERIS (LEPTALIS) CRISIA.

Plate XXXVII. fig. 1, 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna, _Latr._ FAMILY: Papilionidæ,
  _Leach_.

  GENUS. PIERIS, _Schrank. Latr. God._ Papilio (Dan. Cand.) _Linn. &c._
  (SUBGENUS: Leptalis, _Boisduval_.)

  PIERIS (LEPTALIS) CRISIA. Alis oblongis, anticis falcato-acuminatis
  fuscis, fasciâ ante apicem flavescente, posticis integerrimis
  flavescentibus, limbo fusco. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Dan. Cand.) Crisia, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Fabr. Ent.
  Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 166. _No._ 515. _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 197. (Pieris
  Cr.) _Boisduval Hist. Nat. Lep._ 1. _p._ 422. (Leptalis Cr.)

  HABITAT: Brazil. "Rio Janeiro, Mr. Bonifas, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  {50}_Upper Side._ Antennæ spotted white beneath. Thorax and abdomen
  grey-brown. Anterior wings dark brown, almost like chocolate, the tips
  forming an obtuse angle; a white streak crossing them obliquely towards
  the lower corners, having a very small black spot thereon near the upper
  part. The posterior edges are white, extending from the body almost to
  the lower corners. Three small faint white spots are situated near the
  tips. Posterior wings white, deeply edged with brown from the upper to
  the abdominal corners.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, breast, and abdomen grey. Anterior wings not so dark
  as on the upper side; but having the same marks, with the addition of a
  white streak at the tips. Posterior wings white, with a few patches of a
  very light brown, the lower edges being dappled with that colour. Near
  the shoulders are two small yellow spots. Margins of the wings entire.


ACRÆA ETHOSEA.

Plate XXXVII. fig. 3, 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Heliconiidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. ACRÆA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Heliconii), _Fabr._ olim.

  ACRÆA ETHOSEA. Alis oblongis, suprà fuscis disco albo, anticis
  integerrimis, posticis subdenticulatis, his infrà basi punctis nigris,
  margine exteriori maculis albis trigonis serie digestis. (Expans. Alar. 2
  unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph. Phal.) Ethosea, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Enc. Méth._
  ix. _p._ 235. _No._ 17.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Thorax, abdomen, and wings deep brown,
  almost black; the disk of the anterior being white, and extending to the
  shoulders, all the middle part of the posterior being white likewise.

  _Under Side._ Palpi grey. Breast and abdomen brown. Anterior wings next
  the body yellowish brown, but towards the tips inclining to grey; nerves
  black; the disk white, with a round black spot near the body, and another
  of a smaller size below it. The middle of the posterior wings is white,
  surrounded with brown, that part along the lower edges being darkest;
  next the body are five distinct black round spots, and an irregular
  shaped one at the middle of the upper edge; along the lower edges are a
  number of small triangular white spots. Margins of the posterior wings
  slightly dentated.

Although Sierra Leone is given by Drury in his published account of this
insect as the locality for this species, I find it mentioned in his
manuscript Catalogue as being received from "New Zealand, Mr. Banks, 1775."
The authors of the Encyclopédie Méthodique evidently knew the species only
from Drury's figures and descriptions, and therefore have given the former
locality. It is difficult to account for this contradictory statement, or
to assert which of these localities is the correct one.


{51}ACRÆA CYNTHIA.

Plate XXXVII. fig. 5, 6.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Heliconiidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. ACRÆA, _Fabr. Latr. God._ Papilio (Heliconii), _Fabr._ Olim.

  ACRÆA CYNTHIA. Alis oblongis integerrimis fuscis, fasciâ communi
  anticarumque macula apicali, albidis; posticis suprâ punctorum fulvorum
  serie posticâ. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Hel.) Cynthius, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Herbst. Pap._
  _tab._ 80. _f._ 1. 2.

  Acræa Cynthia, _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 234.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ brown. Eyes, thorax, and abdomen black. Anterior
  wings dark brown; a dark cream-coloured band rises at the middle of these
  wings, and crossing the posterior meets at the abdominal edges a little
  above the anus; a dark cream-coloured patch is also situated near the
  tips, and a narrow reddish line runs from the body to the disk. Posterior
  wings dark brown, having a row of five oblong lightish spots placed along
  the lower edges.

  _Under Side._ Palpi grey. Breast and abdomen streaked and spotted with
  dark cream and black. Wings paler than on the upper side; the band and
  patch not so conspicuous as on the anterior ones; a row of marks, like
  acute angles, are placed along the edges of all the wings, the posterior
  ones having a cluster of ten small black spots placed near the body.
  Margins of the wings entire.

In Drury's manuscripts, which have come into my hands, it is stated that
this insect was brought from Sierra Leone by Mr. Smeathman, and that "the
original insect from which this figure was taken is destroyed, and was of a
much livelier colour than those which I judge to be varieties of Cynthius."


PLATE XXXVIII.

[Illustration]

HELICONIA IRENE.

Plate XXXVIII. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Heliconiidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. HELICONIA, _Latr. God._ Papilio (Helicon.), _Fabr._

  HELICONIA IRENE. Alis oblongis, anticis nigris basi ferrugineo radiatis,
  à medio ad extimum flavo-maculatis, posticis fulvis limbo exteriori
  maculisque ante apicem nigris, singulis infrâ punctis marginalibus albis.
  (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph. Phal.) Irene, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Fabr. Ent.
  Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 165. _No._ 510. _Enc. Méth._ ix. _p._ 223. _No._ 60.

  HABITAT: "Jamaica, Mr. Shakespear, 1779" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black at the base, but yellow at the tips. Thorax
  black. Abdomen dark brown. Anterior wings black, with twelve different
  shaped spots, occupying half the wings next the tips; these spots are
  principally yellow, (one next the body being orange), and differ very
  much in form and size; next the body are two narrow faint reddish
  longitudinal streaks. Posterior wings dusky orange, the edges being
  bordered with black from the middle of the anterior edges to the
  abdominal corners; a square black spot is placed near the upper corners,
  and two very small ones by the side of it.

  _Under Side._ Palpi black. Breast streaked with white. Abdomen yellow.
  Wings less brilliant; {52}but having much the same markings as on the
  upper side; the black border on the posterior ones having a row of white
  spots thereon, and another row is observable on the edges of the
  anterior. Posterior wings dentated.


NYMPHALIS IOLE.

Plate XXXVIII. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. NYMPHALIS, _Latr._ Papilio (Nymph. Gemmat.), _Drury_.

  NYMPHALIS IOLE. Alis suprà basi fulvis, tunc nigris coeruleo-micantibus,
  subtus nitenti-ferrugineis, strigis duabus nigris undulatis, posticis
  caudatis. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Nymph. Phal.) Iole, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Stoll Suppl.
  Cram._ _pl._ 29. _fig._ 4. 4. D.

  Papilio (N) Furcula, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 79. _No._ 246. _Enc.
  Méth._ ix. _p._ 360. 36. (Nymphalis F.) _Donovan Nat. Repos._ 5. 151.

  HABITAT: "Jamaica" (_Drury_, in text). "Madras, Mr. Skeene, 1772"
  (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Eyes, thorax, and abdomen brown. Wings
  brown-black, a considerable part of them encircling the body being dark
  orange. Posterior wings furnished with two tails, rather lighter than the
  other part.

  _Under Side._ Palpi, legs, breast, and abdomen cream-coloured. Wings
  brown, having a blueish as well as a reddish hue, several waved lines
  crossing them from the anterior to the abdominal edges; five small white
  spots are placed next the tips, and several small black ones are situated
  along the external edges of both wings.


HIPPARCHIA ANDROMEDA.

Plate XXXVIII. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Nymphalidæ, _Swains._

  GENUS. HIPPARCHIA, _Fabr._ Satyrus, _Latr. God._ Papilio (Helic. Parn.),
  _Drury_.

  HIPPARCHIA ANDROMEDA. Alis hyalinis, anticis strigis duabus fuscantibus,
  posticis apice chermesinis ocello utrinque unico. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 3
  lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (P.) Andromeda, _Fabr. Syst. Ent._ 467. _No._ 107. _Ent.
  Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 184. _No._ 569.

  Papilio (Hel. Parn.) Menander, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Herbst. Pap._
  _t._ 84. _fig._ 6.

  Papilio Philis, _Cramer_, 387. _fig._ E.

  Papilio Pireta, _Cramer_, _pl._ 315. _fig._ A.

  HABITAT: Jamaica (_Drury_). Surinam (_Enc. Méth._).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Two small white spots on the neck. Eyes,
  thorax, and abdomen black. Wings perfectly transparent, the lower part of
  the posterior beautiful carmine-red; close to the upper corner of these
  wings is a round black spot encircled with yellow, and a small white one
  on its edge; another white one, very minute, is also situated just below
  it, which is barely discernible.

  _Under Side._ Palpi white. Breast and abdomen grey. Wings are exactly the
  same as on the upper side. Margins of the wings entire.


{53}HELICONIA SAPPHO.

Plate XXXVIII. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Diurna. FAMILY: Heliconiidæ, _Swainson_.

  GENUS. HELICONIA, _Latr. God._ Papilio (Helicon.), _Fabr._

  HELICONIA SAPPHO. Alis oblongis, supra atro coeruleis infrà nigris;
  anticis utrinque fasciâ transversâ bifidâ; posticis margine exteriori
  albis, his subtùs basi sanguineo radiatis. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Papilio (Hel. Parn.) Sapho, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Fabr. Ent.
  Syst._ III. 1. _p._ 165. _No._ 511. _Stoll Suppl. Cramer_, _pl._ 30. 2.
  _&_ 2. B. _Herbst. Pap._ _tab._ 75. _f._ 7.

  HABITAT: "Jamaica, Mr. Shakespear, 1779" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ black. Eyes brown. Thorax and abdomen black. Wings
  mazarine blue; the anterior ones having a white band crossing them from
  the middle of the anterior edges to the lower corners; the posterior
  edged with a white border, intersected by the blue tendons of the wings.

  _Under Side._ Palpi grey. Breast and abdomen black, streaked with white.
  Wings black where they are blue on the upper side, with the same white
  markings; but next the body are adorned with beautiful red streaks,
  ending in points resembling rays issuing from it. Margins of the wings
  entire.


PLATE XXXIX.

[Illustration]

EREBUS ZENOBIA.

Plate XXXIX.

  ORDER: Lepidoptera. SECTION: Nocturna. FAMILY: Noctuidæ, _Stephens_.

  GENUS. EREBUS, _Latr._ Thysania, _Dalm._ Noctua p., _Fabr._

  EREBUS ZENOBIA. Alis cinereis strigis dentatis et undulatis fuscis et
  brunneis variegatis, subtùs ferrugineis nigro-undatis. (Expans. Alar. 5
  unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Phalæna (Bombyx) Zenobia, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Cramer?_ _tab._
  115. A. B.

  Noctua Zenobia, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ III. 2. _p._ 8. _No._ 1. _Gmel. Linn.
  S. N._ 2529. 969. _Oliv. Enc. Méth._ 8. _p._ 251. 1.

  HABITAT: "Jamaica, Mr. Kenchan, 1775" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  _Upper Side._ Antennæ setaceous and dark brown. Head the same. Thorax and
  abdomen grey: having a tuft of black hairs standing between them. General
  colour grey, faintly tinged with red. Anterior wings with a remarkable
  irregular black bar running from the tips to the shoulders, crossing the
  thorax horizontally, and parallel with the anterior edges; on the middle
  of this edge is a triangular dark brown spot edged with black, and nearer
  the body is a smaller one of the same shape and colour: a second narrower
  black line is situate about half an inch below, and parallel with the
  first, rising on the posterior edges, and extending across the wings
  almost to the external ones. Posterior wings with a black irregular bar
  arising near the external corners, and crossing them in a straight
  direction, meeting at the extremity of the abdomen; just above this, and
  almost close to it, is a very small and narrow waved black line running
  parallel with it, but towards the end suddenly turns off, and reaches the
  anterior edges. Besides the above markings there are a number of lighter
  and darker shades interspersed on the different parts of the wings.

  _Under Side._ Palpi reddish, the extremities brown. Tongue spiral. Legs
  dark brown, mottled with red. Breast, abdomen, and sides red. Wings
  greyish red, with black indented lines and bars running parallel with the
  edges of the wings, and regularly placed one above another. Anterior
  wings {54}having a black spot near their centre shaped like a
  kidney-bean, with a small round one at a little distance nearer the body.
  Posterior having likewise a small black spot about half an inch from the
  base. Margins of the wings rather deeply scolloped.


PLATE XL.

[Illustration]

GOLIATHUS DRURII.

Plate XL.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Lamellicornes. FAMILY: Cetoniidæ.

  GENUS. GOLIATHUS, _De Lamarck_. Cetonia, _Fabr._ Scarabæus, _Linn. Drury,
  &c._

  GOLIATHUS DRURII. Albidus, thorace lineis sex et disco elytrorum
  irregulariter nigris, pedibus æneis, capite porrecto bifido. (Long. Corp.
  4 unc.)

  SYN. Goliathus Maximus var. _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Fabr. Syst. Eleuth._
  2. 135.

  Cetonia Goliata, _Oliv. Ent._ 1. 6. _p._ 71. _t._ 9. _f._ 33. c.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone, Africa (_Drury_).

  Head cream-coloured at top, and black underneath, being full
  three-fourths of an inch in length, from the neck to the extremity of the
  two horns which issue from the fore part of it, the sides of which are
  furnished with two other thick horns which are shorter than the former.
  Eyes black, and situated so as to discern above and beneath. Antennæ
  black. Thorax an inch and a half long, cream-coloured, having a thin,
  sharp, black edge all round; on the top are six longitudinal black
  streaks differently shaped, separated by cream-coloured lines, the middle
  ones being narrowest, on each side of which near the lateral edge is a
  small single black spot; the under part of the thorax is cream-coloured.
  Scutellum of a longish triangular shape, and cream-coloured. Elytra
  cream-coloured, with a broad black streak like velvet, about a third of
  their breadth, running near the lateral edges from the shoulders to the
  tips. On each side the scutellum is a small black oblong spot, at about
  one-third of an inch from it. Legs dark green, finely polished. The hairs
  on the middle and hind thighs and tibiæ dark orange. Abdomen dark green.
  Abdominal scales [posterior coxæ] the same; on which, close to the joints
  of the hinder thighs, are two small cream-coloured spots. Sternum long,
  and of a dark green colour.

I have ventured, on the authority of several distinguished entomologists,
to give this insect as a species distinct from Goliathus maximus, figured
in the first volume of these Illustrations, Pl. 31. It is true, indeed,
that both are from the tropical districts of the western coast of Africa,
and that both exhibit the same general structure and form of the horns,
(the variations of which constitute the chief specific differences in these
cornuted species). Drury evidently at first regarded it as specifically
distinct, for he says, in his observation upon it, "This insect is of the
same genus with that described in Vol. 1. Pl. XXXI., but I judge it to be a
different species," although in the synoptical appendix to the volume he
calls it "a variety of Goliathus," the markings are very different, as may
be seen by comparing the two figures; but it might be considered that the
specimen represented in the first volume was a rubbed individual of that
here figured; this, however, is evidently not the case, because in both
descriptions Drury expressly describes the dark part of the elytra as
resembling velvet, which could not be the case if the specimen was
{55}rubbed. Moreover, a very fine and recent specimen corresponding with
the present figure has lately been received by Mr. Havill, of Oxford
Street, printseller and naturalist, who has demanded the sum of fifty
pounds for it. The individual here figured is in the collection of Mr.
MacLeay, to whom I have been indebted for a sight of it, and by whose
father it was purchased at the sale of Mr. Drury's collection at the price
of £12. 1_s._ 6_d._, forming lot 95, in the first day's sale, Thursday May
23, 1805, and described in the catalogue as "Scarabæus Goliathus, var." I
have also seen in the Royal Museum at Berlin a female of this genus having
the head unarmed, and agreeing in colour and markings with the insect here
figured, but which is regarded by Dr. Klug as a species distinct from the
Goliath. maximus, and which he has recently described in Ermann's Voyage.


PLATE XLI.

[Illustration]

MYRMELEON TORRIDUM.

Plate XLI.

  ORDER: Neuroptera. SECTION: Filicornes. FAMILY: Myrmeleonidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. MYRMELEON, _Linn. &c._

  MYRMELEON TORRIDUM. Capite thoraceque fulvescentibus, lineâ dorsali
  nigrâ, hoc griseo-pubescenti, abdomine fusco, alis fusco-punctatis et
  maculatis, maculis posticarum majoribus et versus apicem crucem
  irregularem formantibus. (Expans. Alar. 6 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Myrmeleon Libelluloides var., _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  Antennæ black, slender, and thickest at the extremities. Head, neck, and
  thorax yellowish brown, with a black longitudinal stripe running along
  the middle. Four palpi, two of which are short; the other two long,
  slender, and knobbed at the extremities. Thorax nearly covered with grey
  hairs. Abdomen yellowish brown; but, when the insect was living, was
  probably green. Wings of equal length, the anterior being broadest, all
  marked with a great number of red-brown spots, and clouds of various
  shapes and sizes, and appearing to be composed of fine lattice-work like
  gauze, and perfectly transparent where they are not clouded. Legs nearly
  of equal length, having two strong tibial spurs.

This is the insect referred to in the observations upon Myrmeleon
Libelluloides figured in Vol. 1. tab. 46. fig. 1. as having been regarded
by Drury and Fabricius as a variety of that South-Europæan species. That
they are specifically distinct both in their habitat and characters will
not, I think, be doubted. The peculiar dilatation of the extremity of the
posterior wings is a curious character not found in the Libelluloides.


{56}PLATE XLII.

[Illustration]

PEPSIS ATROX.

Plate XLII. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Hymenoptera. SECTION: Fossores. FAMILY: Pompilidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. PEPSIS, _Fabr. Latr._ Sphex, _Linn. Drury_.

  PEPSIS ATROX. Nigra, alis fusco-diaphanis, pedibus fulvis. (Long. Corp. 2
  unc. 3 lin. Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Sphex atrox, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  Head dark brown. Jaws strong: two of the palpi are long, the other two
  short. Tongue dilated, and tufted at the tips. Eyes oblong, shining and
  prominent. Thorax and abdomen brown-black. Abdominal peduncle short. In
  the specimen figured the sting was exserted, curved, and furnished with
  two short clavate instruments at its base. Wings thin, and diaphanous.
  Legs yellow-brown, and furnished with a great number of short spines from
  the claws to the base of the tibiæ. Tibiæ with two spurs, except those of
  the fore-legs, which have but one.

Fabricius has described an insect from South America, under the name of
Pepsis Heros, which nearly agrees with this species, with the following
reference--"Sphex Securus, Drury Ins. . tab. . fig. ." It will be
sufficient to observe that Drury has described no such insect, although it
is probable that Fabricius, who was on terms of intimacy with our author,
might have seen the unpublished figure of such insect in his possession.
Mr. Smeathman informed our author that he was once stung in the finger by
one of these insects, but the pain was not so severe as might have been
expected from a wound made by so large a creature belonging to this genus.
His method, when stung by any insects in Africa, was to open the puncture
with a lancet, and squeeze out the blood and venom together, which, when
effectually done, soon caused the pain to abate.


CHLORION FEROX.

Plate XLII. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Hymenoptera. SECTION: Fossores. FAMILY: Sphegidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. CHLORION, _Latr._ Sphex, _Drury_.

  CHLORION FEROX. Viridi-cyaneum, nitidissimum, antennis pedibusque nigris,
  alis fuscescentibus. (Expans. Alar. fere 2 unc.)

  SYN. Sphex ferus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Sphex lobata? _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ 2. 206. 30. _Syst. Piez._ 217.

  HABITAT: China.

  Head fine green. Jaws strong. Tongue not observed. Eyes oblong. Antennæ
  black. Wings thin and diaphanous. Thorax and abdomen beautiful shining
  emerald green. Legs black.

The description given by Drury of this insect entirely agrees with a very
common Chinese insect, the Chlorion lobatum, Latr. This figure is however
hardly to be recognized.


{57}ATTA FERVENS.

Plate XLII. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Hymenoptera. SECTION: Heterogyna. FAMILY: Formicidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. ATTA, _Fabr. Latreille_. Formica, _Linn. Drury_.

  ATTA FERVENS. Fusca, sericea, alis fuscis, capitis angulis posticis
  rotundatis. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Formica fervens, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 2. _Say in Journ. of Nat.
  Hist. Soc. of Boston_, _p._ 290.

  HABITAT: Musquito Shore, on the Bay of Mexico.

  Antennæ small, setaceous, and shorter than the thorax. Head dark brown,
  small and flat, armed with strong jaws. Eyes small, round and black.
  Thorax and abdomen dark brown, and velvety. Wings brown and diaphanous.
  Legs coloured like the body, without any spines at any of the joints;
  neither is there any abdominal peduncle.

This insect (which appears to be a queen or female ant) is nearly allied to
a very celebrated South American species, which, from visiting the houses
of the inhabitants in great swarms, is termed the visiting ant. (Atta
Cephalotes, Fabr.) The late Mr. Say, however, pointed out the differences
between the two species in his manuscripts, which have been published in
the Journal of the Natural History Society of Boston for 1836.


PEPSIS SEVERA.

Plate XLII. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Hymenoptera. SECTION: Fossores. FAMILY: Pompilidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. PEPSIS, _Latr. Fabr._ Sphex, _Linn. Drury_.

  PEPSIS SEVERA. Atra, alis fulvo-diaphanis apice fuscis, pedibus fulvis
  femoribus nigris. (Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Sphex Severus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Coast of Africa.

  Head black. Tongue not observed. Palpi four. Eyes oblong, prominent and
  shining. Wings yellow-brown, diaphanous, the tips black. Thorax, abdomen,
  and thighs black. Tibiæ and tarsi yellow-brown.


PLATE XLIII.

[Illustration]

MANTIS (HARPAX) OCELLARIA.

Plate XLIII. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Orthoptera. SECTION: Cursoria. FAMILY: Mantidæ.

  GENUS. MANTIS, _Linn._ (SUBGENUS: Harpax, _Serville_.)

  MANTIS (HARPAX) OCELLARIA. Capite inermi, femoribus posticis lobo
  apicali, elytris viridibus ocello magno discoidali flavo nigro-cingulato.
  (Expans. Alar. 2 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Mantis ocellaria, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Coast of Africa.

  {58}Antennæ setaceous. The insect, when living, was probably green, but
  is now of a yellowish brown; the eyes, head, and thorax being of that
  colour. One-third of the tegmina, next the tips, is transparent, the
  remainder being green. In the centre is a yellow spot resembling an eye,
  encircled with black, whose centre is dark green, with a black margin at
  top. Wings transparent. Fore-legs yellow-brown. Femora strong, with two
  rows of spines, and a groove between to receive the tibiæ, which are
  furnished with a strong spine at the tip. Middle and hind legs having a
  small flap placed at the tips of the femora, and two tibial spurs.

"This rare and beautiful mantis was found in a savanna."--_Smeathman._


PENTATOMA BICOLORATA.

Plate XLIII. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Pentatomidæ.

  GENUS. PENTATOMA, _Latreille_. Cimex, _Fabricius, Drury_.

  PENTATOMA BICOLORATA. Fusca, pronoti lateribus in spinam obtusam utrinque
  productis, scutello versus basin et ad apicem elytrorumque maculâ costali
  fulvis. (Long. Corp. lin. 7.)

  SYN. Cimex rostratus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 2.

  La punaise à sept taches, _Stoll_, _pl._ 14. _fig._ 97.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone (_Drury_). Coast of Guinea (_Stoll_).

  Head and eyes brown. Thorax dark yellow in front; the hinder part brown,
  the sides terminating in two obtuse spines. Scutellum yellow, brown in
  the middle. Hemelytra brown, with a yellow spot on the middle of the
  anterior edges. Legs yellow-brown, the fore ones having a remarkable
  spine on the thighs, placed near the tips. Rostrum strong, extending as
  far as the middle legs. Abdomen with two lateral dark indented lines
  extending to the anus.

I have been compelled to propose another specific name for this insect,
that given to it by our author being quite inexpressive.


CERBUS? FLAVEOLUS.

Plate XLIII. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Coreidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. CERBUS? _Hahn._ Cimex, _Drury_.

  CERBUS? FLAVEOLUS. Fuscus, pronoti marginibus fasciâque angulatâ
  elytrorum fulvis; abdomine rufo, nigro marginato. (Expans. Alar. 1 unc. 9
  lin.)

  SYN. Cimex flaveolus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  Head dark orange. Antennæ filiform, four-jointed, about three-fourths the
  length of the insect. Thorax brown, edged with yellow. Scutellum
  triangular, not large, brown. Hemelytra brown, one-half of the posterior
  edge next the body having a yellow line running along it, crossing the
  middle, and {59}ending at the anterior edge. Wings diaphanous. Abdomen
  red, edged with black. Rostrum slender, and extending just below the
  fore-legs. Legs yellow-brown. Tibiæ and tarsi almost black.


DIASPIDIUS SCAPHA.

Plate XLIII. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Reduviidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. DIASPIDIUS, _Westw._ Cimex, _Drury_.

  DIASPIDIUS SCAPHA. Fulvus; capite, antennis, pronoti lobo antico,
  membranâ elytrorum pedibusque nigris. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc.)

  SYN. Cimex Scapha, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  Head very small, black, hairy, and long. Antennæ filiform, about half the
  length of the insect. The fore part of the thorax is hairy and black; the
  remainder and the scutellum yellow-brown. Basal half of the hemelytra
  orange-coloured, the remainder dark brown. Wings diaphanous. Abdomen
  brown-yellow. Rostrum short and black, not reaching to the fore-legs,
  which are black. Middle and hind legs partly black and brown.

This insect differs so much from the other species of the extensive family
Reduviidæ, that I have been compelled to raise it to the rank of a distinct
genus, the characters of which are as well marked as those of the majority
of the genera recently proposed by the Continental Entomologists in this
group. Its characters as a genus are--

  Caput parvum. Antennæ breves vix longitudine thoracis, 4?-articulatæ;
  articulo 2ndo., 1mo. et 3tio. breviori. Pronotum posticè in lobum magnum
  depressum, supra scutellum et basin alarum productum. Hemelytra marginem
  lateralem abdominis haud tegentia. Tarsi ut videtur 1-articulati.


PYRRHOCORIS PRINCEPS.

Plate XLIII. fig. 5.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Lygæidæ.

  GENUS. PYRRHOCORIS, _Fallen, Burmeister_. Astemma, _St. Farg. & Serv._
  Platynotus, _Schill._

  PYRRHOCORIS PRINCEPS. Sanguineus; pronoti lobo antico in medio, elytrorum
  fasciâ versus basin maculâque costali mediâ nigris, membranâ apicali
  fuscâ, femoribus in medio nigris. (Expans. Alar. 2 unc.)

  SYN. Cimex longirostris, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  Head yellowish-brown. Thorax in front black, and brown behind. Antennæ
  black and slender, about half the length of the insect. Scutellum
  triangular and black. Corium yellow-brown, having a black streak crossing
  the middle, and a black spot near it; apical membrane opake and dark
  brown. Wings diaphanous. Rostrum long and slender, reaching to the middle
  of the abdomen. Legs partly black and brown. Tarsi three-jointed.

{60}The name applied to this species by Drury is so inexpressive that I
have been induced to propose for it a new specific designation, which has
allusion to its large size and rich colouring.


PLATE XLIV.

[Illustration]

CETONIA TORQUATA.

Plate XLIV. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Lamellicornes. FAMILY: Cetoniidæ.

  GENUS. CETONIA, _Fabricius, &c._ Scarabæus, _Linn. &c._

  CETONIA TORQUATA. Obscure viridis, thoracis margine antico luteo, pygidii
  maculis duabus albis; elytrorum apice suturali spinoso. (Long. Corp. 2
  unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Scar. torquatus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Herbst. Col._ III. _p._
  198. _t._ 28. _f._ 1. _Schon. Syn. Ins._ 3. 117.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  Head rather square, depressed above; dusky in front, grey behind. Eyes
  round and prominent. Antennæ black. The thorax dusky green, margined.
  Scutellum large, triangular, and green. Elytra dusky green, the sides and
  suture margined, having two swellings near the extremities, and two short
  thick spines at the end of the suture. The abdomen covered above with a
  fine brown pile like velvet. Hind part of the abdomen green, with two
  silvery white spots of a squarish form. All the under side of the insect
  green, and of a more lively or shining colour than the upper. Legs strong
  and thick, the tibiæ furnished with thick spines, both in the middle and
  at the tips, the hinder ones being hairy.

This splendid and exceedingly rare insect flew on board a ship at Sierra
Leone, and was taken on the awning on the following morning. It seems to be
unknown to the French Entomologists, and is omitted in the "Monographie des
Cétoines" of Messrs. Gory and Perchéron.


PELIDNOTA UNICOLOR.

Plate XLIV. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Lamellicornes. FAMILY: Rutelidæ, _MacLeay_.

  GENUS. PELIDNOTA, _MacLeay_. Scarabæus p., _Drury_.

  PELIDNOTA UNICOLOR. Tota lutea; elytris tenuiter striatis. (Long Corp. 1
  unc. 1½ lin.)

  SYN. Scarabæus unicolor, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Melolontha Druryana, _Herbst. Col._ II. _p._ 163. 121. _t._ 27. _f._ 3.

  Melolontha lutea, _Olivier Ent._ 1. 5. _p._ 23. _t._ 19. 1. _f._ 2.

  Pelidnota testacea, _Deg. Cat._

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  Brown. Thorax margined. Scutellum small and semi-circular. Elytra
  margined, and faintly striated. Anterior tibiæ dentated. Tibiæ with two
  spurs, except the fore ones, which have only one.


{61}RUTELA LINEOLA.

Plate XLIV. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Lamellicornes. FAMILY: Rutelidæ.

  GENUS. RUTELA, _Latreille_. Scarabæus p. _Drury_. Cetonia p. _Fabr._

  RUTELA LINEOLA. Nigra, lineâ a capite ad scutellum ductâ, lateribusque
  flavis, elytrorum plagâ magnâ flavidâ. (Long. Corp. 7½ lin.)

  SYN. Scarabæus Lineola var. _Linn. Syst. Nat._ 1. II. _p._ 552. 53.
  _Fabr. Syst. El._ II. _p._ 145. 53. (Cetonia L.) _Syst. Ent._ _p._ 46.
  17. _Oliv. Ent._ 1. 6. _p._ 78. 98. _t._ 11. _f._ 106. var. [Greek: b].

  Cetonia Ephippium, _Fabr. Mantiss._ 1. _p._ 29. 31.

  Scarabæus Hespera, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 2.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  Antennæ brown. Head black, with a deep yellow stripe down the middle,
  which is continued across the thorax; that part being black, the sides
  yellow, whereon is a black spot in the middle. Scutellum yellow and
  triangular. Elytra black, with a large yellow patch in the middle of
  each. Podex yellow, the middle being black. Abdomen ringed with black and
  yellow above; black beneath, with two yellow spots on it. Sternum yellow,
  extending to the posterior coxæ, which are brown. Posterior femora broad,
  yellow and brown; the other legs brown.

The specimen here figured appears to differ from the ordinary character of
the species in having the thorax more strongly marked with dark yellow.


MACRASPIS FUCATA.

Plate XLIV. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Lamellicornes. FAMILY: Rutelidæ.

  GENUS. MACRASPIS, _MacLeay_. Cetonia p., _Fabricius_. Scarabæus p.,
  _Drury_.

  MACRASPIS FUCATA. Atra nitida, thoracis margine omni elytrorumque vittis
  duabus flavis. (Long. Corp. 10½ lin.)

  SYN. Cetonia fucata, _Fabr. Syst. El._ II. _p._ 151. 82. _Ent. Syst._ 1.
  II. _p._ 145. 69. _Sch. Syn. Ins._ _vol._ 3. _p._ 158.

  Cetonia quadri-vittata, _Oliv. Ent._ 1. 6. _p._ 73. 92. _t._ 7. _f._ 65.

  Scarabæus Cinctus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 2. _Herbst. Col._ III. _p._ 249.
  38. _t._ 31. _f._ 5. (Cetonia c.)

  HABITAT: Rio Janeiro.

  Head black and circular. Thorax black, margined with yellow. Scutellum
  very large, black, and triangular. Elytra black, the sides brown, between
  which colours is a narrow yellow line, which, running round the
  extremities, returns back pretty broad up to the anterior edge. Podex and
  abdomen brown. Sternum long and black. Legs black. Tibiæ with two long
  spurs at the tips, the fore-legs having only one. Ungues having a long
  slender spine fixed to the joint, of equal length with the hook itself.


PLATE XLV.

[Illustration]

ECTRICHODIA BARBICORNIS.

Plate XLV. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Reduviidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. ECTRICHODIA, _Laporte_. Ectrichotes, _Burmeister_. Loricerus,
  _Hahn._

  ECTRICHODIA BARBICORNIS. Nigra; thorace, abdominis lateribus pedibusque
  rufis, scutello nigro nitido. (Long. Corp. 1 unc. 1½ lin.)

  SYN. Reduvius barbicornis, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ 4. 194. 4. _Syst. Rh._ 267.
  4. _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. (Cimex b.)

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  {62}Head small and dark brown. Antennæ filiform, black. Thorax dark
  orange. Scutellum small, black, rough, and shining. Hemelytra black,
  velvety; but edged next the body with orange. Abdomen black, edged with
  orange. Rostrum short, not reaching to the fore-legs, and brown. Legs
  slender and orange-coloured.


CERBUS FALX.

Plate XLV. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Coreidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. CERBUS, _Hahn._ Anisoscelis, _Latr._ Lygæus, _Fabr._

  CERBUS FALX. Fuscus, thoracis lateribus compresso-lunatis serratis,
  femoribus posticis dilatatis haud dentatis, tibiisque posticis
  membranaceo-dilatatis. (Long. Corp. 9½ lin.)

  SYN. Cimex falx, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Coast of Africa.

  Head small, dirty brown, which is the general colour of the insect.
  Antennæ slender, about two-thirds the length of the insect. Thorax brown,
  the sides terminating in two broad and thin protuberances, bending
  forward towards the head, the edges being serrated. Scutellum triangular.
  Wing-cases, wings and legs muddy-coloured, the hinder legs having the
  tibiæ very broad, and thin.

This insect is very nearly allied to Lygæus Tragus Wolff, fig. 188, which
is, however, an inhabitant of China.


DIACTOR LATIPES.

Plate XLV. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Coreidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. DIACTOR, _Burmeister_. Acanthocephalus, _Laporte_. Cimex, _Drury_.
  Lygæus, _Fabr._

  DIACTOR LATIPES. Fuscus sive brunneus, unicolor; pronoto cano granoso,
  elytrorum venis rufis, tarsis posticis pallidis. (Long. Corp. 1 unc. 1½
  lin.)

  SYN. Cimex latipes, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Lygæus compressipes, _Fabr. Syst. Rh._ 209. 24. _Stoll Cim._ _t._ 2. _f._
  14. _Burmeister Handb._ 2. 334. (Diactor c.)

  HABITAT: Jamaica (_Drury_). South America.

  Head black and very small. Antennæ slender, and almost as long as the
  insect. Thorax dark muddy green, almost black, which is the general
  colour of the insect. Next the head there is a white mark, somewhat
  resembling a crown, the sides terminating in two angles. Scutellum
  triangular. Hemelytra and wings of the same dark colour with the other
  parts. Rostrum slender, extending to the middle legs. Fore and middle
  legs slender, the thighs being dentated. Hinder legs very long, the
  thighs very thick and strong, and much dentated; the tibiæ being very
  broad and thin, and the inner edges serrated. Tarsi dark orange.


{63}HAMMATOCERUS PURCIS.

Plate XLV. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Reduviidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. HAMMATOCERUS, _Burm._ Hammacerus, _Laporte_. Cimex, _Drury_.

  HAMMATOCERUS PURCIS. Niger, undique granosus, elytris basi albis, femorum
  posticorum basi sanguineâ. (Long. Corp. 1 unc.)

  SYN. Cimex Purcis, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Brown Ill._ _tab._ 70. _f._
  2.

  Reduvius Nychthemerus, _Illig. Burm._ _vol._ 2. 236. 1. (Hammatocerus n.)

  Hammacerus conspicillaris var. _Laporte Hem._ 79.

  HABITAT: Virginia (_Drury_). Georgia (_Burmeister_).

  Head, eyes, and thorax black; the latter rough. Antennæ setaceous,
  consisting of innumerable articulations. Scutellum triangular and black.
  Corium white, terminal membrane black. Wings white and transparent.
  Abdomen black, the edges marked with scarlet and black spots. Rostrum
  black and short, not reaching to the fore legs. Legs black, the hinder
  thighs next the body scarlet.


CERBUS SANCTUS.

Plate XLV. fig. 5.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Coreidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. CERBUS, _Hahn._ Anisoscelis, _Latr._ Lygæus, _Fabr._

  CERBUS SANCTUS. Fuscus, thorace maculâque cruciatâ elytrorum fulvis,
  thorace inermi, pedibus nigris femoribus posticis maximis, tibiis
  mediocribus. (Long. Corp. fere 1 unc.)

  SYN. Cimex Sanctus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  Head dark brown. Antennæ almost as long as the insect. Thorax orange
  brown, having a black streak on it next the head. Scutellum triangular
  and black. Corium orange brown, apical membrane black. Rostrum small and
  slender, not reaching to the fore legs. Legs black. Hinder thighs strong
  and thick, having a strong spine on the under part, and another longer,
  near the tip of the tibiæ.

Fabricius has applied the specific name of Sanctus to one of the species of
thick-legged Coreidæ, from Brazil, which is placed by Burmeister in the
Genus Crinocerus. Drury quoted the Fabrician description as belonging to
his species, but the diversity in their locality would alone be sufficient
to prove them to be distinct.


RAPHIGASTER VALIDUS.

Plate XLV. fig. 6.

  For the description of this species, and a representation of an
  individual with expanded wings, see Vol. II. plate XXXVIII. fig. 4. The
  following are the only material variations noticed in the descriptions of
  this specimen as compared with that referred to above, and which can only
  be regarded as indicating slight variety.

  Head very small and black. Antennæ black, about half the length of the
  insect. Thorax shining, punctated, and of a deep blue, almost black,
  being surrounded with a circular line of a cream colour, and which is
  divided in the middle, the sides terminating in two black angular spines.
  Scutellum large, {64}glossy, triangular, and black, the tip being
  cream-coloured and punctated. Hemelytra brownish, tinged with blue, the
  extremities being blueish black. Abdomen red above, edged with orange and
  black; deep yellow beneath, with black spots on the edge. Legs deep
  yellow, tibiæ black. Tarsi black above, yellow beneath.


CERBUS UMBROSUS.

Plate XLV. fig. 7.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Coreidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. CERBUS, _Hahn._ Anisoscelis, _Latr._ Lygæus, _Fabr._

  CERBUS UMBROSUS. Obscurè fulvescens, pronoti disco striis tribus nigris,
  antennarum articulo ultimo fulvo, elytris striis obliquis nigris notatis,
  membranâ apicali æneâ nitidâ, femoribus tibiisque posticis serratis.
  (Long. Corp. 1 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Cimex umbrosus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  Head and thorax dark orange, the latter with three longitudinal streaks
  of a darker colour. Antennæ dark orange and black, the last articulation
  orange. Scutellum triangular, and dark brown. Hemelytra striated with
  dark orange and brown, the extremities being of a bronze-colour and
  glossy. Abdomen darker than the other parts. Rostrum extending to the
  middle legs. Legs orange-brown, the hinder ones having the thighs and
  tibiæ serrated.


HAMMATOCERUS CONSPICILLARIS.

Plate XLV. fig. 8.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Reduviidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. HAMMATOCERUS, _Burm._ Hammacerus, _Laporte_. Cimex, _Drury_.

  HAMMATOCERUS CONSPICILLARIS. Niger, elytris basi albis, maculâ irregulari
  nigrâ, abdominis marginibus rubro-maculatis. (Long. Corp. 1 unc. 1½ lin.)

  SYN. Cimex conspicillaris, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Laporte Hemipt._ _p._
  79. _Burmeister Hem._ _p._ 236. 2.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  Head small and black. Antennæ setaceous, black, and about half the length
  of the insect. Thorax black. Scutellum triangular and black, but tipped
  with white. Hemelytra black, the base white, whereon is an oblong black
  spot. Abdomen dark red, edged with dark red and black. Rostrum short and
  curled, not reaching to the fore legs. Legs black.


PLATE XLVI.

[Illustration]

PENTATOMA CATENA.

Plate XLVI. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Pentatomidæ.

  GENUS. PENTATOMA, _Latreille_. Cimex, _Fabr. Drury_.

  PENTATOMA CATENA. Albida, pronoti dorso maculâ magnâ nigrâ, lineâ tenui
  albâ in medio divisâ, scutello maculâ basali, alterâ subapicali,
  membranâque elytrorum nigris. (Long. Corp. lin. 7½.)

  SYN. Cimex catena, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  {65}Head cream-coloured and black. Antennæ about half the length of the
  insect. Thorax flesh-coloured; a large black spot occupying the middle,
  which is divided by a cream-coloured line. Scutellum shaped like a bell,
  black, surrounded with cream colour, and divided transversely by a line
  of the same colour. Hemelytra flesh-coloured, the extremities black.
  Beneath cream-coloured, with a great many black spots. Rostrum black,
  extending below the fore legs. Legs cream, streaked with black.


EDESSA VIRENS.

Plate XLVI. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Scutati, _Burm._

  GENUS. EDESSA, _Fabr._ Centroproctus, _Hahn._ Cimex, _Drury_.

  EDESSA VIRENS. Obscure virescens, elytris fuscis margine externo pallido,
  pronoto lateribus utrinque in spinam longam rectam et acutam productis.
  (Long. Corp. 10½ lin.)

  SYN. Cimex virens, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Edessa cervus? _Fabr. Syst. Rh._ 146. 2.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  Antennæ small, about two-thirds the length of the insect. Head, thorax,
  and scutellum dirty green; the latter large and triangular. The thorax on
  each side ends in very acute angles. Hemelytra brown, but were probably
  green when the insect was living. Beneath dirty green. Rostrum extending
  beyond the hinder legs.


LARGUS LINEOLA.

Plate XLVI. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY: Lygæidæ, _Leach_.

  GENUS. LARGUS, _Hahn._ Euryopthalmus, _Laporte_. Cimex, _Drury_.

  LARGUS LINEOLA. Ferrugineo-niger, profunde punctatus, pronoto postice
  luteo, membranâ albido-cinereâ fusco venosâ limbo fusco. (Long. Corp. 6
  lin.)

  SYN. Cimex Lineola, _Linn. Syst. Nat._ _p._ 721. _No._ 52.

  Cimex punctatus, _De Geer Mem._ _pl._ 34. _fig._ 17. 18.

  Cimex humilis, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Hahn._ _Wanzen. Art. Ins._ _t._
  2. _f._ 6. (Largus h.) _Stoll_, _tab._ 27. _fig._ 265.

  Euryopth. puncticollis, _Laporte Hemipt._ 38. 4.

  Lygæus Mutilis. _Perty Del. Art. Braz._ _pl._ 34. _f._ 9.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  Head black. Antennæ small and black, and about half the length of the
  insect. Thorax black in front, orange behind; with many minute black
  spots, the under part being edged with cream. Scutellum triangular, small
  and black. Hemelytra black at the base: white at the extremities. Abdomen
  black, edged with cream both above and beneath. Rostrum black, extending
  to the hinder legs, all of which are black likewise.


{66}PENTATOMA SPECTABILIS.

Plate XLVI. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Pentatomidæ.

  GENUS. PENTATOMA, _Latreille_. Cimex, _Fabr. Drury_.

  PENTATOMA SPECTABILIS. Capite rufescenti postice nigro, pronoto albido,
  antice maculisque duabus posticis nigris, scutello et corio albidis
  fasciâ latâ communi membranâque apicali nigris. (Long. Corp. 7½ lin.)

  SYN. Cimex spectabilis, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  Head red. Eyes, neck, and antennæ black. Thorax cream-coloured, edged in
  front with black, having two small black spots on the shoulders, and two
  larger on the hinder part, which are continued on the front of the
  scutellum, which is large and triangular; the tip being cream colour, the
  middle having a broad black band crossing it and the hemelytra, which are
  cream-coloured at the base, the hinder part being black. Beneath red,
  with small black spots along the sides. Rostrum long and black, extending
  below the hinder legs. Thighs red, the tibiæ and tarsi black.


PENTATOMA RUTILANS.

Plate XLVI. fig. 5.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Pentatomidæ.

  GENUS. PENTATOMA, _Latreille_. Cimex, _Fabr. Drury_.

  PENTATOMA RUTILANS. Cyanea aut viridi ænea, pronoti fasciâ transversâ
  anticâ, scutelli apice elytrorumque basi internè sanguineis, abdomine
  sanguineo maculis marginalibus pedibusque nigris. (Long. Corp. 1 unc. 3
  lin.)

  SYN. Edessa rutilans, _Fabr. Syst. Rh._ 151. 25.

  Cimex anchorago, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. (nec _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ 4. 86.
  25.)

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  Head dark blue. Antennæ black. Thorax deep shining mazarine blue, the
  fore part with a scarlet transverse streak. Scutellum triangular,
  appearing swelled in the fore part, which is of a dark greenish blue, the
  hinder part being scarlet, and continued along the edges up to the
  shoulders. Hemelytra dark blueish green. Abdomen scarlet, edged with dark
  blue spots. Rostrum black, extending to the hinder legs. Beneath deep
  yellowish flesh-colour, spotted on the sides with blue. Legs black.


PENTATOMA REGIA.

Plate XLVI. fig. 6.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Pentatomidæ.

  GENUS. PENTATOMA, _Latreille_. Cimex, _Fabr. Drury_.

  PENTATOMA REGIA. Lutea; capite, pronoti maculis duabus oblongis, scutelli
  basi, elytrorum maculâ centrali membranâque apicali nigris. (Long. Corp.
  lin 7½.)

  SYN. Cimex regius, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Pentatoma catena var. vel sexus alter? _Drury_, in text.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  {67}The principal difference between this insect and Pent. catena, is two
  black spots on the flesh-coloured part of the hemelytra; the scutellum
  not having the black part divided by the cream-coloured line, and the
  under part of the insect being rather more spotted than that.


ASPONGOPUS JANUS.

Plate XLVI. fig. 7.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Pentatomidæ.

  GENUS. ASPONGOPUS, _Lap. Burm._ Edessa, _Fabr._ Cimex, _Drury_.

  ASPONGOPUS JANUS. Niger, supra ruber; capite, pronoti maculâ anticâ,
  scutelli basi, membranâque nigris. (Long. Corp. 10 lin.)

  SYN. Cimex Janus, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ 4. 107. 105. _Syst. Rhyng._ 151. 23.
  (Edessa J.) _Stoll Cim._ 2. _t._ 6. _f._ 41. _Wolff. Cim._ 1. 13. _t._ 2.
  _f._ 13. _Burmeister Hemipt._ _p._ 352. 3. (Aspongopus J.)

  Cimex Afer, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Coast of Coromandel (_Drury_). "In Americæ insulis" (_Fabr._
  haud recte).

  Head and antennæ black. Thorax red and margined, having a black
  triangular spot situated near the head. Base of the scutellum black, the
  hinder part and sides being red. Hemelytra red, the extremities black.
  Abdomen red. Rostrum short, extending only to the fore legs. Beneath
  black, edged with red. Legs black.

The specific name, Afer, given to this insect, although having the priority
in point of date over that of Fabricius, is so completely inappropriate
that I have not hesitated in adopting the latter.


PENTATOMA PULCHELLA.

Plate XLVI. fig. 8.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Pentatomidæ.

  GENUS. PENTATOMA, _Latreille_. Cimex, _Fabr. Drury_.

  PENTATOMA PULCHELLA. Sanguinea, supra coeruleo nigra, fasciis duabus
  sanguineis, anticâ arcuatâ, antennis pedibusque nigris. (Long. Corp. 10
  lin.)

  SYN. Cimex pulchellus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Stoll_, _pl._ 5. _fig._
  30. _&_ _pl._ 21. _fig._ 142.

  Cimex concentricus, _Klug, Burmeister Hemipt._ 365. 5.

  HABITAT: Bay of Honduras (_Drury_). Para (_Burmeister_). Guiana (_J. O.
  W._).

  Head flesh-coloured. Antennæ black. Thorax dark blue, the angulated
  corners red. Scutellum scarlet, with a dark blue band crossing it near
  the middle, and two small blue spots adjoining to the thorax. Hemelytra,
  next the thorax red, below which is a broad dark blue band crossing them,
  and a narrow scarlet one beneath it; the remainder being dark blue.
  Rostrum black, extending below the hinder legs. Abdomen scarlet at the
  base, with two rows of white streaks; the extremity next the anus dark
  blue. Legs black.


{68}SPHÆROCORIS ANNULUS.

Plate XLVI. fig. 9.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Heteroptera. SECTION: Geocorisa. FAMILY:
  Pentatomidæ.

  GENUS. SPHÆROCORIS, _Burmeister_. Tetyra, _Fabr._ Cimex, _Drury_.

  SPHÆROCORIS ARGUS. Lutea, guttis 15 pallidis sive rubris nigro-cinctis.
  (Long. Corp. lin. 4.)

  SYN. Cimex annulus, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ 4. 82. 10. _Syst. Rh._ 132. 20.
  (Tetyra A.)

  Cimex Argus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. (nec _Fabr. Syst. Rh._ 533.) _Stoll
  Cim._ _pl._ 7. _fig._ 50.

  Sphærocoris Argus, _Burmeister Hemipt._ 391. _No._ 2?

  Scutellera gibbosa, _Pal. Beauv. Ins. d'Afr. et d'Amer. Hemipt._ _pl._ 5.
  b. _f._ 3.

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone.

  Head dark cream colour, with two black lines from the front to the hinder
  part. Thorax dark cream, with two waved bands crossing it from side to
  side, of a darker colour. Scutellum very large, and entirely covering the
  abdomen. This part is high and rounded, of the same colour with the rest
  of the insect, having a number of oval, circular, and other shaped marks
  thereon. Beneath dark-cream; breast and fore-part lightest. Rostrum
  extending below the hinder legs, all of which are of the same dark cream
  colour with the other parts.

There is some confusion as to the specific names of the insects composing
the present genus. The Tetyra Argus of Fabricius, with which the species
here figured (from Sierra Leone) was considered identical by Drury, is an
inhabitant of South America. Dr. Burmeister has also confused it with a
species from the Cape of Good Hope.


PLATE XLVII.

[Illustration]

ELATER (TETRALOBUS) FLABELLICORNIS.

Plate XLVII. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Serricornes. FAMILY: Elateridæ.

  GENUS. ELATER, _Linn, &c._ (SUBGENUS: Tetralobus, _Encycl. Méth._)

  ELATER (TETRALOBUS) FLABELLICORNIS. Fuscus, antennis 8-laminatis, elytris
  nitidis lævibus. (Long. Corp. 2 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Elater flabellicornis, _Linn. Syst. Nat._ 1. 11. _p._ 651. 1.?
  _Fabr. Syst. Ent._ 1. _App._ _p._ 824. 1.? _Syst. Eleuth._ II. _p._ 221.
  2.? _De Jean Catal. Col. 2nd Edit._ 85. _Oliv. Ent._ II. 31. _p._ 8. _t._
  3. _fig._ 28.? _Herbst. Col._ ix. _p._ 320. _t._ 127. _f._ 1.?

  Elater Gigas, _Fabr. Syst. Eleuth._ II. _p._ 221. 1.?

  HABITAT: Sierra Leone (_Drury, Afzelius, Schonh._). Guinea (_De Jean_).
  India (_Linn. Fabr. Oliv._).

  Head rather small, square, surrounded with a small black margin; palpi
  very short. Antennæ black; those of the male laminated, having eight
  distinct plates or laminæ laying close to each other, which, when closed
  together, appear to be of equal thickness. General colour dark or dirty
  brown. Thorax with a black margin, terminating on the sides in two sharp
  spines. Scutellum small. Elytra smooth and glossy, without any margin,
  and rounded at the extremities, without spines. Sternum black and small.
  Beneath of the same colour as the upper side.

{69}This figure has been usually cited as the Elater flabellicornis Linn.,
the habitat of which is said to be India, whereas the real habitat of
Drury's insect, as confirmed by Afzelius and De Jean, is Sierra Leone and
Guinea. This insect was sometimes found by Mr. Smeathman in the evenings,
having flown into the houses, to which it was attracted by the lights.


ELATER (AGRYPNUS) QUADRI-MACULATUS.

Plate XLVII. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Serricornes. FAMILY: Elateridæ.

  GENUS. ELATER, _Linn. &c._ (SUBGENUS: Agrypnus, _Eschscholtz_.)

  ELATER (AGRYPNUS) QUADRI-MACULATUS. Cinereus, thoracis punctis quatuor,
  elytris fasciis duabus undulatis nigris. (Long. Corp. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Elater quadri-maculatus, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ 1. II. _p._ 219. 14.
  _Syst. Eleuth._ II. _p._ 224. 13. _Oliv. Ent._ II. 31. _p._ 20. _t._ 8.
  _f._ 79. _Herbst. Col._ x. _p._ 105. _t._ 168. _f._ 3. _Klug Ermann's
  Voy. App._ _p._ 31. _pl._ 15. _f._ 3.

  Elater fasciatus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Coast of Africa (_Drury_). "In Africa æquinoctiali" (_Fabr._).

  Head grey. Antennæ serrated and black; much shorter than the thorax,
  which is grey, with two small round black spots on the middle, and two
  square ones next the scutellum, which is black, surrounded by a patch of
  the same colour. Elytra grey, with two waved irregular bands crossing
  them, one near the middle, the other near the tips. Beneath black, and,
  when viewed through a microscope, appearing to be powdered as it were
  with grey. Legs black.


ELATER (CARDIOPHORUS?) PICTUS.

Plate XLVII. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Serricornes. FAMILY: Elateridæ.

  GENUS. ELATER, _Linn. &c._ (SUBGENUS: Cardiophorus, _Eschsch._?)

  ELATER (CARDIOPHORUS?) PICTUS. Fulvus, antennis nigris serratis, thorace
  elytrisque nigro-lineatis et undulatis, his etiam maculâ utrinque
  triangulari nigrâ. (Long. Corp. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Elater pictus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Schonh. Syn. Ins._ 3. 277.

  HABITAT: Coast of Africa.

  Head yellow-brown. Antennæ deeply serrated and black, being shorter than
  the thorax. Thorax yellow-brown, with several black longitudinal streaks.
  Scutellum very small and yellow brown. Elytra of the same colour, with
  several faint black marks thereon, particularly two situated near the
  middle of a triangular shape, and reaching to the sides; they are a
  little striated, and terminate in four blunt spines, two to each. Beneath
  of a greyer colour than on the upper side. Sternum remarkably large.


{70}ELATER (SEMIOTUS) LIGNEUS.

Plate XLVII. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Serricornes. FAMILY: Elateridæ.

  GENUS. ELATER, _Linn. &c._ (SUBGENUS: Semiotus, _Eschscholtz._)
  Pericalus, _Enc. Méth._

  ELATER (SEMIOTUS) LIGNEUS. Ferrugineus, elytris mucronatis vittis duabus
  lateralibus suturâque obscurioribus, thorace lineâ mediâ nigrâ. (Long.
  Corp. 1 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Elater ligneus, _Linn. Amoen. Acad._ vi. _p._ 395. 24. _Syst. Nat._
  1. II. _p._ 652. _Fabr. Syst. Eleuth._ II. _p._ 224. _No._ 20. _Oliv.
  Ent._ II. 31. _p._ 17. _t._ 2. _f._ 15. _Herbst. Col._ ix. p. 339. 14.
  _t._ 158. _f._ 8.

  Elater serraticornis, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Elater conicus, _Voet Col. Ed. Panz._ II. _p._ 110. 9. _t._ 42. _f._ 9.

  HABITAT: Rio Janeiro.

  Head red brown. Antennæ black, shorter than the thorax, which is
  red-brown, with a dark longitudinal streak running along the middle from
  the head to the scutellum, the sides terminating in two angular points.
  Scutellum small and brown. Elytra red-brown, marginated and ending in two
  spines; they are a little striated, with three longitudinal streaks of a
  dark brown colour; one in the middle along the suture, the others on each
  side. Breast and base of the abdomen red-brown colour; hinder part of the
  latter is darker, having two oval spots of a lightish colour near the
  anus.


ELATER (SEMIOTUS) SUTURALIS.

Plate XLVII. fig. 5.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Serricornes. FAMILY: Elateridæ.

  GENUS. ELATER, _Linn. &c._ (SUBGENUS: Semiotus.)

  ELATER (SEMIOTUS) SUTURALIS. Thorace utrinque unidentato ferrugineo,
  lineâ dorsali punctisque duobus; coleoptris testaceis vittis tribus
  atris. (Long. Corp. 1 unc. 5 lin.)

  SYN. Elater Suturalis, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ 1. II. _p._ 224. 35. _Syst.
  Eleuth._ II. _p._ 231. 52. _Oliv. Ent._ II. 31. _p._ 18. _t._ 1. _f._ 3.
  a. b. c. _Herbst. Col._ ix. _t._ 158. _f._ 5. 6.

  Elater angulatus, _Drury Ins._ _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Brazil.

  Head black, with two thick and short spines. Antennæ black, strongly
  serrated. Thorax orange, with a broad black streak down the middle; two
  black lozenge-shaped spots are placed near the middle of the thorax, and
  united to the black streak; close to these are two protuberances, on the
  sides of the thorax. Scutellum black. Elytra pale orange, the sides and
  middle having three black stripes running along them, the extremities
  ending in two sharp spines. Breast orange, with two long black spots on
  the sides. Abdomen dark cream-coloured, with two black stripes running
  along the sides from the breast, and joining at the anus. Legs orange.


{71}ELATER (CHALCOLEPIDIUS) PORCATUS.

Plate XLVII. fig. 6.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Serricornes. FAMILY: Elateridæ.

  GENUS. ELATER, _Linn. &c._ (SUBGENUS: Chalcolepidius, _Eschscholtz_.)

  ELATER (CHALCOLEPIDIUS) PORCATUS. Viridi-æneus, elytris sulcatis; sulcis
  villoso-albis, thoracis marginibus luteis. (Long. Corp. 1 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Elater porcatus, _Fabr. Syst. Ent._ _p._ 211. _8. Syst. Eleuth._ II.
  _p._ 225. 26. _Oliv. Ent._ II. 31. _p._ 14. 10. _t._ 7. _f._ 74. _Herbst.
  Col._ ix. _p._ 323. _t._ 157. _f._ 3. _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Bay of Honduras.

  Head dark green. Antennæ black. Thorax yellow at the sides; having a
  broad bar of a green colour running longitudinally from the head to the
  hinder part, being margined with black. Elytra deeply furrowed with green
  and yellow lines, the sides having a broad yellow stripe along them, and
  margined with black, the extremities being round, and not ending in a
  spine. Breast, abdomen, and legs dark green. Sternum black and large.


PLATE XLVIII.

[Illustration]

FLATA ----? PUPA?

Plate XLVIII. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Homoptera. FAMILY: Fulgoridæ.

  GENUS. FLATA, _Fabricius, &c._ Aphis, _Drury_.

  FLATA ---- PUPA? Corpore toto albo pulveroso vel lanoso. (Long. Corp.
  Ins. haud declar. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Aphis lanosa, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT:

  Head appearing united and fixed to the body, and furnished with a horny
  beak, about one-fourth the length of the whole insect. Antennæ of equal
  thickness, and apparently only two-jointed; one next the head, which is
  white, another in the middle, the extreme part being black; the length
  being about a tenth part of the whole insect. Body white, and covered
  with a very fine cottony substance. Legs white at the base, the remainder
  black. The insect above is round, beneath flat; a fine soft white
  substance, like down, intermixed with hairs of different sizes, some
  being very small, others very coarse, arises from the abdomen.

"I am not certain it is a complete insect."--_Drury._

This figure represents an insect belonging to the genus Flata (probably
Flata nigricornis from South America) in an imperfect state, being most
likely a pupa. The species of this genus are ascertained to be similar to
this figure in their preparatory states, and especially the Flata
nigricornis which is represented by Stoll, both in the winged and apterous
condition, as well as by Donovan, in his Insects of China.


{72}CHOLUS URBANUS.

Plate XLVIII. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Rhyncophora. FAMILY: Curculionidæ. SUBFAMILY:
  Cholides.

  GENUS. CHOLUS, _Germar._ Rhynchænus, _Fabr._ Curculio p. _Linn. &c._

  CHOLUS URBANUS. Fusco-viridis, thorace elytrisque flavo marginatis.
  (Long. Corp. rostr. inclus. 1 unc. 1½ lin.)

  SYN. Curculio urbanus, _Oliv. Enc. Méth._ v. _p._ 503. _Sch. Syn. Ins.
  Curcul._ 3. 571. 17. (Cholus u.)

  Curculio cinctus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. (nec Cholus cinctus, _Oliv._
  Rhynchænus.) _Herbst. Col._ vi. _p._ 478. _t._ 79. _fig._ 7.

  HABITAT: Musquito Shore, near Honduras.

  Head black. Rostrum half the length of the insect. Antennæ black, arising
  near the end of the beak. Thorax dirty green, with a cream-coloured
  stripe running on each side, which is continued along the sides of the
  elytra, meeting at the anus. Beneath cream colour. Legs the same, being
  dirty green above. Every part of the insect appears covered with
  innumerable small black pustules, like spots, some smaller than others,
  those on the upper side being largest. Each of the femora is furnished
  with a single spine.


DYNASTES CLAVIGER.

Plate XLVIII. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Lamellicornes. FAMILY: Dynastidæ.

  GENUS. DYNASTES, _MacLeay_. Geotrupes, _Fabr._ Scarabæus, _Linn. Latr._

  DYNASTES CLAVIGER. Rufus, thoracis cornu elevato apice dilatato; capitis
  longo, subulato recurvo. (Long. Corp. fere 2 unc.)

  SYN. Scarabæus claviger, _Linn. Mant._ 1. _p._ 529. _Fabr. Syst. Ent._ 1.
  _p._ 5. _No._ 7. _Syst. El._ 1. _p._ 6. _No._ 11. _Oliv. Ent._ 1. 3. _p._
  20. _No._ 18. _t._ 5. _fig._ 40. a. b. _Jabl. Nat. Syst._ 1. _p._ 239.
  _No._ 10. _t._ 3. _f._ 1. _Pal. Beauv. Ins. d'Afr. et d'Amer. Col._ ix.
  _pl._ 1e. _f._ 1.

  HABITAT: Cayenne.

  Head small, margined, and armed with a long horn which bends upwards.
  Thorax dark brown and margined, having a very remarkable erect and black
  horn issuing from it, which bends forward towards the head, the extremity
  of which is trifurcate, hollowed beneath, and covered with a brown pile
  like that of velvet. Elytra brown, the margin and suture being black.
  Legs black. Thighs brown. Tibiæ with two spurs. Anterior tibiæ with three
  spines placed on the external part.


HISTER (OXYSTERNUS) MAXIMUS.

Plate XLVIII. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Clavicornes. FAMILY: Histeridæ.

  GENUS. HISTER, _Linn. &c._ (SUBGENUS: Oxysternus, _Erichson_.)

  HISTER (OXYSTERNUS) MAXIMUS.  Depressus ater nitidus; elytris striatis,
  mandibulis exsertis capite longioribus. (Long. Corp. cum mandib. 1 unc. 3
  lin.)

  SYN. Hister maximus, _Linn. Syst. Nat._ 1. 2. 566. 1.

  Hololepta maxillosa, _Park Mon. Hist._ III. 9. _t._ ix. _f._ 7.

  Hister maxillosus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 2.

  Oxysternus maximus, _Erichson in Jahrb. der Ent._ 1. 100.

  O. maxillosus, _Guérin & Percheron Genera des Ins._ 1. _Col. pl._ 7.
  ([female]?) _Fabricius Ent. Syst. vol._ 4. _Append. p._ 437. _Schonh.
  Syn. Ins._ 1. _p._ 98.

  HABITAT: Cayenne.

  {73}Black. Head furnished with two horn-like mandibles, being thicker
  near the head, and terminating in a point; that fixed on the left side of
  the insect being longest. Thorax broad and margined. Elytra slightly
  striated. Scutellum not to be seen. Posterior tibiæ rather long. Tarsi
  short.


PHANÆUS FESTIVUS [female].

Plate XLVIII. fig. 5.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Lamellicornes. FAMILY: Scarabæidæ.

  GENUS. PHANÆUS, _MacLeay_. Copris p. _Fabr._ Scarabæus p. _Linn._

  PHANÆUS FESTIVUS. Thorace gibbo bicorni, capitis cornu erecto [male],
  elytris rubro-æneis; [female] thorace mutico æquali nigro-maculato,
  capite mutico. (Long. Corp. 1 unc. 1½ lin.)

  SYN. Scarabæus festivus, _Linn. Syst. Nat._ 1. 2. _p._ 552. 252. _Fabr.
  Ent. Syst._ 1. _p._ 42. _No._ 139. _Syst. El._ 1. 32. _No._ 10. _Oliv.
  Ent._ 1. 3. _p._ 110. _No._ 127. _t._ 3. _f._ 21. a. b. _De Geer Ins._
  iv. _p._ 315. _t._ 37. _fig._ 3. [male]. 4. [female].

  HABITAT: Cayenne.

  Head black, broad, rounded in front and margined. Thorax red and
  margined, having several black patches thereon. Scutellum not distinct.
  Elytra red and striated, being margined with black. Beneath black and
  shining. Legs thick and strong.


COPRIS FAUNUS.

Plate XLVIII. fig. 6.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Lamellicornes. FAMILY: Scarabæidæ.

  GENUS. COPRIS, _Geoffroy_. Scarabæus p., _Linn._

  COPRIS FAUNUS. Thorace quadricorni, cornubus mediis brevissimis,
  lateralibus dilatatis, capitis cornu recurvo serrato. (Long. Corp. 1 unc.
  9 lin.)

  SYN. Scarabæus Faunus, _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ 1. _p._ 47. _No._ 155. _Syst.
  El._ 1. _p._ 38. _No._ 36. _Oliv. Ent._ 1. 3. 103. _t._ 10. _f._ 87. _t._
  22. _f._ 87. b. _Jabl. Nat. Syst._ II. _p._ 61. _t._ 9. _f._ 3.

  HABITAT: Cayenne.

  Entirely black. Head rounded in front and margined; armed with a long
  horn that inclines towards the body, the inner part of which, near the
  top, is dentated. Thorax terminating at the corners, next the body, in
  two projections like horns, extending in an horizontal position, being
  very obtuse, and wider at the ends than the middle. The central part has
  two small projections which are bifid, and two dents on the middle of the
  posterior margin. Scutellum not distinct. Elytra deeply furrowed. Legs
  thick and strong. Fore and hinder tibiæ dentated.


{74}RHIPICERA DRURÆI.

Plate XLVIII. fig. 7.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Serricornes. FAMILY: Cebrionidæ.

  GENUS. RHIPICERA, _Latr. Kirby_. Hispa, _Fabr. Drury_. Ptilinus, _Fabr._
  Polytomus, _Dalman_. Ptiocerus, _Hoffmansegg_.

  RHIPICERA DRURÆI. Thorace griseo sericeo; elytris brunneis albo-punctatis
  scutelloque albido, pedibus supra fuscis subtus griseis. (Long. Corp. 7½
  lin.)

  SYN. Hispa mystacina, _Fabr. Syst. Ent._ _p._ 70. 1.? _Syst. Eleuth._ 1.
  _p._ 328. 1.? (Ptilinus m.) _Herbst. Col._ v. _p._ 45. _t._ 46. _f._ 13.?
  _Laporte in Ann. Soc. Ent. de France_, 1834. _p._ 235.? (Rhipicera m.)

  HABITAT: "Sierra Leone, Mr. Smeathman, 1776" (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  Head small, black, thin, and margined from the part where the antennæ are
  placed; but behind them to the thorax growing suddenly thick and round.
  Antennæ strongly pectinated, each ramification increasing from the base
  towards the middle, and then gradually decreasing in length; they are
  about a third part of the insect's length, and entirely black. Thorax
  grey, rounded, having a ridge on each side, and seeming covered with a
  fine pile or down. Scutellum grey and round, appearing like a whiteish
  spot. Elytra dark red-brown, covered with a multitude of small whiteish
  spots, furrowed and margined at the sides and suture. Breast and abdomen
  grey, each ring of the latter having some black spots on it. Legs brown
  above, grey beneath.

I have attached a mark of doubt to all the synonyms quoted above, 1st. on
account of the difference of locality between Drury's Insect, and that
described by Fabricius, which is from New Holland. 2ndly. Because Drury's
description does not agree with the true Rh. mystacina: and 3dly. because
as there is another spotted species of the genus found in North America,
described by Laporte, it is most probable that Drury's insect is altogether
distinct, in which case I have proposed for it the name of Rhipicera
Druræi. Mr. Kirby speaks of the New Holland species of this genus as though
there were more than one, and he has described one from that country under
the name of R. femorata, in the 12th volume of the Linn. Trans. No. 9. in
which the thorax, as well as the elytra, is spotted with white, whereas the
thorax of Mystacina is described by Fabricius as being "cinereus." The Rh.
mystacina of Laporte entirely agrees with Mr. Kirby's Rh. femorata. The Rh.
femorata of Dalman is a totally distinct species from Brazil, and as it is
necessary that a new specific name should be given to it, I would suggest
that it should be termed Rh. Dalmanni.


SAPERDA SPECTABILIS.

Plate XLVIII. fig. 8.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Longicornes. FAMILY: Lamiidæ.

  GENUS. SAPERDA, _Fabr._ Cerambyx P., _Drury_. (SUBGENUS: ----?)

  SAPERDA SPECTABILIS. Nigra, thorace flavo punctis tribus nigris, elytris
  fasciis duabus flavis, apice truncato et spinoso. (Long. Corp. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Cerambyx spectabilis, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 2. _Sch. Syn. Ins._ 3.
  421. (Saperda s.)

  HABITAT: Bay of Honduras.

  {75}Head black, with a large yellowish spot between the eyes. Antennæ
  black, and almost the length of the insect, having a row of short hairs
  running along the under side. Thorax black beneath, lemon-coloured above,
  with three black spots. Scutellum small, triangular, and black. Elytra
  black, with two broad straw-coloured bars crossing them, each having a
  spine at the extremity near the suture. Beneath black, except the middle
  of the abdominal rings, which is grey.


PLATE XLIX.

[Illustration]

PRONUS (TITANUS) GIGANTEUS.

Plate XLIX. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Longicornes. FAMILY: Prionidæ.

  GENUS. PRIONUS, _Geoffroy_. Cerambyx P., _Linn._ (SUBGENUS: Titanus,
  _Serv. Ann. Soc. Ent. France_, 1. _p._ 133.)

  PRIONUS (TITANUS) GIGANTEUS. Thorace utrinque bidentato, corpore nigro,
  elytris ferrugineis, antennis brevibus. (Long. Corp. 6 unc. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Cerambyx Giganteus, _Linn. Mant._ 1. 531. _Shaw Nat. Misc._ _t._
  280. _Fabr. Syst. El._ 2. 261. 17. (Prionus g.) _Oliv. Ent._ 4. 66. _p._
  12. _t._ 6. _f._ 21.

  HABITAT: Cayenne.

  Head and thorax black; all the rest of the insect dark brown. Jaws broad
  and thin, the extremities bending inwards towards each other. Antennæ
  thickest at their base, and about half the length of the insect,
  gradually diminishing in size to the extremities. Thorax smooth and
  rounded at top, the middle appearing as if polished; the sides rough,
  like shagreen, and armed with two short and pointed spines, like horns;
  it is also margined. Scutellum small and bell-shaped. Elytra deeply
  margined on their sides and suture; faintly ribbed, each having five
  placed longitudinally, the surface very rough. Sides of the abdomen
  covered beneath with a dark brown velvety pile. Legs with short strong
  tibial spurs.


HEILIPUS? SCALARIS.

Plate XLIX. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Rhyncophora. FAMILY: Curculionidæ.

  GENUS. HEILIPUS? _Germar._

  HEILIPUS? SCALARIS. Niger; thoracis lateribus et elytrorum disco
  irregulariter flavescentibus. (Long. Corp. 1 unc. 1½ lin.)

  SYN. Curculio scalaris, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Bay of Honduras.

  Head, eyes, and rostrum black, slender, and nearly half the length of the
  insect; antennæ arising near the end of it. Thorax black, with a yellow
  streak running along each side from the eyes to the corners of the
  elytra. Scutellum small, black, triangular. Elytra black, with a yellow
  zigzag streak running along the sides, all the black part being full of
  small punctures. Beneath entirely black.


{76}CERAMBYX (COSMISOMA) PLUMICORNIS.

Plate XLIX. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Longicornes. FAMILY: Cerambycidæ.

  GENUS. CERAMBYX, _Linn. &c._ (SUBGENUS: Cosmisoma, _Serv._)

  CERAMBYX (COSMISOMA) PLUMICORNIS. Fulvus, elytris cruce nigrâ, pedibus
  antennisque nigris, his scopiferis. (Long. Corp. 7½ lin.)

  SYN. Leptura plumicornis, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 2. _Sch. Syn. Ins._ 3.
  429. (Saperda p.)

  HABITAT: Musquito Shore, Bay of Honduras.

  Head dark brown. Antennæ longer than the insect, and slender; basal joint
  thickest; furnished with remarkable tufts of hair, four on each antenna;
  the smallest is on the first articulation from the head; the next
  articulation has a pretty large one surrounding entirely the joint of the
  antenna, and is black. On the next joint is a very small one, standing on
  the joint in the form of an acute angle, and is also black. At a little
  distance from this, the largest tuft is situated, which, like the second,
  entirely surrounds the antenna, part of it next the head being black, the
  remainder orange colour. Thorax round, without lateral spines,
  orange-coloured. Elytra orange, with a broad black patch crossing them in
  the middle, where are two lines in the form of a cross. Legs black, the
  hind ones very long. Femora thick at the tips.


CYPHUS 16-PUNCTATUS.

Plate XLIX. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Rhyncophora. FAMILY: Curculionidæ. SUBFAMILY:
  Brachyderides.

  GENUS. CYPHUS, _Schonherr_. Chlorima, _Dej._ Curculio p., _Linn._

  CYPHUS SEDECIM-PUNCTATUS. Coerulescens, thorace punctis nigris quatuor,
  coleopteris duodecim. (Long. Corp. 1 unc.)

  SYN. Curculio sedecim-punctatus, _Linn. Syst. Nat._ 1. 2. 618. 92. _Fabr.
  Syst. Eleuth._ 3. 509. 10. _Oliv. Ent._ v. 83. _t._ 2. _f._ 17. a. b.
  _Schonh. Syn. Ins. Curcul._ 1. 625. 8.

  HABITAT: Cayenne.

  Entirely fine blue-coloured. Antennæ somewhat longer than represented in
  the plate, and black. Thorax with five black spots on it; one in the
  centre, and two on each side. Elytra having twelve spots of the same
  colour, the apices terminating in two sharp points.


SOLENOPUS CACICUS.

Plate XLIX. fig. 5.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Rhyncophora. FAMILY: Curculionidæ. SUBFAMILY:
  Cholides.

  GENUS. SOLENOPUS, _Schonherr_. Odontoderes, _Sahlberg_. Curculio p.,
  _Drury_.

  SOLENOPUS CACICUS. Ater sulphureo-squamosus, thorace bivittato, lateribus
  granulatis, elytris punctis magnis oblongo-quadratis et striatis. (Long.
  Corp. rostr. inclus. 1 unc. 3 lin.)

  SYN. Curculio morbillosus, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Solenopus cacicus, _Schonh. Syn. Ins. Curcul._ 3. 597. 1.

  Dionychus granicollis, _Germ. Ins. Spec._ 315. 454.

  HABITAT: Cayenne.

  {77}Head, eyes, and rostrum black, the latter being about the length of
  the thorax. Antennæ arising near the end of the beak. Thorax dirty brown,
  having a number of very small pustules on it. Scutellum small and
  triangular. Elytra the same colour with the thorax, with patches of
  lighter brown on them. They are also margined and furrowed, having a
  great number of black pustules. Legs black, tibiæ with two spurs, the
  outer ones being the thickest.


PLATE L.

[Illustration]

LESTES COERULEATA.

Plate L. fig. 1.

  ORDER: Neuroptera. SECTION: Subulicornes. FAMILY: Libellulidæ.

  GENUS. LESTES, _Leach_. Libellula p., _Drury, Donovan_.

  LESTES COERULEATA. Coerulea, thorace pallidè vittato, alis hyalinis
  fasciâ latâ subapicali coerulescenti, stigmate nigro. (Expans. Alar. 5
  unc. 6 lin. Long. Corp. fere 4 unc.)

  SYN. Libellula coeruleata, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Libellula coerulea, _Donovan Nat. Repos._ 4. 110.

  HABITAT: Bay of Honduras (_Drury_). "Muskito Shore, Mr. Shakespear, 1779"
  (_Drury's_ MSS.).

  Eyes large, projecting from the head. Thorax dark blue. Wings reticulated
  and transparent, having a broad patch of a deep mazarine blue crossing
  them near the extremities, the tips being transparent. Abdomen three
  inches and an eighth in length, dark blue. Under side of the head,
  thorax, &c. grey.


LAMPYRIS GIGANTEA.

Plate L. fig. 2.

  ORDER: Coleoptera. SECTION: Serricornes. FAMILY: Lampyridæ.

  GENUS. LAMPYRIS, _Linn. &c._

  LAMPYRIS GIGANTEA. Ovata depressa, thorace semi-circulari fulvo, disco
  irregulari, elytris fuscis vittâ laterali albidâ. (Long. Corp. 1 unc. 3
  lin.)

  SYN. Lampyris gigantea, _Schonh. Syn. Ins._ 3. 66. _No._ 46.

  Lampyris splendida, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  Lampyris Savignii? _Kirby Trans. Linn. &c._ v. 12. _Guérin. Icon. R. An.
  Ins._ _pl._ 14. _fig._ 7.

  HABITAT: Rio Janeiro.

  Antennæ setaceous, with a small spine, like a short hair, at each of the
  joints. Head withdrawn, and entirely hid by the shield-like thorax.
  Thorax yellow, margined and semicircular, with a rugged projection in the
  middle. Scutellum small, yellow, and triangular. Elytra dark red-brown,
  with a cream-coloured line running longitudinally from the thorax towards
  the apex, and having a small cream-coloured margin. Breast orange colour.
  Legs partly orange and black. Abdomen, which is rather thick, black, with
  a cream-coloured streak crossing it near the anus.


{78}BLATTA (PHORASPIS) PICTA.

Plate L. fig. 3.

  ORDER: Orthoptera. SECTION: Cursoria. FAMILY: Blattidæ.

  GENUS. BLATTA, _Linn. &c._ (SUBGENUS: Phoraspis, _Serville_.)

  BLATTA (PHORASPIS) PICTA. Atra; elytris vittâ sanguineâ thoracisque
  margine antico flavescenti. (Long. Corp. 9 lin.)

  SYN. Blatta picta, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3. _Fabr. Ent. Syst._ 2. _p._ 10.
  _Serville Revis. Orthop._ _p._ 17. (Phoraspis p.)

  Lampyris rufo-vittata, _Schonh. Syn. Ins._ 3. _p._ 66. _No._ 47.

  HABITAT: Rio Janeiro, Brazil.

  Antennæ filiform, orbicular. Head dark brown, and retracted under the
  shield-like thorax, which is black, the anterior margin being yellowish.
  Elytra black and margined, semi-coriaceous, and crossing over one
  another, having a red streak from the shoulders to the apex. Abdomen
  black, having two spines at the extremity near the anus. Legs black and
  cursorial, the tibiæ being furnished with many spines.


FULGORA DIADEMA.

Plate L. fig. 4.

  ORDER: Hemiptera. SUBORDER: Homoptera. FAMILY: Fulgoridæ.

  GENUS. FULGORA, _Linn._

  FULGORA DIADEMA. Fusca, vertice, pronoti medio, elytrorum fasciâ luteis;
  alis purpureis, apice nigris, capitis cornu in medio dentato apice
  dentibus tribus majoribus. (Long. Corp. cum capitis cornu, 1 unc. 9 lin.
  Expans. Alar. 3 unc. 6 lin.)

  SYN. Fulgora diadema, _Linn. Syst. N._ 1. 2. 703. 2. _Fabr. Syst. Rh._ 2.
  3. _Stoll_, _fig._ 22. _Donovan Nat. Repos._ _vol._ 5. _fol._ 145.

  Fulgora armata, _Drury_, _App. vol._ 3.

  HABITAT: Cayenne (_Drury_).

  Head extending almost half an inch above the eyes, having many tubercles,
  like stubbed horns, on the sides, trifurcate at the tip. It is likewise
  furnished with two short pointed and black horns that are placed directly
  over the eyes, and two smaller ones a little below them. It appears as if
  it had four eyes; two fixed, and of a grey colour like horn; just below
  which the other two (seeming eyes) are placed. They are black and
  moveable, but are the antennæ, and are perfectly round. Hemelytra dirty
  green at the base, with some dusky red patches irregularly placed; but
  near the extremity having a large patch of a dark orange colour. The
  wings are black, but next the body red, with some red spots in the centre
  of them. Rostrum horny, lying between the legs, even with and close to
  the breast. Tongue seeming to proceed from the mouth, and much smaller
  than the other instrument (labium), being as small and fine as a hair.
  Feet formed for walking.

There is a confusion in the works of the earlier authors relative to the
native country of this species; Linnæus and Fabricius stating it to be
India, whilst Stoll records Surinam, Drury, Cayenne, during that it and
others figured by him were collected by Mons. Mallouet, {79}who sent them
to Europe, but in their passage they were taken by the Shaftesbury
privateer, and afterwards sold by public auction, where he purchased them.
Donovan states that two specimens he possessed were taken in Brazil; and
Dr. Burmeister still more satisfactorily says, "Gleichfalls aus
_Sud-Amerika_ findet sich besonders haufig auf den Cautschuck-Baumen
(Siphonia elastica)."

NOTES

SELECTED FROM THE MANUSCRIPT CATALOGUES OF MR. DRURY,

RELATIVE TO SPECIES OF DISPUTED LOCALITY

Contained in Vol. 1 and 2 of these Illustrations.

(_The Notes relating to the Species of the third Volume are incorporated in
the text._)

  GENUS.  SPECIES.        LOCALITY.    FROM WHOM     DATE.  ILLUSTRATIONS.
                                        RECEIVED.
  Scarabæus Gideon     Africa         Mr. Smeathman  1775 Vol. 1. plate 36,
       var.                                                         fig. 1.
  ---- Didymus         St. Vincent's  Mr. Kearton    1773 Vol. 1. plate 32,
                                                                    fig. 3.
  ---- tetradactylus   Brazil         Mr. Bonifas    1774 Vol. 1. plate 37,
                                                                    fig. 7.
  ---- cordatus,
       Swederus Cet.   Sierra Leone   Mr. Smeathman  1773 Vol. 2. plate 32,
       olivacea                                                     fig. 5.
  ---- sulcatus        Georgia        Mr. Abbot      1785 Vol. 1. plate 35,
                                                                    fig. 1.
  Cerambyx cinnamomeus Jamaica        Mr. Keuchan    1775 Vol. 1. plate 40,
                                                                    fig. 2.
                      {Caught in a    }
                      {Timber-yard    }
  ---- notatus        {in Bunhill Row;}Mr. Haller    1768 Vol. 2. plate 35,
                      {supposed to be }                             fig. 2.
                      {bred in fir[1] }
  ---- araneiformis    Jamaica         Mr. Felton    1765 Vol. 2. plate 35,
                                                                    fig. 4.
  ---- atomarius       Georgia         Mr. Abbot     1785 Vol. 1. plate 41,
                                                                    fig. 6.
                      {Bay of Honduras}
  ---- longipes       {--they live in }By the Actæon 1771 Vol. 1. plate 37,
                      {the mahogany   }                             fig. 4.
                      {trees          }
  ---- irroratus       Jamaica        Mr. Dupont     1765 Vol. 1. plate 41,
                                                                    fig. 3.
  Papilio Dione        Batavia       General Rengers 1776 Vol. 2.  plate 8,
                                                                 fig. 3, 4.
  ---- Licus           Madras[2]      Mr. Skeene     1772 Vol. 1. plate 16,
                                                                    fig. 1.
  ---- Arethusa        Madras         Mr. Skeene     1772 Vol. 2. plate 19,
                                                                 fig. 5, 6.
  ---- Bolina          Sierra Leone   Mr. Smeathman  1775 Vol. 1. plate 14,
                                                                 fig. 1, 2.
  ---- Philantha       Sierra Leone   Mr. Smeathman  1776 Vol. 1. plate 21,
                                                                 fig. 1, 2.
  ---- Iphicla         Jamaica        Mr. Keuchan    1772 Vol. 1. plate 14,
                                                                 fig. 3, 4.
  ---- Laure           Jamaica        Dr. Fothergill 1777 Vol. 2. plate 17,
                                                                 fig. 5, 6.
  ---- Leda            Madras         Mr. Skeene     1772 Vol. 1. plate 15,
                                                                 fig. 5, 6.
  ---- Pan             New York       Mr. James      1766 Vol. 2. plate 23,
                                                                 fig. 3, 4.
  ---- Isis            Sierra Leone   Mr. Smeathman  1775 Vol. 2.  plate 3,
                                                                 fig. 4, 5.
  ---- Acis            New York       Mr. James      1766 Vol. 1.  plate 1,
                                                                    fig. 2.
  ---- Phylæus         Madras         Mr. Skeene     1772 Vol. 1. plate 13,
                                                                 fig. 4, 5.
  Phalæna Chera        Madras         Mr. Skeene     1772 Vol. 2. plate 20,
                                                                    fig. 4.
  ---- Egle            Antigua        Mr. Archer          Vol. 2. plate 20,
                                                                    fig. 3.
  ---- Myrtæa          Rio Janeiro    Mr. Bonifas    1776 Vol. 2.  plate 2,
                                                                    fig. 3.
  Cimex incarnatus     Madras         Mr. Skeene     1773 Vol. 2.  plate 3,
                                                                    fig. 5.
  Libellula Lucretia   Muskito Shore  Mr. Shakespear 1779 Vol. 2. plate 48,
                                                                    fig. 1.
  Formica barbara?     Island of      Mr. Richardson 1772 Vol. 2. plate 38,
                         Johanna                                    fig. 3.
  Sphex coeruleata     Boston,        Mr. J. Harris  1768 Vol. 2. plate 39,
                         New England                                fig. 4.
  ---- maculata        Coromandel    General Rengers 1770 Vol. 2. plate 40,
                         Coast[3]                                   fig. 3.
  ---- plumipes        Jamaica        Mr. Dupont     1760 Vol. 1. plate 44,
                                                                 fig. 4, 5.




GENERAL ALPHABETICAL INDEX.

  Obs.--_The names to which an * are attached are those employed in the
  first edition of this work, and which are here introduced for convenience
  of reference._


  Acheta membranacea, vol. 2. pl. 43. f. 2. p. 91.
  ---- (Schizodactyla) monstrosa, vol. 2. pl. 43. f. 1. p. 90.
  Acræa Camoena, vol. 2. pl. 7. f. 2. p. 15.
  ---- Circeis, vol. 3. pl. 18. f. 5, 6. p. 26.
  ---- Cynthia, vol. 3. pl. 37. f. 5, 6. p. 51.
  ---- Dice, vol. 3. pl. 18. f. 3, 4. p. 25.
  ---- Ethosea, vol. 3. pl. 37. f. 3, 4. p. 50.
  ---- Gea, vol. 3. pl. 28. f. 3, 4. p. 38.
  ---- Horta, vol. 3. pl. 28. f. 1, 2. p. 37.
  ---- Hypatia, vol. 3. pl. 13. f. 1, 2. p. 16.
  ---- Menippe, vol. 3. pl. 13. f. 3, 4. p. 17.
  ---- Umbra, vol. 3. pl. 18. f. 1, 2. p. 24.
  Actias Luna, vol. 1. pl. 24. f. 1. p. 45.
  Ægeria? plumipes, vol. 3. pl. 2. f. 3. p. 3.
  ---- tibialis, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 2. p. 52.
  Ægocera amabilis, vol. 2. pl. 13. f. 3. p. 25.
  Æshna Junia, vol. 1. pl. 47. f. 5. p. 116.
  Aglaope plumipes, vol. 2. pl. 27. f. 3. p. 51.
  Agrion Caia, vol. 2. pl. 45. f. 2. p. 92.
  ---- Titia, vol. 2. pl. 45. f. 5. p. 94.
  ---- virginica, vol. 1. pl. 48. f. 2. p. 118.
  Alcis scolopacea, vol. 2. pl. 22. f. 1. p. 40.
  Anthocaris Arethusa, vol. 2. pl. 19. f. 5, 6. p. 37.
  Aphana lanata, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 3. p. 75.
  *Aphis lanosa, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 1.
  *Apis annularis, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 7.
  *---- cornuta, vol. 2. pl. 48. f. 3.
  *---- grossa, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 3.
  *---- latipes, vol. 2. pl. 48. f. 2
  *---- surinamensis, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 4.
  *---- Virginica, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 1.
  Arctia menea, vol. 3. pl. 3. f. 2. p. 4.
  Areoda lanigera, vol. 1. pl. 34. f. 6. p. 70.
  Arilus serratus, vol. 2. pl. 36. f. 6. p. 73.
  Argynnis Erymanthis, vol. 1. pl. 15. f. 3, 4. p. 28.
  ---- Idalia, vol. 1. pl. 13. f. 1, 2, 3. p. 24.
  ---- Niphe, vol. 1. pl. 6. f. 1. p. 12.
  ---- Phalanta, vol. 1. pl. 21. f. 1, 2. p. 38.
  ---- Tephnia, vol. 1. pl. 6. f. 2. p. 13.
  Aspongopus Janus, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 7. p. 67.
  Atta fervens, vol. 3. pl. 42. f. 3. p. 57.
  *Attelabus longicollis, vol. 1. pl. 42. f. 4, 6.

  Bacteria linearis, vol. 1. pl. 50. f. 3. p. 122.
  Baridius? ovalis, vol. 2. pl. 33. f. 1, 2. p. 64.
  Biblis Ariadne? vol. 3. pl. 11. f. 3, 4. p. 14.
  ---- Hiarbas, vol. 3. pl. 14. f. 1, 2. p. 18.
  ---- Ilithyia, vol. 2. pl. 17. f. 1, 2. p. 32.
  ---- undularis, vol. 2. pl. 10. f. 1, 2. p. 18.
  Blatta (Polyphaga) Ægyptiaca? vol. 2. pl. 36. f. 3. p. 71.
  ---- (Blaberus) gigantea? vol. 2. pl. 36. f. 2. p. 71.
  ---- nivea, vol. 2. pl. 36. f. 1. p. 70.
  ---- (Phoraspis) picta, vol. 3. pl. 50. f. 3. p. 78.
  Bombylius plumipes, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 3. p. 83.
  Botys (Desmia) sericea, vol. 2. pl. 6. f. 1. p. 11.
  Brachycerus globosus, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 4. p. 64.
  ---- ornatus, vol. 2. pl. 34. f. 3. p. 66.
  Brenthus minutus, vol. 1. pl. 42. f. 3, 7. p. 90.
  Bupalus catenarius, vol. 1. pl. 8. f. 3. p. 16.
  Buprestis (Chalcophora) Virginiensis, vol. 1. pl. 30. f. 3.

  Cælioxys? annularis, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 7. p. 77.
  Calandra serrirostris, [female]? vol. 2. pl. 33. f. 3. p. 64.
  Callimorpha Coenea, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 3. p. 29.
  ----? Cafra, vol. 3. pl. 5. f. 1. p. 6.
  ----? Diaphana, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 4. p. 31.
  ---- Epimenis, vol. 3. pl. 29. f. 2. p. 40.
  ----? Eucharis, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 6. p. 32.
  ----? Famula, vol. 2. pl. 11. f. 3. p. 22.
  ----? Glaucopis, vol. 2. pl. 6. f. 4. p. 14.
  ----? Helcita, vol. 3. pl. 29. f. 4. p. 41.
  ----? marginata, vol. 2. pl. 22. f. 2. p. 40.
  ----? Mopsa, vol. 3. pl. 3. f. 3. p. 4.
  ----? Nerina, vol. 3. pl. 5. f. 2. p. 6.
  ----? Phileta, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 5. p. 32.
  ---- Phyllira, vol. 1. pl. 7. f. 2. p. 15.
  ----? Pylotis, vol. 2. pl. 5. f. 3. p. 11.
  ----? sanguiflua, vol. 2. pl. 20. f. 1, 2. p. 37.
  ----? Venosa, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 4. p. 43.
  *Carabus bicolor, vol. 1. pl. 42. f. 2.
  Casnonia longicollis, vol. 1. pl. 42. f. 4, 6. p. 90.
  Castnia Licus, vol. 1. pl. 16. f. 1, 2. p. 29.
  ---- Thais, vol. 3. pl. 16. f. 4. p. 22.
  Catocala affinis, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 6. p. 44.
  ---- Epione, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 2. p. 43.
  Centris grossa, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 3. p. 102.
  ---- Surinamensis, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 4. p. 92.
  Cerambyx (Callichroma) afer, vol. 1. pl. 39. f. 4. p. 84.
  ---- (Rosalia) alpina, vol. 2. pl. 31. f. 5. p. 61.
  *---- araneiformis, vol. 2. pl. 35. f. 4.
  *---- atomarius, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 6.
  *---- bipunctatus, vol. 2. pl. 31. f. 2.
  *---- Capensis, vol. 1. pl. 39. f. 3.
  *---- Carcharias, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 5.
  *---- Cerdo, vol. 1. pl. 39. f. 1.
  *---- cinctus, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 6.
  *---- cinnamomeus, vol. 1. pl. 40. f. 2.
  *---- crenulatus, vol. 1. pl. 38. f. 2.
  *---- damicornis, vol. 1. pl. 38. f. 1.
  *---- farinosus, vol. 2. pl. 31. f. 4.
  *---- festivus, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 5.
  *---- Giganteus, vol. 3. pl. 49. f. 1.
  ---- (Hamaticherus) Heros, vol. 1. pl. 39. f. 1. p. 83.
  *---- irroratus, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 3.
  *---- laticollis, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 2.
  *---- longipes, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 4.
  *---- maculatus, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 3.
  *---- maxillosus, vol. 1. pl. 38. f. 3.
  *---- mirabilis, vol. 2. pl. 31. f. 1.
  *---- notatus, vol. 2. pl. 35. f. 2.
  ---- (Cosmisoma) plumicornis, vol. 3. pl. 49. f. 3. p. 76.
  *---- pulcher, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 6.
  *---- pustulatus, vol. 2. pl. 35. f. 1.
  *---- spectabilis, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 8.
  *---- spinicornis, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 4.
  *---- spinosus, vol. 2. pl. 31. f. 3.
  *---- succinctus, vol. 1. pl. 39. f. 2.
  *---- trilineatus, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 1.
  *---- unicolor, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 1.
  *---- verrucosus, vol. 1. pl. 40. f. 3.
  ---- (Callichroma) virens, vol. 1. pl. 40. f. 1. p. 85.
  Ceratocampa imperialis, vol. 1. pl. 9. f. 1, 2. p. 17.
  Cerbus falx, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 2. p. 62.
  ----? flaveolus, vol. 3. pl. 43. f. 3. p. 58.
  ---- sanctus, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 5. p. 63.
  ---- umbrosus, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 7. p. 64.
  Cethosia Biblis, vol. 1. pl. 4. f. 2. p. 9.
  ---- Cyane, vol. 1. pl. 4. f. 1. p. 8.
  Cetonia (Gnathocera) africana, vol. 2. pl. 30. f. 4. p. 57.
  ---- aurata, _var._ vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 1. p. 66.
  ---- capensis, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 3. p. 67.
  ---- cordata, vol. 2. pl. 32. f. 5. p. 63.
  ---- fascicularis, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 2. p. 66.
  ---- fastuosa, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 4. p. 67.
  ---- marginata, vol. 2. pl. 32. f. 1. p. 61.
  ---- torquata, vol. 3. pl. 44. f. 1. p. 60.
  Chasmodia? virens, vol. 2. pl. 30. f. 3. p. 57.
  Chauliodes virginiensis, vol. 1. pl. 46. f. 3. p. 105.
  Chlorion ferox, vol. 3. pl. 42. f. 2. p. 56.
  Cholus urbanus, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 2. p. 72.
  *Cicada catenata, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 2.
  *---- lanata, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 3.
  ---- maculata, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 1. p. 74.
  *---- sanguinea, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 5.
  ---- Stridula, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 2. p. 75.
  *Cimex afer, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 7.
  *---- Anchorago, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 5.
  *---- Argus, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 9.
  *---- balteatus, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 3.
  *---- barbicornis, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 1.
  *---- carinatus, vol. 2. pl. 36. f. 6.
  *---- catena, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 1.
  *---- conspicillatis, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 8.
  *---- corticatus, vol. 2. pl. 40. f. 2.
  *---- Druræi, vol. 1. pl. 42. f. 1, 5.
  *---- falx, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 2.
  *---- flaveolus, vol. 3. pl. 43. f. 3.
  *---- flavicollis, vol. 2. pl. 36. f. 4.
  *---- humilis, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 3.
  *---- incarnatus, vol. 2. pl. 36. f. 5.
  *---- latipes, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 3.
  *---- longirostris, vol. 3. pl. 43. f. 5.
  *---- papillosus, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 2.
  *---- pictus, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 1.
  *---- pulchellus, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 8.
  *---- variegatus, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 5.
  *---- variegatus, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 4.
  *---- purcis, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 4.
  *---- regius, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 6.
  *---- rostratus, vol. 3. pl. 43. f. 2.
  *---- sanctus, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 5.
  *---- scapha, vol. 3. pl. 43. f. 4.
  *---- spectabilis, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 4.
  *---- umbrosus, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 7.
  *---- validus, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 6.
  *---- virens, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 2.
  Clytus longipes, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 4. p. 79.
  ---- pictus, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 2. p. 87.
  Colias (Callidryas) Pyranthe, _var._ vol. 1. pl. 12. f. 3, 4. p. 24.
  Copris Carolina, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 2. p. 72.
  ---- Faunus, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 6. p. 73.
  ---- minutus, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 6. p. 73.
  ---- Molossus, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 2. p. 64.
  ---- Sulcatus, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 1. p. 71.
  Coprobius lævis, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 7. p. 73.
  ---- triangularis, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 7.
  Cordulegaster Sabina, vol. 1. pl. 48. f. 4. p. 119.
  Cossus Laocoon, vol. 3. pl. 3. f. 1. p. 3.
  *Curculio aurifer, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 1.
  *---- cinctus, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 2.
  *---- globosus, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 4.
  *---- imperialis, vol. 2. pl. 34. f. 1.
  *---- minutus, vol. 1. pl. 42. f. 3, 7.
  *---- longipes, vol. 2. pl. 33. f. 3.
  *---- morbillosus, vol. 3. pl. 49. f. 5.
  *---- muricatus, vol. 2. pl. 34. f. 4.
  *---- niger, vol. 2. pl. 34. f. 2.
  *---- ovalis, vol. 2. pl. 33. f. 1, 2.
  *---- ornatus, vol. 2. pl. 34. f. 3.
  *---- rufescens, vol. 2. pl. 33. f. 4.
  *---- scalaris, vol. 3. pl. 49. f. 2.
  *---- 16-punctatus, vol. 3. pl. 49. f. 4.
  *---- similis, vol. 2. pl. 33. f. 5.
  *---- verrucosus, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 5.
  Cyclocephala signata, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 6. p. 77.
  Cynthia Huntera, vol. 1. pl. 5. f. 1. p. 10.
  ---- Laomedia, vol. 1. pl. 5. f. 3. p. 12.
  Cyphus 16-punctatus, vol. 3. pl. 49. f. 4. p. 76.

  Deilephila Alecto, vol. 2. pl. 27. f. 4. p. 51.
  ---- Chiron, vol. 1. pl. 26. f. 3. p. 51.
  ---- Clotho, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 1. p. 52.
  ---- Euphorbiæ, vol. 1. pl. 29. f. 3. p. 58.
  ---- Nessus, vol. 2. pl. 27. f. 1. p. 50.
  ---- tersa, vol. 1. pl. 28. f. 3. p. 56.
  Deiopeia astrea, vol. 2. pl. 6. f. 3.
  ---- bella, vol. 1. pl. 24. f. 3. p. 46.
  ---- ornatrix, vol. 1. pl. 24. f. 2. p. 46.
  ----? puella, vol. 2. pl. 2. f. 2. p. 3.
  Diactor latipes, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 3. p. 62.
  Diaprepes Spengleri, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 1. p. 63.
  Diaspidius scapha, vol. 3. pl. 43. f. 4. p. 59.
  Dryocampa Virginiensis, vol. 2. pl. 13. f. 2. p. 24.
  Dynastes Ægeon, vol. 2. pl. 30. f. 5. p. 58.
  ---- Antæus, vol. 1. pl. 34. f. 3, 4. p. 26.
  ---- Centaurus, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 1. p. 75.
  ---- Claviger, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 3. p. 72.
  ---- Geryon, vol. 2. pl. 30. f. 6. p. 58.
  ---- Gideon, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 5. p. 76.
  ---- Hercules, vol. 1. pl. 30. f. 1, 2. p. 59.
  ---- Satyrus, vol. 1. pl. 34. f. 1, 2. p. 69.
  ---- Titanus, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 3, 4, p. 76.

  Echinomyia hirta, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 4. p. 102.
  ---- pilosa, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 7. p. 104.
  Ectrichodia barbicornis, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 1. p. 61.
  Edessa virens, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 2. p. 65.
  *Elater angulatus, vol. 3. pl. 47. f. 5.
  ---- auratus, vol. 2. pl. 35. f. 3. p. 69.
  *---- fasciatus, vol. 3. pl. 47. f. 2.
  ---- (Tetralobus) flabellicornis, vol. 3. pl. 47. f. 1. p. 68.
  ---- (Semiotus) ligneus, vol. 3. pl. 47. f. 4. p. 70.
  ---- (Chalcolepidius) porcatus, vol. 3. pl. 47. f. 6. p. 71.
  ---- (Cardiophorus) pictus, vol. 3. pl. 47. f. 3. p. 69.
  ---- (Agrypnus) 4-maculatus, vol. 3. pl. 47. f. 2. p. 69.
  *---- serraticornis, vol. 3. pl. 47. f. 4.
  ---- (Semiotus) suturalis, vol. 3. pl. 47. f. 5. p. 70.
  Empusa Gongylodes, vol. 1. pl. 50. f. 2. p. 122.
  ---- pennicornis, vol. 1. pl. 50. f. 1. p. 121.
  Endromis Rhodope, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 3. p. 31.
  Entimus imperialis, vol. 2. pl. 34. f. 1. p. 65.
  Erebus crepuscularis? vol. 1. pl. 20. f. 1, 2. p. 37.
  ---- Edusa, vol. 2. pl. 24. f. 4. p. 46.
  ---- fluctuosus, vol. 2. pl. 14. f. 1. p. 26.
  ---- Hercyna, vol. 2. pl. 24. f. 1, 2. p. 44.
  ---- hieroglyphicus, vol. 2. pl. 2. f. 1. p. 3.
  ---- odora, vol. 1. pl. 3. f. 1. p. 6.
  ----? opigena, vol. 2. pl. 22. f. 4. p. 41.
  ---- Zenobia, vol. 3. pl. 39. p. 53.
  Eristalis cinctus, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 6. p. 103.
  Erycina Ampyx, vol. 3. pl. 9. f. 2, 3. p. 12.
  ---- Baucis, vol. 3. pl. 12. f. 3, 4. p. 15.
  ---- Jarbas, vol. 3. pl. 8. f. 2. p. 10.
  ---- Lysippus, vol. 1. pl. 2. f. 2. p. 4.
  ---- Menetas, vol. 3. pl. 8. f. 3. p. 11.
  Eumenes abdominalis, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 2. p. 102.
  Euptilon ornatum, vol. 1. pl. 46. f. 2. p. 105.

  Flata ----? pupa, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 1. p. 71.
  *Formica barbara, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 3.
  *---- bihamata, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 7, 8. p. 82.
  *---- fervens, vol. 3. pl. 42. f. 3.
  ---- rubripes, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 3. p. 78.
  *---- armata, vol. 3. pl. 50. f. 4.
  Fulgora Diadema, vol. 3. pl. 50. f. 4. p. 78.

  Galerita Americana, vol. 1. pl. 42. f. 2. p. 89.
  Gastropacha? Otus, vol. 1. pl. 16. f. 3. p. 30.
  Geometra argentata, vol. 2. pl. 14. f. 2. p. 27.
  ---- (Pæcilophasia fulvata, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 4. p. 29.
  ---- (Angerona) serrata, vol. 1. pl. 20. f. 4. p. 38.
  ---- transversata, vol. 1. pl. 8. f. 2. p. 16.
  Glaucopis? astreas, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 4. p. 53.
  ---- coarctata, vol. 2. pl. 27. f. 2. p. 50.
  ---- fenestrata, vol. 1. pl. 25. f. 3. p. 49.
  ----? Phalænoides, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 6. p. 54.
  ---- Pholus, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 3. p. 53.
  ---- Polymena, vol. 1. pl. 26. f. 1. p. 50.
  ----? pulchra, vol. 2. pl. 29. f. 3. p. 56.
  Gnophria? collaris, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 2. p. 28.
  Goliathus Drurii, vol. 3. pl. 40. p. 54.
  ---- Giganteus, vol. 1. pl. 31. f. 1. p. 61.
  ---- micans, vol. 2. pl. 32. f. 3. p. 62.
  *Gryllus Americanus, vol. 1. pl. 49. f. 2.
  *---- Acr. Braziliensis, vol. 2. pl. 40. f. 1.
  *---- Locust. coeruleus, vol. 2. pl. 42. f. 1.
  *---- Loc. centurio, vol. 2. pl. 41. f. 3.
  *---- Loc. Dux. vol. 2. pl. 44.
  *---- Ach. membranaceus, vol. 2. pl. 43. f. 2.
  *---- Loc. Miles, vol. 2. pl. 42. f. 2.
  *---- Ach. Monstrosus, vol. 2. pl. 43. f. 1.
  ---- (Phyllopterus) myrtifolius, vol. 2. pl. 41. f. 2. p. 88.
  *---- Locust. obscura, vol. 2. pl. 41. f. 1.
  *---- Loc. punctatus, vol. 2. pl. 41. f. 4.
  *---- squarrosus, vol. 1. pl. 49. f. 1.
  ---- (Gryllacris) tesselatus, vol. 2. pl. 42. f. 3. p. 90.
  Gymnetis Lanius, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 8. p. 68.
  ---- nitida & Var. vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 5, 6. p. 67.

  Hætera Philoctetes, vol. 2. pl. 1. f. 1, 2, 3. p. 1.
  Hammatocerus conspicillaris, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 8. p. 64.
  ---- purcis, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 4. p. 63.
  Heilipus? scalaris, vol. 3. pl. 49. f. 2. p. 75.
  Heliconia papilionaris, vol. 2. pl. 2. f. 4. p. 4.
  ---- diaphana, vol. 2. pl. 7. f. 3. p. 15.
  ---- Gazoria, vol. 3. pl. 13. f. 5, 6. p. 17.
  ---- Irene, vol. 3. pl. 38. f. 1. p. 51.
  ---- Sappho, vol. 3. pl. 38. f. 4. p. 53.
  *Hemerobius ornatus, vol. 1. pl. 46. f. 2.
  *---- Virginiensis, vol. 1. pl. 46. f. 3.
  Hepialus crassus, vol. 3. pl. 2. f. 1. p. 2.
  Hesperia Arcas, vol. 1. pl. 19. f. 5, 6. p. 36.
  ---- Helops, vol. 3. pl. 33. f. 2, 3. p. 45.
  ---- Iphis, vol. 2. pl. 15. f. 3, 4. p. 30.
  ---- Ophion, vol. 3. pl. 17. f. 1, 2. p. 23.
  ---- (Eudamus) Orion, vol. 3. pl. 17. f. 3, 4. p. 23.
  Hipparchia Andromeda, vol. 3. pl. 38. f. 3. p. 52.
  ---- Cluena, vol. 3. pl. 7. f. 5, 6. p. 9.
  ---- Eumea, vol. 1. pl. 2. f. 3. p. 5.
  ---- Leda, vol. 1. pl. 15. f. 5, 6. p. 28.
  ---- Nereis, vol. 3. pl. 35. f. 2, 3. p. 47.
  Hipporhinus? muricatus, vol. 2. pl. 34. f. 4. p. 67.
  ---- Verrucosus, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 5. p. 65.
  *Hispa Mystacina, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 7.
  *Hister Maxillosus, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 4.
  ---- (Oxysternus) maximus, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 4. p. 72.
  Hoplia coerulea, vol. 2. pl. 32. f. 4. p. 63.
  Hydrocampa? nivalis, vol. 2. pl. 14. f. 4. p. 28.

  *Ichneumon Macrurus, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 5.
  *---- Polyturator, vol. 2. pl. 40. f. 4.
  Idæa Lyncæa, vol. 2. pl. 7. f. 1. p. 14.

  *Julus virginiensis, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 8.

  Lamia (Acanthoderes) araneiformis, vol. 2. pl. 35. f. 4. p. 69.
  ---- (Agaphantia) bipunctata, vol. 2. pl. 31. f. 2. p. 59.
  ---- (Polyrhaphis) cancriformis, vol. 2. pl. 35. f. 1. p. 68.
  ---- Capensis, vol. 1. pl. 39. f. 3. p. 84.
  ---- (Monochamus) dentator? vol. 2. pl. 35. f. 2. p. 68.
  ---- (Sternotomis) mirabilis, vol. 2. pl. 31. f. 1. p. 59.
  ---- (Sternotomis) pulchra, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 6. p. 65.
  ---- punctator, vol. 2. pl. 31. f. 4. p. 60.
  ---- (Acanthocinus) spinosa, vol. 2. pl. 31. f. 3. p. 60.
  ---- verrucosa, vol. 1. pl. 40. f. 3. p. 86.
  Lampyris Gigantea, vol. 3. pl. 50. f. 2. p. 77.
  *---- Splendida, vol. 3. pl. 50. f. 2.
  Largus Lineola, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 3. p. 65.
  Lepisma collaris, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 5. p. 76.
  *---- sacharia, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 5.
  Leptoscelis balteatus, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 3. p. 92.
  ---- pictus, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 1. p. 101.
  *Leptura picta, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 2.
  *---- plumicornis, vol. 3. pl. 49. f. 3.
  Lestes coeruleata, vol. 3. pl. 50. f. 1. p. 77.
  ---- Lucretia, vol. 2. pl. 48. f. 1. p. 97.
  *Libellula Arria, vol. 2. pl. 46. f. 1.
  ---- Axilena, vol. 2. pl. 47. f. 1. p. 96.
  ---- Berenice, vol. 1. pl. 48. f. 3. p. 118.
  *---- Caia, vol. 2. pl. 45. f. 2.
  ---- Carolina, vol. 1. pl. 48. f. 1. p. 117.
  *---- coeruleata, vol. 3. pl. 50. f. 1.
  ---- Domitia, vol. 2. pl. 45. f. 4. p. 93.
  ---- Eponina, vol. 2. pl. 47. f. 2. p. 96.
  ---- Fulvia, vol. 2. pl. 46. f. 2. p. 95.
  *---- Junia, vol. 1. pl. 47. f. 5.
  ---- Lucia, vol. 2. pl. 45. f. 1. p. 92.
  *---- Lucretia, vol. 2. pl. 48. f. 1.
  *---- Lydia, vol. 2. pl. 47. f. 1.
  ---- Lydia, vol. 1. pl. 47. f. 4. p. 116.
  ---- Marcia, vol. 2. pl. 45. f. 3. p. 93.
  ---- Paulina, vol. 2. pl. 46. f. 4. p. 95.
  ---- Portia, vol. 2. pl. 47. f. 3. p. 96.
  ---- Pulchella, vol. 1. pl. 48. f. 5. p. 119.
  *---- Sabina, vol. 1. pl. 48. f. 4.
  ---- Servilia, vol. 1. pl. 47. f. 6. p. 117.
  ---- Sophronia, vol. 2. pl. 47. f. 4. p. 97.
  *---- Titia, vol. 2. pl. 45. f. 5.
  ---- Tullia, vol. 2. pl. 46. f. 3. p. 95.
  ---- variegata, vol. 2. pl. 46. f. 1. p. 94.
  *---- virgo, vol. 1. pl. 48. f. 2.
  Limacodes? Arenacea, vol. 1. pl. 18. f. 1. p. 32.
  Liparis? rivulosa, vol. 2. pl. 14. f. 5. p. 28.
  Lithosia? Ino, vol. 3. pl. 29. f. 3. p. 40.
  Locusta coerulea, vol. 2. pl. 42. f. 1. p. 89.
  ---- (Rutidoderes) Centurio, vol. 2. pl. 41. f. 3. p. 88.
  ---- (Rutidoderes) Dux, vol. 2. pl. 44. p. 92.
  ---- (Rutidoderes) Miles, vol. 2. pl. 42. f. 2. p. 89.
  ---- obscura, vol. 2. pl. 41. f. 1. p. 87.
  ---- (Phymatea) punctata, vol. 2. pl. 41. f. 4. p. 89.
  ---- (Rutidoderes) Squarrosa, vol. 1. pl. 49. f. 1. p. 119.
  ---- Tartarica, vol. 1. pl. 49. f. 2. p. 121.

  Macraspis fucata, vol. 3. pl. 44. f. 4. p. 61.
  ---- tetradactyla, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 7. p. 68.
  Macroglossa Passalus, vol. 2. pl. 29. f. 2. p. 55.
  ---- zonata, vol. 1. pl. 26. f. 5. p. 52.
  Mantis cingulata, vol. 2. pl. 49. f. 2. p. 99.
  *---- Gigas, vol. 2. pl. 50.
  *---- Gongylodes, vol. 1. pl. 50. f. 2.
  *---- Jamaicensis, vol. 2. pl. 49. f. 1.
  *---- linearis, vol. 1. pl. 50. f. 3.
  *---- minuta, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 5.
  ---- (Harpax) ocellaria, vol. 3. pl. 43. f. 1. p. 57.
  ---- (Thespis) parva, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 5. p. 84.
  *---- pectinata, vol. 1. pl. 50. f. 1.
  Melitæa Cytheris, vol. 2. pl. 4. f. 3, 4. p. 9.
  ---- Pelops, vol. 1. pl. 19. f. 3, 4. p. 36.
  ---- Phaeton, vol. 1. pl. 21. f. 3, 4. p. 39.
  ---- Tharos, vol. 1. pl. 21. f. 5, 6. p. 39.
  Melolontha occidentalis, vol. 2. pl. 32. f. 2. p. 62.
  Milesia Virginiensis, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 6. p. 77.
  Morpho Laertes, vol. 3. pl. 15. f. 1. p. 19.
  *Musca cincta, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 6.
  *---- clavata, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 1.
  *---- hirta, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 4.
  *---- pilosa, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 7.
  *---- Virginiensis, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 6.
  Mydas clavatus, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 1. p. 97.
  Myrmeleon Americanum, vol. 1. pl. 46. f. 4. p. 106.
  *---- Libelluloides, _var._ vol. 3. pl. 41.
  ---- Libelluloides, vol. 1. pl. 46. f. 1. p. 104.
  ---- torridum, vol. 3. pl. 41. p. 55.

  Nemeophila figurata, vol. 2. pl. 12. f. 4. p. 23.
  Noctua anilis, vol. 2. pl. 12. f. 3. p. 23.
  ---- chera, vol. 2. pl. 20. f. 4. p. 38.
  ---- guttata, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 1. p. 30.
  ----? Hesione, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 2. p. 30.
  ---- (Calyptra) lugubris, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 5. p. 29.
  ---- lunata, vol. 1. pl. 20. f. 3. p. 37.
  ---- (Acontia) margaritata, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 6. p. 30.
  ---- Melicerta, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 1. p. 42.
  ---- myrtæa, vol. 2. pl. 2. f. 3. p. 3.
  ---- Numeria, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 5. p. 44.
  ---- (Acontia?) nundina, vol. 1. pl. 18. f. 5. p. 35.
  ---- Pales, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 3. p. 43.
  ----? speciosa, vol. 2. pl. 5. f. 2. p. 10.
  ---- squamularis, vol. 1. pl. 9. f. 3. p. 18.
  ---- tristris, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 1. p. 28.
  ---- undularis, vol. 1. pl. 9. f. 4. p. 19.
  Nymphalis Afer, vol. 3. pl. 36. f. 1, 2. p. 48.
  ---- Alphæa, vol. 3. pl. 36. f. 3, 4. p. 48.
  ---- Althea, vol. 3. pl. 20. f. 1, 2. p. 27.
  ---- (Charaxes) Anticlea, vol. 3. pl. 27. f. 5, 6. p. 37.
  ---- Antiochus, vol. 3. pl. 7. f. 3, 4. p. 9.
  ---- Arethusa, vol. 3. pl. 8. f. 1, 4. p. 10.
  ---- (Limenitis) Arthemis, vol. 2. pl. 10. f. 3, 4. p. 19.
  ---- assimilis, vol. 1. pl. 17. f. 3, 4. p. 31.
  ---- (Charaxes) Berenice, vol. 3. pl. 11. f. 1, 2. p. 13.
  ---- Bolina, vol. 1. pl. 14. f. 1, 2. p. 26.
  ---- Cadma, vol. 2. pl. 18. f. 1, 2. p. 34.
  ---- Cænis, vol. 2. pl. 19. f. 1, 2. p. 36.
  ---- Camillus, vol. 3. pl. 6. f. 4. p. 8.
  ---- Decius, vol. 3. pl. 6. f. 1, 2. p. 7.
  ---- Doriclæa, vol. 3. pl. 36. f. 5, 6. p. 49.
  ---- Eleus, vol. 3. pl. 12. f. 1, 2. p. 15.
  ---- Erithonius, vol. 2. pl. 15. f. 1, 2. p. 29.
  ---- (Charaxes) Etesipe, vol. 3. pl. 10. p. 13.
  ---- (Charaxes) Eudoxus, vol. 3. pl. 33. f. 1, 4. p. 44.
  ---- Eupale, vol. 3. pl. 6. f. 3. p. 7.
  ---- Feronia, vol. 1. pl. 10. f. 1, 2. p. 19.
  ---- Hippona, vol. 3. pl. 16. f. 1, 2. p. 21.
  ---- Hostilia, vol. 3. pl. 28. f. 5, 6. p. 38.
  ---- (Catagramma) Hydaspes, vol. 3. pl. 15. f. 2, 3. p. 20.
  ---- Jacintha, vol. 2. pl. 21. f. 1, 2. p. 39.
  ---- Janais, vol. 3. pl. 17. f. 5, 6. p. 24.
  ---- (Charaxes) Jason, vol. 1. pl. 1. f. 1. p. 1.
  ---- Iole, vol. 3. pl. 38. f. 2. p. 52.
  ---- Isis, vol. 3. pl. 7. f. 1, 2. p. 8.
  ---- Iphicla, vol. 1. pl. 14. f. 3, 4. p. 27.
  ---- Laodice, vol. 3. pl. 26. f. 1, 2. p. 35.
  ---- Laure, vol. 2. pl. 17. f. 5, 6. p. 33.
  ---- Meleagris, vol. 3. pl. 27. f. 3, 4. p. 36.
  ---- Melicerta, vol. 2. pl. 19. f. 3, 4. p. 36.
  ---- Opis, vol. 2. pl. 16. f. 5, 6. p. 31.
  ---- Opis, vol. 2. pl. 18. f. 5, 6. p. 35.
  ---- Orsis, vol. 3. pl. 16. f. 3. p. 22.
  Nyctalemon Patroclus, vol. 1. pl. 7. f. 1. pl. 8. f. 1. p. 13.
  Nymphalis Perseis, vol. 2. pl. 21. f. 3, 4. p. 39.
  ---- (Charaxes) Pollux, vol. 3. pl. 30. f. 1, 2. p. 41.
  ---- Pyramus, vol. 3. pl. 23. f. 3, 4. p. 33.
  ---- Salmacis, vol. 2. pl. 8. f. 1, 2. p. 16.
  ---- Semire, vol. 3. pl. 14. f. 3, 4. p. 18.
  ---- (Limenitis) Sibilla, vol. 2. pl. 16. f. 1, 2. p. 30.
  ---- (Charaxes) Tiridates, vol. 3. pl. 23. f. 1, 2. p. 32.
  ---- Varanes, vol. 3. pl. 31. f. 1, 2. p. 42.
  Odonestis? Servula, vol. 2. pl. 11. f. 4. p. 23.
  Onitis Spinipes, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 8. p. 74.
  Onthophagus serratipes, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 8. p. 78.
  Ophion macrurum, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 5. p. 92.
  Oryctes nasicornis, vol. 1. pl. 34. f. 7, 8. p. 71.

  Pamphila Metis, vol. 2. pl. 16. f. 3, 4. p. 31.
  ---- Phileus, vol. 1. pl. 13. f. 4, 5. p. 25.
  *Papilio Pleb. Rur. Acis, vol. 1. pl. 1. f. 2.
  *---- Nymph. Ph. afer, vol. 3. pl. 36. f. 1, 2.
  ---- Agavus, vol. 3. pl. 9. f. 4. p. 12.
  *---- Pleb. Rur. Agis, vol. 3. pl. 26. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Alphæa, vol. 3. pl. 36. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Nymph. Ph. Althea, vol. 3. pl. 20. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Amestris, vol. 3. pl. 20. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Pleb. Urb. Ampyx, vol. 3. pl. 9. f. 2, 3.
  ---- Antenor, vol. 2. pl. 3. f. 1. p. 4.
  *---- Nymph. Ph. Anticlea, vol. 3. pl. 27. f. 5, 6.
  ---- Antiochus, vol. 3. pl. 1. p. 1.
  *---- Dan. Fest. Antiochus, vol. 3. pl. 7. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Arcas, vol. 1. pl. 19. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Dan. Cand. Aretheusa, vol. 2. pl. 19. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Dan. Fest. Arethusa, vol. 3. pl. 8. f. 1, 4.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Argynnis, vol. 1. pl. 6. f. 2.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Ariadne, vol. 3. pl. 11. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Arthemis, vol. 2. pl. 10. f. 3, 4.
  ---- Ascanius, vol. 3. pl. 9. f. 1. p. 11.
  ---- Asius, vol. 3. pl. 35. f. 4. p. 47.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. assimilis, vol. 1. pl. 17. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Eq. Troj. Astyagas, vol. 3. pl. 35. f. 4.
  ---- Asterias, vol. 1. pl. 11. f. 2, 3, 5. p. 21.
  *---- Eq. Troj. Astinous, vol. 1. pl. 11. f. 1, 4.
  *---- Eq. Ach. Athamas, vol. 1. pl. 2. f. 4.
  *---- Pleb. Rur. Baucis, vol. 3. pl. 12. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Berenice, vol. 3. pl. 11. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Biblis, vol. 1. pl. 4. f. 2.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Bolina, vol. 1. pl. 14. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Nymph. Gemm. Cadma, vol. 2. pl. 18. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Dan. Cand. Cænis, vol. 2. pl. 19. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Dan. Cand. Calypso, vol. 2. pl. 17. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Eq. Hel. Camæna, vol. 2. pl. 7. f. 2.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Camulus, vol. 3. pl. 30.
  *---- Nymph. Gemm. Cardui Virginiensis, vol. 1. pl. 5. f. 1.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Charonia, vol. 1. pl. 15. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Dan. Cand. Chloris, vol. 3. pl. 32. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Dan. Cand. Chryseis, vol. 1. pl. 12. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Hel. Circeis, vol. 3. pl. 18. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Cluena, vol. 3. pl. 7. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Dan. Cand. Crisia, vol. 3. pl. 37. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Crithea, vol. 2. pl. 16. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Cyane, vol. 1. pl. 4. f. 1.
  *---- Helic. Cynthius, vol. 3. pl. 37. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Nymph. Ph. Cytheris, vol. 2. pl. 4. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Nymph. Gemm. Decius, vol. 3. pl. 6. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Nymph. Ph. Delius, vol. 3. pl. 14. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Eq. Hel. Diaphanus, vol. 2. pl. 7. f. 3.
  *---- Helic. Dice, vol. 3. pl. 18. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Dan. Cand. Dione, vol. 2. pl. 8. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Nymph. Ph. Doriclea, vol. 3. pl. 36. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Eleus, vol. 3. pl. 12. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Dan. Fest. Erymantis, vol. 1. pl. 15. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Nymph. Ph. Etheocles, vol. 3. pl. 10.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Ethosea, vol. 3. pl. 37. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Dan. Cand. Eucharis, vol. 2. pl. 10. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Dan. Cand. Eudoxia, vol. 3. pl. 32. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Eq. Ach. Eudoxus, vol. 3. pl. 33. f. 1, 4.
  *---- Dan. Fest. Eumeus, vol. 1. pl. 2. f. 3.
  *---- Pleb. urb. Eupale, vol. 3. pl. 6. f. 3.
  *---- Hel. Euritea, vol. 3. pl. 13. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Dan. Cand. Evippe, vol. 1. pl. 5. f. 2.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Fabius, vol. 3. pl. 16. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Pleb. rur. Faunus, vol. 2. pl. 1. f. 4, 5.
  *---- Nymph. Gemm. Feronia, vol. 1. pl. 10. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Dan. Cand. Glaucippe, vol. 1. pl. 10. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Pleb. urb. Helops, vol. 3. pl. 33. f. 2, 3.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Hiarbas, vol. 3. pl. 14. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Hel. Hirce, vol. 3. pl. 28. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Helic. Horta, vol. 3. pl. 28. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Dan. Fest. Hostilia, pl. 28. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Pl. Rur. Hydaspes, vol. 3. pl. 15. f. 2, 3.
  *---- Helic. Hypatia, vol. 3. pl. 13. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Dan. Cand. Hypatia, vol. 3. pl. 32. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Hyppolite, vol. 3. pl. 14. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Idalia, vol. 1. pl. 13. f. 1, 2, 3.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Ilithyia, vol. 2. pl. 17. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Iole, vol. 3. pl. 38. f. 2.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Iphicla, vol. 1. pl. 14. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Pleb. urb. Iphis, vol. 2. pl. 15. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Irene, vol. 3. pl. 38. f. 1.
  *---- Dan. Fest. Isis, vol. 2. pl. 3. f. 4, 5.
  *---- Dan. Fest. Isis, vol. 3. pl. 7. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Jacintha, vol. 2. pl. 21. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Janais, vol. 3. pl. 17. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Dan. Fest. Jarbas, vol. 3. pl. 8. f. 2.
  *---- Eq. Ach. Jasius, vol. 1. pl. 1. f. 1.
  *---- Eq. Ach. Laertes, vol. 3. pl. 15. f. 1.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Laodice, vol. 3. pl. 26. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Nymph. Gemm. Laomedia, var. vol. 1. pl. 5. f. 3.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Laure, vol. 2. pl. 17. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Dan. Cand. Leda, vol. 1. pl. 15. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Dan. Fest. Licus, vol. 1. pl. 16. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Dan. Fest. Lynceus, vol. 2. pl. 7. f. 1.
  *---- Pleb. rur. Lysippus, vol. 1. pl. 2. f. 2.
  *---- Eq. Achiv. Medon, vol. 2. pl. 15. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Dan. Fest. Meleagris, vol. 3. pl. 27. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Melicerta, vol. 2. pl. 19. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Helic. Parn. Menander, vol. 3. pl. 38. f. 3.
  *---- Menestheus, vol. 2. pl. 9. f. 1, 2. p. 17.
  *---- Pleb. urb. Menetas, vol. 3. pl. 8. f. 3.
  *---- Eq. Hel. Menippe, vol. 3. pl. 13. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Pleb. urb. Metis, vol. 2. pl. 16. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Helic. Parn. Nereis, vol. 3. pl. 35. f. 2, 3.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Niphe, vol. 1. pl. 6. f. 1.
  *---- Nireus, vol. 2. pl. 4. f. 1, 2. p. 6.
  *---- Pleb. Urb. Ophion, vol. 3. pl. 17. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Opis, vol. 2. pl. 18. f. 5, 6.
  *---- Pleb. rur. Orcas, vol. 3. pl. 34. f. 2, 3.
  *---- Pleb. urb. Orion, vol. 3. pl. 17. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Orsis, vol. 3. pl. 16. f. 3.
  ---- Palamedes, vol. 1. pl. 19. f. 1, 2. p. 35.
  *---- Pleb. rur. Pan. vol. 2. pl. 23. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Eq. Ach. Pantheus, vol. 3. pl. 6. f. 4.
  *---- Nymph. Gemm. Parhassus, vol. 3. pl. 4.
  ---- Paris, vol. 1. pl. 12. f. 1, 2. p. 23.
  *---- Eq. Ach. Patroclus, vol. 1. pl. 7. f. 1. pl. 8. f. 1.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Pelarga, vol. 3. pl. 27. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Pleb. rur. Pelops, vol. 1. pl. 19. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Perseis, vol. 2. pl. 21. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Dan. Fest. Phaeton, vol. 1. pl. 21. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Phalantha, vol. 1. pl. 21. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Eq. Ach. Philoctetes, vol. 2. pl. 1. f. 1, 2.
  ---- Philenor, vol. 1. pl. 11. f. 1, 4. p. 20.
  *---- Pleb. Urb. Phyleus, vol. 1. pl. 13. f. 4, 5.
  ---- Polydamus, vol. 1. pl. 17. f. 1, 2. p. 31.
  *---- Protesilaus, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Pleb. rur. Pyramus, vol. 3. pl. 23. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Eq. Troj. Rhipheus, vol. 2. pl. 23. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Rumina, vol. 1. pl. 2. f. 1.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Salmacis, vol. 2. pl. 8. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Helic. Sapho, vol. 3. pl. 38. f. 4.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Sibilla, _var._ vol. 2. pl. 16. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Pleb. Rur. Simäethis, vol. 1. pl. 1. f. 3.
  ---- Sinon, vol. 1. pl. 22. f. 3, 4. p. 41.
  *---- Pleb. Rur. Sylvanus, vol. 2. pl. 3. f. 2, 3.
  *---- Nymph. Gemm. Terea, vol. 2. pl. 18. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Dan. Fest. Thais, vol. 3. pl. 16. f. 4.
  *---- Dan. Cand. Thetis, vol. 2. pl. 9. f. 3, 4.
  ---- Thoas, vol. 1. pl. 22. f. 1, 2. p. 40.
  ---- Thyastes, vol. 3. pl. 35. f. 1. p. 46.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Tiridates, vol. 3. pl. 23. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Eq. Troj. Troilus, vol. 1. pl. 11. f. 2, 3, 5.
  *---- Dan. Festiv. Umbra, vol. 3. pl. 18. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Nymph. Phal. Undularis, vol. 2. pl. 10. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Nymph. Gemm. Varanes, vol. 3. pl. 31.
  Pelecinus Politurator, vol. 2. pl. 40. f. 4. p. 87.
  Pelidnota punctata, vol. 1. pl. 34. f. 5. p. 70.
  ---- unicolor, vol. 3. pl. 44. f. 2. p. 60.
  Pelopæus cæmentarius, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 6, 7, 8. & pl. 45. f. 8, 9, 10.
      p. 99.
  ---- petiolatus, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 7. p. 85.
  Pentatoma bicolorata, vol. 3. pl. 43. f. 2. p. 58.
  ---- catena, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 1. p. 64.
  ---- flavicollis, vol. 2. pl. 36. f. 4. p. 72.
  ---- pulchella, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 8. p. 67.
  ---- regia, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 6. p. 66.
  ---- rutilans, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 5. p. 66.
  ---- spectabilis, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 4. p. 66.
  Pepsis atrox, vol. 3. pl. 42. f. 1. p. 56.
  ---- coeruleana, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 4. p. 83.
  ---- rubra, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 6. p. 84.
  ---- severa, vol. 3. pl. 42. f. 4. p. 57.
  Petasia? ministra, vol. 2. pl. 14. f. 3. p. 27.
  *Phalæna Bomb. Acrea, vol. 1. pl. 3. f. 2.
  *---- Attac. Alinda, vol. 3. pl. 19.
  *---- Noct. Amabilis, vol. 2. pl. 13. f. 3.
  *---- Noct. anilis, vol. 2. pl. 12. f. 3.
  *---- Bomb. aranacea, vol. 1. pl. 18. f. 1.
  *---- Noct. Arge, vol. 1. pl. 18. f. 3.
  *---- Geom. argentata, vol. 2. pl. 14. f. 2.
  *---- Noct. astrea, vol. 2. pl. 6. f. 3.
  *---- Tinea bella, vol. 1. pl. 24. f. 3.
  *---- Bomb. brachyura, vol. 3. pl. 29. f. 1.
  *---- Noct. Cænea, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 3.
  *---- Bomb. Cafra, vol. 3. pl. 5. f. 1.
  *---- Bomb. Caprotina, vol. 1. pl. 3. f. 3.
  *---- Geom. catenaria, vol. 1. pl. 8. f. 3.
  *---- Attac. Cecropia, vol. 1. pl. 18. f. 2.
  *---- Noct. Chera, vol. 2. pl. 20. f. 4.
  *---- Noct. Collaris, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 2.
  *---- Noct. Crassa, vol. 3. pl. 2. f. 1.
  *---- Attac. Crepuscularis, vol. 1. pl. 20. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Bomb. Cunea, vol. 1. pl. 18. f. 4.
  *---- Attac. Cynthia, vol. 2. pl. 6. f. 2.
  *---- Noct. Diaphana, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 4.
  *---- Noct. Edusa, vol. 2. pl. 24. f. 4.
  *---- Bomb. Egle, vol. 2. pl. 20. f. 3.
  *---- Noct. Epimenis, vol. 3. pl. 29. f. 2.
  *---- Attac. Epimethea, vol. 2. pl. 13. f. 1.
  *---- Noct. Epione, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 2.
  *---- Noct. Eucharis, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 6.
  *---- Bomb. spiril. Famila, vol. 2. pl. 11. f. 3.
  *---- Bomb. figurata, vol. 2. pl. 12. f. 4.
  *---- Noct. fluctuosa, vol. 2. pl. 14. f. 1.
  *---- Geometra fulvata, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 4.
  *---- Bomb. spiril. Glaucopis, vol. 2. pl. 6. f. 4.
  *---- Noct. guttata, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 1.
  *---- Noct. Helcita, vol. 3. pl. 29. f. 4.
  *---- Noct. Hercyna, vol. 2. pl. 24. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Noct. Hesione, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 2.
  *---- Noct. Hieroglyphica, vol. 2. pl. 2. f. 1.
  *---- Attac. imperialis, vol. 1. pl. 9. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Noct. Ino, vol. 3. pl. 29. f. 3.
  *---- Attac. Laocoon, vol. 3. pl. 3. f. 1.
  *---- Attac. Lucina, vol. 3. pl. 34. f. 1.
  *---- Noct. lugubris, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 5.
  *---- Attac. Luna, vol. 1. pl. 24. f. 1.
  *---- Noct. lunata, vol. 1. pl. 20. f. 3.
  *---- Bomb. Maia, vol. 2. pl. 24. f. 3.
  *---- Noct. margaritata, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 6
  *---- Bomb. marginata, vol. 2. pl. 22. f. 2.
  *---- Noct. Materna, vol. 2. pl. 13. f. 4.
  *---- Noct. Menea, vol. 3. pl. 3. f. 2.
  *---- Noct. Melicerta, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 1.
  *---- Noct. Ministra, vol. 2. pl. 14. f. 3.
  *---- Noct. Mopsa, vol. 3. pl. 3. f. 3.
  *---- Attac. Mylitta, vol. 2. pl. 5. f. 1.
  *---- Noct. Myrtæa, vol. 2. pl. 2. f. 3.
  *---- Noct. Nais, vol. 1. pl. 7. f. 3.
  *---- Bomb. Nerina, vol. 3. pl. 5. f. 2.
  *---- Pyral. nivalis, vol. 2. pl. 14. f. 4.
  *---- Noct. Numeria, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 5.
  *---- Noct. Nundina, vol. 1. pl. 18. f. 5.
  *---- Attac. Odora, vol. 1. pl. 3. f. 1.
  *---- Noct. Opigena, vol. 2. pl. 22. f. 4.
  *---- Noct. Ornatrix, vol. 1. pl. 24. f. 2.
  *---- Noct. Pales, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 3.
  *---- Noct. papilionaris, vol. 2. pl. 2. f. 4.
  *---- Paranympha, var. vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 6.
  *---- Attac. Phædusa, vol. 3. pl. 24, 25.
  *---- Noct. Phileta, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 5.
  *---- Bomb. Phyllira, vol. 1. pl. 7. f. 2.
  *---- Attac. Promethea, vol. 2. pl. 11. f. 1, 2. & pl. 12. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Noct. Puella, vol. 2. pl. 2. f. 2.
  *---- Bomb. Pylotes, vol. 2. pl. 5. f. 3.
  *---- Bomb. Rhodope, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 3.
  *---- Bomb. rivulosa, vol. 2. pl. 14. f. 5.
  *---- sanguiflua, vol. 2. pl. 20. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Noct. serrata, vol. 1. pl. 20. f. 4.
  *---- Noct. Scolopacea, vol. 2. pl. 22. f. 1.
  *---- Pyral. sericea, vol. 2. pl. 6. f. 1.
  *---- Noct. servula, vol. 2. pl. 11. f. 4.
  *---- Noct. Sospeta, vol. 2. pl. 22. f. 3.
  *---- Noct. speciosa, vol. 2. pl. 5. f. 2.
  *---- Noct. Squamularis, vol. 1. pl. 9. f. 3.
  *---- Geom. transversata, vol. 1. pl. 8. f. 2.
  *---- Noct. tristis, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 1.
  *---- Noct. undularis, vol. 1. pl. 9. f. 4.
  *---- Bomb. Virginiensis, vol. 2. pl. 13. f. 2.
  *---- Bomb. Zenobia, vol. 3. pl. 39.
  Phanæus Carnifex, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 3, 4, 5. p. 72.
  ---- festivus, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 5. p. 73.
  Phasma (Diapherodes) Gigas, vol. 2. pl. 50. p. 100.
  ---- (Platycrana) Jamaicensis, vol. 2. p. 49. f. 1. p. 99.
  Phileurus Didymus, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 3. p. 64.
  Phloea corticata, vol. 2. pl. 40. f. 2. p. 86.
  Pieris Calypso, vol. 2. pl. 17. f. 3, 4. p. 33.
  ---- Chloris, vol. 3. pl. 32. f. 3, 4. p. 43.
  ---- (Leptalis) Chrisia, vol. 3. pl. 37. f. 1, 2. p. 49.
  ---- Eucharis, vol. 2. pl. 10. f. 5, 6. p. 19.
  ---- Eudoxia, vol. 3. pl. 32. f. 1, 2. & pl. 43.
  ---- (Iphias) Glaucippe, vol. 1. pl. 10. f. 3, 4. p. 20.
  ---- Hypatia, vol. 3. pl. 32. f. 5, 6. p. 44.
  ---- Pasithoe, vol. 2. pl. 8. f. 3, 4. p. 16.
  ---- (Thestias) Pyrene? vol. 1. pl. 5. f. 2. p. 11.
  Polistes annularis, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 6. p. 95.
  ---- squamosa, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 7. p. 96.
  Polydesmus (Fontaria) virginiensis, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 8. p. 96.
  Polyommatus Isis, vol. 2. pl. 3. f. 4, 5. p. 6.
  ---- Thero, vol. 1. pl. 2. f. 1. p. 4.
  Prepodes? Cameleon, v. vol. 2. pl. 33. f. 4, 5. p. 65.
  Prionus (Orthomegas) Cinnamomeus, vol. 1. pl. 40. f. 2. p. 85.
  ---- (Stenodontes) damicornis, vol. 1. pl. 38. f. 1. p. 80.
  ---- (Titanus) Giganteus, vol. 3. pl. 49. f. 1. p. 75.
  ---- (Derobrachus) laticollis, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 2. p. 78.
  ---- (Mallodon) Maxillosus, vol. 1. pl. 38. f. 3. p. 82.
  ---- (Mallodon) melanopus, vol. 1. pl. 38. f. 2. p. 82.
  ---- (Orthosoma) pensylvanicus, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 1. p. 78.
  Pyrrhocoris Princeps, vol. 3. pl. 43. f. 5. p. 59.

  Raphigaster incarnatus, vol. 2. pl. 36. f. 5. p. 72.
  ---- validus, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 4. p. 81.
  ---- ---- vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 6. p. 63.
  Reduvius (Conorhinus) variegatus, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 5. p. 103.
  Rhina barbirostris, vol. 2. pl. 34. f. 2. p. 66.
  Rhipicera Druræi, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 7. p. 74.
  Rutela lineola, vol. 3. pl. 44. f. 3. p. 60.

  Sagra femorata, vol. 2. pl. 34. f. 5. p. 67.
  Saperda carcharias, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 5. p. 88.
  ---- spectabilis, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 8. p. 74.
  ---- trilineata, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 1. p. 86.
  Saturnia Alinda, vol. 3. pl. 19. p. 26.
  ---- Argus, vol. 3. pl. 29. f. 1. p. 39.
  ---- Cecropia, vol. 1. pl. 18. f. 2. p. 32.
  ---- Cynthia, vol. 2. pl. 6. f. 2. p. 12.
  ---- Epimethea, vol. 2. pl. 13. f. 1. p. 24.
  ---- Lucina, vol. 3. pl. 34. f. 1. p. 45.
  ---- Maia, vol. 2. pl. 24. f. 3. p. 45.
  ---- Mylitta, vol. 2. pl. 5. f. 1. p. 10.
  ---- Phædusa, vol. 3. pl. 24, & 25. p. 34.
  ---- Promethea, vol. 2. pl. 11. f. 1, 2.--pl. 12. f. 1, 2. p. 20.
  *Scarabæus Ægeon, vol. 2. pl. 30. f. 5.
  *---- Æruginosus, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 4.
  *---- Africanus, vol. 2. pl. 30. f. 4.
  *---- Amazonus? vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 6.
  *---- Antæus, vol. 1. pl. 34. f. 3, 4.
  *---- Capensis, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 3.
  *---- carnifex, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 3, 4, 5.
  *---- Carolinus, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 2.
  *---- cinctus, vol. 3. pl. 44. f. 4.
  *---- claviger, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 3.
  *---- cordatus, vol. 2. pl. 32. f. 5.
  *---- coeruleus, vol. 2. pl. 32. f. 4.
  *---- Delta, vol. 2. pl. 30. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Didymus, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 3.
  *---- fasciatus, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 2.
  *---- fascicularis, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 2.
  *---- faunus, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 6.
  *---- festivus, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 5.
  *---- Geryon, vol. 2. pl. 30. f. 6.
  *---- Gideon, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 1.
  *---- Goliatus, vol. 1. pl. 31.
  *---- ---- var. vol. 3. pl. 40.
  *---- Hercules, vol. 1. pl. 30. f. 1, 2.
  *---- Hespera, vol. 3. pl. 44. f. 3.
  *---- Jamaicensis, vol. 1. pl. 34. f. 1, 2.
  *---- lævis, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 7.
  *---- lanigerus, vol. 1. pl. 34. f. 6.
  *---- Lanius, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 8.
  *---- marginatus, vol. 2. pl. 32. f. 1.
  *---- micans, vol. 2. pl. 32. f. 3.
  *---- minutus, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 6.
  *---- Molossus, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 2.
  *---- nasicornis, vol. 1. pl. 34. f. 7, 8.
  *---- nitidus, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 5, 6.
  *---- occidentalis, vol. 2. pl. 32. f. 2.
  *---- Oromedon, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 5.
  *---- pallidus, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 1.
  *---- punctatus, vol. 1. pl. 34. f. 5.
  *---- serratipes, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 8.
  *---- Simson, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 3, 4.
  *---- sulcatus, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 1.
  *---- tetradactylus, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 7.
  *---- torquatus, vol. 3. pl. 44. f. 1.
  *---- triangularis, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 7.
  *---- spinipes, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 8.
  *---- unicolor, vol. 3. pl. 44. f. 2.
  *---- virens, vol. 2. pl. 30. f. 3.
  Scolia flavifrons? vol. 2. pl. 40. f. 3. p. 86.
  ---- fossulana, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 5. p. 98.
  ---- Mutillæformis, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 4. p. 76.
  ---- 4-maculata, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 2. p. 83.
  Scutellera Druræi, vol. 1. pl. 42. f. 1, 5. p. 89.
  *Sirex cinctus, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 2.
  Smerinthus Astylus, vol. 2. pl. 26. f. 2. p. 48.
  ---- Jamaicensis, vol. 2. pl. 25. f. 2. p. 47.
  Solenopus Cacicus, vol. 3. pl. 49. f. 5. p. 76.
  Sphærocoris Annulus, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 9. p. 68.
  *Sphex abdominalis, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 2.
  *---- atrox, vol. 3. pl. 42. f. 1.
  *---- coementaria, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 6.
  *---- coerulea, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 8.
  *---- coeruleana, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 4.
  *---- ferus, vol. 3. pl. 42. f. 2.
  ---- Jamaicensis, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 4. p. 98.
  *---- maculata, vol. 2. pl. 40. f. 3.
  *---- Mutillæformis, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 4.
  ---- Pensylvanica, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 8. p. 85.
  *---- petiolatus, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 7.
  *---- plumipes, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 5.
  *---- rubra, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 6.
  *---- severus, vol. 3. pl. 42. f. 4.
  *---- speciosus, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 1.
  Sphinx Achemon, vol. 2. pl. 29. f. 1. p. 55.
  *---- Alecto, vol. 2. pl. 27. f. 4.
  ---- Alope, vol. 1. pl. 27. f. 1. p. 52.
  ---- Antæus, vol. 2. pl. 25. f. 1. p. 47.
  *---- Astreus, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 4.
  *---- Astylus, vol. 2. pl. 26. f. 2.
  *---- Brontes, vol. 2. pl. 29. f. 4. p. 56.
  ---- Carolina, vol. 1. pl. 25. f. 1. p. 47.
  *---- Cerbera, vol. 1. pl. 26. f. 2.
  *---- Chiron, vol. 1. pl. 26. f. 3.
  ---- cingulata, vol. 1. pl. 25. f. 4. p. 49.
  *---- Clotho, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 1.
  *---- coarctata, vol. 2. pl. 27. f. 2.
  *---- convolvuli, var. vol. 1. pl. 25. f. 4.
  ---- Ello, vol. 1. pl. 27. f. 3. p. 54.
  *---- Euphorbia, vol. 1. pl. 29. f. 3.
  *---- fenestrata, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 5.
  *---- ---- vol. 1. pl. 25. f. 3.
  ---- Ficus, vol. 2. pl. 26. f. 1. p. 48.
  ---- Hylæus, vol. 2. pl. 26. f. 3. p. 49.
  ---- Idrieus, vol. 3. pl. 2. f. 2. p. 3.
  *---- lugubris, vol. 1. pl. 28. f. 2.
  *---- Nessus, vol. 2. pl. 27. f. 1.
  *---- ocellatus Jamaicensis, vol. 2. pl. 25. f. 2.
  *---- Otus, vol. 1. pl. 16. f. 3.
  *---- Passalus, vol. 2. pl. 29. f. 2.
  *---- Phalænoides, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 6.
  *---- Phegea, vol. 1. pl. 25. f. 2.
  *---- Pholus, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 3.
  ---- Pinastri, vol. 1. pl. 27. f. 2. p. 53.
  *---- Plumipes, vol. 2. pl. 27. f. 3.
  *---- ---- vol. 3. pl. 2. f. 3.
  *---- Polymena, vol. 1. pl. 26. f. 1.
  *---- pulchra, vol. 2. pl. 29. f. 3.
  ---- Satellita, vol. 1. pl. 29. f. 1, 2. p. 57.
  ---- Strigiles, vol. 1. pl. 28. f. 4. p. 57.
  *---- tersa, vol. 1. pl. 28. f. 3.
  *---- Thetis, vol. 1. pl. 26. f. 4.
  *---- tibialis, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 2.
  *---- vinosa, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 4.
  ---- Vitis, vol. 1. pl. 28. f. 1. p. 54.
  *---- zonata, vol. 1. pl. 26. f. 5.
  Spilosoma Acrea, vol. 1. pl. 3. f. 2, 3. p. 7.
  ---- Arge, vol. 1. pl. 18. f. 3. p. 33.
  ---- Cunea, vol. 1. pl. 18. f. 4. p. 34.
  ---- Egle, vol. 2. pl. 20. f. 3. p. 38.
  ---- Nais, vol. 1. pl. 7. f. 3. p. 15.
  Stenocorus atomarius, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 6. p. 88.
  ---- (Cerasphorus) balteatus, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 6. p. 80.
  ---- (Chlorida) festivus, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 5. p. 80.
  ---- (Elaphidion) irroratus, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 3. p. 87.
  ---- (Eburia) quadrimaculatus, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 3. p. 79.
  ---- (Elaphidion) spinicornis, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 4. p. 87.
  Stizus speciosus, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 1. p. 77.
  Synagris cornuta, [male] vol. 2. pl. 48. f. 3. p. 98.
  Syntomis Cerbera, vol. 1. pl. 26. f. 2. p. 51.
  ---- fenestrata, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 5. p. 54.
  ---- Phegea, vol. 1. pl. 25. f. 2. p. 48.

  Tabanus Americanus, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 3.
  ---- plumbeus, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 2. p. 97.
  *Tenebrio femoratus, vol. 2. pl. 34. f. 5.
  Tesseratoma papillosa, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 2. p. 91.
  Tettigonia sanguinea, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 5, 6. p. 81.
  Thecla Acis, vol. 1. pl. 1. f. 2. p. 3.
  ---- Faunus, vol. 2. pl. 1. f. 4, 5. p. 2.
  ---- Orcas, vol. 3. pl. 34. f. 2, 3. p. 46.
  ---- Pan, vol. 2. pl. 23. f. 3, 4. p. 44.
  ---- Phaleros, vol. 3. pl. 26. f. 3, 4. p. 35.
  ---- Simaethis, vol. 1. pl. 1. f. 3. p. 3.
  ---- Sylvanus, vol. 2. pl. 3. f. 2, 3. p. 5.
  ---- Thetis, vol. 2. pl. 9. f. 3, 4. p. 18.
  Thyreus lugubris, vol. 1. pl. 28. f. 2. p. 55.
  Trachyderes succinctus, vol. 1. pl. 39. f. 2. p. 83.
  Tremex Columba, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 2. p. 78.
  Trichius fasciatus, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 2. p. 75.
  ---- (Archimedius) Delta, vol. 2. pl. 30. f. 1, 2. p. 57.
  Triphæna materna, vol. 2. pl. 13. f. 4. p. 26.
  Truxalis Brasiliensis, vol. 2. pl. 40. f. 1. p. 85.

  Urania Rhipheus, vol. 2. pl. 23. f. 1, 2. p. 42.

  Vanessa Amestris, vol. 3. pl. 20. f. 3, 4. p. 27.
  ---- Anacardii, vol. 3. pl. 4. f. 1, 2. p. 5.
  ---- Charonia. vol. 1. pl. 15. f. 1, 2. p. 27.
  ---- Delius, vol. 3. pl. 14. f. 5, 6. p. 19.
  ---- Pelarga, vol. 3. pl. 27. f. 1, 2. p. 36.
  ---- Terea, vol. 2. pl. 18. f. 3, 4. p. 36.
  Venilia Sospeta, vol. 2. pl. 22. f. 3. p. 41.
  *Vespa cincta, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 6.
  *---- Jamaicensis, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 4.
  *---- maculata, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 2.
  ---- orientalis, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 1. p. 82.
  *---- squamosus, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 7.
  *---- turcica, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 1.

  Xylocopa latipes, vol. 2. pl. 48. f. 2. p. 98.
  ---- Virginica, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 1. p. 90.

  Zygæna Thetis, vol. 1. pl. 26. f. 4. p. 52.




SYSTEMATIC ARRANGEMENT

OF

THE INSECTS

FIGURED IN THESE ILLUSTRATIONS.

  NOTE.--_The Species are arranged alphabetically under the Generic Names,
      independently of the Subgenera,
  which are in brackets thus_, (    ).

  _Order_: COLEOPTERA, _Linnæus_.
    _Section_: ADEPHAGA.
      _Family_: CARABIDÆ.
        _Sub-Family_: BRACHINIDES.
  Casnonia longicollis, vol. 1. pl. 42. f. 4, 6. p. 90.
  Galerita Americana, vol. 1. pl. 42. f. 2. p. 89.

    _Section_: CLAVICORNES.
      _Family_: HISTERIDÆ.
  Hister (Oxysternus) maximus, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 4. p. 72.

    _Section_: LAMELLICORNES.
      _Family_: SCARABÆIDÆ.
  Coprobius lævis, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 7. p. 73.
  ---- triangularis, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 7. p. 77.
  Onthophagus serratipes, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 8. p. 78.
  Onitis Spinipes, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 8. p. 74.
  Phanæus Carnifex, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 3, 4, 5. p. 72.
  ---- festivus, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 5. p. 73.
  Copris Carolina, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 2. p. 72.
  ---- Faunus, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 6. p. 73.
  ---- minutus, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 6. p. 73.
  ---- Molossus, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 2. p. 64.
  ---- Sulcatus, vol. 1. pl. 35. f. 1. p. 71.

      _Family_: DYNASTIDÆ.
  Oryctes nasicornis, vol. 1. pl. 34. f. 7, 8. p. 71.
  Dynastes Ægeon, vol. 2. pl. 30. f. 5. p. 58.
  ---- Antæus, vol. 1. pl. 34. f. 3, 4. p. 26.
  ---- Centaurus, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 1. p. 75.
  ---- Claviger, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 3. p. 72.
  ---- Geryon, vol. 2. pl. 30. f. 6. p. 58.
  ---- Gideon, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 5. p. 76.
  ---- Hercules, vol. 1. pl. 30. f. 1, 2. p. 59.
  ---- Satyrus, vol. 1. pl. 34. f. 1, 2. p. 69.
  ---- Titanus, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 3, 4, p. 76.
  Phileurus Didymus, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 3. p. 64.

      _Family_: RUTELIDÆ.
  Rutela lineola, vol. 3. pl. 44. f. 3. p. 60.
  Cyclocephala signata, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 6. p. 77.
  Pelidnota punctata, vol. 1. pl. 34. f. 5. p. 70.
  ---- unicolor, vol. 3. pl. 44. f. 2. p. 60.
  Chasmodia? virens, vol. 2. pl. 30. f. 3. p. 57.
  Macraspis fucata, vol. 3. pl. 44. f. 4. p. 61.
  ---- tetradactyla, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 7. p. 68.

      _Family_: MELOLONTHIDÆ.
  Areoda lanigera, vol. 1. pl. 34. f. 6. p. 70.
  Melolontha occidentalis, vol. 2. pl. 32. f. 2. p. 62.
  Hoplia coerulea, vol. 2. pl. 32. f. 4. p. 63.

      _Family_: CETONIIDÆ.
  Trichius (Archimedius) Delta, vol. 2. pl. 30. f. 1, 2. p. 57.
  ---- fasciatus, vol. 1. pl. 36. f. 2. p. 75.
  Goliathus Drurii, vol. 3. pl. 40. p. 54.
  ---- Giganteus, vol. 1. pl. 31. f. 1. p. 61.
  ---- micans, vol. 2. pl. 32. f. 3. p. 62.
  Gymnetis Lanius, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 8. p. 68.
  ---- nitida & Var. vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 5, 6. p. 67.
  Cetonia (Gnathocera) africana, vol. 2. pl. 30. f. 4. p. 57.
  ---- aurata, _var._ vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 1. p. 66.
  ---- capensis, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 3. p. 67.
  ---- cordata, vol. 2. pl. 32. f. 5. p. 63.
  ---- fascicularis, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 2. p. 66.
  ---- fastuosa, vol. 1. pl. 33. f. 4. p. 67.
  ---- marginata, vol. 2. pl. 32. f. 1. p. 61.
  ---- torquata, vol. 3. pl. 44. f. 1. p. 60.

    _Section_: SERRICORNES.
      _Family_: BUPRESTIDÆ.
  Buprestis (Chalcophora) Virginiensis, vol. 1. pl. 30. f. 3.

      _Family_: ELATERIDÆ.
  Elater auratus, vol. 2. pl. 35. f. 3. p. 69.
  ---- (Tetralobus) flabellicornis, vol. 3. pl. 47. f. 1. p. 68.
  ---- (Semiotus) ligneus, vol. 3. pl. 47. f. 4. p. 70.
  ---- (Chalcolepidius) porcatus, vol. 3. pl. 47. f. 6. p. 71.
  ---- (Cardiophorus) pictus, vol. 3. pl. 47. f. 3. p. 69.
  ---- (Agrypnus) 4-maculatus, vol. 3. pl. 47. f. 2. p. 69.
  ---- (Semiotus) suturalis, vol. 3. pl. 47. f. 5. p. 70.

      _Family_: CEBRIONIDÆ.
  Rhipicera Druræi, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 7. p. 74.

      _Family_: LAMPYRIDÆ.
  Lampyris Gigantea, vol. 3. pl. 50. f. 2. p. 77.

    _Section_: RHYNCOPHORA.
      _Family_: BRENTHIDÆ.
  Brenthus minutus, vol. 1. pl. 42. f. 3, 7. p. 90.

      _Family_: CURCULIONIDÆ.
  Brachycerus globosus, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 4. p. 64.
  ---- ornatus, vol. 2. pl. 34. f. 3. p. 66.
  Rhina barbirostris, vol. 2. pl. 34. f. 2. p. 66.
  Hipporhinus? muricatus, vol. 2. pl. 34. f. 4. p. 67.
  ---- Verrucosus, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 5. p. 65.
  Heilipus? scalaris, vol. 3. pl. 49. f. 2. p. 75.
  Entimus imperialis, vol. 2. pl. 34. f. 1. p. 65.
  Diaprepes Spengleri, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 1. p. 63.
  Cyphus 16-punctatus, vol. 3. pl. 49. f. 4. p. 76.
  Cholus urbanus, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 2. p. 72.
  Solenopus Cacicus, vol. 3. pl. 49. f. 5. p. 76.
  Prepodes? Cameleon, v. vol. 2. pl. 33. f. 4, 5. p. 65.
  Baridius? ovalis, vol. 2. pl. 33. f. 1, 2. p. 64.
  Calandra serrirostris, [female]? vol. 2. pl. 33. f. 3. p. 64.

    _Section_: LONGICORNES.
      _Family_: PRIONIDÆ.
  Prionus (Orthomegas) cinnamomeus, vol. 1. pl. 40. f. 2. p. 85.
  ---- (Stenodontes) damicornis, vol. 1. pl. 38. f. 1. p. 80.
  ---- (Titanus) Giganteus, vol. 3. pl. 49. f. 1. p. 75.
  ---- (Derobrachus) laticollis, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 2. p. 78.
  ---- (Mallodon) Maxillosus, vol. 1. pl. 38. f. 3. p. 82.
  ---- (Mallodon) melanopus, vol. 1. pl. 38. f. 2. p. 82.
  ---- (Orthosoma) pensylvanicus, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 1. p. 78.

      _Family_: CERAMBYCIDÆ.
  Cerambyx (Callichroma) afer, vol. 1. pl. 39. f. 4. p. 84.
  ---- (Rosalia) alpina, vol. 2. pl. 31. f. 5. p. 61.
  ---- (Hamaticherus) Heros, vol. 1. pl. 39. f. 1. p. 83.
  ---- (Cosmisoma) plumicornis, vol. 3. pl. 49. f. 3. p. 76.
  Stenocorus atomarius, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 6. p. 88.
  ---- (Cerasphorus) balteatus, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 6. p. 88.
  ---- (Chlorida) festivus, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 5. p. 80.
  ---- (Elaphidion) irroratus, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 3. p. 87.
  ---- (Eburia) quadrimaculatus, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 3. p. 79.
  ---- (Elaphidion) spinicornis, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 4. p. 87.
  Trachyderes succinctus, vol. 1. pl. 39. f. 2. p. 83.
  Clytus longipes, vol. 1. pl. 37. f. 4. p. 79.
  ---- pictus, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 2. p. 87.

      _Family_: LAMIIDÆ.
  Lamia (Acanthoderes) araneiformis, vol. 2. pl. 35. f. 4. p. 69.
  ---- (Agaphantia) bipunctata, vol. 2. pl. 31. f. 2. p. 59.
  ---- (Polyrhaphis) cancriformis, vol. 2. pl. 35. f. 1. p. 68.
  ---- Capensis, vol. 1. pl. 39. f. 3. p. 84.
  ---- (Monochamus) dentator? vol. 2. pl. 35. f. 2. p. 68.
  ---- (Sternotomis) mirabilis, vol. 2. pl. 31. f. 1. p. 59.
  ---- (Sternotomis) pulchra, vol. 1. pl. 32. f. 6. p. 65.
  ---- punctator, vol. 2. pl. 31. f. 4. p. 60.
  ---- (Acanthocinus) spinosa, vol. 2. pl. 31. f. 3. p. 60.
  ---- verrucosa, vol. 1. pl. 40. f. 3. p. 86.
  Saperda carcharias, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 5. p. 88.
  ---- trilineata, vol. 1. pl. 41. f. 1. p. 86.
  ---- spectabilis, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 8. p. 74.

      _Family_: CRIOCERIDÆ.
  Sagra femorata, vol. 2. pl. 34. f. 5. p. 67.

  _Order_: ORTHOPTERA.
    _Section_: CURSORIA.
      _Family_: BLATTIDÆ.
  Blatta (Polyphaga) Ægyptiaca? vol. 2. pl. 36. f. 3. p. 71.
  ---- (Blaberus) gigantea? vol. 2. pl. 36. f. 2. p. 71.
  ---- nivea, vol. 2. pl. 36. f. 1. p. 70.
  ---- (Phoraspis) picta, vol. 3. pl. 50. f. 3. p. 78.

      _Family_: MANTIDÆ.
  Mantis cingulata, vol. 2. pl. 49. f. 2. p. 99.
  ---- (Harpax) ocellaria, vol. 3. pl. 43. f. 1. p. 57.
  ---- (Thespis) parva, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 5. p. 84.
  Empusa Gongylodes, vol. 1. pl. 50. f. 2. p. 122.
  ---- pennicornis, vol. 1. pl. 50. f. 1. p. 121.

      _Family_: PHASMIDÆ.
  Phasma (Diapherodes) Gigas, vol. 2. pl. 50. p. 100.
  ---- (Platycrana) Jamaicensis, vol. 2. p. 49. f. 1. p. 99.
  Bacteria linearis, vol. 1. pl. 50. f. 3. p. 122.

    _Section_: SALTATORIA.
      _Family_: ACHETIDÆ.
  Acheta membranacea, vol. 2. pl. 43. f. 2. p. 91.
  ---- (Schizodactyla) monstrosa, vol. 2. pl. 43. f. 1. p. 90.

      _Family_: GRYLLIDÆ.
  Gryllus (Phyllopterus) myrtifolius, vol. 2. pl. 41. f. 2. p. 88.
  ---- (Gryllacris) tesselatus, vol. 2. pl. 42. f. 3. p. 90.

      _Family_: LOCUSTIDÆ.
  Locusta coerulea, vol. 2. pl. 42. f. 1. p. 89.
  ---- (Rutidoderes) Centurio, vol. 2. pl. 41. f. 3. p. 88.
  ---- (Rutidoderes) Dux, vol. 2. pl. 44. p. 92.
  ---- (Rutidoderes) Miles, vol. 2. pl. 42. f. 2. p. 89.
  ---- obscura, vol. 2. pl. 41. f. 1. p. 87.
  ---- (Phymatea) punctata, vol. 2. pl. 41. f. 4. p. 89.
  ---- (Rutidoderes) squarrosa, vol. 1. pl. 49. f. 1. p. 119.
  ---- Tartarica, vol. 1. pl. 49. f. 2. p. 121.
  Truxalis Brasiliensis, vol. 2. pl. 40. f. 1. p. 85.

  _Order_: NEUROPTERA.
      _Family_: LIBELLULIDÆ.
  Æshna Junia, vol. 1. pl. 47. f. 5. p. 116.
  Libellula Axilena, vol. 2. pl. 47. f. 1. p. 96.
  ---- Berenice, vol. 1. pl. 48. f. 3. p. 118.
  ---- Carolina, vol. 1. pl. 48. f. 1. p. 117.
  ---- Eponina, vol. 2. pl. 47. f. 2. p. 96.
  ---- Fulvia, vol. 2. pl. 46. f. 2. p. 95.
  ---- Lucia, vol. 2. pl. 45. f. 1. p. 92.
  ---- Lydia, vol. 1. pl. 47. f. 4. p. 116.
  ---- Marcia, vol. 2. pl. 45. f. 3. p. 93.
  ---- Paulina, vol. 2. pl. 46. f. 4. p. 95.
  ---- Portia, vol. 2. pl. 47. f. 3. p. 96.
  ---- Pulchella, vol. 1. pl. 48. f. 5. p. 119.
  ---- Servilia, vol. 1. pl. 47. f. 6. p. 117.
  ---- Domitia, vol. 2. pl. 45. f. 4. p. 93.
  ---- Sophronia, vol. 2. pl. 47. f. 4. p. 97.
  ---- Tullia, vol. 2. pl. 46. f. 3. p. 95.
  ---- variegata, vol. 2. pl. 46. f. 1. p. 94.

        _Subfamily_: AGRIONIDES.
  Agrion Caia, vol. 2. pl. 45. f. 2. p. 92.
  ---- Titia, vol. 2. pl. 45. f. 5. p. 94.
  ---- virginica, vol. 1. pl. 48. f. 2. p. 118.
  Cordulegaster Sabina, vol. 1. pl. 48. f. 4. p. 119.
  Lestes coeruleata, vol. 3. pl. 50. f. 1. p. 77.
  ---- Lucretia, vol. 2. pl. 48. f. 1. p. 97.

      _Family_: MYRMELEONIDÆ.
  Myrmeleon Americanum, vol. 1. pl. 46. f. 4. p. 106.
  ---- Libelluloides, vol. 1. pl. 46. f. 1. p. 104.
  ---- torridum, vol. 3. pl. 41. p. 55.
  Euptilon ornatum, vol. 1. pl. 46. f. 2. p. 105.

      _Family_: HEMEROBIIDÆ.
  Chauliodes virginiensis, vol. 1. pl. 46. f. 3. p. 105.

  _Order_: HYMENOPTERA.
      _Family_: SIRICIDÆ.
  Tremex Columba, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 2. p. 78.

      _Family_: EVANIIDÆ?
  Pelecinus Politurator, vol. 2. pl. 40. f. 4. p. 87.

      _Family_: ICHNEUMONIDÆ.
  Ophion macrurum, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 5. p. 92.

      _Family_: FORMICIDÆ.
  Formica bihamata, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 7, 8. p. 82.
  ---- rubripes, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 3. p. 78.
  Atta fervens, vol. 3. pl. 42. f. 3. p. 57.

      _Family_: SCOLIIDÆ.
  Scolia flavifrons? vol. 2. pl. 40. f. 3. p. 86.
  ---- fossulana, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 5. p. 98.
  ---- Mutillæformis, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 4. p. 76.
  ---- 4-maculata, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 2. p. 83.

      _Family_: SPHEGIDÆ.
  Sphex Jamaicensis, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 4. p. 98.
  ---- Pensylvanica, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 8. p. 85.
  Pelopæus cæmentarius, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 6, 7, 8. & pl. 45. f. 8, 9, 10.
      p. 99.
  ---- petiolatus, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 7. p. 85.
  Pepsis atrox, vol. 3. pl. 42. f. 1. p. 56.
  ---- coeruleana, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 4. p. 83.
  ---- rubra, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 6. p. 84.
  ---- severa, vol. 3. pl. 42. f. 4. p. 57.
  Chlorion ferox, vol. 3. pl. 42. f. 2. p. 56.

      _Family_: BEMBECIDÆ.
  Stizus speciosus, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 1. p. 77.

      _Family_: VESPIDÆ.
  Eumenes abdominalis, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 2. p. 102.
  Polistes annularis, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 6. p. 95.
  ---- squamosa, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 7. p. 96.
  Vespa orientalis, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 1. p. 82.
  Synagric cornuta, [male], vol. 2. pl. 48. f. 3. p. 98.

      _Family_: APIDÆ.
  Cælioxys? annularis, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 7. p. 77.
  Xylocopa latipes, vol. 2. pl. 48. f. 2. p. 98.
  ---- Virginica, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 1. p. 90.
  Centris grossa, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 3. p. 102.
  ---- Surinamensis, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 4. p. 92.

  _Order_: LEPIDOPTERA.
    _Section_: DIURNA.
      _Family_: PAPILIONIDÆ.
  Papilio Agavus, vol. 3. pl. 9. f. 4. p. 12.
  ---- Antenor, vol. 2. pl. 3. f. 1. p. 4.
  ---- Antiochus, vol. 3. pl. 1. p. 1.
  ---- Ascanius, vol. 3. pl. 9. f. 1. p. 11.
  ---- Asius, vol. 3. pl. 35. f. 4. p. 47.
  ---- Asterias, pl. 11. f. 2, 3, 5. p. 21.
  ---- Menestheus, vol. 2. pl. 9. f. 1, 2. p. 17.
  ---- Nireus, vol. 2. pl. 4. f. 1, 2. p. 6.
  ---- Paris, vol. 1. pl. 12. f. 1, 2. p. 23.
  ---- Philenor, vol. 1. pl. 11. f. 1, 4. p. 20.
  ---- Polydamus, vol. 1. pl. 17. f. 1, 2. p. 31.
  ---- Sinon, vol. 1. pl. 22. f. 3, 4. p. 41.
  ---- Thoas, vol. 1. pl. 22. f. 1, 2. p. 40.
  ---- Thyastes, vol. 3. pl. 35. f. 1. p. 46.
  Colias (Callidryas) Pyranthe, _var._ vol. 1. pl. 12. f. 3, 4. p. 24.
  Pieris Calypso, vol. 2. pl. 17. f. 3, 4. p. 33.
  ---- Chloris, vol. 3. pl. 32. f. 3, 4. p. 43.
  ---- (Leptalis) Chrisia, vol. 3. pl. 37. f. 1, 2. p. 49.
  ---- Eucharis, vol. 2. pl. 10. f. 5, 6. p. 19.
  ---- Eudoxia, vol. 3. pl. 32. f. 1, 2. & pl. 43.
  ---- (Iphias) Glaucippe, vol. 1. pl. 10. f. 3, 4. p. 20.
  ---- Hypatia, vol. 3. pl. 32. f. 5, 6. p. 44.
  ---- Pasithoe, vol. 2. pl. 8. f. 3, 4. p. 16.
  ---- (Thestias) Pyrene? vol. 1. pl. 5. f. 2. p. 11.
  Anthocaris Arethusa, vol. 2. pl. 19. f. 5, 6. p. 37.

      _Family_: HELICONIIDÆ.
  Heliconia diaphana, vol. 2. pl. 7. f. 3. p. 15.
  ---- Gazoria, vol. 3. pl. 13. f. 5, 6. p. 17.
  ---- Irene, vol. 3. pl. 38. f. 1. p. 51.
  ---- Sappho, vol. 3. pl. 38. f. 4. p. 53.
  Acræa Camoena, vol. 2. pl. 7. f. 2. p. 15.
  ---- Circeis, vol. 3. pl. 18. f. 5, 6. p. 26.
  ---- Cynthia, vol. 3. pl. 37. f. 5, 6. p. 51.
  ---- Dice, vol. 3. pl. 18. f. 3, 4. p. 25.
  ---- Ethosea, vol. 3. pl. 37. f. 3, 4. p. 50.
  ---- Gea, vol. 3. pl. 28. f. 3, 4. p. 38.
  ---- Horta, vol. 3. pl. 28. f. 1, 2. p. 37.
  ---- Hypatia, vol. 3. pl. 13. f. 1, 2. p. 16.
  ---- Menippe, vol. 3. pl. 13. f. 3, 4. p. 17.
  ---- Umbra, vol. 3. pl. 18. f. 1, 2. p. 24.
  Idæa Lyncæa, vol. 2. pl. 7. f. 1. p. 14.

      _Family_: NYMPHALIDÆ.
  Melitæa Cytheris, vol. 2. pl. 4. f. 3, 4. p. 9.
  ---- Pelops, vol. 1. pl. 19. f. 3, 4. p. 36.
  ---- Phaeton, vol. 1. pl. 21. f. 3, 4. p. 39.
  ---- Tharos, vol. 1. pl. 21. f. 5, 6. p. 39.
  Argynnis Erymanthis, vol. 1. pl. 15. f. 3, 4. p. 28.
  ---- Idalia, vol. 1. pl. 13. f. 1, 2, 3. p. 24.
  ---- Niphe, vol. 1. pl. 6. f. 1. p. 12.
  ---- Phalanta, vol. 1. pl. 21. f. 1, 2. p. 38.
  ---- Tephnia, vol. 1. pl. 6. f. 2. p. 13.
  Cethosia Biblis, vol. 1. pl. 4. f. 2. p. 9.
  ---- Cyane, vol. 1. pl. 4. f. 1. p. 8.
  Nymphalis Afer, vol. 3. pl. 36. f. 1, 2. p. 48.
  ---- Alphæa, vol. 3. pl. 36. f. 3, 4. p. 48.
  ---- Althea, vol. 3. pl. 20. f. 1, 2. p. 27.
  ---- (Charaxes) Anticlea, vol. 3. pl. 27. f. 5, 6. p. 37.
  ---- Antiochus, vol. 3. pl. 7. f. 3, 4. p. 9.
  ---- Arethusa, vol. 3. pl. 8. f. 1, 4. p. 10.
  ---- (Limenitis) Arthemis, vol. 2. pl. 10. f. 3, 4. p. 19.
  ---- assimilis, vol. 1. pl. 17. f. 3, 4. p. 31.
  ---- (Charaxes) Berenice, vol. 3. pl. 11. f. 1, 2. p. 13.
  ---- Bolina, vol. 1. pl. 14. f. 1, 2. p. 26.
  ---- Cadma, vol. 2. pl. 18. f. 1, 2. p. 34.
  ---- Cænis, vol. 2. pl. 19. f. 1, 2. p. 36.
  ---- Camillus, vol. 3. pl. 6. f. 4. p. 8.
  ---- Decius, vol. 3. pl. 6. f. 1, 2. p. 7.
  ---- Doriclæa, vol. 3. pl. 36. f. 5, 6. p. 49.
  ---- Eleus, vol. 3. pl. 12. f. 1, 2. p. 15.
  ---- Erithonius, vol. 2. pl. 15. f. 1, 2. p. 29.
  ---- (Charaxes) Etesipe, vol. 3. pl. 10. p. 13.
  ---- (Charaxes) Eudoxus, vol. 3. pl. 33. f. 1, 4. p. 44.
  ---- Eupale, vol. 3. pl. 6. f. 3. p. 7.
  ---- Feronia, vol. 1. pl. 10. f. 1, 2. p. 19.
  ---- Hippona, vol. 3. pl. 16. f. 1, 2. p. 21.
  ---- Hostilia, vol. 3. pl. 28. f. 5, 6. p. 38.
  ---- (Catagramma) Hydaspes, vol. 3. pl. 15. f. 2, 3. p. 20.
  ---- Jacintha, vol. 2. pl. 21. f. 1, 2. p. 39.
  ---- Janais, vol. 3. pl. 17. f. 5, 6. p. 24.
  ---- (Charaxes) Jason, vol. 1. pl. 1. f. 1. p. 1.
  ---- Iole, vol. 3. pl. 38. f. 2. p. 52.
  ---- Isis, vol. 3. pl. 7. f. 1, 2. p. 8.
  ---- Iphicla, vol. 1. pl. 14. f. 3, 4. p. 27.
  ---- Laodice, vol. 3. pl. 26. f. 1, 2. p. 35.
  ---- Laure, vol. 2. pl. 17. f. 5, 6. p. 33.
  ---- Meleagris, vol. 3. pl. 27. f. 3, 4. p. 36.
  ---- Melicerta, vol. 2. pl. 19. f. 3, 4. p. 36.
  ---- Opis, vol. 2. pl. 16. f. 5, 6. p. 31.
  ---- Opis, vol. 2. pl. 18. f. 5, 6. p. 35.
  ---- Orsis, vol. 3. pl. 16. f. 3. p. 22.
  ---- Perseis, vol. 2. pl. 21. f. 3, 4. p. 39.
  ---- (Charaxes) Pollux, vol. 3. pl. 30. f. 1, 2. p. 41.
  ---- Pyramus, vol. 3. pl. 23. f. 3, 4. p. 33.
  ---- Salmacis, vol. 2. pl. 8. f. 1, 2. p. 16.
  ---- Semire, vol. 3. pl. 14. f. 3, 4. p. 18.
  ---- (Limenitis) Sibilla, vol. 2. pl. 16. f. 1, 2. p. 30.
  ---- (Charaxes) Tiridates, vol. 3. pl. 23. f. 1, 2. p. 32.
  ---- Varanes, vol. 3. pl. 31. f. 1, 2. p. 42.
  Vanessa Amestris, vol. 3. pl. 20. f. 3, 4. p. 27.
  ---- Anacardii, vol. 3. pl. 4. f. 1, 2. p. 5.
  ---- Charonia, vol. 1. pl. 15. f. 1, 2. p. 27.
  ---- Delius, vol. 3. pl. 14. f. 5, 6. p. 69.
  ---- Pelarga, vol. 3. pl. 27. f. 1, 2. p. 31.
  ---- Terea, vol. 2. pl. 18. f. 3, 4. p. 36.
  Cynthia Huntera, vol. 1. pl. 5. f. 1. p. 10.
  ---- Laomedia, vol. 1. pl. 5. f. 3. p. 12.
  Hipparchia Andromeda, vol. 3. pl. 38. f. 3. p. 52.
  ---- Cluena, vol. 3. pl. 7. f. 5, 6. p. 9.
  ---- Eumea, vol. 1. pl. 2. f. 3. p. 5.
  ---- Leda, vol. 1. pl. 15. f. 5, 6. p. 28.
  ---- Nereis, vol. 3. pl. 35. f. 2, 3. p. 47.
  Hætera Philoctetes, vol. 2. pl. 1. f. 1, 2, 3. p. 1.
  Biblis Ariadne? vol. 3. pl. 11. f. 3, 4. p. 14.
  ---- Hiarbas, vol. 3. pl. 14. f. 1, 2. p. 18.
  ---- Ilithyia, vol. 2. pl. 17. f. 1, 2. p. 32.
  ---- undularis, vol. 2. pl. 10. f. 1, 2. p. 18.
  Morpho Laertes, vol. 3. pl. 15. f. 1. p. 19.

      _Family_: LYCÆNIDÆ.
  Erycina Ampyx, vol. 3. pl. 9. f. 2, 3. p. 12.
  ---- Baucis, vol. 3. pl. 12. f. 3, 4. p. 15.
  ---- Jarbas, vol. 3. pl. 8. f. 2. p. 10.
  ---- Lysippus, vol. 1. pl. 2. f. 2. p. 4.
  ---- Menetas, vol. 3. pl. 8. f. 3. p. 11.
  Polyommatus Isis, vol. 2. pl. 3. f. 4, 5. p. 6.
  ---- Thero, vol. 1. pl. 2. f. 1. p. 4.
  Thecla Acis, vol. 1. pl. 1. f. 2. p. 3.
  ---- Faunus, vol. 2. pl. 1. f. 4, 5. p. 2.
  ---- Orcas, vol. 3. pl. 34. f. 2, 3. p. 46.
  ---- Pan, vol. 2. pl. 23. f. 3, 4. p. 44.
  ---- Phaleros, vol. 3. pl. 26. f. 3, 4. p. 35.
  ---- Simaethis, vol. 1. pl. 1. f. 3. p. 3.
  ---- Sylvanus, vol. 2. pl. 3. f. 2, 3. p. 5.
  ---- Thetis, vol. 2. pl. 9. f. 3, 4. p. 18.

      _Family_: HESPERIIDÆ.
  Hesperia Arcas, vol. 1. pl. 19. f. 5, 6. p. 36.
  ---- Helops, vol. 3. pl. 33. f. 2, 3. p. 45.
  ---- Iphis, vol. 2. pl. 15. f. 3, 4. p. 30.
  ---- Ophion, vol. 3. pl. 17. f. 1, 2. p. 23.
  ---- (Eudamus) Orion, vol. 3. pl. 17. f. 3, 4. p. 23.
  Pamphila Metis, vol. 2. pl. 16. f. 3, 4. p. 31.
  ---- Phyleus, vol. 1. pl. 13. f. 4, 5. p. 25.

    _Section_: ----?
      _Family_: URANIIDÆ.
  Urania Rhipheus, vol. 2. pl. 23. f. 1, 2. p. 42.
  Nyctalemon Patroclus, vol. 1. pl. 7. f. 1. pl. 8. f. 1. p. 13.

      _Family_: CASTNIIDÆ.
  Castnia Licus, vol. 1. pl. 16. f. 1, 2. p. 29.
  ---- Thais, vol. 3. pl. 16. f. 4. p. 22.

    _Section_: CREPUSCULARIA.
      _Family_: SPHINGIDÆ.
  Sphinx Achemon, vol. 2. pl. 29. f. 1. p. 55.
  ---- Alope, vol. 1. pl. 27. f. 1. p. 52.
  ---- Antæus, vol. 2. pl. 25. f. 1. p. 47.
  ---- Brontes, vol. 2. pl. 29. f. 4. p. 56.
  ---- Carolina, vol. 1. pl. 25. f. 1. p. 47.
  ---- cingulata, vol. 1. pl. 25. f. 4. p. 49.
  ---- Ello, vol. 1. pl. 27. f. 3. p. 54.
  ---- Ficus, vol. 2. pl. 26. f. 1. p. 48.
  ---- Hylæus, vol. 2. pl. 26. f. 3. p. 49.
  ---- Idrieus, vol. 3. pl. 2. f. 2. p. 3.
  ---- Pinastri, vol. 1. pl. 27. f. 2. p. 53.
  ---- Satellita, vol. 1. pl. 29. f. 1, 2. p. 57.
  ---- Strigiles, vol. 1. pl. 28. f. 4. p. 57.
  ---- Vitis, vol. 1. pl. 28. f. 1. p. 54.
  Deilephila Alecto, vol. 2. pl. 27. f. 4. p. 51.
  ---- Chiron, vol. 1. pl. 26. f. 3. p. 51.
  ---- Clotho, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 1. p. 52.
  ---- Euphorbiæ, vol. 1. pl. 29. f. 3. p. 58.
  ---- Nessus, vol. 2. pl. 27. f. 1. p. 50.
  ---- tersa, vol. 1. pl. 28. f. 3. p. 56.
  Smerinthus Astylus, vol. 2. pl. 26. f. 2. p. 48.
  ---- Jamaicensis, vol. 2. pl. 25. f. 2. p. 47.
  Macroglossa Passalus, vol. 2. pl. 29. f. 2. p. 55.
  ---- zonata, vol. 1. pl. 26. f. 5. p. 52.
  Thyreus lugubris, vol. 1. pl. 28. f. 2. p. 55.

    _Section_: ----?
      _Family_: ZYGÆNIDÆ.
  Zygæna Thetis, vol. 1. pl. 26. f. 4. p. 52.
  Ægeria? plumipes, vol. 3. pl. 2. f. 3. p. 3.
  ---- tibialis, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 2. p. 52.
  Glaucopis? astreas, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 4. p. 53.
  ---- coarctata, vol. 2. pl. 27. f. 2. p. 50.
  ---- fenestrata, vol. 1. pl. 25. f. 3. p. 49.
  ----? Phalænoides, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 6. p. 54.
  ---- Pholus, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 3. p. 53.
  ---- Polymena, vol. 1. pl. 26. f. 1. p. 50.
  Ægocera amabilis, vol. 2. pl. 13. f. 3. p. 25.
  Syntomis Cerbera, vol. 1. pl. 26. f. 2. p. 51.
  ---- fenestrata, vol. 2. pl. 28. f. 5. p. 54.
  ---- Phegea, vol. 1. pl. 25. f. 2. p. 48.
  Aglaope plumipes, vol. 2. pl. 27. f. 3. p. 51.

    _Section_: NOCTURNA.
      _Family_: HEPIALIDÆ.
  Hepialus crassus, vol. 3. pl. 2. f. 1. p. 2.
  Cossus Laocoon, vol. 3. pl. 3. f. 1. p. 3.

      _Family_: BOMBYCIDÆ (AND NOTODONTIDÆ.)
  Saturnia Alinda, vol. 3. pl. 19. p. 26.
  ---- Argus, vol. 3. pl. 29. f. 1. p. 39.
  ---- Cecropia, vol. 1. pl. 18. f. 2. p. 32.
  ---- Cynthia, vol. 2. pl. 6. f. 2. p. 12.
  ---- Epimethea, vol. 2. pl. 13. f. 1. p. 24.
  ---- Lucina, vol. 3. pl. 34. f. 1. p. 45.
  ---- Maia, vol. 2. pl. 24. f. 3. p. 45.
  ---- Mylitta, vol. 2. pl. 5. f. 1. p. 10.
  ---- Phædusa, vol. 3. pl. 24, & 25. p. 34.
  ---- Promethea, vol. 2. pl. 11. f. 1, 2. [male] pl. 12. f. 1, 2. [female]
      p. 20.
  Actias Luna, vol. 1. pl. 24. f. 1. p. 45.
  Ceratocampa imperialis, vol. 1. pl. 9. f. 1, 2. p. 17.
  Dryocampa Virginiensis, vol. 2. pl. 13. f. 2. p. 24.
  Odonestis? Servula, vol. 2. pl. 11. f. 4. p. 23.
  Gastropacha? Otus,[4] vol. 1. pl. 16. f. 3. p. 30.
  Endromis Rhodope, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 3. p. 31.
  Petasia? ministra, vol. 2. pl. 14. f. 3. p. 27.

      _Family_: ARCTIIDÆ (& LITHOSIIDÆ.)
  Arctia menea, vol. 3. pl. 3. f. 2. p. 4.
  Spilosoma Acrea, vol. 1. pl. 3. f. 2, 3. p. 7.
  ---- Arge, vol. 1. pl. 18. f. 3. p. 33.
  ---- Cunea, vol. 1. pl. 18. f. 4. p. 34.
  ---- Egle, vol. 2. pl. 20. f. 3. p. 38.
  ---- Nais, vol. 1. pl. 7. f. 3. p. 15.
  Nemeophila figurata, vol. 2. pl. 12. f. 4. p. 23.
  Liparis? rivulosa, vol. 2. pl. 14. f. 5. p. 28.
  Limacodes? Arenacea, vol. 1. pl. 18. f. 1. p. 32.
  Heleonia papilionaris, vol. 2. pl. 2. f. 4. p. 4.
  Callimorpha Coenea, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 3. p. 29.
  ----? Cafra, vol. 3. pl. 5. f. 1. p. 6.
  ----? Diaphana, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 4. p. 31.
  ---- Epimenis, vol. 3. pl. 29. f. 2. p. 40.
  ----? Eucharis, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 6. p. 32.
  ----? Famula, vol. 2. pl. 11. f. 3. p. 22.
  ----? Glaucopis, vol. 2. pl. 6. f. 4. p. 14.
  ----? Helcita, vol. 3. pl. 29. f. 4. p. 41.
  ----? marginata, vol. 2. pl. 22. f. 2. p. 40.
  ----? Mopsa, vol. 3. pl. 3. f. 3. p. 4.
  ----? Nerina, vol. 3. pl. 5. f. 2. p. 6.
  ----? Phileta, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 5. p. 32.
  ---- Phyllira, vol. 1. pl. 7. f. 2. p. 15.
  ----? Pylotis, vol. 2. pl. 5. f. 3. p. 11.
  ----? sanguiflua, vol. 2. pl. 20. f. 1, 2. p. 37.
  ----? Venosa, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 4. p. 43.
  Lithosia? Ino, vol. 3. pl. 29. f. 3. p. 40.
  Deiopeia astrea, vol. 2. pl. 6. f. 3.
  ---- bella, vol. 1. pl. 24. f. 3. p. 46.
  ---- ornatrix, vol. 1. pl. 24. f. 2. p. 46.
  ----? puella, vol. 2. pl. 2. f. 2. p. 3.
  Gnophria? collaris, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 2. p. 28.

      _Family_: NOCTUIDÆ.
  Noctua anilis, vol. 2. pl. 12. f. 3. p. 23.
  ---- chera, vol. 2. pl. 20. f. 4. p. 38.
  ---- guttata, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 1. p. 30.
  ----? Hesione, vol. 3. pl. 22. f. 2. p. 30.
  ---- (Calyptra) lugubris, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 5. p. 29.
  ---- lunata, vol. 1. pl. 20. f. 3. p. 37.
  ---- (Acontia) margaritata, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 6. p. 30.
  ---- Melicerta, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 1. p. 42.
  ---- myrtæa, vol. 2. pl. 2. f. 3. p. 3.
  ---- Numeria, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 5. p. 44.
  ---- (Acontia?) nundina, vol. 1. pl. 18. f. 5. p. 35.
  ---- Pales, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 3. p. 43.
  ----? speciosa, vol. 2. pl. 5. f. 2. p. 10.
  ---- squamularis, vol. 1. pl. 9. f. 3. p. 18.
  ---- tristris, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 1. p. 28.
  ---- undularis, vol. 1. pl. 9. f. 4. p. 19.
  Catocala affinis, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 6. p. 44.
  ---- Epione, vol. 1. pl. 23. f. 2. p. 43.
  Triphæna materna, vol. 2. pl. 13. f. 4. p. 26.
  Erebus crepuscularis? vol. 1. pl. 20. f. 1, 2. p. 37.
  ---- Edusa, vol. 2. pl. 24. f. 4. p. 46.
  ---- fluctuosus, vol. 2. pl. 14. f. 1. p. 26.
  ---- Hercyna, vol. 2. pl. 24. f. 1, 2. p. 44.
  ---- hieroglyphicus, vol. 2. pl. 2. f. 1. p. 3.
  ---- odora, vol. 1. pl. 3. f. 1. p. 6.
  ----? opigena, vol. 2. pl. 22. f. 4. p. 41.
  ---- Zenobia, vol. 3. pl. 39. p. 53.

      _Family_: GEOMETRIDÆ.
  Geometra argentata, vol. 2. pl. 14. f. 2. p. 27.
  ---- (Poecilophasia) fulvata, vol. 3. pl. 21. f. 4. p. 29.
  ---- (Angerona) serrata, vol. 1. pl. 20. f. 4. p. 38.
  ---- transversata, vol. 1. pl. 8. f. 2. p. 16.
  Bupalus catenarius, vol. 1. pl. 8. f. 3. p. 16.
  Alcis scolopacea, vol. 2. pl. 22. f. 1. p. 40.
  Venilia Sospeta, vol. 2. pl. 22. f. 3. p. 41.

      _Family_: PYRALIDÆ.
  Botys (Desmia) sericea, vol. 2. pl. 6. f. 1. p. 11.
  Hydrocampa? nivalis, vol. 2. pl. 14. f. 4. p. 28.

  _Order_: HEMIPTERA.
    _Suborder_: HETEROPTERA.
      _Family_: SCUTELLERIDÆ.
  Scutellera Druræi, vol. 1. pl. 42. f. 1, 5. p. 89.
  Sphærocoris Annulus, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 9. p. 68.
  Pentatoma bicolorata, vol. 3. pl. 43. f. 2. p. 58.
  ---- catena, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 1. p. 64.
  ---- flavicollis, vol. 2. pl. 36. f. 4. p. 72.
  ---- pulchella, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 8. p. 67.
  ---- regia, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 6. p. 66.
  ---- rutilans, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 5. p. 66.
  ---- spectabilis, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 4. p. 66.
  Raphigaster incarnatus, vol. 2. pl. 36. f. 5. p. 72.
  ---- validus, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 4. p. 81.
  ---- ---- vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 6. p. 63.
  Edessa virens, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 2. p. 65.
  Tesseratoma papillosa, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 2. p. 91.
  Aspongopus Janus, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 7. p. 67.
  Phloea corticata, vol. 2. pl. 40. f. 2. p. 86.

      _Family_: COREIDÆ.
  Cerbus falx, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 2. p. 62.
  ----? flaveolus, vol. 3. pl. 43. f. 3. p. 58.
  ---- sanctus, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 5. p. 63.
  ---- umbrosus, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 7. p. 64.
  Diactor latipes, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 3. p. 62.
  Leptoscelis balleatus, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 3. p. 92.
  ---- pictus, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 1. p. 101.

      _Family_: LYGÆIDÆ.
  Pyrrhocoris Princeps, vol. 3. pl. 43. f. 5. p. 59.
  Largus Lineola, vol. 3. pl. 46. f. 3. p. 65.

      _Family_: REDUVIIDÆ.
  Reduvius (Conorhinus) variegatus, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 5. p. 103.
  Arilus serratus, vol. 2. pl. 36. f. 6. p. 73.
  Diaspidius scapha, vol. 3. pl. 43. f. 4. p. 59.
  Ectrichodia barbicornis, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 1. p. 61.
  Hammatocerus conspicillaris, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 8. p. 64.
  ---- purcis, vol. 3. pl. 45. f. 4. p. 63.

    _Suborder_: HOMOPTERA.
      _Family_: CICADIDÆ.
  Cicada maculata, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 1. p. 74.
  ---- Stridula, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 2. p. 75.

      _Family_: FULGORIDÆ.
  Fulgora Diadema, vol. 3. pl. 50. f. 4. p. 78.
  Aphana lanata, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 3. p. 75.
  Flata ----? pupa, vol. 3. pl. 48. f. 1. p. 71.

      _Family_: CERCOPIDÆ.
  Tettigonia sanguinea, vol. 2. pl. 38. f. 5, 6. p. 81.

  _Order_: DIPTERA.
      _Family_: TABANIDÆ.
  Tabanus Americanus, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 3. p. 97.
  ---- plumbeus, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 2. p. 97.

      _Family_: MYDASIDÆ.
  Mydas clavatus, vol. 1. pl. 44. f. 1. p. 97.

      _Family_: BOMBYLIIDÆ.
  Bombylius plumipes, vol. 2. pl. 39. f. 3. p. 83.

      _Family_: SYRPHIDÆ.
  Eristalis cinctus, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 6. p. 103.
  Milesia Virginiensis, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 6. p. 77.

      _Family_: MUSCIDÆ.
  Echinomyia hirta, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 4. p. 102.
  ---- pilosa, vol. 1. pl. 45. f. 7. p. 104.

  _Order_: THYSANURA.
      _Family_: LEPISMIDÆ.
  Lepisma collaris, vol. 2. pl. 37. f. 5. p. 76.

  _Order_: CHILOGNATHA.
      _Family_: JULIDÆ.
  Polydesmus (Fontaria) virginiensis, vol. 1. pl. 43. f. 8. p. 96.


THE END.


G. NORMAN, PRINTER, MAIDEN LANE, COVENT GARDEN.




NOTES.

[1] Thus confirming my observations on this insect in vol. 1. p. 68. (J. O.
    W.)

[2] Drury however received many insects from Brazil as well as Madras by
    Mr. Skeene.

[3] "Banks of the Morea, up the Mediterranean," in the text. Edit. 1.

[4] I believe this species to belong to the genus Magasoma. _Bdv._







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Illustrations of Exotic Entomology,
Volume 3, by Dru Drury

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ILLUSTRATIONS OF EXOTIC ENTOMOLOGY, V.3 ***

***** This file should be named 47601-8.txt or 47601-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/6/0/47601/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
