The Project Gutenberg eBook, A Brief Account of the Rise and Progress of
the People Called Quakers, by William Penn


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: A Brief Account of the Rise and Progress of the People Called Quakers


Author: William Penn



Release Date: September 25, 2006  [eBook #19377]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE RISE AND
PROGRESS OF THE PEOPLE CALLED QUAKERS***





Transcribed from the 1834 Harrison and Crosfield edition by David Price,
email ccx074@pglaf.org





                             A BRIEF ACCOUNT
                                  OF THE
                            RISE AND PROGRESS
                              OF THE PEOPLE
                             CALLED QUAKERS,
                              IN WHICH THEIR
 FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE, DOCTRINES, WORSHIP, MINISTRY, AND DISCIPLINE, ARE
                            PLAINLY DECLARED.


 WITH A SUMMARY RELATION OF THE FORMER DISPENSATIONS OF GOD IN THE WORLD;
                         BY WAY OF INTRODUCTION.

                             BY WILLIAM PENN.

    AS UNKNOWN, AND YET WELL KNOWN.  2 COR. VI. 9.

                             TWELFTH EDITION.

                               MANCHESTER:

          _Printed by Harrison and Crosfield_, _Market Street_.

                                 SOLD BY

               HARVEY & DARTON, GRACECHURCH STREET, LONDON.

                                  1834.




AN EPISTLE TO THE READER.


Reader, this following account of the people called Quakers, &c. was
written in the fear and love of God: first, as a standing testimony to
that ever blessed truth in the inward parts, with which God, in my
youthful time, visited my soul, and for the sense and love of which I was
made willing, in no ordinary way, to relinquish the honours and interests
of the world.  Secondly, as a testimony for that despised people, that
God has in his great mercy gathered and united by his own blessed Spirit
in the holy profession of it; whose fellowship I value above all worldly
greatness.  Thirdly, in love and honour to the memory of that worthy
servant of God, George Fox, the first instrument thereof, and therefore
styled by me--The great and blessed apostle of our day.  As this gave
birth to what is here presented to thy view, in the first edition of it,
by way of preface to George Fox's excellent Journal; so the consideration
of the present usefulness of the following account of the people called
Quakers, by reason of the unjust reflections of some adversaries that
once walked under the profession of Friends, and the exhortations that
conclude it, prevailed with me to consent that it should be republished
in a smaller volume; knowing also full well, that great books, especially
in these days, grow burthensome, both to the pockets and minds of too
many; and that there are not a few that desire, so it be at an easy rate,
to be informed about this people, that have been so much every where
spoken against: but blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, it is upon no worse grounds than it was said of old time of the
primitive Christians, as I hope will appear to every sober and
considerate reader.  Our business, after all the ill usage we have met
with, being the realities of religion, an effectual change before our
last and great change: that all may come to an inward, sensible, and
experimental knowledge of God, through the convictions and operations of
the light and spirit of Christ in themselves; the sufficient and blessed
means given to all, that thereby all may come savingly to know the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent to enlighten and redeem the
world: which knowledge is indeed eternal life.  And that thou, reader,
mayst obtain it, is the earnest desire of him that is ever thine in so
good a work.

WILLIAM PENN.




CHAP. I.


_Containing a brief account of divers dispensations of God in the world_,
_to the time he was pleased to raise this despised people_, _called
Quakers_.

Divers have been the dispensations of God since the creation of the
world, unto the sons of men; but the great end of all of them, has been
the renown of his own excellent name in the creation and restoration of
man: man, the emblem of himself, as a God on earth, and the glory of all
his works.  The world began with innocency; all was then good that the
good God had made: and as he blessed the works of his hands, so their
natures and harmony magnified him their Creator.  Then the morning stars
sang together for joy, and all parts of his work said Amen to his law.
Not a jar in the whole frame; but man in paradise, the beasts in the
field, the fowl in the air, the fish in the sea, the lights in the
heavens, the fruits of the earth; yea, the air, the earth, the water, and
fire, worshipped, praised, and exalted his power, wisdom, and goodness.
O holy sabbath!  O holy day to the Lord!

But this happy state lasted not long; for man, the crown and glory of the
whole, being tempted to aspire above his place, unhappily yielded,
against command and duty, as well as interest and felicity, and so fell
below it; lost the divine image, the wisdom, power, and purity he was
made in; by which, being no longer fit for paradise, he was expelled that
garden of God, his proper dwelling and residence, and was driven out, as
a poor vagabond, from the presence of the Lord, to wander in the earth,
the habitation of beasts.

Yet God that made him had pity on him; for he, seeing man was deceived,
and that it was not of malice, or an original presumption in him, but
through the subtilty of the serpent, who had first fallen from his own
state, and by the mediation of the woman, man's own nature and companion,
whom the serpent had first deluded, in his infinite goodness and wisdom
provided a way to repair the breach, recover the loss, and restore fallen
man again by a nobler and more excellent Adam, promised to be born of a
woman; that as by means of a woman the evil one had prevailed upon man,
by a woman also he should come into the world, who would prevail against
him, and bruise his head, and deliver man from his power: and which, in a
signal manner, by the dispensation of the Son of God in the flesh, in the
fulness of time was personally and fully accomplished by him, and in him,
as man's Saviour and Redeemer.

But his power was not limited, in the manifestation of it to that time;
for both before and since his blessed manifestation in the flesh, he has
been the light and life, the rock and strength of all that ever feared
God; was present with them in their temptations, followed them in their
travels and afflictions, and supported and carried them through and over
the difficulties that have attended them in their earthly pilgrimage.  By
this, Abel's heart excelled Cain's, and Seth obtained the pre-eminence,
and Enoch walked with God.  It was this that strove with the old world,
and which they rebelled against, and which sanctified and instructed Noah
to salvation.

But the outward dispensation that followed the benighted state of man,
after his fall, especially among the patriarchs, was generally that of
angels; as the scriptures of the Old Testament do in many places express,
as to Abraham, Jacob, &c.  The next was that of the law by Moses, which
was also delivered by angels, as the apostle tells us.  This dispensation
was much outward, and suited to a low and servile state; called
therefore, by the apostle Paul, that of a schoolmaster, which was to
point out and prepare that people to look and long for the Messiah, who
would deliver them from the servitude of a ceremonious and imperfect
dispensation, by knowing the realities of those mysterious
representations in themselves.  In this time the law was written on
stone, the temple built with hands, attended with an outward priesthood,
and external rites and ceremonies, that were shadows of the good things
that were to come, and were only to serve till the seed came, or the more
excellent and general manifestation of Christ, to whom was the promise,
and to all men only in him, in whom it was yea and amen, even life from
death, immortality and eternal life.

This the prophets foresaw, and comforted the believing Jews in the
certainty of it; which was the top of the Mosaical dispensation, which
ended in John's ministry, the forerunner of the Messiah, as John's was
finished in him, the fulness of all.  And then God, that at sundry times,
and in divers manners, had spoken to the fathers by his servants the
prophets, spoke to men by his Son Christ Jesus, who is heir of all
things, being the gospel-day, which is the dispensation of sonship:
bringing in thereby a nearer testament, and a better hope; even the
beginning of the glory of the latter days, and of the restitution of all
things; yea, the restoration of the kingdom unto Israel.

Now the spirit, that was more sparingly communicated in former
dispensations, began to be poured forth upon all flesh, according to the
prophet Joel; and the light that shined in darkness, or but dimly before,
the most gracious God caused to shine out of darkness, and the day-star
began to rise in the hearts of believers, giving unto them the knowledge
of God in the face, or appearance, of his Son Christ Jesus.

Now the poor in spirit, the meek, the true mourners, the hungry and
thirsty after righteousness, the peacemakers, the pure in heart, the
merciful and persecuted, came more especially in remembrance before the
Lord, and were sought out and blessed by Israel's true Shepherd.  Old
Jerusalem with her children grew out of date, and the new Jerusalem into
request, the mother of the sons of the gospel-day.  Wherefore, no more at
old Jerusalem, nor at the mountain of Samaria, will God be worshipped
above other places; for, behold, he is, by his own Son, declared and
preached a Spirit, and that he will be known as such, and worshipped in
the spirit and in the truth.  He will now come nearer than of old time,
and he will write his law in the heart, and put his fear and spirit in
the inward parts, according to his promise.  Then signs, types, and
shadows flew away, the day having discovered their insufficiency in not
reaching to the inside of the cup, to the cleansing of the conscience;
and all elementary services expired in and by him, that is the substance
of all.

And to this great and blessed end of the dispensation of the Son of God,
did the apostles testify, whom he had chosen and anointed by his spirit,
to turn the Jews from their prejudice and superstition, and the Gentiles
from their vanity and idolatry, to Christ's light and spirit that shined
in them; that they might be quickened from the sins and trespasses in
which they were dead, to serve the living God, in the newness of the
spirit of life, and walk as children of the light, and of the day, even
the day of holiness: for such put on Christ, the light of the world, and
make no more provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof.  So
that the light, spirit, and grace, that come by Christ, and appear in
man, were that divine principle the apostles ministered from, and turned
people's minds unto, and in which they gathered and built up the church
of Christ in their day.  For which cause they advise them not to quench
the spirit, but to wait for the spirit, and speak by the spirit, and pray
by the spirit, and walk in the spirit too, as that which approved them
the truly begotten children of God, born not of flesh and blood, or of
the will of man, but of the will of God; by doing his will, and denying
their own; by drinking of Christ's cup, and being baptized with his
baptism of self-denial; the way and path that all the heirs of life have
ever trod to blessedness.

But alas! even in the apostles' days, those bright stars of the first
magnitude of the gospel light, some clouds, foretelling an eclipse of
this primitive glory, began to appear; and several of them gave early
caution of it to the Christians of their time, that even then there was,
and yet would be more and more, a falling away from the power of
godliness, and the purity of that spiritual dispensation, by such as
sought to make a fair show in the flesh, but with whom the offence of the
cross ceased.  Yet with this comfortable conclusion, that they saw beyond
it a more glorious time than ever to the true church.  Their sight was
true; and what they foretold to the churches, gathered by them in the
name and power of Jesus, came to pass: for Christians degenerated apace
into outsides, as days, and meats, and divers other ceremonies.  And,
which was worse, they fell into strife and contention about them;
separating one from another, then envying, and, as they had power,
persecuting one another, to the shame and scandal of their common
Christianity, and grievous stumbling and offence of the heathen; among
whom the Lord had so long and so marvellously preserved them.  And having
got at last the worldly power into their hands, by kings and emperors
embracing the Christian profession, they changed, what they could, the
kingdom of Christ, which is not of this world, into a worldly kingdom;
or, at least, styled the worldly kingdom that was in their hands, the
kingdom of Christ, and so they became worldly and not true Christians.
Then human inventions and novelties, both in doctrine and worship,
crowded fast into the church; a door opened thereunto, by the grossness
and carnality that appeared then among the generality of Christians, who
had long since left the guidance of God's meek and heavenly spirit, and
given themselves up to superstition, will-worship, and voluntary
humility.  And as superstition is blind, so it is heady and furious, for
all must stoop to its blind and boundless zeal, or perish by it: in the
name of the spirit, persecuting the very appearance of the spirit of God
in others, and opposing that in others, which they resisted in
themselves, viz. the light, grace, and spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ;
but always under the notion of innovation, heresy, schism, or some such
plausible name; though Christianity allows of no name, or pretence
whatever, for persecuting of any man for matters of mere religion, being
in its very nature meek, gentle, and forbearing; and consists of faith,
hope, and charity, which no persecutor can have, whilst he remains a
persecutor; in that a man cannot believe well, or hope well, or have a
charitable or tender regard to another, whilst he would violate his mind,
or persecute his body, for matters of faith or worship towards his God.

Thus the false church sprang up, and mounted the chair; but, though she
lost her nature, she would needs keep her good name of the Lamb's bride,
the true church, and mother of the faithful: constraining all to receive
her mark, either in their forehead, or right-hand; that is, publicly, or
privately.  But, in deed and in truth, she was mystery Babylon, the
mother of harlots, mother of those that, with all their show and outside
of religion, were adulterated and gone from the spirit, nature, and life
of Christ, and grown vain, worldly, ambitious, covetous, cruel, &c. which
are the fruits of the flesh, and not of the spirit.

Now it was, that the true church fled into the wilderness, that is, from
superstition and violence, to a retired, solitary, and lonely state:
hidden, and as it were, out of sight of men, though not out of the world.
Which shows, that her wonted visibility was not essential to the being of
a true church in the judgment of the Holy Ghost; she being as true a
church in the wilderness, though not as visible and lustrous, as when she
was in her former splendor of profession.  In this state many attempts
she made to return, but the waters were yet too high, and her way blocked
up; and many of her excellent children, in several nations and centuries,
fell by the cruelty of superstition, because they would not fall from
their faithfulness to the truth.

The last age did set some steps towards it, both as to doctrine, worship,
and practice.  But practice quickly failed: for wickedness flowed, in a
little time, as well among the professors of the reformation, as those
they reformed from; so that by the fruits of conversation they were not
to be distinguished.  And the children of the reformers, if not the
reformers themselves, betook themselves, very early, to earthly policy
and power, to uphold and carry on their reformation that had been begun
with spiritual weapons; which I have often thought has been one of the
greatest reasons the reformation made no better progress, as to the life
and soul of religion.  For whilst the reformers were lowly and
spiritually minded, and trusted in God, and looked to him, and lived in
his fear, and consulted not with flesh and blood, nor sought deliverance
in their own way, there were daily added to the church such as, one might
reasonably say, should be saved: for they were not so careful to be safe
from persecution, as to be faithful and inoffensive under it: being more
concerned to spread the truth by their faith and patience in tribulation,
than to get the worldly power out of their hands that inflicted those
sufferings upon them: and it will be well if the Lord suffer them not to
fall, by the very same way they took to stand.

In doctrine they were in some things short; in other things, to avoid one
extreme, they ran into another: and for worship, there was, for the
generality, more of man in it than of God.  They owned the spirit,
inspiration, and revelation, indeed, and grounded their separation and
reformation upon the sense and understanding they received from it, in
the reading of the scriptures of truth.  And this was their plea; the
scripture is the text, the spirit the interpreter, and that to every one
for himself.  But yet there was too much of human invention, tradition,
and art, that remained both in praying and preaching; and of worldly
authority, and worldly greatness in their ministers; especially in this
kingdom, Sweden, Denmark, and some parts of Germany.  God was therefore
pleased in England to shift us from vessel to vessel; and the next remove
humbled the ministry, so that they were more strict in preaching, devout
in praying, and zealous for keeping the Lord's day, and catechising of
children and servants, and repeating at home in their families what they
had heard in public.  But even as these grew into power, they were not
only for whipping some out, but others into the temple: and they appeared
rigid in their spirits, rather than severe in their lives, and more for a
party than for piety: which brought forth another people, that were yet
more retired and select.

They would not communicate at large, or in common with others; but formed
churches among themselves of such as could give some account of their
conversion, at least of very promising experiences of the work of God's
grace upon their hearts, and under mutual agreements and covenants of
fellowship, they kept together.  These people were somewhat of a softer
temper, and seemed to recommend religion by the charms of its love,
mercy, and goodness, rather than by the terrors of its judgments and
punishments; by which the former party would have awed people into
religion.

They also allowed greater liberty to prophesy than those before them; for
they admitted any member to speak or pray, as well as their pastor, whom
they always chose, and not the civil magistrate.  If such found anything
pressing upon them to either duty, even without the distinction of clergy
or laity, persons of any trade had their liberty, be it never so low and
mechanical.  But alas! even these people suffered great loss: for tasting
of worldly empire, and the favour of princes, and the gain that ensued,
they degenerated but too much.  For though they had cried down national
churches and ministry, and maintenance too, some of them, when it was
their own turn to be tried, fell under the weight of worldly honour and
advantage, got into profitable parsonages too much, and outlived and
contradicted their own principles; and, which was yet worse, turned, some
of them, absolute persecutors of other men for God's sake, that but so
lately came themselves out of the furnace; which drove many a step
further, and that was into the water: another baptism, as believing they
were not scripturally baptized: and hoping to find that presence and
power of God, in submitting to this watery ordinance, which they desired
and wanted.

These people also made profession of neglecting, if not renouncing and
censuring not only the necessity, but use, of all human learning, as to
the ministry; and all other qualifications to it, besides the helps and
gifts of the spirit of God, and those natural and common to men.  And for
a time they seemed, like John of old, a burning and a shining light to
other societies.

They were very diligent, plain, and serious; strong in scripture, and
bold in profession; bearing much reproach and contradiction.  But that
which others fell by, proved their snare.  For worldly power spoiled them
too; who had enough of it to try them what they would do if they had
more: and they rested also too much upon their watery dispensation,
instead of passing on more fully to that of the fire and Holy Ghost,
which was his baptism, who came with a fan in his hand, that he might
thoroughly, and not in part only, purge his floor, and take away the
dross and the tin of his people, and make a man finer than gold.  Withal,
they grew high, rough, and self-righteous; opposing further attainment;
too much forgetting the day of their infancy and littleness, which gave
them something of a real beauty; insomuch that many left them, and all
visible churches and societies, and wandered up and down as sheep without
a shepherd, and as doves without their mates; seeking their beloved, but
could not find him, as their souls desired to know him, whom their souls
loved above their chiefest joy.

These people were called Seekers by some, and the Family of Love by
others; because, as they came to the knowledge of one another, they
sometimes met together, not formally to pray or preach at appointed times
or places, in their own wills, as in times past they were accustomed to
do, but waited together in silence; and as anything rose in any one of
their minds, that they thought savoured of a divine spring, they
sometimes spoke.  But so it was, that some of them not keeping in
humility, and in the fear of God, after the abundance of revelation, were
exalted above measure; and for want of staying their minds in an humble
dependance upon him that opened their understandings, to see great things
in his law, they ran out in their own imaginations, and mixing them with
those divine openings, brought forth a monstrous birth, to the scandal of
those that feared God, and waited daily in the temple not made with
hands, for the consolation of Israel; the Jew inward, and circumcision in
spirit.

This people obtained the name of Ranters, from their extravagant
discourses and practices.  For they interpreted Christ's fulfilling of
the law for us, to be a discharging of us from any obligation and duty
the law required of us, instead of the condemnation of the law for sins
past, upon faith and repentance: and that now it was no sin to do that
which before it was a sin to commit; the slavish fear of the law being
taken off by Christ, and all things good that man did, if he did but do
them with the mind and persuasion that it was so.  Insomuch that divers
fell into gross and enormous practices; pretending in excuse thereof,
that they could, without evil, commit the same act which was sin in
another to do: thereby distinguishing between the action and the evil of
it, by the direction of the mind, and intention in the doing of it.
Which was to make sin super-abound by the aboundings of grace, and to
turn from the grace of God into wantonness; a securer way of sinning than
before: as if Christ came not to save us from our sins, but in our sins;
not to take away sin, but that we might sin more freely at his cost, and
with less danger to ourselves.  I say, this ensnared divers, and brought
them to an utter and lamentable loss as to their eternal state; and they
grew very troublesome to the better sort of people, and furnished the
looser with an occasion to profane.




CHAP. II.


_Of the rise of this People_, _their fundamental principle_, _and
doctrine_, _and practice_, _in twelve points resulting from it_: _their
progress and sufferings_: _an expostulation with England thereupon_.

At was about that very time, as you may see in George Fox's annals, that
the eternal, wise, and good God, was pleased, in his infinite love, to
honour and visit this benighted and bewildered nation, with his glorious
day-spring from on high; yea, with a more sure and certain sound of the
word of light and life, through the testimony of a chosen vessel, to an
effectual and blessed purpose, can many thousands say, glory be to the
name of the Lord for ever!

For as it reached the conscience, and broke the heart, and brought many
to a sense and search, so that which people had been vainly seeking
without, with much pains and cost, they, by this ministry, found within,
where it was they wanted what they sought for, viz. the right way to
peace with God.  For they were directed to the light of Jesus Christ
within them, as the seed and leaven of the kingdom of God; near all,
because in all, and God's talent to all: a faithful and true witness, and
just monitor in every bosom.  The gift and grace of God to life and
salvation, that appears to all, though few regard it.  This the
traditional Christian, conceited of himself, and strong in his own will
and righteousness, overcome with blind zeal and passion, either despised
as a low and common thing, or opposed as a novelty, under many hard names
and opprobrious terms; denying, in his ignorant and angry mind, any fresh
manifestations of God's power and spirit in man, in these days, though
never more needed to make true Christians.  Not unlike those Jews of old,
that rejected the Son of God, at the very same time that they blindly
professed to wait for the Messiah to come; because, alas! he appeared not
among them according to their carnal mind and expectation.

This brought forth many abusive books, which filled the greater sort with
envy, and lesser with rage; and made the way and progress of this blessed
testimony strait and narrow, indeed, to those that received it.  However,
God owned his own work, and this testimony did effectually reach, gather,
comfort, and establish the weary and heavy-laden, the hungry and thirsty,
the poor and needy, the mournful and sick of many maladies, that had
spent all upon physicians of no value, and waited for relief from heaven,
help only from above; seeing, upon a serious trial of all things, nothing
else would do but Christ himself; the light of his countenance, a touch
of his garment, and help from his hand, who cured the poor woman's issue,
raised the centurion's servant, the widow's son, the ruler's daughter,
and Peter's mother: and like her they no sooner felt his power and
efficacy upon their souls, but they gave up to obey him in a testimony to
his power: and that with resigned wills and faithful hearts, through all
mockings, contradictions, confiscations, beatings, prisons, and many
other jeopardies that attended them for his blessed name's sake.

And, truly, they were very many, and very great; so that in all human
probability they must have been swallowed up quick of the proud and
boisterous waves that swelled and beat against them, but that the God of
all their tender mercies was with them in his glorious authority; so that
the hills often fled, and the mountains melted before the power that
filled them; working mightily for them, as well as in them; one ever
following the other.  By which they saw plainly, to their exceeding great
confirmation and comfort, that all things were possible with him with
whom they had to do.  And that the more that which God required seemed to
cross man's wisdom, and expose them to man's wrath, the more God appeared
to help and carry them through all to his glory.

Insomuch, that if ever any people could say in truth, Thou art our sun
and our shield, our rock and sanctuary; and by thee we have leaped over a
wall, and by thee we have run through a troop, and by thee we have put
the armies of the aliens to flight; these people had a right to say it.
And as God had delivered their souls of the wearisome burdens of sin and
vanity, and enriched their poverty of spirit, and satisfied their great
hunger and thirst after eternal righteousness, and filled them with the
good things of his own house, and made them stewards of his manifold
gifts; so they went forth to all quarters of these nations, to declare to
the inhabitants thereof, what God had done for them; what they had found,
and where and how they had found it, viz.--The way to peace with God:
inviting all to come and see, and taste for themselves, the truth of what
they declared unto them.

And as their testimony was to the principle of God in man, the precious
pearl and leaven of the kingdom, as the only blessed means appointed of
God to quicken, convince, and sanctify man; so they opened to them what
it was in itself, and what it was given to them for; how they might know
it from their own spirit, and that of the subtle appearance of the evil
one: and what it would do for all those whose minds should be turned off
from the vanity of the world, and its lifeless ways and teachers, and
adhere to his blessed light in themselves, which discovers and condemns
sin in all its appearances, and shows how to overcome it, if minded and
obeyed in its holy manifestations and convictions: giving power to such,
to avoid and resist those things that do not please God, and to grow
strong in love, faith, and good works.  That so man, whom sin hath made
as a wilderness, over-run with briers and thorns, might become as the
garden of God, cultivated by his divine power, and replenished with the
most virtuous and beautiful plants of God's own right-hand planting, to
his eternal praise.

But these experimental preachers of glad tidings of God's truth and
kingdom could not run when they list, or pray or preach when they
pleased, but as Christ their Redeemer prepared and moved them by his own
blessed Spirit, for which they waited in their services and meetings, and
spoke as that gave them utterance; and which was as those having
authority, and not like the dry, and formal Pharisees.  And so it plainly
appeared to the serious-minded, whose spiritual eye the Lord Jesus had in
any measure opened: so that to one was given the word of exhortation, to
another the word of reproof, to another the word of consolation, and all
by the same Spirit, and in the good order thereof, to the convincing and
edifying of many.

And, truly, they waxed strong and bold through faithfulness; and by the
power and Spirit of the Lord Jesus became very fruitful; thousands, in a
short time, being turned to the truth in the inward parts, through their
testimony in ministry and sufferings: insomuch as, in most counties, and
many of the considerable towns of England, meetings were settled; and
daily there were added such as should be saved.  For they were diligent
to plant and to water, and the Lord blessed their labours with an
exceeding great increase; notwithstanding all the opposition made to
their blessed progress, by false rumours, calumnies, and bitter
persecutions; not only from the powers of the earth, but from every one
that listed to injure and abuse them: so that they seemed, indeed, to be
as poor sheep appointed to the slaughter, and as a people killed all the
day long.

It were fitter for a volume than a preface, but so much as to repeat the
contents of their cruel sufferings; from professors as well as from
profane, and from magistrates as well as the rabble: that it may be said
of this abused and despised people, they went forth weeping, and sowed in
tears, bearing testimony to the precious seed, even the seed of the
kingdom, which stands not in words, the finest, the highest that man's
wit can use; but in power, the power of Christ Jesus, to whom God the
Father hath given all power in heaven and in earth, that he might rule
angels above, and men below.  Who empowered them, as their work
witnesseth, by the many that were turned through their ministry, from
darkness to light, and out of the broad into the narrow way of life and
peace: bringing people to a weighty, serious, and God-like conversation;
the practice of that doctrine which they taught.

And as without this secret divine power, there is no quickening and
regenerating of dead souls, so the want of this generating and begetting
power and life, is the cause of the little fruit that the many
ministries, that have been and are in the world, bring forth.  O that
both ministers and people were sensible of this!  My soul is often
troubled for them, and sorrow and mourning compass me about for their
sakes.  O that they were wise!  O that they would consider, and lay to
heart the things that truly and substantially make for their lasting
peace!

Two things are to be considered; the doctrine they taught, and the
example they led among all people.  I have already touched upon their
fundamental principle, which is as the corner-stone of their fabric: and,
indeed, to speak eminently and properly, their characteristic, or main
distinguishing point or principle, viz. the light of Christ within, as
God's gift for man's salvation.  This, I say, is as the root of the
goodly tree of doctrines that grew and branched out from it, which I
shall now mention in their natural and experimental order.

First, repentance from dead works to serve the living God.  Which
comprehends three operations.  First, a sight of sin.  Secondly, a sense
and godly sorrow for sin.  Thirdly, an amendment for the time to come.
This was the repentance they preached and pressed, and a natural result
from the principle they turned all people unto.  For of light came sight;
and of sight came sense and sorrow; and of sense and sorrow came
amendment of life.  Which doctrine of repentance leads to justification;
that is, forgiveness of the sins that are past, through Christ the alone
propitiation, and the sanctification or purgation, of the soul from the
defiling nature and habits of sin present, by the Spirit of Christ in the
soul; which is justification in the complete sense of that word:
comprehending both justification from the guilt of the sins that are
past, as if they had never been committed, through the love and mercy of
God in Christ Jesus; and the creature's being made inwardly just, through
the cleansing and sanctifying power and Spirit of Christ revealed in the
soul; which is commonly called sanctification.  But none can come to know
Christ to be their sacrifice, that reject him as their sanctifier: the
end of his coming being to save his people from the nature and
defilement, as well as guilt of sin; and, therefore, those that resist
his light and Spirit, make his coming and offering of none effect to
them.

From hence sprang a second doctrine they were led to declare, as the mark
of the prize of the high calling to all true Christians, viz. Perfection
from sin, according to the scriptures of truth; which testify it to be
the end of Christ's coming, and the nature of his kingdom, and for which
his Spirit was and is given, viz. to be perfect as our Heavenly Father is
perfect, and holy, because God is holy.  And this the apostles laboured
for, that the Christians should be sanctified throughout in body, soul,
and spirit; but they never held a perfection in wisdom and glory in this
life, or from natural infirmities, or death, as some have, with a weak or
ill mind, imagined and insinuated against them.

This they called a redeemed state, regeneration, or the new birth:
teaching everywhere, according to their foundation, that unless this work
was known, there was no inheriting of the kingdom of God.

Thirdly, this leads to an acknowledgment of eternal rewards and
punishments, as they have good reason; for else, of all people, certainly
they must be most miserable, who, for above forty years, have been
exceeding great sufferers for their profession; and, in some cases,
treated worse than the worst of men; yea, as the refuse and off-scouring
of all things.

This was the purport of their doctrine and ministry; which for the most
part, is what other professors of Christianity pretend to hold in words
and forms, but not in the power of godliness; which, generally speaking,
has been long lost by men's departing from that principle and seed of
life that is in man, and which man has not regarded, but lost the sense
of; and in and by which he can only be quickened in his mind to serve the
living God in newness of life.  For as the life of religion was lost, and
the generality lived and worshipped God after their own wills, and not
after the will of God, nor the mind of Christ, which stood in the works
and fruits of the Holy Spirit; so that which these pressed, was not
notion, but experience; not formality, but godliness; as being sensible
in themselves, through the work of God's righteous judgments, that
without holiness no man shall ever see the Lord with comfort.

Besides these general doctrines, as the larger branches, there sprang
forth several particular doctrines, that did exemplify and farther
explain the truth and efficacy of the general doctrine before observed,
in their lives and examples.  As,

I.  Communion and loving one another.  This is a noted mark in the mouths
of all sorts of people concerning them: they will meet, they will help
and stick one to another: whence it is common to hear some say, "Look how
the Quakers love and take care of one another."  Others, less moderate,
will say, "The Quakers love none but themselves:" and if loving one
another, and having an intimate communion in religion, and constant care
to meet to worship God, and help one another, be any mark of primitive
Christianity, they had it, blessed be the Lord, in an ample manner.

II.  To love enemies.  This they both taught and practised.  For they did
not only refuse to be revenged for injuries done them, and condemned it
as of an unchristian spirit; but they did freely forgive, yea, help and
relieve those that had been cruel to them, when it was in their power to
have been even with them: of which many and singular instances might be
given: endeavouring, through faith and patience, to overcome all
injustice and oppression, and preaching this doctrine as Christian, for
others to follow.

III.  Another was, the sufficiency of truth-speaking, according to
Christ's own form of sound words, of yea, yea, and nay, nay, among
Christians, without swearing, both from Christ's express prohibition to
swear at all; (Mat. v.) and for that, they being under the tie and bond
of truth in themselves, there was no necessity for an oath; and it would
be a reproach to their Christian veracity to assure their truth by such
an extraordinary way of speaking; simple and uncompounded answers, as yea
and nay, without asseveration, attestation, or supernatural vouchers,
being most suitable to evangelical righteousness.  But offering, at the
same time, to be punished to the full for false-speaking, as others for
perjury, if ever guilty of it: and hereby they exclude with all true, all
false and profane swearing; for which the land did and doth mourn, and
the great God was, and is, not a little offended with it.

IV.  Not fighting, but suffering, is another testimony peculiar to this
people: they affirm that Christianity teacheth people to beat their
swords into plough-shares, and their spears into pruning-hooks, and to
learn war no more; that so the wolf may lie down with the lamb, and the
lion with the calf, and nothing that destroys be entertained in the
hearts of people: exhorting them to employ their zeal against sin, and
turn their anger against Satan, and no longer war one against another;
because all wars and fightings come of men's own hearts' lusts, according
to the apostle James, and not of the meek Spirit of Christ Jesus, who is
captain of another warfare, and which is carried on with other weapons.
Thus, as truth-speaking succeeded swearing, so faith and patience
succeeded fighting, in the doctrine and practice of this people.  Nor
ought they for this to be obnoxious to civil government, since, if they
cannot fight for it, neither can they fight against it; which is no mean
security to any state.  Nor is it reasonable, that people should be
blamed for not doing more for others than they can do for themselves.
And, Christianity set aside, if the costs and fruits of war were well
considered, peace, with all its inconveniencies, is generally preferable.
But though they were not for fighting, they were for submitting to
government, and that, not only for fear, but for conscience-sake, where
government doth not interfere with conscience; believing it to be an
ordinance of God, and where it is justly administered, a great benefit to
mankind.  Though it has been their lot, through blind zeal in some, and
interest in others, to have felt the strokes of it with greater weight
and rigour than any other persuasion in this age; whilst they of all
others, religion set aside, have given the civil magistrate the least
occasion of trouble in the discharge of his office.

V.  Another part of the character of this people was, and is, they refuse
to pay tithes or maintenance to a national ministry; and that for two
reasons: the one is, they believe all compelled maintenance, even to
gospel-ministers, to be unlawful, because expressly contrary to Christ's
command, who said, "Freely you have received, freely give:" at least,
that the maintenance of gospel-ministers should be free, and not forced.
The other reason of their refusal is, because these ministers are not
gospel ones, in that the Holy Ghost is not their foundation, but human
arts and parts.  So that it is not matter of humour or sullenness, but
pure conscience towards God, that they cannot help to support national
ministries where they dwell, which are but too much and too visibly
become ways of worldly advantage and preferment.

VI.  Not to respect persons, was, and is, another of their doctrines and
practices, for which they were often buffeted and abused.  They affirmed
it to be sinful to give flattering titles, or to use vain gestures and
compliments of respect.  Though to virtue and authority they ever made a
deference; but after their plain and homely manner, yet sincere and
substantial way: well remembering the examples of Mordecai and Elihu; but
more especially the command of their Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who
forbade his followers to call men Rabbi, which implies Lord or Master;
also the fashionable greetings and salutations of those times; that so
self-love and honour, to which the proud mind of man is incident, in his
fallen state, might not be indulged, but rebuked.  And though this
rendered their conversation disagreeable, yet they that will remember
what Christ said to the Jews, "How can you believe which receive honour
one of another?" will abate of their resentment, if his doctrine has any
credit with them.

VII.  They also used the plain language of Thee and Thou, to a single
person, whatever was his degree among men.  And, indeed, the wisdom of
God was much seen in bringing forth this people in so plain an
appearance.  For it was a close and distinguishing test upon the spirits
of those they came among; showing their insides, and what predominated,
notwithstanding their high and great profession of religion.  This among
the rest sounded harsh to many of them, and they took it ill, forgetting
the language they use to God in their own prayers, and the common style
of the scriptures, and that it is an absolute and essential propriety of
speech.  And what good, alas! had their religion done them, who were so
sensibly touched with indignation for the use of this plain, honest, and
true speech?

VIII.  They recommended silence by their example, having very few words
upon all occasions.  They were at a word in dealing: nor could their
customers, with many words, tempt them from it, having more regard to
truth than custom, to example than gain.  They sought solitude: but when
in company, they would neither use, nor willingly hear unnecessary or
unlawful discourses: whereby they preserved their minds pure and
undisturbed from unprofitable thoughts, and diversions.  Nor could they
humour the custom of Good Night, Good Morrow, God Speed; for they knew
the night was good, and the day was good, without wishing of either; and
that in the other expression, the holy name of God was too lightly and
unthankfully used, and therefore taken in vain.  Besides, they were words
and wishes of course, and are usually as little meant, as are love and
service in the custom of cap and knee; and superfluity in those, as well
as in other things, was burthensome to them; and therefore, they did not
only decline to use them, but found themselves often pressed to reprove
the practice.

IX.  For the same reason they forbore drinking to people, or pledging of
them, as the manner of the world is: a practice that is not only
unnecessary, but they thought evil in the tendencies of it, being a
provocation to drink more than did people good, as well as that it was in
itself vain and heathenish.

X.  Their way of marriage is peculiar to them; and shows a distinguishing
care above other societies professing Christianity.  They say, that
marriage is an ordinance of God, and that God only can rightly join man
and woman in marriage.  Therefore, they use neither priest nor
magistrate; but the man and woman concerned take each other as husband
and wife, in the presence of divers credible witnesses, promising to each
other, with God's assistance, to be loving and faithful in that relation,
till death shall separate them.  But antecedent to this, they first
present themselves to the monthly meeting for the affairs of the church
where they reside; there declaring their intentions to take one another
as husband and wife, if the said meeting have nothing material to object
against it.  They are constantly asked the necessary questions, {25} as
in case of parents or guardians, if they have acquainted them with their
intention, and have their consent, &c.  The method of the meeting is, to
take a minute thereof, and to appoint proper persons to inquire of their
conversation and clearness from all others, and whether they have
discharged their duty to their parents or guardians; and to make report
thereof to the next monthly meeting, where the same parties are desired
to give their attendance. {26}  In case it appears they have proceeded
orderly, the meeting passes their proposal, and so records it in their
meeting book.  And in case the woman be a widow, and hath children, due
care is there taken that provision also be made by her for the orphans,
before the meeting pass the proposals of marriage: advising the parties
concerned, to appoint a convenient time and place, and to give fitting
notice to their relations, and such friends and neighbours, as they
desire should be the witnesses of their marriage: where they take one
another by the hand, and by name promise reciprocally, love and fidelity,
after the manner before expressed.  Of all which proceedings, a narrative
in way of certificate is made, to which the said parties first set their
hands, thereby confirming it as their act and deed; and then divers
relations, spectators, and auditors, set their names as witnesses of what
they said and signed.  And this certificate is afterward registered in
the record belonging to the meeting, where the marriage is solemnized.
Which regular method has been, as it deserves, adjudged in courts of law
a good marriage, where it has been by cross and ill people disputed and
contested, for want of the accustomed formalities of priest and ring,
&c.--ceremonies they have refused, not out of humour, but conscience
reasonably grounded; inasmuch as no scripture example tells us, that the
priest had any other part, of old time, than that of a witness among the
rest, before whom the Jews used to take one another: and, therefore, this
people look upon it as an imposition, to advance the power and profits of
the clergy: and for the use of the ring, it is enough to say, that it was
a heathenish and vain custom, and never in practice among the people of
God, Jews, or primitive Christians.  The words of the usual form, as
"with my body I thee worship," &c. are hardly defensible.  In short, they
are more careful, exact, and regular, than any form now used; and it is
free of the inconveniences, with which other methods are attended; their
care and checks being so many, and such, as that no clandestine marriages
can be performed among them.

XI.  It may not be unfit to say something here of their births and
burials, which make up so much of the pomp of too many called Christians.
For births, the parents name their own children; which is usually some
days after they are born, in the presence of the midwife, if she can be
there, and those that were at the birth, who afterwards sign a
certificate for that purpose prepared, of the birth and name of the child
or children; which is recorded in a proper book, in the monthly-meeting
to which the parents belong; avoiding the accustomed ceremonies and
festivals.

XII.  Their burials are performed with the same simplicity.  If the body
of the deceased be near any public meeting-place, it is usually carried
thither, for the more convenient reception of those that accompany it to
the burying-ground.  And it so falls out sometimes, that while the
meeting is gathering for the burial, {27} some or other has a word of
exhortation, for the sake of the people there met together.  After which
the body is borne away by young men, or else those that are of their
neighbourhood, or those that were most of the intimacy of the deceased
party: the corpse being in a plain coffin, without any covering or
furniture upon it.  At the ground they pause some time before they put
the body into its grave, that if any there should have anything upon them
to exhort the people, they may not be disappointed; and that the
relations may the more retiredly and solemnly take the last leave of the
body of their departed kindred, and the spectators have a sense of
mortality, by the occasion then given them, to reflect upon their own
latter end.  Otherwise, they have no set rites or ceremonies on those
occasions.  Neither do the kindred of the deceased ever wear mourning;
{28} they looking upon it as a worldly ceremony and piece of pomp; and
that what mourning is fit for a Christian to have, at the departure of a
beloved relation or friend, should be worn in the mind, which is only
sensible of the loss: and the love they had to them, and remembrance of
them, to be outwardly expressed by a respect to their advice, and care of
those they have left behind them, and their love of that they loved.
Which conduct of theirs, though unmodish or unfashionable, leaves nothing
of the substance of things neglected or undone; and as they aim at no
more, so that simplicity of life is what they observe with great
satisfaction; though it sometimes happens not to be without the mockeries
of the vain world they live in.

These things gave them a rough and disagreeable appearance with the
generality; who thought them turners of the world upside down, as,
indeed, in some sense they were: but in no other than that wherein Paul
was so charged, viz. To bring things back into their primitive and right
order again.  For these and such like practices of theirs were not the
result of humour, or for civil distinction, as some have fancied; but a
fruit of inward sense, which God through his holy fear, had begotten in
them.  They did not consider how to contradict the world, or distinguish
themselves as a party from others; it being none of their business, as it
was not their interest; no, it was not the result of consultation, or a
framed design, by which to declare or recommend schism or novelty.  But
God having given them a sight of themselves, they saw the whole world in
the same glass of truth; and sensibly discerned the affections and
passions of men, and the rise and tendency of things; what it was that
gratified the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of
life, which are not of the Father, but of the world.  And from thence
sprang, in the night of darkness and apostacy, which hath been over
people through their degeneration from the light and Spirit of God, these
and many other vain customs, which are seen, by the heavenly day of
Christ that dawns in the soul, to be either wrong in their original, or,
by time and abuse, hurtful in their practice.  And though these things
seemed trivial to some, and rendered these people stingy and conceited in
such persons' opinion; there was and is more in them, than they were, or
are, aware of.

It was not very easy to our primitive friends to make themselves sights
and spectacles, and the scorn and derision of the world; which they
easily foresaw must be the consequence of so unfashionable a conversation
in it: but here was the wisdom of God seen in the foolishness of these
things; first, that they discovered the satisfaction and concern that
people had in and for the fashions of this world, notwithstanding their
high pretences to another: in that any disappointment about them came so
very near them, as that the greatest honesty, virtue, wisdom, and
ability, were unwelcome without them.  Secondly, it seasonably and
profitably divided conversation; for this making their society uneasy to
their relations and acquaintance, it gave them the opportunity of more
retirement and solitude; wherein they met with better company, even the
Lord God their Redeemer; and grew strong in his love, power, and wisdom;
and were thereby better qualified for his service.  And the success
abundantly showed it, blessed be the name of the Lord.

And though they were not great and learned in the esteem of this world,
(for then they had not wanted followers upon their own credit and
authority,) yet they were generally of the most sober of the several
persuasions they were in, and of the most repute for religion; and many
of them of good capacity, substance, and account among men.

And also some among them wanted not for parts, learning, or estate;
though then as of old, not many wise, or noble, &c, were called; or, at
least, received the heavenly call, because of the cross that attended the
profession of it in sincerity.  But neither do parts or learning make men
the better Christians, though the better orators and disputants; and it
is the ignorance of people about the divine gift, that causes that vulgar
and mischievous mistake.  Theory and practice, speculation and enjoyment,
words and life, are two things.  O! it is the penitent, the reformed, the
lowly, the watchful, the self-denying, and holy soul, that is the
Christian!  And that frame is the fruit and work of the Spirit, which is
the life of Jesus; whose life, though hid in the fulness of it in God the
Father, is shed abroad in the hearts of them that truly believe,
according to their capacity.  O that people did but know this to cleanse
them, to circumcise them, to quicken them, and to make them new creatures
indeed! recreated, or regenerated, after Christ Jesus unto good works;
that they might live to God, and not to themselves; and offer up living
prayers and living praises to the living God, through his own living
Spirit, in which he is only to be worshipped in this gospel day.

O that they that read me could but feel me! for my heart is affected with
this merciful visitation of the Father of lights and spirits to this poor
nation, and the whole world through the same testimony.  Why should the
inhabitants thereof reject it?  Why should they lose the blessed benefit
of it?  Why should they not turn to the Lord with all their hearts, and
say from the heart, Speak Lord, for now thy poor servants hear: O that
thy will may be done, thy great, thy good, and holy will, in earth as it
is in heaven! do it in us, do it upon us, do what thou wilt with us; for
we are thine, and desire to glorify thee our Creator, both for that, and
because thou art our Redeemer; for thou art redeeming us from the earth,
from the vanities and pollutions of it, to be a peculiar people unto
thee.  O! this were a brave day for England, if so she could say in
truth! but alas, the case is otherwise! for which some of thine
inhabitants, O land of my nativity! have mourned over thee with bitter
wailing and lamentation.  Their heads have been, indeed, as waters, and
their eyes as fountains of tears, because of thy transgression and
stiffneckedness; because thou wilt not hear, and fear, and return to the
Rock, even thy Rock, O England! from whence thou art hewn.  But be thou
warned, O land of great profession, to receive him into thy heart.
Behold, at that door it is he hath stood so long knocking; but thou wilt
yet have none of him.  O! be thou awakened! lest Jerusalem's judgments do
swiftly overtake thee, because of Jerusalem's sins that abound in thee.
For she abounded in formality, but made void the weighty things of God's
law, as thou daily dost.

She withstood the Son of God in the flesh, and thou resistest the Son of
God in the Spirit.  He would have gathered her, as a hen gathereth her
chickens under her wings, and she would not; so would he have gathered
thee out of thy lifeless profession, and have brought thee to inherit
substance; to have known his power and kingdom: for which he often
knocked within, by his grace and Spirit; and without, by his servants and
witnesses: but, on the contrary, as Jerusalem of old persecuted the
manifestation of the Son of God in the flesh, and crucified him, and
whipped and imprisoned his servants; so hast thou, O land! crucified to
thyself afresh the Lord of life and glory, and done despite to his Spirit
of grace; slighting the fatherly visitation, and persecuting the blessed
dispensers of it by thy laws and magistrates: though they have early and
late pleaded with thee in the power and Spirit of the Lord; in love and
meekness, that thou mightest know the Lord, and serve him, and become the
glory of all lands.

But thou hast evilly entreated and requited them, thou hast set at nought
all their counsel, and wouldst have none of their reproof, as thou
shouldst have had.  Their appearance was too straight, and their
qualifications were too mean for thee to receive them; like the Jews of
old, that cried, Is not this the Carpenter's Son, and are not his
brethren among us; which of the scribes, of the learned (the orthodox)
believe in him?  Prophesying their fall in a year or two, and making and
executing of severe laws to bring it to pass: endeavouring to terrify
them out of their holy way, or destroy them for abiding faithful to it.
But thou hast seen how many governments that rose against them, and
determined their downfall, have been overturned and extinguished, and
that they are still preserved, and become a great and a considerable
people, among the middle sort of thy numerous inhabitants.  And
notwithstanding the many difficulties without and within, which they have
laboured under, since the Lord God eternal first gathered them, they are
an increasing people; the Lord still adding unto them, in divers parts,
such as shall be saved, if they persevere to the end.  And to thee, O
England! were they, and are they lifted up as a standard, and as a city
set upon a hill, and to the nations round about thee, that in their light
thou mayst come to see light, even in Christ Jesus the light of the
world, and, therefore, thy light and life too, if thou wouldst but turn
from thy many evil ways, and receive and obey it.  "For in the light of
the Lamb must the nations of them that are saved walk," as the scripture
testifies.

Remember, O nation of great profession! how the Lord has waited upon thee
since the dawning reformation, and the many mercies and judgments by
which he has pleaded with thee; and awake and arise out of thy deep
sleep, and yet hear his word in thy heart, that thou mayst live.

Let not this thy day of visitation pass over thy head, nor neglect thou
so great salvation as is this which is come to thy house, O England! for
why shouldst thou die?  O land that God desires to bless, be assured it
is he that has been in the midst of this people, in the midst of thee,
and not a delusion, as thy mistaken teachers have made thee believe.  And
this thou shalt find by their marks and fruits, if thou wilt consider
them in the spirit of moderation.



CHAP.  III.


_Of the Qualifications of their Ministry_.  _Eleven marks that it is
Christian_.

I.  They were changed men themselves, before they went about to change
others.  Their hearts were rent, as well as their garments; and they knew
the power and work of God upon them.  And this was seen by the great
alteration it made, and their stricter course of life, and more godly
conversation that immediately followed upon it.

II.  They went not forth, or preached, in their own time or will, but in
the will of God; and spoke not their own studied matters, but as they
were opened and moved of his Spirit, with which they were well acquainted
in their own conversion: which cannot be expressed to carnal men, so as
to give them any intelligible account; for to such it is, as Christ said,
like the blowing of the wind, which no man knows whence it cometh, or
whither it goeth.  Yet this proof and seal went along with their
ministry, that many were turned from their lifeless professions, and the
evil of their ways, to an inward and experimental knowledge of God, and a
holy life, as thousands can witness.  And as they freely received what
they had to say from the Lord, so they freely administered it to others.

III.  The bent and stress of their ministry was conversion to God;
regeneration and holiness.  Not schemes of doctrines and verbal creeds,
or new forms of worship: but a leaving off in religion the superfluous,
and reducing the ceremonious and formal part, and pressing earnestly the
substantial, the necessary and profitable part to the soul; as all, upon
a serious reflection, must and do acknowledge.

IV.  They directed people to a principle in themselves, though not of
themselves, by which all that they asserted, preached, and exhorted
others to, might be wrought in them, and known to them, through
experience, to be true; which is a high and distinguishing mark of the
truth of their ministry, both that they knew what they said, and were not
afraid of coming to the test.  For as they were bold from certainty, so
they required conformity upon no human authority, but upon conviction,
and the conviction of this principle, which they asserted was in them
that they preached unto: and unto that they directed them, that they
might examine and prove the reality of those things which they had
affirmed of it, as to its manifestation and work in man.  And this is
more than the many ministers in the world pretended to.  They declare of
religion, say many things true, in words, of God, Christ, and the Spirit;
of holiness and heaven; that all men should repent and amend their lives,
or they will go to hell, &c.  But which of them all pretend to speak of
their own knowledge and experience; or ever directed to a divine
principle, or agent, placed of God in man, to help him; and how to know
it, and wait to feel its power to work that good and acceptable will of
God in them?

Some of them, indeed, have spoken of the spirit, and the operations of it
to sanctification, and performance of worship to God; but where and how
to find it, and wait in it, to perform our duty to God, was yet as a
mystery to be declared by this farther degree of reformation.  So that
this people did not only in words, more than equally press repentance,
conversion, and holiness, but did it knowingly and experimentally; and
directed those, to whom they preached, to a sufficient principle; and
told them where it was, and by what tokens they might know it, and which
way they might experience the power and efficacy of it to their souls'
happiness.  Which is more than theory and speculation, upon which most
other ministers depend: for here is certainty; a bottom upon which man
may boldly appear before God in the great day of account.

V.  They reached to the inward state and condition of people; which is an
evidence of the virtue of their principle, and of their ministering from
it, and not from their own imaginations, glosses, or comments upon
scripture.  For nothing reaches the heart, but what is from the heart; or
pierces the conscience, but what comes from a living conscience; insomuch
as it hath often happened, where people have under secrecy revealed their
state or condition to some choice friends, for advice or ease, they have
been so particularly directed in the ministry of this people, that they
have challenged their friends with discovering their secrets, and telling
their preachers their cases, to whom a word hath not been spoken.  Yea,
the very thoughts and purposes of the hearts of many have been so plainly
detected, that they have, like Nathaniel, cried out, of this inward
appearance of Christ, "Thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of
Israel."  And those that have embraced this divine principle, have found
this mark of its truth and divinity, that the woman of Samaria did of
Christ when in the flesh, to be the Messiah, viz. It had told them all
that ever they had done; shown them their insides, the most inward
secrets of their hearts, and laid judgment to the line, and righteousness
to the plummet; of which thousands can at this day give in their witness.
So that nothing has been affirmed by this people, of the power and virtue
of this heavenly principle, that such as have turned to it have not found
true, and more; and that one half had not been told to them of what they
have seen of the power, purity, wisdom, and goodness of God therein.

VI.  The accomplishments, with which this principle fitted even some of
the meanest of this people for their work and service, furnishing some of
them with an extraordinary understanding in divine things, and an
admirable, fluency, and taking-way of expression, gave occasion to some
to wonder, saying of them, as of their Master, "Is not this such a
mechanic's son, how came he by this learning?"  As from thence others
took occasion to suspect and insinuate they were Jesuits in disguise, who
had the reputation of learned men for an age past; though there was not
the least ground of truth for any such reflection; in that their
ministers are known, the places of their abode, their kindred and
education.

VII.  That they came forth low, and despised, and hated, as the primitive
Christians did; and not by the help of worldly wisdom or power, as former
reformations in part have done: but in all things it may be said, this
people were brought forth in the cross; in a contradiction to the ways,
worships, fashions, and customs of this world; yea, against wind and
tide, that so no flesh might glory before God.

VIII.  They could have no design to themselves in this work, thus to
expose themselves to scorn and abuse; to spend and be spent; leaving wife
and children, house and land, and all that can be accounted dear to men,
with their lives in their hands, being daily in jeopardy, to declare this
primitive message revived in their spirits, by the good Spirit and power
of God, viz.

That God is light, and in him is no darkness at all; and that he has sent
his Son a light into the world, to enlighten all men in order to
salvation; and that they that say they have fellowship with God, and are
his children and people, and yet walk in darkness, viz. in disobedience
to the light in their consciences, and after the vanity of this world,
lie and do not the truth.  But that all such as love the light, and bring
their deeds to it, and walk in the light, as God is light, the blood of
Jesus Christ his Son should cleanse them from all sin.  Thus John i. 4.
19.  Chap. iii. 20, 21.  1 John i. 5, 6, 7.

IX.  Their known great constancy and patience in suffering for their
testimony in all the branches of it; and that sometimes unto death, by
beatings, bruisings, long and crowded imprisonments, and noisome
dungeons: four of them in New England dying by the hands of the
executioner, purely for preaching amongst that people: besides
banishments, and excessive plunders and sequestrations of their goods and
estates, almost in all parts, not easily to be expressed, and less to
have been endured, but by those that have the support of a good and
glorious cause; refusing deliverance by any indirect ways or means, as
often as it was offered unto them.

X.  That they did not only not show any disposition to revenge, when it
was at any time in their power, but forgave their cruel enemies; showing
mercy to those that had none for them.

XI.  Their plainness with those in authority, like the ancient prophets,
not fearing to tell them to their faces, of their private and public
sins; and their prophesies to them of their afflictions and downfal, when
in the top of their glory: also of some national judgments, as of the
plague, and fire of London, in express terms; and likewise particular
ones to divers persecutors, which accordingly overtook them; and were
very remarkable in the places where they dwelt, which in time may be made
public for the glory of God.

Thus, reader, thou seest this people in their rise, principles, ministry,
and progress, both their general and particular testimony; by which thou
mayst be informed how, and upon what foot, they sprang, and became so
considerable a people.  It remains next, that I show also their care,
conduct, and discipline as a Christian and reformed society, that they
might be found living up to their own principles and profession.  And
this the rather, because they have hardly suffered more in their
character from the unjust charge of error, than by the false imputation
of disorder: which calumny, indeed, has not failed to follow all the true
steps that were ever made to reformation, and under which reproach none
suffered more than the primitive Christians themselves, that were the
honour of Christianity, and the great lights and examples of their own
and succeeding ages.




CHAP. IV.


_Of the discipline and practice of this people_, _as a religious
society_.  _The church power they own and exercise_, _and that which they
reject and condemn_: _with the method of their proceedings against erring
and disorderly persons_.

This people increasing daily both in town and country, a holy care fell
upon some of the elders among them, for the benefit and service of the
church.  And the first business in their view, after the example of the
primitive saints, was the exercise of charity; to supply the necessities
of the poor, and answer the like occasions.  Wherefore collections were
early and liberally made for that and divers other services in the
church, and intrusted with faithful men, fearing God, and of good report,
who were not weary in well doing; adding often of their own in large
proportions, which they never brought to account, or desired should be
known, much less restored to them, that none might want, nor any service
be retarded or disappointed.

They were also very careful, that every one that belonged to them,
answered their profession in their behaviour among men, upon all
occasions; that they lived peaceably, and were in all things good
examples.  They found themselves engaged to record their sufferings and
services: and in the case of marriage, which they could not perform in
the usual methods of the nation, but among themselves, they took care
that all things were clear between the parties and all others: and it was
then rare, that any one entertained an inclination to a person on that
account, till he or she had communicated it secretly to some very weighty
and eminent friends among them, that they might have a sense of the
matter; looking to the counsel and unity of their brethren as of great
moment to them.  But because the charge of the poor, the number of
orphans, marriages, sufferings, and other matters, multiplied; and that
it was good that the churches were in some way and method of proceeding
in such affairs among them, to the end they might the better correspond
upon occasion, where a member of one meeting might have to do with one of
another; it pleased the Lord, in his wisdom and goodness, to open the
understanding of the first instrument of this dispensation of life, about
a good and orderly way of proceeding; who felt a holy concern to visit
the churches in person throughout this nation, to begin and establish it
among them: and by his epistles, the like was done in other nations and
provinces abroad; which he also afterwards visited, and helped in that
service, as shall be observed when I come to speak of him.

Now the care, conduct, and discipline, I have been speaking of, and which
are now practised among this people, is as followeth.

This godly elder, in every county where he travelled, exhorted them that
some, out of every meeting of worship, should meet together once in the
month, to confer about the wants and occasions of the church.  And, as
the case required, so those monthly meetings were fewer or more in number
in every respective county; four or six meetings of worship, usually
making one monthly meeting of business.  And accordingly, the brethren
met him from place to place, and began the said meetings, viz. For the
poor, orphans, orderly walking, integrity to their profession, births,
marriages, burials, sufferings, &c.  And that these monthly meetings
should, in each county, make up one quarterly meeting, where the most
zealous and eminent friends of the county should assemble to communicate,
advise, and help one another, especially when any business seemed
difficult, or a monthly meeting was tender of determining a matter.

Also that these several quarterly meetings should digest the reports of
their monthly meetings, and prepare one for each respective county,
against the yearly meeting, in which all quarterly meetings resolve;
which is held in London: where the churches in this nation, and other
nations {43a} and provinces, meet by chosen members of their respective
counties, both mutually to communicate their church affairs, and to
advise, and be advised in any depending case, to edification.  Also to
provide a requisite stock for the discharge of general expenses for
general services in the church, not needful to be here particularized.
{43b}

At these meetings any of the members of the churches may come, if they
please, and speak their minds freely, in the fear of God, to any matter;
but the mind of each quarterly meeting, therein represented, is chiefly
understood, as to particular cases, in the sense delivered by the persons
deputed, or chosen for that service by the said meeting.

During their yearly meeting, to which their other meetings refer in their
order, and naturally resolve themselves, care is taken by a select
number, for that service chosen by the general assembly, to draw up the
minutes {44} of the said meeting, upon the several matters that have been
under consideration therein, to the end that the respective quarterly and
monthly meetings may be informed of all proceedings; together with a
general exhortation to holiness, unity, and charity.  Of all which
proceedings in yearly, monthly, and quarterly meetings, due record is
kept by some one appointed for that service, or that hath voluntarily
undertaken it.  These meetings are opened and usually concluded in their
solemn waiting upon God, who is sometimes graciously pleased to answer
them with as signal evidences of his love and presence, as in any of
their meetings of worship.

It is further to be noted, that in these solemn assemblies for the
churches' service, there is no one presides among them after the manner
of the assemblies of other people; Christ only being their President, as
he is pleased to appear in life and wisdom in any one or more of them, to
whom, whatever be their capacity or degree, the rest adhere with a firm
unity, not of authority, but conviction, which is the divine authority
and way of Christ's power and Spirit in his people: making good his
blessed promise, "that he would be in the midst of his, where and
whenever they were met together in his name, even to the end of the
world."  So be it.

Now it may be expected, I should here set down what sort of authority is
exercised by this people, upon such members of their society as
correspond not in their lives with their profession, and that are
refractory to this good and wholesome order settled among them: and the
rather, because they have not wanted their reproach and sufferings from
some tongues and pens, upon this occasion, in a plentiful manner.

The power they exercise, is such as Christ has given to his own people,
to the end of the world, in the persons of his disciples, viz. To
oversee, exhort, reprove, and, after long suffering and waiting upon the
disobedient and refractory, to disown them, as any longer of their
communion, or that they will stand charged with the behaviour of such
transgressors, or their conversation, until they repent.  The subject
matter about which this authority, in any of the foregoing branches of
it, is exercised, is, first, in relation to common and general practice.
And, secondly, about those things that more strictly refer to their own
character and profession, and which distinguish them from all other
professors of Christianity; avoiding two extremes upon which many split,
viz. persecution and libertinism, that is, a coercive power to whip
people into the temple; that such as will not conform, though against
faith and conscience, shall be punished in their persons or estates; or
leaving all loose and at large, as to practice; and so unaccountable to
all but God and the magistrate.   To which hurtful extreme, nothing has
more contributed than the abuse of church power, by such as suffer their
passion and private interests to prevail with them, to carry it to
outward force and corporal punishment: a practice they have been taught
to dislike, by their extreme sufferings, as well as their known principle
for a universal liberty of conscience.

On the other hand, they equally dislike an independency in society:--an
unaccountableness, in practice and conversation, to the rules and terms
of their own communion, and to those that are the members of it.  They
distinguish between imposing any practice that immediately regards faith
or worship, which is never to be done or suffered, or submitted unto; and
requiring Christian compliance with those methods that only respect
church-business in its more civil part and concern; and that regard the
discreet and orderly maintenance of the character of the society as a
sober and religious community.  In short, what is for the promotion of
holiness and charity, that men may practise what they profess, live up to
their own principles, and not be at liberty to give the lie to their own
profession without rebuke, is their use and limit of church power.  They
compel none to them, but oblige those that are of them to walk suitably,
or they are denied by them: that is all the mark they set upon them, and
the power they exercise, or judge a Christian society can exercise, upon
those that are members of it.

The way of their proceeding against such as have lapsed or transgressed,
is this.  He is visited by some of them, and the matter of fact laid home
to him, be it any evil practice against known and general virtue, or any
branch of their particular testimony, which he, in common, professeth
with them.  They labour with him in much love and zeal, for the good of
his soul, the honour of God, and reputation of their profession, to own
his fault and condemn it, in as ample a manner as the evil or scandal was
given by him; which, for the most part, is performed by some written
testimony under the party's hand: and if it so happen, that the party
prove refractory, and is not willing to clear the truth they profess,
from the reproach of his or her evil doing or unfaithfulness, they, after
repeated entreaties and due waiting for a token of repentance, give forth
a paper to disown such a fact, and the party offending: recording the
same as a testimony of their care for the honour of the truth they
profess.

And if he or she shall clear their profession and themselves, by sincere
acknowledgment of their fault, and godly sorrow for so doing, they are
received and looked upon again as members of their communion.  For as
God, so his true people, upbraid no man after repentance.

This is the account I had to give of the people of God called Quakers, as
to their rise, appearance, principles, and practices, in this age of the
world, both with respect to their faith and worship, discipline and
conversation.  And I judge it very proper in this place, because it is to
preface the journal of the first, blessed, and glorious instrument of
this work, and for a testimony to him in his singular qualifications and
services, in which he abundantly excelled in this day, and which are
worthy to be set forth as an example to all succeeding times, to the
glory of the most high God, and for a just memorial to that worthy and
excellent man, his faithful servant and apostle to this generation of the
world.




CHAP. V.


_Of the first instrument or person by whom God was pleased to gather this
people into the way they profess_.  _His name George Fox_: _his many
excellent qualifications; showing a divine_, _and not a human power to
have been their original in him_.  _His troubles and sufferings both from
without and within_.  _His end and triumph_.

I am now come to the third head or branch of my preface, viz. the
instrumental author.  For it is natural for some to say, Well, here is
the people and work, but where and who was the man, the instrument?  He
that in this age was sent to begin this work and people?  I shall, as God
shall enable me, declare who and what he was; not only by report of
others, but from my own long and most inward converse, and intimate
knowledge of him; for which my soul blesseth God, as it hath often done:
and I doubt not, but by that time I have discharged myself of this part
of my preface, my serious readers will believe I had good cause so to do.

The blessed instrument of, and in this day of God, and of whom I am now
about to write, was George Fox, distinguished from another of that name,
by that other's addition of younger to his name, in all his writings; not
that he was so in years, but that he was so in the truth: but he was also
a worthy man, witness, and servant of God in his time.

But this George Fox was born in Leicestershire, about the year 1624.  He
descended of honest and sufficient parents, who endeavoured to bring him
up, as they did the rest of their children, in the way and worship of the
nation: especially his mother, who was a woman accomplished above most of
her degree in the place where she lived.  But from a child he appeared of
another frame of mind than the rest of his brethren; being more
religious, inward, still, solid, and observing beyond his years, as the
answers he would give, and the questions he would put, upon occasion,
manifested, to the astonishment of those that heard him, especially in
divine things.

His mother, taking notice of his singular temper, and the gravity,
wisdom, and piety, that very early shined through him, refusing childish
and vain sports, and company, when very young, was tender and indulgent
over him, so that from her he met with little difficulty.  As to his
employment, he was brought up in country business, and as he took most
delight in sheep, so he was very skilful in them; an employment that very
well suited his mind in several respects, both for its innocency and
solitude; and was a just emblem of his after ministry and service.

I shall not break in upon his own account, which is by much the best that
can be given, and therefore desire what I can, to avoid saying anything
of what is said already, as to the particular passages of his coming
forth: but, in general, when he was somewhat above twenty, he left his
friends, and visited the most retired and religious people in those
parts; and some there were in this nation, who waited for the consolation
of Israel, night and day; as Zacharias, Anna, and good old Simeon did of
old time.  To these he was sent, and these he sought out in the
neighbouring counties, and among them he sojourned till his more ample
ministry came upon him.  At this time he taught, and was an example of,
silence, endeavouring to bring them from self-performances; testifying
of, and turning them to, the light of Christ within them, and encouraging
them to wait in patience, and to feel the power of it to stir in their
hearts, that their knowledge and worship of God might stand in the power
of an endless life, which was to be found in the light, as it was obeyed
in the manifestation of it in man.  For in the word was life, and that
life is the light of men: life in the word, light in men; and life in men
too, as the light is obeyed: the children of the light living by the life
of the word, by which the word begets them again to God, which is the
regeneration and new birth, without which there is no coming into the
kingdom of God: and to which whoever comes, is greater than John; that
is, than John's dispensation, which was not that of the kingdom, but the
consummation of the legal, and fore-running of the gospel-times, the time
of the kingdom.  Accordingly several meetings were gathered in those
parts; and thus his time was employed for some years.

In 1652, he being in his usual retirement, his mind exercised towards the
Lord, upon a very high mountain in some of the higher parts of Yorkshire,
as I take it, he had a vision of the great work of God in the earth, and
of the way that he was to go forth in a public ministry, to begin it.  He
saw people as thick as motes in the sun, that should in time be brought
home to the Lord, that there might be but one shepherd and one sheepfold
in all the earth.  There his eye was directed northward, beholding a
great people that should receive him and his message in those parts.
Upon this mountain he was moved of the Lord to sound out his great and
notable day, as if he had been in a great auditory; and from thence went
north, as the Lord had shown him.  And in every place where he came, if
not before he came to it, he had his particular exercise and service
shown to him, so that the Lord was his leader indeed.  For it was not in
vain that he travelled; God in most places sealing his commission with
the convincement of some of all sorts, as well publicans as sober
professors of religion.  Some of the first and most eminent of those that
came forth in a public ministry, and who are now at rest, were Richard
Farnsworth, James Nayler, William Dewsberry, Thomas Aldam, Francis
Howgil, Edward Burroughs, John Camm, John Audland, Richard Hubberthorn,
T. Taylor, T. Holmes, Alexander Parker, Wm.  Simson, William Caton, John
Stubbs, Robert Withers, Thomas Low, Josiah Coale, John Burnyeat, Robert
Lodge, Thomas Salthouse, and many more worthies, that cannot well be here
named; together with divers yet living of the first and great
convincement; who, after the knowledge of God's purging judgment in
themselves, and some time of waiting in silence upon him, to feel and
receive power from on high to speak in his name, (which none else rightly
can, though they may use the same words,) felt its divine motions, and
were frequently drawn forth, especially to visit the public assemblies,
to reprove, inform, and exhort them: sometimes in markets, fairs,
streets, and by the highway-side: calling people to repentance, and to
turn to the Lord with their hearts as well as their mouths; directing
them to the light of Christ within them, to see, examine, and consider
their ways by, and to eschew the evil, and do the good and acceptable
will of God.  And they suffered great hardships for this their love and
good-will; being often stocked, stoned, beaten, whipped, and imprisoned,
though honest men, and of good report where they lived; that had left
wives, children, and houses and lands to visit them with a living call to
repentance.  And though the priests generally set themselves to oppose
them, and wrote against them, and insinuated most false and scandalous
stories to defame them, stirring up the magistrates to suppress them,
especially in those northern parts; yet God was pleased to fill them with
his living power, and give them such an open door of utterance in his
service, that there was a mighty convincement over those parts.

And through the tender and singular indulgence of judge Bradshaw, and
judge Fell, and colonel West, in the infancy of things, the priests were
never able to gain the point they laboured for, which was to have
proceeded to blood; and, if possible, Herod-like, by a cruel exercise of
the civil power, to have cut them off, and rooted them out of the
country.  But especially judge Fell, who was not only a check to their
rage in the course of legal proceedings, but otherwise upon occasion; and
finally countenanced this people.  For, his wife receiving the truth with
the first, it had that influence upon his spirit, being a just and wise
man, and seeing in his own wife and family a full confutation of all the
popular clamours against the way of truth, that he covered them what he
could, and freely opened his doors, and gave up his house to his wife and
her friends; not valuing the reproach of ignorant or evil-minded people:
which I here mention to his and her honour, and which will be, I believe,
an honour and a blessing to such of their name and family, as shall be
found in that tenderness, humility, love, and zeal for the truth and
people of the Lord.

That house was for some years, at first especially, until the truth had
opened its way into the southern parts of this island, an eminent
receptacle of this people.  Others, of good note and substance in those
northern countries, had also opened their houses, together with their
hearts, to the many publishers, that, in a short time, the Lord had
raised to declare his salvation to the people; and where meetings of the
Lord's messengers were frequently held, to communicate their services and
exercises, and comfort and edify one another in their blessed ministry.

But lest this may be thought a digression, having touched upon this
before, I return to this excellent man; and for his personal qualities,
both natural, moral, and divine, as they appeared in his converse with
the brethren, and in the church of God, take as follows:

I.  He was a man that God endued with a clear and wonderful depth: a
discerner of others' spirits, and very much a master of his own.  And
though that side of his understanding which lay next to the world, and
especially the expression of it, might sound uncouth and unfashionable to
nice ears, his matter was nevertheless very profound; and would not only
bear to be often considered, but the more it was so, the more weighty and
instructing it appeared.  And as abruptly and brokenly as sometimes his
sentences would seem to fall from him, about divine things, it is well
known they were often as texts to many fairer declarations.

And indeed it showed, beyond all contradiction, that God sent him, in
that no arts or parts had any share in the matter or manner of his
ministry; and that so many great, excellent, and necessary truths, as he
came forth to preach to mankind, had therefore nothing of man's wit or
wisdom to recommend them.  So that as to man he was an original, being no
man's copy; and his ministry and writings show they are from one that was
not taught of man, nor had learned what he said by study.  Nor were they
notional or speculative, but sensible and practical truths, tending to
conversion and regeneration, and the setting up of the kingdom of God in
the hearts of men: and the way of it was his work.  So that I have many
times been overcome in myself, and been made to say, with my Lord and
Master, upon the like occasion, "I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven
and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent of
this world, and revealed them to babes:" for, many times hath my soul
bowed in an humble thankfulness to the Lord, that he did not choose any
of the wise and learned of this world to be the first messenger in our
age, of his blessed truth to men; but that he took one that was not of
high degree, or elegant speech, or learned after the way of this world,
that his message and work he sent him to do might come with less
suspicion, or jealousy of human wisdom and interest, and with more force
and clearness upon the consciences of those that sincerely sought the way
of truth in the love of it.  I say, beholding with the eye of my mind,
which the God of heaven had opened in me, the marks of God's finger and
hand visibly in this testimony, from the clearness of the principle, the
power and efficacy of it, in the exemplary sobriety, plainness, zeal,
steadiness, humility, gravity, punctuality, charity, and circumspect care
in the government of church-affairs, which shined in his and their life
and testimony, that God employed in this work, it greatly confirmed me
that it was of God, and engaged my soul in a deep love, fear, reverence,
and thankfulness for his love and mercy therein to mankind: in which mind
I remain, and shall, I hope, through the Lord's strength, to the end of
my days.

II.  In his testimony or ministry, he much laboured to open truth to the
people's understandings, and to bottom them upon the principle and
principal, Christ Jesus the light of the world; that by bringing them to
something that was from God in themselves, they might the better know and
judge of him and themselves.

III.  He had an extraordinary gift in opening the scriptures.  He would
go to the marrow of things, and show the mind, harmony, and fulfilling of
them, with much plainness, and to great comfort and edification.

IV.  The mystery of the first and second Adam, of the fall and
restoration, of the law and gospel, of shadows and substance, of the
servant's and Son's state, and the fulfilling of the scriptures in Christ
and by Christ the true light, in all that are his, through the obedience
of faith, were much of the substance and drift of his testimonies: in all
which he was witnessed to be of God: being sensibly felt to speak that
which he had received of Christ, and was his own experience, in that
which never errs nor fails.

V.  But, above all, he excelled in prayer.  The inwardness and weight of
his spirit, the reverence and solemnity of his address and behaviour, and
the fewness and fulness of his words, have often struck even strangers
with admiration, as they used to reach others with consolation.  The most
awful, living, reverent frame I ever felt or beheld, I must say, was his
in prayer.  And truly it was a testimony he knew and lived nearer to the
Lord than other men; for they that know Him most, will see most reason to
approach him with reverence and fear.

VI.  He was of an innocent life, no busy-body, nor self-seeker: neither
touchy nor critical: what fell from him was very inoffensive, if not very
edifying.  So meek, contented, modest, easy, steady, tender, it was a
pleasure to be in his company.  He exercised no authority but over evil,
and that everywhere, and in all; but with love, compassion, and
long-suffering.  A most merciful man, as ready to forgive, as unapt to
take or give an offence.  Thousands can truly say, he was of an excellent
spirit and savour among them, and because thereof, the most excellent
spirits loved him with an unfeigned and unfading love.

VII.  He was an incessant labourer: for in his younger time, before his
many, great, and deep sufferings and travels had enfeebled his body for
itinerant services, he laboured much in the word and doctrine, and
discipline, in England, Scotland, and Ireland, turning many to God, and
confirming those that were convinced of the truth, and settling good
order, as to church affairs, among them.  And towards the conclusion of
his travelling service, between the years 1671, and 1677, he visited the
churches of Christ in the plantations of America, and in the United
Provinces, and Germany, as his journal relates; to the convincement and
consolation of many.  After that time he chiefly resided in and about the
city of London; and, besides his labour in the ministry, which was
frequent and serviceable, he wrote much, both to them that are within,
and those that are without, the communion.

But the care he took of the affairs of the church in general was very
great.

VIII.  He was often where the records of the business of the church are
kept, and where the letters from the many meetings of God's people over
all the world use to come: which letters he had read to him, and
communicated them to the meeting, that is weekly {57} held for such
services; and he would be sure to stir them up to answer them, especially
in suffering cases, showing great sympathy and compassion upon all such
occasions; carefully looking into the respective cases, and endeavouring
speedy relief, according to the nature of them.  So that the churches, or
any of the suffering members thereof, were sure not to be forgotten, or
delayed in their desires, if he was there.

IX.  As he was unwearied, so he was undaunted in his services for God and
his people; he was no more to be moved to fear than to wrath.  His
behaviour at Derby, Lichfield, Appleby, before Oliver Cromwell, at
Launceston, Scarborough, Worcester, and Westminster Hall, with many other
places and exercises, did abundantly evidence it, to his enemies as well
as his friends.

But as, in the primitive times, some rose up against the blessed apostles
of our Lord Jesus Christ, even from among those that they had turned to
the hope of the gospel, and became their greatest trouble; so this man of
God had his share of suffering from some that were convinced by him; who,
through prejudice or mistake, ran against him, as one that sought
dominion over conscience, because he pressed, by his presence or
epistles, a ready and zealous compliance with such good and wholesome
things, as tended to an orderly conversation about the affairs of the
church, and in their walking before men.  That which contributed much to
this ill work, was, in some, a begrudging of this meek man the love and
esteem he had and deserved in the hearts of the people; and weakness in
others, that were taken with their groundless suggestions of imposition
and blind obedience.

They would have had every man independent, that as he had the principle
in himself, he should only stand and fall to that, and nobody else: not
considering that the principle is one in all; and though the measure of
light or grace might differ, yet the nature of it was the same; and being
so, they struck at the spiritual unity which a people, guided by the same
principle, are naturally led into: so that what is an evil to one, is so
to all; and what is virtuous, honest, and of good repute to one, is so to
all, from the sense and savour of the one universal principle which is
common to all, and which the disaffected also profess to be the root of
all true Christian fellowship, and that spirit into which the people of
God drink, and come to be spiritually-minded, and of one heart and one
soul.

Some weakly mistook good order in the government of church affairs, for
discipline in worship, and that it was so pressed or recommended by him
and other brethren.  And thereupon they were ready to reflect the same
things that dissenters had very reasonably objected upon the national
churches, that have coercively pressed conformity to their respective
creeds and worships.  Whereas these things related wholly to
conversation, and the outward, and, as I may say, civil part of the
church; that men should walk up to the principles of their belief, and
not be wanting in care and charity.  But though some have stumbled and
fallen through mistakes, and an unreasonable obstinacy even to a
prejudice; yet, blessed be God, the generality have returned to their
first love, and seen the work of the enemy, that loses no opportunity or
advantage by which he may check or hinder the work of God, and disquiet
the peace of his church, and chill the love of his people to the truth,
and one to another; and there is hope of divers of the few that yet are
at a distance.

In all these occasions, though there was no person the discontented
struck so sharply at, as this good man, he bore all their weakness and
prejudice, and returned not reflection for reflection; but forgave them
their weak and bitter speeches, praying for them, that they might have a
sense of their hurt, and see the subtilty of the enemy to rend and
divide, and return into their first love that thought no ill.

And truly, I must say, that though God had visibly clothed him with a
divine preference and authority, yet he never abused it; but held his
place in the church of God with great meekness, and a most engaging
humility and moderation.  For upon all occasions, like his blessed
Master, he was a servant to all; holding and exercising his eldership in
the invisible power that had gathered them, with reverence to the Head,
and care over the body: and was received, only in that Spirit and power
of Christ, as the first and chief elder in this age: who, as he was
therefore worthy of double honour, so for the same reason it was given by
the faithful of this day; because his authority was inward and not
outward, and that he got it and kept it by the love of God, and power of
an endless life.  I write my knowledge, and not report; and my witness is
true; having been with him for weeks and months together on divers
occasions, and those of the nearest, and most exercising nature; and that
by night and by day, by sea and by land; in this and in foreign
countries; and I can say, I never saw him out of his place, or not a
match for every service or occasion.  For in all things he acquitted
himself like a man, yea, a strong man, a new and heavenly-minded man, a
divine and a naturalist, and all of God Almighty's making.  I have been
surprised at his questions and answers in natural things: that whilst he
was ignorant of useless and sophistical science, he had in him the
grounds of useful and commendable knowledge, and cherished it every
where.  Civil, beyond all forms of breeding, in his behaviour: very
temperate, eating little, and sleeping less, though a bulky person.

Thus he lived and sojourned among us: and, as he lived, so he died;
feeling the same eternal power, that had raised and preserved him, in his
last moments.  So full of assurance was he, that he triumphed over death;
and so even in his spirit to the last, as if death were hardly worth
notice, or a mention: recommending to some of us with him, the despatch
and dispersion of an epistle just before given forth by him to the
churches of Christ throughout the world, and his own books: but, above
all, Friends; and of all Friends, those in Ireland and America, twice
over, saying, "Mind poor Friends in Ireland and America."

And to some that came in and inquired how he found himself, he answered,
"Never heed, the Lord's power is over all weakness and death; the seed
reigns, blessed be the Lord:" which was about four or five hours before
his departure out of this world.  He was at the great meeting near
Lombard-street, on the first day of the week, and it was the third
following about ten at night when he left us; being at the house of Henry
Goldney, in the same court.  In a good old age he went, after having
lived to see his children's children in the truth to many generations.
He had the comfort of a short illness, and the blessing of a clear sense
to the last: and we may truly say, with a man of God of old, that being
dead, he yet speaketh: and though now absent in body, he is present in
spirit; neither time nor place being able to interrupt the communion of
saints, or dissolve the fellowship of the spirits of the just.  His works
praise him, because they are to the praise of Him that wrought by him;
for which his memorial is and shall be blessed.  I have done, as to this
part of my preface, when I have left this short epitaph to his
name,--Many sons have done virtuously in this day; but, dear George, thou
excellest them all.




CHAP. VI.


_Containing five several exhortations_: _first_, _general_, _reminding
this people of their primitive integrity and simplicity_.  _Secondly_,
_in particular_, _to the ministry_.  _Thirdly_, _to the young convinced_.
_Fourthly_, _to the children of Friends_.  _Fifthly_, _to those that are
yet strangers to this people and way_, _to whom this book_, _and that
which it was preface to_, _in its former edition_, _may come_.  _All the
several exhortations accommodated to their several states and
conditions_: _that all may answer the end of God's glory_, _and their own
salvation_.

And now, Friends, you that profess to walk in the way that this blessed
man was sent of God to turn us into, suffer, I beseech you, the word of
exhortation, as well fathers as children, and elders as young men.  The
glory of this day, and foundation of the hope that has not made us
ashamed since we were a people, you know, is that blessed principle of
light and life of Christ which we profess, and direct all people to, as
the great and divine instrument and agent of man's conversion to God.  It
was by this that we were first touched, and effectually enlightened, as
to our inward state; which put us upon the consideration of our latter
end, causing us to set the Lord before our eyes, and to number our days,
that we might apply our hearts to wisdom.  In that day we judged not
after the sight of the eye, or after the hearing of the ear; but
according to the light and sense this blessed principle gave us, so we
judged and acted, in reference to things and persons, ourselves and
others; yea, towards God our Maker.  For being quickened by it in our
inward man, we could easily discern the difference of things, and feel
what was right and what was wrong, and what was fit, and what not, both
in reference to religion and civil concerns.  That being the ground of
the fellowship of all saints, it was in that our fellowship stood.  In
this we desired to have a sense of one another, acted towards one
another, and all men; in love, faithfulness, and fear.

In feeling of the stirrings and motions of this principle in our hearts,
we drew near to the Lord, and waited to be prepared by it, that we might
feel drawings and movings before we approached the Lord in prayer, or
opened our mouths in ministry.  And in our beginning and ending with
this, stood our comfort, service, and edification.  And as we ran faster,
or fell short in our services, we made burdens for ourselves to bear;
finding in ourselves a rebuke instead of an acceptance; and, in lieu of
"Well-done," "Who has required this at your hands?"  In that day we were
an exercised people, our very countenances and deportment declared it.

Care for others was then much upon us, as well as for ourselves;
especially of the young convinced.  Often had we the burden of the word
of the Lord to our neighbours, relations, and acquaintance; and sometimes
strangers also.  We were in travail likewise for one another's
preservation; not seeking, but shunning, occasions of any coldness or
misunderstanding; treating one another as those that believed and felt
God present; which kept our conversation innocent, serious, and weighty;
guarding ourselves against the cares and friendships of the world.  We
held the truth in the Spirit of it, and not in our own spirits, or after
our own wills and affections.

We were bowed and brought into subjection, insomuch that it was visible
to them that knew us.  We did not think ourselves at our own disposal, to
go where we list, or say or do what we list, or when we list.  Our
liberty stood in the liberty of the Spirit of truth; and no pleasure, no
profit, no fear, no favour, could draw us from this retired, strict, and
watchful frame.  We were so far from seeking occasions of company, that
we avoided them what we could; pursuing our own business with moderation,
instead of meddling with other people's unnecessarily.

Our words were few and savoury, our looks composed and weighty, and our
whole deportment very observable.  True it is, that this retired and
strict sort of life, from the liberty of the conversation of the world,
exposed us to the censures of many, as humourists, conceited and
self-righteous persons, &c.; but it was our preservation from many
snares, to which others were continually exposed, by the prevalency of
the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life, that
wanted no occasions or temptations to excite them abroad in the converse
of the world.

I cannot forget the humility and chaste zeal of that day.  O! how
constant at meetings, how retired in them; how firm to truth's life, as
well as truth's principles; and how entire and united in our communion,
as, indeed, became those that profess one head, even Christ Jesus the
Lord.

This being the testimony and example the man of God before mentioned was
sent to declare and leave amongst us, and we having embraced the same, as
the merciful visitation of God to us, the word of exhortation, at this
time, is that we continue to be found in the way of this testimony, with
all zeal and integrity, and so much the more, by how much the day draweth
near.  And first, as to you my beloved and much honoured brethren in
Christ, that are in the exercise of the ministry: O! feel life in your
ministry.  Let life be your commission, your well-spring and treasury on
all such occasions; else, you well know, there can be no begetting to
God: since nothing can quicken or make people alive to God, but the life
of God; and it must be a ministry in and from life, that enlivens any
people to God.  We have seen the fruit of all other ministries, by the
few that are turned from the evil of their ways.  It is not our parts, or
memory, the repetition of former openings, in our own will and time, that
will do God's work.  A dry doctrinal ministry, however sound in words,
can reach but the ears, and is but a dream at the best.  There is another
soundness that is soundest of all, viz. Christ the power of God.  This is
the key of David, that opens, and none shuts; and shuts and none can
open: as the oil to the lamp, and the soul to the body, so is that to the
best of words: which made Christ to say, "My words, they are Spirit, and
they are life;" that is, they are from life, and therefore they make you
alive, that receive them.  If the disciples that had lived with Jesus,
were to stay at Jerusalem till they received it; much more must we wait
to receive before we minister, if we will turn people from darkness to
light, and from satan's power to God.

I fervently bow my knees to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that you may always be like-minded; that you may ever wait reverently for
the coming and opening of the word of life, and attend upon it in your
ministry and service, that you may serve God in his Spirit.  And be it
little, or be it much, it is well; for much is not too much, and the
least is enough, if from the motion of God's Spirit; and without it,
verily, never so little is too much, because to no profit.

For it is the Spirit of the Lord immediately, or through the ministry of
his servants, that teacheth his people to profit; and to be sure, so far
as we take him along with us in our services, so far we are profitable,
and no further.  For if it be the Lord that must work all things in us
for our salvation, much more is it the Lord that must work in us for the
conversion of others.  If therefore it was once a cross to us to speak,
though the Lord required it at our hands, let it never be so to be
silent, when he does not.

It is one of the most dreadful sayings in the book of God, "That he that
adds to the words of the prophecy of this book, God will add to him the
plagues written in this book."  To keep back the counsel of God, is as
terrible; "For he that takes away from the words of the book of this
prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life."  And
truly, it has great caution in it, to those that use the name of the
Lord, to be well assured the Lord speaks; that they may not be found of
the number of those that add to the words of the testimony of prophecy,
which the Lord giveth them to bear; nor yet to mince or diminish the
same, both being so very offensive to God.

Wherefore, Brethren, let us be careful, neither to out-go our guide, nor
yet loiter behind him; since he that makes haste may miss his way, and he
that stays behind lose his guide.  For even those that have received the
word of the Lord, had need wait for wisdom, that they may see how to
divide the word aright: which plainly implieth, that it is possible for
one that hath received the word of the Lord, to miss in the dividing and
application of it; which must come from an impatiency of spirit, and a
self-working, which makes an unsound and dangerous mixture, and will
hardly beget a right-minded living people to God.

I am earnest in this, above all other considerations, as to brethren in
the ministry, (well knowing how much it concerns the present and future
state and preservation of the church of Christ Jesus, that has been
gathered and built up by a living and powerful ministry,) that the
ministry be held, preserved, and continued in the manifestations,
motions, and supplies of the same life and power, from time to time.

And wherever it is observed, that any do minister more from gifts and
parts, than life and power, though they have an enlightened and doctrinal
understanding, let them in time be advised and admonished for their
preservation, because insensibly such will come to depend upon a
self-sufficiency; to forsake Christ the living Fountain, and hew out unto
themselves cisterns, that will hold no living waters: and, by degrees,
such will come to draw others from waiting upon the gift of God in
themselves, and to feel it in others, in order to their strength and
refreshment, to wait upon them, and to turn from God to man again, and so
make shipwreck of the faith once delivered to the saints, and of a good
conscience towards God: which are only kept by that divine gift of life
that begat the one, and awakened and sanctified the other in the
beginning.

Nor is it enough, that we have known the divine gift, and in it have
reached to the spirits in prison, and been the instruments of the
convincing of others of the way of God, if we keep not as low and poor in
ourselves, and as depending upon the Lord, as ever: since no memory, no
repetitions of former openings, revelations, or enjoyments, will bring a
soul to God, or afford bread to the hungry, or water to the thirsty,
unless life go with what we say, and that must be waited for.

O that we may have no other fountain, treasure, or dependence!  That none
may presume at any rate to act of themselves for God, because they have
long acted from God; that we may not supply want of waiting, with our own
wisdom, or think that we may take less care and more liberty in speaking
than formerly; and that where we do not feel the Lord by his power, to
open us and enlarge us, whatever be the expectation of the people, or has
been our customary supply and character, we may not exceed or fill up the
time with our own.

I hope we shall ever remember, who it was that said, "Of yourselves you
can do nothing;" our sufficiency is in him.  And if we are not to speak
our own words, or take thought what we should say to men in our defence,
when exposed for our testimony; surely, we ought to speak none of our own
words, or take thought what we shall say in our testimony and ministry,
in the name of the Lord, to the souls of the people: for then, of all
times, and of all other occasions, should it be fulfilled in us, "For it
is not you that speak, but the Spirit of my Father that speaketh in you."

And, indeed, the ministry of the Spirit must and does keep its analogy
and agreement with the birth of the Spirit: that as no man can inherit
the kingdom of God, unless he be born of the Spirit; so no ministry can
beget a soul to God, but that which is from the Spirit.  For this, as I
said before, the disciples waited before they went forth; and in this our
elder brethren and messengers of God in our day, waited, visited, and
reached to us; and having begun in the Spirit, let none ever hope or seek
to be made perfect in the flesh: for what is the flesh to the Spirit, or
the chaff to the wheat?  And if we keep in the Spirit, we shall keep in
the unity of it, which is the ground of true fellowship.  For by drinking
into that one Spirit, we are made one people to God, and by it we are
continued in the unity of the faith, and the bond of peace.  No envying,
no bitterness, no strife, can have place with us.  We shall watch always
for good, and not for evil, one over another; and rejoice exceedingly,
and not begrudge at one another's increase in the riches of the grace
with which God replenisheth his faithful servants.

And Brethren, as to you is committed the dispensation of the oracles of
God, which give you frequent opportunities, and great place with the
people among whom you travel, I beseech you, that you would not think it
sufficient to declare the word of life in their assemblies, however
edifying and comfortable such opportunities may be to you and them: but,
as was the practice of the man of God before mentioned, in great measure,
when among us, inquire the state of the several churches you visit; who
among them are afflicted or sick, who are tempted, and if any are
unfaithful or obstinate; and endeavour to issue those things in the
wisdom and power of God, which will be a glorious crown upon your
ministry.  As that prepares your way in the hearts of the people, to
receive you as men of God, so it gives you credit with them to do them
good by your advice in other respects; the afflicted will be comforted by
you, the tempted strengthened, the sick refreshed, the unfaithful
convicted and restored, and such as are obstinate, softened and fitted
for reconciliation; which is clinching the nail, and applying and
fastening the general testimony, by this particular care of the several
branches of it, in reference to them more immediately concerned in it.

For though good and wise men, and elders too, may reside in such places,
who are of worth and importance in the general, and in other places; yet
it does not always follow, that they may have the room they deserve in
the hearts of the people they live among; or some particular occasion may
make it unfit for him or them to use that authority.  But you that travel
as God's messengers, if they receive you in the greater, shall they
refuse you in the less?  And if they own the general testimony, can they
withstand the particular application of it in their own cases?  Thus ye
will show yourselves workmen indeed, and carry your business before you,
to the praise of his name that hath called you from darkness to light,
that you might turn others from satan's power unto God and his kingdom,
which is within.  And O that there were more of such faithful labourers
in the vineyard of the Lord!--Never more need since the day of God.

Wherefore I cannot but cry and call aloud to you, that have been long
professors of the truth, and know the truth in the convincing power of
it, and have had a sober conversation among men; yet content yourselves
only to know truth for yourselves, to go to meetings, and exercise an
ordinary charity in the church, and an honest behaviour in the world, and
limit yourselves within those bounds; feeling little or no concern upon
your spirits, for the glory of the Lord in the prosperity of his truth in
the earth, more than to be glad that others succeed in such service.
Arise ye in the name and power of the Lord Jesus!  Behold how white the
fields are unto harvest, in this and other nations, and how few able and
faithful labourers there are to work therein!  Your country-folks,
neighbours, and kindred, want to know the Lord and his truth, and to walk
in it.  Does nothing lie at your door upon their account!  Search and
see, and lose no time, I beseech you, for the Lord is at hand.

I do not judge you; there is one that judgeth all men, and his judgment
is true.  You have mightily increased in your outward substance, may you
equally increase in your inward riches, and do good with both, while you
have a day to do good.  Your enemies would once have taken what you had,
from you, for his name's sake in whom you have believed; wherefore he has
given you much of the world, in the face of your enemies.  But O, let it
be your servant, and not your master! your diversion rather than your
business! let the Lord be chiefly in your eye, and ponder your ways, and
see if God has nothing more for you to do: and if you find yourselves
short in your account with him, then wait for his preparation, and be
ready to receive the word of command, and be not weary of well-doing,
when you have put your hand to the plough; and, assuredly, you shall
reap, if you faint not, the fruit of your heavenly labour in God's
everlasting kingdom.

And you, young convinced ones, be you entreated and exhorted to a
diligent and chaste waiting upon God, in the way of his blessed
manifestation and appearance of himself to you.  Look not out, but
within: let not another's liberty be your snare: neither act by
imitation, but by sense and feeling of God's power in yourselves: crush
not the tender buddings of it in your souls, nor over-run, in your
desires and warmness of affections, the holy and gentle motions of it.
Remember it is a still voice that speaks to us in this day, and that it
is not to be heard in the noises and hurries of the mind; but is
distinctly understood in a retired frame.  Jesus loved and chose
solitudes, often going to mountains, gardens, and sea sides, to avoid
crowds and hurries: to show his disciples it was good to be solitary, and
sit loose to the world.  Two enemies lie near your states, imagination
and liberty; but the plain, practical, living, holy truth, that has
convinced you, will preserve you, if you mind it in yourselves, and bring
all thoughts, inclinations, and affections, to the test of it, to see if
they are wrought in God, or of the enemy, or of your ownselves: so will a
true taste, discerning, and judgment, be preserved to you, of what you
should do and leave undone.  And in your diligence and faithfulness in
this way, you will come to inherit substance; and Christ, the eternal
wisdom, will fill your treasury.  And when you are converted, as well as
convinced, then confirm your brethren; and be ready to every good word
and work, that the Lord shall call you to: that you may be to his praise,
who has chosen you to be partakers, with the saints in light, of a
kingdom that cannot be shaken, an inheritance incorruptible in eternal
habitations.

And now, as for you that are the children of God's people, a great
concern is upon my spirit for your good and often are my knees bowed to
the God of your fathers for you, that you may come to be partakers of the
same divine life and power, that have been the glory of this day: that a
generation you may be to God, a holy nation, and a peculiar people,
zealous of good works, when all our heads are laid in the dust.  O! you
young men and women, let it not suffice you, that you are the children of
the people of the Lord; you must also be born again, if you will inherit
the kingdom of God.  Your fathers are but such after the flesh, and could
but beget you into the likeness of the first Adam; but you must be
begotten into the likeness of the second Adam, by a spiritual generation,
or you will not, you cannot, be of his children or offspring.  And
therefore look carefully about you, O ye children of the children of God;
consider your standing, and see what you are in relation to this divine
kindred, family, and birth.  Have you obeyed the light, and received and
walked in the Spirit, which is the incorruptible seed of the word and
kingdom of God, of which you must be born again?  God is no respecter of
persons.  The father cannot save or answer for the child, or the child
for the father; but in the sin thou sinnest thou shalt die; and in the
righteousness thou doest, through Christ Jesus, thou shalt live: for it
is the willing and obedient that shall eat the good of the land.  Be not
deceived, God is mocked.  Such as all nations and people sow, such they
shall reap at the hand of the just God.  And then your many and great
privileges, above the children of other people, will add weight in the
scale against you, if you choose not the way of the Lord.  For you have
had line upon line, and precept upon precept, and not only good doctrine
but good example; and which is more, you have been turned to, and
acquainted with, a principle in yourselves, which others too generally
have been ignorant of: and you know you may be as good as you please,
without the fear of frowns and blows, or being turned out of doors, and
forsaken of father and mother, for God's sake and his holy religion; as
has been the case of some of your fathers in the day they first entered
into this holy path.  And if you, after hearing and seeing the wonders
that God has wrought in the deliverance and preservation of them, through
a sea of troubles, and the manifold temporal, as well as spiritual,
blessings that he has filled them with, in the sight of their enemies,
should neglect and turn your backs upon so great and near a salvation,
you would not only be most ungrateful children to God and them, but must
expect that God will call the children of those that knew him not, to
take the crown out of your hands, and that your lot will be a dreadful
judgment at the hand of the Lord: but, O that it may never be so with any
of you!  The Lord forbid, saith my soul.

Wherefore, O ye young men and women! look to the rock of your fathers:
there is no other God but him, no other light but his, no other grace but
his, nor spirit but his, to convince you, quicken, and comfort you; to
lead, guide, and preserve you to God's everlasting kingdom.  So will you
be possessors as well as professors of the truth, embracing it, not only
by education, but judgment and conviction; from a sense begotten in your
souls, through the operation of the eternal Spirit and power of God; by
which you may come to be the seed of Abraham, through faith, and the
circumcision not made with hands; and so heirs of the promise made to the
fathers, of an incorruptible crown.  That, as I said before, a generation
you may be to God, holding up the profession of the blessed truth in the
life and power of it.  For formality in religion is nauseous to God and
good men; and the more so, where any form or appearance has been new and
peculiar, and begun and practised, upon a principle, with an uncommon
zeal and strictness.  Therefore I say, for you to fall flat and formal,
and continue the profession, without that salt and savour by which it is
come to obtain a good report among men, is not to answer God's love, or
your parents' care, or the mind of truth in yourselves, or in those that
are without: who, though they will not obey the truth, have sight and
sense enough to see if they do that make a profession of it.  For where
the divine virtue of it is not felt in the soul, and waited for and lived
in, imperfections will quickly break out, and show themselves, and detect
the unfaithfulness of such persons; and that their insides are not
seasoned with the nature of that holy principle which they profess.

Wherefore, dear children, let me entreat you to shut your eyes at the
temptations and allurements of this low and perishing world, and not
suffer your affections to be captivated by those lusts and vanities that
your fathers, for the truth's sake, long since turned their backs upon:
but as you believe it to be the truth, receive it into your hearts, that
you may become the children of God: so that it may never be said of you,
as the evangelist writes of the Jews in his time, that Christ, the true
light, "came to his own, but his own received him not; but to as many as
received him, to them he gave power to become the children of God; which
were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God;" a most close and comprehensive passage to this
occasion.  You exactly and peculiarly answer to those professing Jews, in
that you bear the name of God's people, by being the children, and
wearing of the form of God's people: and he, by his light in you, may be
very well said to come to his own, and if you obey it not, but turn your
backs upon it, and walk after the vanities of your minds, you will be of
those that received him not; which I pray God may never be your case and
judgment.  But that you may be thoroughly sensible of the many and great
obligations you lie under to the Lord for his love, and to your parents
for their care: and with all your heart, and all your soul, and all your
strength, turn to the Lord, to his gift and Spirit in you; and hear his
voice, and obey it, that you may seal to the testimony of your fathers,
by the truth and evidence of your own experience: that your children's
children may bless you, and the Lord for you, as those that delivered a
faithful example, as well as record of the truth of God unto them.  So
will the grey hairs of your dear parents, yet alive, go down to the grave
with joy, to see you the posterity of truth, as well as theirs: and that
not only their nature, but spirit, shall live in you when they are gone.

* * * * *

I shall conclude this account with a few words to those who are not of
our communion, into whose hands this may come; especially those of our
own nation.

* * * * *

Friends, as you are the sons and daughters of Adam, and my brethren after
the flesh, often and earnest have been my desires and prayers to God on
your behalf, that you may come to know your Creator to be your Redeemer,
and Restorer to the holy image that through sin you have lost, by the
power and Spirit of his Son Jesus Christ, whom he hath given for the
light and life of the world.  And O that you, who are called Christians,
would receive him into your hearts! for there it is you want him, and at
that door he stands knocking, that you might let him in; but you do not
open to him; you are full of other guests, so that a manger is his lot
among you now as well as of old.  Yet you are full of profession, as were
the Jews when he came among them, who knew him not, but rejected and
evily entreated him.  So that if you come not to the possession and
experience of what you profess, all your formality and religion will
stand you in no stead in the day of God's judgment.

I beseech you ponder with yourselves your eternal condition, and see what
title, what ground and foundation you have for your Christianity: if more
than a profession, and an historical belief of the gospel.  Have you
known the baptism of fire, and the Holy Ghost, and the fan of Christ that
winnows away the chaff in your minds, the carnal lusts, and affections;
that divine leaven of the kingdom, that, being received, leavens the
whole lump of man, sanctifying him throughout in body, soul, and spirit?
If this be not the ground of your confidence, you are in a miserable
state.

You will say, perhaps, that though you are sinners, and live in daily
commission of sin, and are not sanctified, as I have been speaking, yet
you have faith in Christ, who has borne the curse for you, and in him you
are complete by faith, his righteousness being imputed to you.

But, my friends, let me entreat you not to deceive yourselves, in so
important a point, as is that of your immortal souls.  If you have true
faith in Christ, your faith will make you clean; it will sanctify you:
for the saints' faith was their victory of old: by this they overcame sin
within, and sinful man without.  And if thou art in Christ, thou walkest
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, whose fruits are manifest.
Yea, thou art a new creature: new made, new fashioned, after God's will
and mould.  Old things are done away, and, behold, all things are become
new: new love, desires, will, affections, and practices.  It is not any
longer thou that livest; (thou disobedient, carnal, worldly one;) but it
is Christ that liveth in thee; and to live is Christ, and to die is thy
eternal gain: because thou art assured, that thy corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and thy mortal, immortality, and that thou hast a glorious
house, eternal in the heavens, that will never wax old or pass away.  All
this follows being in Christ, as heat follows fire, and light the sun.

Therefore have a care how you presume to rely upon such a notion, as that
you are in Christ, whilst in your old fallen nature.  For what communion
hath light with darkness, or Christ with Belial?  Hear what the beloved
disciple tells you: "If we say we have fellowship with God, and walk in
darkness, we lie, and do not the truth."  That is, if we go on in a
sinful way, are captivated by our carnal affections, and are not
converted to God, we walk in darkness, and cannot possibly in that state
have any fellowship with God.  Christ clothes them with his
righteousness, that receive his grace in their hearts, and deny
themselves, and take up his cross daily, and follow him.  Christ's
righteousness makes men inwardly holy; of holy minds, wills, and
practices.  It is not the less Christ's, because we have it; for it is
ours, not by nature, but by faith and adoption: it is the gift of God.
But, still, though not ours, as of or from ourselves, (for in that sense
it is Christ's, for it is of and from him,) yet it is ours, and must be
ours, in possession, efficacy, and enjoyment, to do us any good; or
Christ's righteousness will profit us nothing.  It was after this manner
that he was made to the primitive Christians, righteousness,
sanctification, justification, and redemption; and if ever you will have
the comfort, kernel, and marrow of the Christian religion, thus you must
come to learn and obtain it.

Now, my friends, by what you have read, you may perceive that God has
visited a poor people among you, with this saving knowledge and
testimony, whom he has upheld and increased to this day, notwithstanding
the fierce opposition they have met withal.  Despise not the meanness of
this appearance: it was, and yet is, we know, a day of small things and
of small account with too many; and many hard and ill names are given to
it; but it is of God, it came from him, because it leads to him.  This we
know, but we cannot make another to know it, unless he will take the same
way to know it that we took.  The world talks of God, but what do they
do?  They pray for power, but reject the principle in which it is.  If
you would know God, and worship and serve God as you should do, you must
come to the means he has ordained and given for that purpose.  Some seek
it in books, some in learned men; but what they look for is in
themselves, (though not of themselves,) but they overlook it.  The voice
is too still, the seed too small, and the light shineth in darkness; they
are abroad, and so cannot divide the spoil: but the woman that lost her
silver, found it at home, after she had lighted her candle, and swept her
house.  Do you so too, and you shall find what Pilate wanted to know,
viz. Truth.  Truth in the inward parts, so valuable in the sight of God.

The light of Christ within, who is the light of the world, and so a light
to you, that tells you the truth of your condition, leads all, that take
heed unto it, out of darkness into God's marvellous light.  For light
grows upon the obedient; it is sown for the righteous, and their way is a
shining light, that shines forth more and more to the perfect day.

Wherefore, O friends, turn in, turn in, I beseech you: where is the
poison, there is the antidote.  There you want Christ, and there you must
find him; and blessed be God, there you may find him.  Seek and you shall
find, I testify for God.  But then you must seek aright, with your whole
heart, as men that seek for their lives, yea for their eternal lives:
diligently, humbly, patiently, as those that can taste no pleasure,
comfort, or satisfaction in any thing else, unless you find him whom your
souls want to know and love above all.  O it is a travail, a spiritual
travail! let the carnal, profane world, think and say as it will.  And
through this path you must walk to the city of God, that has eternal
foundations, if ever you will come there.

Well! and what doth this blessed light do for you?  Why, first, it sets
all your sins in order before you: it detects the spirit of this world in
all its baits and allurements, and shows how man came to fall from God,
and the fallen state he is in.  Secondly, it begets a sense and sorrow,
in such as believe in it, for this fearful lapse.  You will then see him
distinctly whom you have pierced, and all the blows and wounds you have
given him by your disobedience, and how you have made him to serve with
your sins; and you will weep and mourn for it, and your sorrow will be a
godly sorrow.  Thirdly, after this it will bring you to the holy watch,
to take care that you do so no more, and that the enemy surprise you not
again.  Then thoughts, as well as words and works, will come to judgment,
which is the way of holiness, in which the redeemed of the Lord do walk.
Here you will come to love God above all, and your neighbours as
yourselves.  Nothing hurts, nothing harms, nothing makes afraid on this
holy mountain.  Now you come to be Christ's indeed; for you are his in
nature and spirit, and not your own.  And when you are thus Christ's,
then Christ is yours, and not before.  And here you will know communion
with the Father and with the Son, and the efficacy of the blood of
cleansing, even the blood of Jesus Christ, that immaculate Lamb, which
speaks better things than the blood of Abel; and which cleanseth from all
sin, the consciences of those that, through the living faith, come to be
sprinkled with it, from dead works to serve the living God.

* * * * *

To conclude; behold the testimony and doctrine of the people called
Quakers; behold their practice and discipline; and behold the blessed man
and men, at least many of them, that were sent of God in this excellent
work and service; all which is more particularly expressed in the annals
of that man of God, which I do heartily recommend to my reader's most
serious perusal; and beseech Almighty God, that his blessing may go along
with both, to the convincement of many, as yet strangers to this holy
dispensation, and also to the edification of God's church in general: who
for his manifold and repeated mercies and blessings to his people, in
this day of his great love, is worthy ever to have the glory, honour,
thanksgiving, and renown; and be it rendered and ascribed, with fear and
reverence, through him in whom he is well pleased, his beloved Son and
Lamb, our light and life, that sits with him upon the throne, world
without end.  Amen.

Says one that God has long since mercifully favoured with his fatherly
visitation, and who was not disobedient to the heavenly vision and call;
to whom the way of truth is more lovely and precious than ever, and that
knowing the beauty and benefit of it above all worldly treasures, has
chosen it for his chiefest joy, and therefore recommends it to thy love
and choice, because he is with great sincerity and affection,

Thy soul's friend,
WILLIAM PENN.

                                  FINIS.

              PRINTED BY HARRISON AND CROSFIELD, MANCHESTER.




BOOKS, &c.


_On sale_, _at reduced prices_; _the property of the Society_: _to be had
of_ William Manley, 86, _Houndsditch_, _London_; _and at the_ Manchester
and Stockport Tract Depository, (_for particulars of which see its
annexed List_.)
                                    _Pounds._ _s._ _d._
Robert Barclay's Apology for the    0 4 6
True Christian Divinity, _octavo_
   Universal Love                   0 0 3
   Discipline                       0 0 6
   Theses                           0 0 2
E. Bates on the Doctrines of        0 4 0
Friends
Elizabeth Bathurst's Truth          0 1 6
Vindicated
W. Shewen's True Christian's        0 1 3
Faith briefly stated
   Counsel to the Christian         0 0 3
Traveller
E. Pugh's Salutation or Call,       0 1 6
from the Many Things to the One
Thing Needful.  12mo.  bound
H. Turford's Grounds of a Holy      0 1 0
Life.  19th edit.
William Penn's Fruits of a          0 0 4
Father's Love
   Key to distinguish the           0 0 3
Religion professed by Friends
from perversion &
misrepresentation
B. Holme's Serious Call, in         0 0 6
Christian Love to all People.
17th edition
C. Marshall's Way of Life           0 0 3
revealed
M. Brook on Silent Waiting          0 0 3
J. Crook's Truth's Principles on    0 0 2
Doctrine, &c.
G. Whitehead's Epistle on True      0 0 1
Christian Love
J. Griffith's Remarks on            0 0 6
Important Subjects
M. Leadbeater's Biographical        0 3 0
Notices of Friends who were
resident in Ireland
G. Fox's Journal of Travels,        0 12 0
Sufferings, and Labours of Love,
in the Work of the Ministry.  2
vols.  8vo.  boards
William Edmundson's Journal of      0 3 0
his Life, Travels, &c.
I. Pennington's Memoirs, and        0 2 6
Review of his Writings, by J. G.
Bevan, 12mo.  boards
T. Ellwood's Life                   0 3 0
T. Chalkley's Journal and Works     0 3 0
J. Woolman's Journal and Works      0 4 0
   Serious Considerations           0 1 0
J. Churchman's Journal, 12mo.       0 3 0
cloth
S. Crisp, Memoirs of, by S. Tuke    0 3 0
J. Gratton's Journal                0 1 0
James Gough's Memoirs, Religious    0 1 6
Experience, &c.
D. Hall's Life and Epistles         0 1 6
R. Jordan's Life                    0 1 6
G. Latey's Life                     0 1 0
Jane Pearson, Memoirs of            0 1 0
C. Story's Life                     0 0 6
John Alderson, Memoirs of           0 0 2
Abiah Darby's Catechism             0 0 4
T. Carrington's Exhortation         0 0 2
Selection of G. Fox's Epistles,     0 3 6
by S. Tuke
Yearly Epistles to 1817, calf       0 7 0
Selection of Advices                0 1 6
SEWEL'S HISTORY OF FRIENDS, (_new
edition_.)
Rules and Advices of the Yearly
Meeting, _just published_.
Penn's Rise and Progress of the     0 0 8
People called Quakers, in which
their Fundamental Principle,
Doctrines, Worship, Ministry, and
Discipline, are plainly declared.
_Stiff cover_
   _Cloth_                          0 1 0


There is an Association of Friends in London, for the printing and
distribution of TRACTS on Moral and Religious Subjects, chiefly such as
have a tendency to elucidate and support the Principles of Christianity
as held by the Society of Friends; in which there are _sixty two_
different Tracts, price from 3_d._ to 2_s._ 6_d._ per doz.  Sold by
EDMUND FRY, 73, Houndsditch; and by HARVEY and DARTON, 55, Gracechurch
Street, London: also at the Manchester and Stockport TRACT DEPOSITORY.




Footnotes


{25}  Instead of being asked those questions, the present practice is to
produce the needful certificates of consent.

{26}  This second attendance is not now required.

{27}  This hardly describes the present practice.  It is not _during_ the
gathering only, if at all, that exhortation takes place.  If the corpse
be conveyed to a meeting-house, the meeting is held like any other; and
what is here called 'Exhortation,' takes place or not, as any minister
present believes him or herself influenced.  The usage at the burial
ground is still as here described.  Interments often take place without
any previous meeting.

{28}  The collective sense and judgment of the church, herein, remains
the same, as is manifest by the frequent advices given forth from their
yearly and other meetings.

{43a}  At present (1834) there are eight yearly meetings on the American
continent, which correspond with the yearly meeting in London, and
mutually with each other; they are united in doctrine, and their
discipline is similar.

{43b}  They are thus particularized in a more recent publication of the
society:--This is an occasional voluntary contribution, expended in
printing books; house-rent for a clerk, and his wages for keeping
records; the passage of ministers who visit their brethren beyond sea;
and some small incidental charges; but not, as has been falsely supposed,
the reimbursement of those who suffer distraint for tithes, and other
demands, with which they scruple to comply.

{44}  This is not now quite correct.  A committee still draws up the
General Epistle; but the minutes of the transactions of the meeting are
made as matters occur during its several sittings.

{57}  Called the Meeting for Sufferings, and now held monthly, except
exigencies require more frequent sittings.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE RISE AND
PROGRESS OF THE PEOPLE CALLED QUAKERS***


******* This file should be named 19377.txt or 19377.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/3/7/19377



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
