The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Amours of Zeokinizul, King of the
Kofirans, by Claude Prosper Jolyot de Crébillon


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Amours of Zeokinizul, King of the Kofirans
       Translated from the Arabic of the famous Traveller Krinelbol


Author: Claude Prosper Jolyot de Crébillon



Release Date: May 30, 2006  [eBook #18472]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMOURS OF ZEOKINIZUL, KING OF
THE KOFIRANS***


E-text prepared by Barbara Tozier, Labyrinths, Bill Tozier, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net/)



THE AMOURS OF ZEOKINIZUL, KING OF THE KOFIRANS.

Translated from the Arabic of the famous Traveller Krinelbol.

With a Key.







London:
Printed for G. Smith, near Temple-Bar. 1749.
[Price One Shilling and Sixpence.]




PREFACE.


_The Bookseller, who has taken upon him to print this little Work,
having absolutely insisted upon my introducing it with a _Preface,_
I was unwilling to refuse him so easy a Matter; and the rather as the
Omission might greatly prejudice it. He urged his Request, by saying,
that a _Preface_ was no less essential to a Book, than an _Exordium_ to
a Sermon. As few read the one, as listen to the other; however, if
either be wanting, the Performance is defective, and, is not so much as
thought worthy to be read in order to be censured. Nevertheless, what
can be said with Regard to a useless Discourse? Why, really, I think, it
is best to say nothing at all. This little Work places Truth in so just
a Light, that no Characters are wanting to point it out. But perhaps,
the real Truth may be amplified in it, and there may be Applications
made of it as false as injurious. This is what ought strongly to be
guarded against; and to this Purpose I sincerely declare, that I have
intermix'd nothing of my own in the Amours of _Zeokinizul:_ But, like a
faithful Translator, I have constantly kept close to _Krinelbol's_
Manuscript. I have related the Facts just as he himself says they were
told him by the _Kofiran_ Nobility. This sincere Protestation, is all
that I can do, In order to remove any Suspicion of Interpolations. The
_Arabian_ Manuscript is still in my Possession, and if desired, shall be
printed. But I own, with Concern, that it is quite beyond my Power, to
procure such a Number of Types as will be requisite to give this
Satisfaction; therefore, let those who are willing and equal to such an
Expence, set the Printer to work. I promise to deliver him the
Manuscript on Demand. I cannot help thinking, but that the Malice of the
World is at its highest Pitch. Formerly People were overjoy'd at the
Certainty of the Antipodes; and to hear that the Inhabitants of those
Climates came nearest to us in Industry, and the Love of Arts and
Sciences; and that the Sun approached to, and receded from them, as it
does with Regard to us. In fine, that their Temperature, their Seasons,
their Manners, and Inclinations, were the same as our own. Yet, in this
my Endeavour to verify such a Resemblance, by Proofs extracted from
their own History, demonstrating by notorious and certain Facts that
they think and act just like ourselves, I shall be branded for an
Imposture; or some, who affect to be more sharp-sighted, will suspect
that under fictitious Names, I have represented Persons for whom my
Heart is filled with the most respectful Sentiments. Let this suffice,
as the shorter a _Preface_ is the better it is liked._




THE AMOURS OF _ZEOKINIZUL_,

King of the Kofirans.


After all the Labours and Attention of our best Academicians to form
just Plans, and draw complete Maps of the whole Terraqueous Globe, there
are many large Empires and powerful Nations, which their Enquiries have
not reached; so that they are not only ignorant of their Position, but
even of their Existence. Of this Number are the vast Dominions of the
King of the _Kofirans_, of which hitherto we have had not the least
Idea; and which probably would ever have continued unknown to us had not
an _Arabic_ Manuscript of the famous Traveller _Krinelbol_ luckily
fallen into my Hands.

This illustrious Enquirer, of whom we have several Works, which
ostentatious Translators, on Account of their Excellency, have published
as their own, that he might not be misled by the various geographical
Descriptions of the Globe, determined to ground his Knowledge upon his
own Experience. With this rational View he left _Arabia Felix_, his
native Country, and travelled all over both _Asia_ and _Africa_. Always
careful to take an accurate View of every Thing which was worth being
seen or known, and making a judicious Collection of what was most
remarkable in the Customs and History of the Countries which he visited.
But a very small Part of his Collection has reached us. That we are so
unhappy as to have only mutilated and unsatisfactory Fragments of an
Author of such Veracity, and in such curious Matters, must be imputed to
the want of Printing in most of the eastern Nations, and the Ignorance
of this Traveller's Heirs.

An Acquaintance of mine, who is extremely fond of Travelling, thinking
it would be a very acceptable Present, brought me these Sheets from
_Ispahan_, where they cost him twelve _Tomans_, that is between twenty
and thirty Pounds Sterling. I have translated it without either
diminishing, augmenting, or altering it in any one Particular. Only,
for the Reader's Convenience, I have expressed the Names of Posts and
Dignities in our Language, which in the Original were in _Arabic_,
keeping to it in the Appellations of Persons and Nations, out of regard
to historical Exactness. I do not in the least claim any Thanks or
Acknowledgements for my Trouble; the several Works of this Nature which
I have published producing in me an habitual Pleasure of employing my
Pen, for the Instruction and Entertainment of polite Readers.

Possibly the whole Universe could not afford a more tranquil, happy
Kingdom than that of the _Kofirans_, would their Princes equitably sit
down contented with the Honours and Prerogatives with which they were
invested at their Institution, and not falsly imagine, that their
Grandeur and Glory consist in the Oppression of their Subjects; and
would they be watchful to entail the Harmony and due Subordination
betwixt the several Orders in their Government. Whereas for several
Centuries past, they have been labouring to erect an Arbitrary Power;
and the two last have taken large Steps towards this execrable End.

_Zeoteirizul_, the First of the Two, was Son to the greatest King that
ever govern'd the _Kofirans_. Being scarcely eight Years old when the
Crown devolv'd to him by his Father's Death, his Mother seiz'd the Reins
of Government. This Princess who was a _Neitilene_ by Birth, was related
to the King of _Jerebi_. Secret History relates that, prompted by her
Ambition, she entered into a private Treaty with her Relation, her
Husband's most inveterate Enemy, and contrived his Murder, which was
unfortunately executed, to the great Loss and Grief of all true
_Kofirans_. What aggravates the Guilt is, that this worthy Prince was
stabb'd on the very Day of her Coronation, at a Juncture when he was
giving this flagitious Wretch the highest Mark of his Affection.

No sooner was the Queen declared Regent of the Kingdom, but she bent all
her Endeavours to establish her Power by protracting the King's
Minority, as long as possible. She constantly amused the young Prince
with Toys and Triffles; she kept him in such Awe that he trembled at her
Appearance, and durst not refuse paying a blind Obedience to those whom
she had placed near him. But so short-sighted is human Artifice, that
what she imagined would be the Basis of her Power, was the very Thing
which overthrew it. A crafty _Mollak_ having insinuated himself into her
Confidence, made Use of it to gain that of the young King; and being too
sagacious a Politician not to foresee what he had to fear from this
enraged Woman, if he left her any Degree of Power or Opportunity of
hurting him, he compelled her to leave the Kingdom in a disgraceful
Manner; and by this successful Boldness, he became Master of the young
King, and the Depository of his Authority. His Pride, the general Vice
of his Order, made him take a Pleasure in humbling the Nobility. He
brought all Employments to depend upon the Court, and by this Means the
Persons of Quality to court the Minister's Favour, which effectually
exalted the Sovereign as much above them as he himself affected in all
Things to appear beneath him.

This Management soon brought upon him the Hatred of the whole Nation;
but notwithstanding such a declared and general Hatred, he was succeeded
by another _Mollak_. He had the same Views as his Predecessor, tho' he
acted on different Maxims. And the former having succeeded in reducing
the first Order nearer the second, he was for bringing them both to an
Equality, and raising the third to a Level with them, by making all
Employments and Dignities venial; and, without any Regard to Merit,
constantly bestowing them on the highest Bidder. Thus, as the same Posts
and Honours were equally attainable by the Citizen and Gentleman, there
was no material Distinction betwixt them. The Government which had
flourished as Monarchical, was become an absolute Despotism. And whereas
the King in all important Transactions, was dependant on the Assembly of
the States, who were look'd upon as the Defenders and Interpreters of
the Laws; both Laws and States were now only mere Phantoms, which he
could raise or annihilate at his Pleasure. It is true, that this has
made the King of the _Kofirans_ the most powerful Monarch in the
Universe; but perhaps, it also makes the People the most miserable;
tho' an abject Veneration for their Kings will not permit them to own
their Slavery, or lament their Grievances.

In order to the better Understanding of what I shall relate concerning
this Monarchy, it will not be an useless Digression to say something of
its Foundation, and gradual Increase to that Pitch of Glory to which it
was raised by the King who proceeded _Zeokinizul_.

I am apt to believe, that when the divine Missionary offered up Paradise
to Men, as the Reward of their Belief and Obedience, he drew his Idea
from the Country of the _Kofirans_. The many Rivers which intermix their
Streams, maintain a perpetual Verdure in the Meadows; the Soil produces
all Sorts of Corn, useful Herbs and Fruits; and is so well cultivated,
that there are no more Woods than are necessary for Fewel and other
Uses. Its exquisite Wines, are little inferior to those of _Ghinoer_;
if it has but few Gold or Silver Mines, the Defect is abundantly
compensated by those of Iron, Copper, Tin, and the valuable Quarries of
Porcelaine, which abound throughout almost all the Provinces of this
delicious Kingdom. The Women are sprightly, witty, and chearful. The
Men, brave, industrious, laborious and addicted to Learning. Its
Situation is so very advantageous, that it is reckoned one of Nature's
Master-pieces. Its steep and lofty Clefts towards the Sea, secure this
charming Country from the Invasions of the King of the Island _Alniob_.
Its Ports are numerous, but so well fortified, as to be of the greatest
Advantage to the _Kofirans_. Another Side of this Country has
inaccessible Mountains, as a Fence against the King of _Jerebi_, and the
_Kam_ of _Vosaïe_. The River _Nhir_ is its Barrier against the
formidable Power of the Emperor of the _Maregins_. And, lastly, many
Cities of almost impregnable Strength, seem to defy the Attacks of the
_Junes_ Provinces, and the _Bapasis_. Such is the Situation and Quality
of the Kingdom of the _Kofirans_, being also blessed with a temperate
Climate, and an healthful Air.

The People who are at present seated in this luxuriant Country, are not
its original Possessors. The first Colony settled here after the Deluge,
were so contented with the spontaneous Produce of its Fertility, that
they forbore to cultivate and improve it. This Moderation which, since
the Sin of _Sultan Adam_, has ceased to be a Virtue, so enervated their
Courage, that they became slothful and timorous. The _Manoris_, tho'
their own Country, wanted for nothing, envied the more fruitful
Possessions of their Neighbours, and invaded them Sword in Hand. The
_Goilaus_, who at that Time inhabited it, and whose Pleasures were
heightened by Liberty, made some Efforts to preserve that valuable
Blessing; but being not so vigorous as the Juncture required, they were
unsuccessful, and the Consequence of their Inactivity was Slavery. After
some Shews of Resistance, in which their Multitudes were easily defeated
by an handful of _Manoris_, they underwent the Fate of several other
Nations, whom this fierce People had reduced.

However, by an Intercourse with the _Manoris_, they became sensible of
their wretched and disgraceful Condition. After they had been conquer'd,
they learned the Art of War from their Conquerors; who, also in a short
Time, declined from the Love of Glory, and a martial Spirit, that they
were no longer formidable but by their Numbers. They grew intoxicated
with Luxury, and run into Extremes opposite to their original Ferosity,
so as to become more despicable than those they had conquered.

It was at this Time, that the _Nodais_, the _Guernonies_, the _Duesois_,
and the _Sokans_ issuing from the North of _Africa_, over-run their
finest Provinces. A Body of these Barbarians fell upon the Territories
of the _Goilaus_, and having forced them to share this delightful
Country, settled themselves there under the Name of _Kranfs_. These new
Conquerors were for some Time molested by the _Manoris_, but as Luxury
had brought their flourishing Empire to Decay, the _Kranfs_ forced them
to desist, and remained in quiet Possession of the _Goilaus_:

I shall omit the first rude Ages, when these Conquerors train'd up to
the Licentiousness of War, were under no Regulation or Law, and whose
Towns, like those of other Nations, were only a confused Assemblage of
Huts. It is true, that there were Kings among them from their first
Settlement, but the Men thus dignified, were in Reality only Generals
elected out of the Troops, and whose Prerogative was limited to Military
Affairs. These Chiefs, whose Savageness was rather augmented by the
Power with which they were invested, made no Scruple to dispatch a
neighbouring Competitor with the Sword or Poison, and their History is
full of unnatural Instances, of Brothers stabbing Brothers, Subjects
poisoning their Sovereigns to usurp their dangerous Stations.

The Religion of _Suesi_, which the fifth of their Kings embraced, tho'
its Maxims are far from countenancing Ambition and Murder, but entirely
adapted to the Welfare of Society; yet have been so perverted by the
Depravity of the _Faquirs_ and the _Imans_, as to be alledged in
Vindication of them, and have besides, set on Foot so many Cheats and
Errors, that the holy Books, _Bileb_ and _Liegnelau_ in their Purity, as
dictated by the divine Spirit to the Legislators, has been treated by
them with Contempt, as mutilated and inconsistent. In Defence of their
respective Notions, these People have engaged in furious Wars with each
other, and out of a Zeal for Religion, have assassinated several of
their Kings. The Times seem now more tranquil, and without any
Apprehension of such shocking Crimes. Their Faith is very different from
what it was, and the lower Sort of People, who alone adhere to the
Tenets of _Suesi_, are entirely recovered from that stupid Obedience
formerly paid to the _Pepa_, who, having made the World believe, that
the Keys of Paradise were in his Hands, required an implicit Compliance
with his Decrees, and be ready to second any Scheme of his Revenge or
Ambition, with their Lives and Fortunes.

The Destruction of the Empire of the _Kofirans_, seems morally
impossible in its present confirm'd State. It has hitherto withstood
several violent Shocks from the Kings of _Jerebi and Alniob_, and the
Emperor of the _Maregins_, who were all its professed Enemies.
Especially the King of _Alniob_, who, taking Advantage of the Frenzy of
one of its Sovereigns, made such a Progress, as to wrest the Sceptre out
of his Hands; but the great _Zokitarezoul_, having compelled him to
renounce even the very Title, has brought all the others into Subjection
so as to acknowledge his Superiority over all the Sovereigns of
_Africa_. It is to this illustrious Monarch, that the Kingdom of the
_Kofirans_ owes its unparalleled Riches and Grandeur. His Courage and
good Fortune have reduced all his Enemies, his Liberality and Wisdom has
established Commerce, his good Sense has civilized it, and his
Successors must attribute the ardent Loyalty and Love of the _Kofirans_
towards them, to the Plans and Labours of this Prince for the Happiness
and Glory of his Subjects. After having driven from the Throne of
_Jerebi_, a Family which had been an Enemy to his, placing one of his
Grandsons on it, he died covered with Glory, and left the Crown to his
great Grandson _Zeokinizul_, who is the particular Hero of this
History.

This young Prince being the only Remains of a numerous Royal Family, was
the Darling of the great _Zokitarezoul_, who apprehending that he might
fall a Victim to the same untimely Fate which had laid so many of his
Descendants in their Graves, was not wanting to secure him by all
possible Precautions. Being persuaded, that the People loved him too
well to suffer any Infractions of his last Disposals, he made a Will; in
which he deprived the _Kam_ of _Anserol_, his Nephew, whose Ambition he
dreaded, of the Regency, in Favour of the _Kam_ of _Meani_, his natural
Son. The _Kam_ of _Anserol_ was highly exasperated at the Injury done
him; but being the greatest Politician of his Time, he took Care that
nothing should escape him at such a Crisis, which might increase the
Suspicions, and consequently the Precautions of his Enemies. It was not
till after the Death of _Zokitarezoul_, that he asserted his Claim.
Attended by a Multitude of his Adherents, he went to the _Pemenralt_,
which is a Phantom of the antient States. There feigning to submit his
Destiny to the Arbitration of that illustrious Senate, he set forth, and
urged his Claim with such a persuasive Eloquence, that the whole
Assembly unanimously annulled a Will, which deprived him of an Honour
that was his incontestable Right, and of a Trust for which he was
unexceptionably qualified. This so enraged his Enemies, that they forged
the vilest Scandals, in order to render him odious. They gave out, that
after having poisoned the chief Persons of the royal Blood, his chief
Aim was to take off his Pupil. Under pretence of such an Apprehension,
they proposed that the Lady of the _Bassa_ of _Ourtavan_ should take
care of the King, and taste of every kind of Food which was brought to
his Table. And soon after they were not wanting to alarm the People with
Reports, that his Victuals had been several Times poisoned. The great
Men of the Kingdom, whose Abilities the Regent never consulted, as being
himself equal to all the Difficulties of Government, enter'd into a
League against him, under Pretence of Concern for _Zeokinizul_, whose
Life they declar'd was in Danger. But the _Kam_ of _Anserol_, who was
too vigilant to be surprized, soon discovered the Plot, and having
secur'd the Leaders, he quench'd the Rebellion in the Blood of its
Contrivers.

He did not give himself the Trouble of verbally refuting the Calumnies,
and Invectives, with which he was daily loaded, but took Care to
disprove them by his Conduct. The publick Finances had been quite
exhausted, during the last Years of the great _Zokitarezoul_, and he
took upon himself to restore them. It is true, that his Scheme ruined
some Families; but besides that their Number was but small, and their
Ruin rather owing to their inconsiderate Greediness, such a desperate
Distemper could not have been well removed by a softer Remedy.

No sooner was _Zeokinizul_ of Age, but the _Kam_ delivered up to him the
Government of the Kingdom, which by his Care and Munificence, was the
Abode of the polite Arts, of which he had declared himself the
Protector. Nay more, he induced the young King to chuse himself a
Consort; and thus he refuted the base Views which his Enemies had
fathered on him.

Scarce was this important Affair finished, when the _Kam_ of _Anserol_,
as if this World could afford no Addition to his Glory, died suddenly,
as he had always desired. His Enemies laid hold of this Circumstance, to
revile him, even in his Grave. They spread a Report, that his Intention
was to poison the King, by a Liquor which he was to drink along with
him, but that by a fortunate Mistake of the Cups, he had fallen the
Victim of his own Contrivance. The young King could not hear such
atrocious Insults without Horror. He threatened the severest Punishments
to any one who should dare to blacken the Character of this great
Prince, and he himself never mentioned his Name but with Words of the
highest Esteem, and the warmest Acknowledgment.

The joyful _Kofirans_ promised themselves, from the hopeful Inclinations
of _Zeokinizul_, a Reign no less happy than the preceding; but by a
Fatality, not uncommon amongst them, the young Monarch was so fond of an
old _Mollak_, formerly his Tutor, of a very insinuating but hypocritical
Humility, that he entirely remitted to him the whole Management of his
Kingdom. This old Wretch, whose predominate Passion was Avarice, loaded
the People with Taxes. And as a War would not allow him to embezzle at
will the public Treasures, he never would enter into one unless utterly
impossible to be avoided. And then, with so much Niggardliness, and so
little Conduct, that he became the Scorn both of the Generals and the
Officers of State. Happy if he could have saved those vast Sums, or have
expended them in a manner suitable to the Honour of the Prince, and the
unbounded Zeal of his Subjects. But they were all in a short Time
squandered away, among Foreigners, who made him their constant Dupe.
Indeed, the best Schemes miscarried thro' his Sordidness, and yet with
all these Faults, he maintain'd his Ascendency over the Prince, so that
no Courtier dared utter any Complaint against him.

_Zeokinizul_, whose whole Life was devoted to his Consort and his
Hunting, of both which he was equally fond, had only the Title and Pomp
of a King, for the _Mollak Jeflur_ had engrossed all the Authority, by
which Means he aggrandized his Family, promoted and enriched his
Creatures, and supplied the enormous Profusion of his Mistress the
Princess of _Ginarkan_, Spouse to a Prince of the Blood of _Vosaïe_.

His selfish Love of Peace, could not, however, hinder his being involved
in an unavoidable War.

_Sicidem_, grand _Kam_ of _Katenos_, among the Provinces of the
_Neitilanes_, dying without Issue, the Emperor of the _Maregins_ laid
Claim to his Succession. This Prince was already too powerful for the
King of the _Kofirans_ not to oppose this Addition to his Greatness. And
thus this ecclesiastical Statesman _Jeflur_, was brought under a
Necessity of employing his Master's Troops, in order to deprive him of
so rich an Inheritance. About this Time also, the Throne of _Goplone_,
of which his Father-in-Law had been dispossess'd, became vacant, and
_Zeokinizul_'s Honour required, that he should lay hold of this
Opportunity to restore him. After a fruitless Trial of all the peaceable
Ways of Bribery and Negotiation to compass his End, the _Mollak_ was at
last oblig'd to order the _Kofiran_ Troops to march. The first Body
marched towards the _Nhir_, to oppose the Emperor of the _Maregins_, the
second towards the Kingdom of _Goplone_, to impose upon them their
former Sovereign, and the third hastened into the Provinces of the
_Neitilanes_, to make sure of the Dominions of _Sicidem_.

As this War was carried on only in _Zeokinizul_'s Name, and he did not
personally act in it, I shall omit its various Events, in Order to come
the sooner to what immediately relates to this young King. After the
loss of two Battles, and a strong City taken by the _Kofirans_, the
Emperor of the _Maregins_ was very glad to accept of a Peace, upon such
Conditions as were alone detrimental to his Allies. As a Satisfaction to
_Zeokinizul_'s Father-in-law for his Kingdom, which he relinquish'd to
another, he was allowed to retain the Title of King, and was made
actual Sovereign of the Province of _Reinarol_, which after his Death,
was by the Treaty to be annexed to the Kingdom of the _Kofirans_, and
the _Kam_ in exchange for this Cession, was invested with the Dominions
of _Sicidem_. Tho' this was an advantageous Peace to the Conquerors, yet
it was very short of what they might reasonably have expected, or at
least, if _Zeokinizul_ was so moderate as to be contented with such
small Matters, it behov'd his Minister to insist upon more important and
honourable Terms. However, the Glory of his Arms, was the continual
Topic to him; and this Prince by hearing of the Exploits of his Soldiers
so frequently extoll'd, began to give Signs of a martial Disposition.
His Genius now display'd itself, and instead of reigning ingloriously
only by a Minister, he shewed, that he would be in all Respects the
King. His Courtiers, who had always with Reluctance paid Obedience to
the Order of the haughty _Mollak_, applauded this generous Resolution,
while the crafty _Jeflur_ had the Mortification to see, that his
Ministry was going to be overturned, by the very Thing which he fancied
would have prolonged it.

As this was a fatal Blow, so was he not wanting in his Endeavours to
ward it off. Accordingly he set all his Springs at Work, nor minded the
Guilt of any Measure if it had a promising Aspect. I question if an
Instance of such an hellish Contrivance, and so detestable a Scandal,
can be found in any History. A Man to whom a whole Kingdom had
committed its only Hope, a Man who had been chosen to rectify and refine
the Morals of its King, endeavours by all Means to corrupt them; and,
as a Return for the vast Favours received from him, he draws him in to
forfeit his Innocence, the Love of his Consort, and the Esteem of his
Subjects.

_Zeokinizul_, as has been said, was passionately fond of the Queen his
Spouse, which guarded him against those Irregularities which stain'd the
Memory of the preceding Kings of the _Kofirans_. Yet these People being
of a volatile and fickle Humour, could not think, that a settled Love
afforded any Pleasure, and were continually wishing that their Sovereign
would commence an Intrigue with some Court Beauty. This unbecoming Wish
was pretended to proceed from a Regard for the Welfare and Glory of the
Nation. What, says they, shall our King always be tutor'd by _Mollaks_?
What signifies this Peace, which is only owing to the Weakness and
Pusillanimity of this set of Men, for we are oppressed with Taxes as
much as if we were engaged in a War with all the Powers of _Africa_?
Why does not our King shew some Spirit, and give into an Intrigue? An
ambitious Mistress would break these scandalous Fetters, and when he is
once his own Master, instead of this enervating Idleness, he would soon
find such Work for our Forces, as would enhance our Reputation, and
enlarge his Dominions.

At this Rate the _Kofirans_ used to talk, and _Jeflur_ was no stranger
to it. But a clearer Insight into human Nature, made him conclude, that
tho' their Wishes were answered, it would be so far from producing the
desired Effect, that he laid it down as a Certainty, that a new Amour
would more and more indispose _Zeokinizul_ to State Affairs, and he
would quickly lay them aside as Embarasments, in order the more freely
to indulge his Passion. With this View, so far from censuring this
popular Desire, tho' it had neither Religion nor Laws on its Side, he
bent all his Thoughts to accomplish it.

It was not any Beauty in the Queen which had attach'd her Consort to
her. For tho' she had not been one third older than himself, there was
nothing in her Face to strike the Affections of a Prince constantly
encircled with numberless Beauties, and whose Love they would have
accounted the highest Honour. The exact Return which he made to her Duty
and Tenderness, entirely flowed from this Prince's generous and grateful
Temper, and from his good and religious Heart. He had such a delicate
Sense of conjugal Duty, that he never fail'd shewing his Displeasure to
any Courtiers, who presumed to expatiate on the Charms of some _Houris_
in his Capital, and once when _Kigenpi_, one of the _Methers_, or Lords
of his Bed-Chamber began to talk to him of a Person of incomparable
Beauty, he gave him no Answer, only asking him in a dry and scornful
Manner, whether she was handsomer than the Queen?

This Coldness rendered it no easy Matter for the _Mollak_ to alienate
the Affections of _Zeokinizul_ from the Queen. But what are Churchmen
uncapable of? He changed his Measures, and determined to make the Queen
an Instrument to remove from herself a Spouse who loved her most
tenderly. He managed it in the following Manner.

This Princess being born in a Country where the Religion of _Suesi_ is
directed by the _Pepa_, who stiles himself the Sovereign Arbitrator of
it, had imbibed a strong Prepossession for what in the Kingdom of the
_Kofirans_ is called Bigotry, or misplaced Devotion. The Customs and
religious Notions of this Nation, which were more free and rational than
in the Country of this Princess, had been a Constraint upon her
Inclination, without lessening her mistaken Austerity. It was on this
Side, that _Jeflur_ spread his Snares. He placed near the Queen a
_Dervise_, one of those sly finished Villains, who, being Masters of the
execrable Art of giving Sin an Appearance of Sanctity, instruct the
great ones, whose Favour they purchase at the most infamous Rate, how to
Sin without Guilt. This Traytor perform'd his Commission according to
_Jeflur_'s Desire. He was continually fomenting in the Heart of his over
pious Sovereign, the Excesses and fanatical Rants of his Order. He dwelt
on the inconceiveable Sweetness of an Intimacy with _Suesi_, who was
ever ready to communicate himself to such Souls as detach'd themselves
from sensual Pleasures. He magnified the great Merit of Fastings,
Prayers, and Austerities; and when he had rooted these Things in the
Heart of his credulous Proselyte, he proceeded to declare to her, that
Chastity was a Virtue absolutely necessary to merit the divine Favours;
strongly insisting, that this Chastity must be so refined and
abstracted, as not to be awed, or seduced by human Engagements. The
unhappy Queen, misled by the pathetic Discourse, and the feigned Piety
of the _Dervise_, greedily swallowed the Poison he was administring. She
passed whole Days and Nights in Prayer, and the Austerities of a false
Devotion, according to the Instructions of her infamous Director. Nor
was it long, before she attain'd the Height of that superstitious
Chastity which he required of her, and, imagining there was no stopping
in a Course which was to end so gloriously, she formed a Resolution,
in order to devote herself with the greater Fervour and Purity to the
heavenly Bridegroom which had been promised her, to separate herself
from the Embraces of a Spouse, to whom she was united by the most sacred
Ties, and endeared by the tenderest Affection.

The young King who had been extremely uneasy for some Days at this
misterious Behaviour, grew highly offended, when upon asking the Queen
to comply with his Affection, he was repulsed, under the Pretence of
imaginary Dispositions, from which she was known to be entirely free.
However, so far from taking the Denial, it only made him more urgent;
at which the Queen to free herself from what she call'd her Consort's
Importunities, sent him Word, and confirm'd it herself, that an
incurable Disorder had rendered her unfit for the conjugal Functions.

The Monarch was Thunderstruck at this. It threw him into such a
Melancholy, that he kept his Chamber for three Days. Even Hunting, which
had always been his favourite Diversion, seem'd to be banished from his
Thoughts. He never appeared in the Drawing-Room, and the most
distinguished Courtiers were oblig'd to put on a sorrowful Appearance
whenever they approached him. _Jeflur_ exulted at the Success of his
Scheme. He brib'd one of the Lords of the Bed-Chamber, whom the King
honoured with a particular Confidence, and having inform'd him what the
Arrow was which had pierced the King's Heart, he made him large Promises
if he could pluck it out.

_Kelirieu_, for so was this Lord called, readily embraced the Proposal,
and sought for an Opportunity of being alone with his Master. Nor was he
long without it. One Day as _Zeokinizul_ was negligently leaning upon a
_Sopha_, involv'd in melancholy Thoughts on the Alteration of his
Spouse, the Lord came towards him, throwing himself at his Feet.

Permit, said he, a faithful Subject, to presume to enquire into the
Secrets of your Highness. You know, Sire, my respectful Attachment to
your august Person. You also know, that your Glory and Satisfaction are
dearer to me than my very Life. Vouchsafe then, Sire, to disclose to me
the Cause of that Sorrow which incessantly preys upon you. Let the Heart
of a faithful Servant be the Depository of all your Disquietudes.
Possibly Means may be discover'd to mitigate them.--_Kelirieu_,
perceiving that his Discourse made no Impression upon the King, who
indeed continued in the same Posture, without seeming to give the least
Attention to it, proceeded thus. But, Sire, I see my Presumption offends
you. I have lost the Confidence of my Sovereign. It is enough, let your
Highness speak, and decide the Fate of a Subject, who is become hateful
to himself, by being hateful to you.

The Firmness with which _Kelirieu_ pronounced these last Words, roused
the King from his Lethargy. No, my dear Friend, said he, raising him up,
I still love you, and the only Reason why I do not impart my Sorrows to
you, is, because they are without Remedy, and you would only have the
Trouble of knowing them, without the Power of redressing them.--The
Queen.--Ah! enquire no farther? I must either forfeit my everlasting
Happiness, or lose the Esteem of my Subjects. But I am fully determined,
there is no room for Hesitation, for I am unalterably fixed in my
Choice. Withdraw, and leave me to strengthen my Resolutions.

_Kelirieu_ insisted no farther, but hastened to acquaint the _Mollak_,
that he had already search'd the King's Wound. And since, added he,
I have drawn out of his Heart the fatal Secret which was lodg'd in it,
I flatter myself, that in a short Time, I shall entirely complete the
Cure. 'Tis a good Step, replied _Jeflur_, to have comforted
_Zeokinizul_, but that is not enough. You must still induce him to
bestow his Heart upon the Person I shall name to you. Carry but this
Point, and I promise you a thousand _Tomans_ as the first Token of my
Acknowledgement.

The King, in the mean Time, felt some Relief from the Confidence which
he had placed in _Kelirieu_. He looked for him all the Remainder of the
Day. But this Artful Mediator found Means to avoid a private Meeting.
Nor did he appear before his Master till after some Days, and the King
was obliged to send for him, and demand his immediate Attendance. No
sooner were they alone, but the King said, did I not tell you, my dear
_Kelirieu_, that my Sufferings were past Remedy, and that you would only
have the Grief of hearing them without having the Power of relieving
them? Sire, interrupted the crafty Courtier, with a bashful Air, I know
a Remedy, but I dare not mention it, and yet it is the only one
practicable. Ah! said the King, eagerly embracing him, declare it, and
tho' I should refuse to make use of it, yet I shall always acknowledge
myself oblig'd to your Zeal for the Discovery. Sire, replied _Kelirieu_,
one Woman is the Cause of your Highness's Melancholy, and another Woman
must be the Remedy. How dost thou dare to offer me such infamous
Advice, answer'd _Zeokinizul_ in a Rage, when I have already told you,
that I had rather perish than lose the Esteem of my Subjects? Must I,
being the Interpreter, and Protector of the Laws, only make a Parade of
my Prerogative, by licentiously violating them?

I beseech your Highness to hear me, replied _Kelirieu_, not in the least
daunted at the King's Anger, I swear by your royal Head, that it was not
my Intention to offend you. But a too precipitate Construction of my
Advice has led you to resent it as base and criminal. But, Sire, can
your Highness harbour a Suspicion that _Kelirieu_ would offer to eclipse
your Glory? No, Heaven is my Witness, that I would rather die a thousand
Deaths. When I intimated to your Highness, that the Remedy of your
Sorrows was too be found only in the Conversation of Women, I meant no
other than what the Laws both human and divine admit of. And that as
Solitude only serves to augment your Grief, the entertaining Wit and
Sprightliness of the Fair Sex, in their Conversations, was the only
Antidote against your growing Affliction, in which a whole Nation
participates.

There may be Danger in such a Step, replied the King, when once a Woman
has charmed the Mind, she soon makes her Way to the Heart, and since the
Queen has been pleased to return me mine, which I had so affectionately
given her, I will be always upon my Guard to keep it free and
insensible.

And at the same Time he changed the Discourse, and soon after dismissed
his Confident, who was impatient till he had related his Progress to
_Jeflur_. The _Mollak_, embracing him a thousand Times, cried, thy
Services are inestimable, neither shall I be ungrateful. _Liamil_, Wife
to the _Bassa_ of the same Name, is she whom you are to propose to
_Zeokinizul_. _Kelirieu_ could not conceal his Surprise at her Name.

How, says he to the Minister, can you conceive that he is to be
captivated by a Person of her Age? Would your _Holiness_ but reflect on
the Nature of _Zeokinizul_'s Scruples. It must be some enchanting Beauty
which can transport him to commit an Infidelity which he accounts no
small Crime. And you are for seducing him by _Liamil_, who has as few
Charms as any Court Lady, and who, besides, is under conjugal
Engagements. How shocking will the Idea of this complicated Guilt appear
to the Prince, who cannot bear the Thoughts of a single Infidelity? Ah!
learned _Mollak_, you require of me what is beyond my Power, and out of
the Course of Nature. Furnish me with a proper Instrument, let the
Person to be recommended be young, gay, handsome, and artful, and then I
will be answerable for the Success.

Surely you must be very little acquainted with _Zeokinizul_, interrupted
the Minister, is it not apparent that this Prince, who has been used to
an antiquated Beauty, and was so excessively fond of her, will think
nothing lovely but as it resembles his Spouse? Besides, he will have no
Time to attend to the Suggestions of his Scruples. And _Liamil_'s small
Share of Beauty will prevent any Mistrust in him. I rely more upon her
Wit than on her personal Charms, in which she has few Equals, and that
is the Talent by which I suppose she shall commence the Intrigue;
Opportunity will forward it. Besides, do you think that I am so blind to
mine own Interest, as to provide _Zeokinizul_ with a young ambitious
Mistress, who will be for monopolizing the royal Favour, and never be
satisfied till she has grasp'd the Disposal of all Offices and Honours?
No, no, my dear _Kelirieu_, _Liamil_ is the Woman for the King, 'tis she
whom you must bring him to like, if you value my Friendship, and whose
Friendship can equal mine? Any other than she would give me too much
Umbrage for me to bear with it long. There is a Bill for a Thousand
_Tomans_, go and receive them at the Treasury. A thousand more shall
recompense your Success.

_Jeflur_ was quite void of true Liberality, but this Matter concerned
him too nearly to lose such a dexterous Manager, who had taken it into
his Hands, by an unseasonable Parsimony. _Kelirieu_ appear'd the next
Day at the King's Levee, who took him into his Closet, and renewing
their last Conversation; what a feeble Remedy, says he, do you propose
for my violent Agitations! Such Sufferings as mine require something
more than Words. I know a Person, replied _Kelirieu_, whose Conversation
is so charming, that I am sure your Highness upon a Tryal, will be so
delighted with it, that it would recover your former Chearfulness. The
King seeming to question it, the Lord flew away to the Queen's
Apartment, to tell _Liamil_, that the King had sent for her.

_Liamil_, full of Joy, as having already been instructed, made no less
Haste thither. But how was she surprised and mortified, when
_Zeokinizul_, having ask'd her what she wanted, view'd her for some Time
without speaking a Word more. Tho' she was prepared to act her Part, she
could not forbear blushing, tho' more out of Spite than Bashfulness. And
as she could not presume to speak first, after staying about a Quarter
of an Hour in the Apartment, she made a low Courtesy, and withdrew, full
of Confusion and Rancour.

The _Mollak_, who was waiting for her Return, used his utmost to appease
her. Believe me, says he to her, _Zeokinizul_ is smitten, only allow him
Time to get the better of some troublesome Scruples, and every Thing
will be according to our Desires. And indeed, she was scarce out of
Sight, but _Zeokinizul_ was sorry for the cold Reception he had given
her. He blamed himself for his Incivility; and, to make her some Amends,
he went to the Queen's Apartment. Now was the critical Instant, the
decisive Moment for this Princess. Could she have suspended her
excessive Devotion to receive the King her Husband in a becoming Manner,
there had been an End of all _Jeflur_'s Schemes, and _Kelirieu_'s
thousand _Tomans_ had been saved to the Treasury; but her sending him
Word, that she begg'd his Highness would suffer her to finish her
Devotion before she waited on him, gave him Time enough to talk to
_Liamil_, who did not fail of exerting all her Talents, which charm'd
the King to that Degree, that he thought _Kelirieu_ had not exceeded in
his high Enconiums, the Wit and agreeable Qualities of this Lady. And
under Pretence of being extremely taken with her Conversation, he
desired her Company in his Closet that very Evening.

_Jeflur_'s Exultations at hearing this News from _Liamil_, were beyond
all Description. He made her repeat the Oath, which she had at first
swore, never to require the Rights of the Favorite _Sultana_, but be
satisfied with the Honours of the Handkerchief. He drew her a Plan for
her Rule of Life, regulated her Behaviour to the Queen, and instructed
her in the King's Temper. In fine, he imitated the fond Mother, who,
upon her Daughters being soon to be delivered up to a Bridegroom,
prepares her for the Conflict, represents to her the Pleasures and
Sorrows attendant on the Marriage State, and instructs her how to
heighten the one, and alleviate the other. When he came to be alone,
he applauded his happy Choice, and really he never could have met with
a Person so fit for the Purpose, nor who would have submitted to his
Directions with less Ambition, and more Pliantness and Punctuality.

Besides, her singular Wit, _Liamil_ had a Serenity of Temper which
excited Love, though she was in her thirty sixth Year. The Minister
before this, was under no Apprehension that she would fail in her Aim at
_Zeokinizul_'s Heart. The artificial Charms with which she concealed the
Loss, or want of natural ones, the exquisite Neatness and Elegancy of
her Dress, with the Gracefulness of her Deportment, rendered the
Conquest certain. Besides, it was no Novelty for a _Kofiran_ King to
keep a Mistress older than himself, and some have been even known to
retain the Affections from Father to Son, to the third Generation.

_Liamil_ did not fail to keep so promising an Appointment. She found
_Zeokinizul_ expecting her, and tho' this Prince had prepared himself to
see her, he was as much disordered at the Sight of her, as he had been
in the Morning. _Liamil_ was oblig'd to furnish Talk, for _Zeokinizul_
went no further than a reserv'd Complaisance; and after being a full
Hour by themselves, upon the Prince's signifying that he would be alone,
she left him, having only receiv'd eight or ten Answers, and those
rather civil than gallant. Who can conceive the Anguish of _Liamil_,
when she return'd to _Jeflur_? Wretch that I am, cried she, throwing
herself upon a _Sopha_, here her Sighs stopp'd her Voice, that she could
not proceed. _Jeflur_ was struck with Amazement, and knew not what to
think of such Emotions. He dried her Tears, he inlarged his Promises,
and particularly vowed he would make her rich Amends for the Vexation
she suffered on his Account. Let me alone, said she, at last, was it
not enough to make me marry a Man whom I hate, but must you also draw me
to love one who slights me? Yes, the King, with whose Love you flatter'd
me, slights me; I am come directly from his Closet, where I was with him
above an Hour; and so far from making Love to me, that he did not say
the least soft Thing. Is not this Coldness? Is not this slighting? Is
this all that raises such a Storm in this poor Bosom, replied _Jeflur_?
Did not I forewarn you, that _Zeokinizul_'s deep Sense of his Duty,
would make him be greatly upon the Reserve with you? And that you would
think him insensible, tho' he was only immerst in Thought? Why did not
you intice him? Come, come, be easy, I will engage to procure you
another private Meeting; but take Care not to act the Prude again so
unseasonably. Ply him with every alluring Art, and even make Use of a
fond Violence to make him yield. He is not to be treated like common
Lovers. These Injunctions cannot be disagreeable to you. _Zeokinizul_ is
perfectly handsome, and in the Prime of Life. You love him, and
therefore must leave no Means untry'd to secure his.

_Liamil_ relish'd this judicious Lesson, and impatiently waited the
Performance of _Jeflur_'s Promise; and being resolv'd to make the utmost
Efforts to seduce _Zeokinizul_, she promised herself, that at the next
Meeting she should beat down all Resistance, and allure the King to
gratify her Desires. _Kelirieu_ soon brought it about, for the King
seeing nothing dangerous to his Freedom in _Liamil_, was easily
prevailed upon by the Entreaties of his Confident, to admit of another
Visit from her. Accordingly he sent her a Message to come in the Evening
to a certain Chamber in the Palace. It is easy to conceive how welcome
this Message was to her. She was there some Time before the King
appeared. The Apartment had but a dim Light; however, this rather
favoured than prejudiced _Liamil_, as her Wit was to kindle the first
Desires in _Zeokinizul_. Their Conversation must however, remain a
Secret, as neither of them has reveal'd it to any one. What is certain,
and also more important, is, that _Liamil_ so charm'd the King by her
lively Flights of Wit, heightened by an expressive Air, that he heard
her with more Pleasure than he had imagined, that the Inticements of
this Woman were too strong for his Virtue, and that at last, she
gradually drew him to a Couch, where he gave her the Pledges of his
Love, satisfied her longing Desires, and completed the _Mollak_'s
Stratagem.

This first Step, at once put an End to all the King's Remorse and
Disquietude. He repeated several Times the Pleasure which his
experienced Mistress enhanced in such a Manner as his devout Consort was
a Stranger to, and at last left this fatal Chamber in such a Temper as
_Jeflur_ and _Kelirieu_ had been contriving; that is, passionately in
Love. Their Meetings were for some Times a Secret, but Passion soon grew
too vehement to be concealed. It became the common Talk of the
Courtiers, and at last it reached the Queen's Ear. But she, instead of
endeavouring to reclaim her Spouse by an endearing Carriage, and the
Ascendency which she had over him, gave herself up to a fruitless
Lamentation for his Misfortune, at the Feet of an Image of _Suesi_, and
this unseasonable Devotion deprived her of all Hopes of ever regaining
her Consort's Heart. _Liamil_'s Husband took upon him to resent his
Wife's Infidelity, upon which he receiv'd an Order never to have any
Commerce with her. Her Father, who was one of the most eminent _Bassas_
in the Kingdom, began also to exclaim against it; but a Quantity of
_Tomans_ which he greatly wanted, effectually silenced him. Even
_Jeflur_ himself, in order to avoid Suspicion, openly censured the
King's Behaviour. The Monarch was offended at his Representations on so
delicate a Point, and sharply said, I have indeed made you Master of my
Kingdom, but I expect to be Master of myself. This Answer completed the
_Mollak_'s Design, and he took Care that it should not be lost to the
People. The general Displeasure which it gave, is hardly to be imagined.
The King's Amour, which had been so greatly desired, appearing to settle
_Jeflur_'s Power, was look'd upon in a very different Light. It was
look'd upon as an odious Adultery, an impious Commerce, which would pull
down divine Vengeance upon the Kingdom. Satires and Lampoons flew about
every where, in which both Lover and Mistress were so openly exposed,
that any one who was a Stranger to their Fickleness, and how suddenly
they pass from one Extreme to the other, would have been apprehensive
that the most dangerous Commotions were at hand. However, _Zeokinizul_
was so charmed with _Liamil_, that he was continually with her. He
pitched upon the House of an old _Bassa_ of the first Rank, for the more
peaceable and secure Enjoyment of the Delights of his new Mistress. All
the Inventions of the most refined Luxury, were employed to add new
Incentives to Wantonness. The House seemed the very Residence of Love
and Delight. Every Thing in it declar'd the Elegance of the Mistress,
and the Magnificence of the Lover. Each succeeding Day brought with it
the most ravishing Scenes, without any Alarm or Disturbance. The old
_Bassa_ and his Family saw no more than the Prologue, only some few
Spectators of approved Discretion and Secrecy, were admitted to be
present at the Plot of the Play, but for the Conclusion, it was
privately transacted between the two chief Actors.

It is a Saying of a great _Kofiran_ Poet, that Virtue is like a steep
Island, there is no setting Foot on it again when once one is out of it.
_Zeokinizul_ was a sad Instance of this. In the midst of these
delightful Meetings, which consisted entirely of Confidence, _Liamil_
obtain'd Leave for one of her Sisters to be admitted. Imprudent
Creature! not to see that after she herself had stifled all Remorse in
her Lover's Heart, their being so nearly related would not be Proof
against Love, nor hinder her from becoming her Rival. This Lady, who
could not boast of more Beauty than her Sister, surpass'd her even in
Wit, and was possess'd of all the Arts and Qualities requisite in a
Favourite. She was as enterprizing as _Liamil_ was moderate; of
unbounded Ambition, haughty, revengeful, entirely bent on her own
Interest, and aiming at royal Favour only for its Advantages, such was
_Leutinemil_. She no sooner perceiv'd how easy it would be to supplant
her Sister, but she formed the Design, and _Zeokinizul_ who began to be
pall'd with the long Enjoyment of so indifferent a Mistress, was easily
inclin'd to vary the Object of his Love. He therefore commenced an Amour
with _Leutinemil_, but however, was far from discarding her Sister, his
View being only to sharpen his Appetite with Novelty, in order to return
with the greater Gust to his first Entertainment. Love is well known to
pay no Regard to the Tyes of Nature; _Liamil_ was so exasperated at
_Leutinemil_'s being her Rival, that she forgot she was her Sister. She
hastened to inform _Jeflur_, and to engage him to revenge her Quarrel.
The _Mollak_ was thunderstruck at this News, for such an Alteration in
the King had shipwreck'd all his Hopes. His two thousand _Tomans_ were
lost, and he seem'd on the Brink of his Ruin. In this Extremity he had
Recourse to _Kelirieu_.

But it was no longer this Courtier's Interest to serve him. The two
thousand _Tomans_ were all he could get of the vast Riches which had
been promised him, and as _Liamil_ had shewn but little Concern for her
Friends, he sided with her Sister, who was like to prove a powerful
Benefactress to her Creatures. So that all the soothing Speeches of the
_Mollak_ made no Impression on him, neither was _Jeflur_ greatly
concerned at it; for, being long practised in Wickedness, he had already
discovered a Way to remove his Fears, without hazarding his _Tomans._
Endeavour, says he to _Liamil_, to preserve those Remains of Favour
which the King still has for you. Be blind to those Fondnesses which so
deeply affect you; let not your Sister's Rivalship alarm you: I will
soon bring it to an End. Flatter _Zeokinizul_; I know him, Fondness and
Complaisance are the only Means to preserve his Heart.

Pursuant to these Instructions of _Jeflur_, _Liamil_ so far from
troubling the King with Complaints, was more eager in her Caresses, and
the Prince overjoyed to Love and be beloved by two such easy and
unsuspecting Rivals, carried on with both of them an Amour, whose Guilt
seemed to make it the more delightful. _Leutinemil_ became with Child,
and as she protested that her Husband had no Share in her Pregnancy, it
must be attributed to _Zeokinizul_. _Jeflur_ was not at all disturbed at
it, he was only affraid of the Mother, and here was a favourable
Opportunity to dispatch her.

She went her Time very happily, and was safely delivered. _Zeokinizul_
paid her his Compliments in the most tender Terms; but a few Days
changed all this Joy into the deepest Sorrow. She was seiz'd with
violent Pains in her Breast, which were followed with such terrible
Convulsions, as, in a few Hours proved the Death of this unfortunate
Mother; nor could the Physicians, or at least they would not, declare
the real Cause of it. _Zeokinizul_ was so afflicted at this unexpected
Loss, that he intermitted every Pleasure and Diversion. _Liamil_ seemed
to indulge an excessive Grief on a double Account, and so artfully
concealed her Joy for her Rival's Death, that the compassionate King
dismist his Sorrows to put an End to hers. This Shew of Sympathy and
Tenderness in _Liamil_, imposed on many, and reunited _Zeokinizul_ to
her with more Fondness and Attachment than ever.

Though he had a very important War upon his Hands, it did not divert him
from the Gratifications of Love; he left the entire Management of every
Thing to the _Mollak Jeflur_. The Welfare of his Troops and Glory of his
Arms were to depend on Generals of the Minister's Appointment, whose
Weakness and sordid Parsimony, occasioned several very ignominious
Miscarriages to the _Kofirans_. _Zeokinizul_ had such a paternal Love
for his People, that the Loss of a hundred thousand brave Soldiers, and
above seven Millions of _Tomans_ would have greatly afflicted him, had
his Passion for _Liamil_ left him any Freedom of Thought, but in her
Company, he was insensible to every other Concern. The disinterested
Fondness of this Favourite, who only loved the Lover in the King, must
have made her the happiest that ever was, if relying less on her Merit,
or warned by a recent Experience, she had guarded against some of her
own Sex, whom she must think envied her Elevation, and watch'd her Ruin;
but as an illusory Conceit that a Passion which had subsisted for many
Years, would never be extinguished, brought her into the very Misfortune
from which _Leutinemil_'s Death had delivered her.

She had three Sisters still remaining, who all longed impatiently to
show themselves to their Sovereign, though they were none of Nature's
Master-pieces. Coquetry and something worse had always been hereditary
in this Family, who yet seem to have bewitch'd _Zeokinizul_. The eldest
of these three Sisters, was the Widow of a _Bassa_ of the second Rank,
she expected the Precedence as being a little more sprightly than the
others; and full of a high Conceit of her Desert, she depended on
keeping her Station long enough to put the others out of all Hopes. She
had a great deal of _Leutinemil_'s Temper, only still more Ambition.
There had formerly been a very close Intimacy betwixt her and
_Kelirieu_, and it is thought, that he espoused her Interests as much
through Gratitude, as Envy and Revenge to displace _Liamil_.

Her continued Familiarity with _Zeokinizul_, had worn away even that
little Modesty which the most abandoned Prostitutes are seen to retain;
and having been long in Possession of his Spouse's Rights, she came to
look upon herself as such; and made no Scruple of seeing Company when
she was just coming from her Lover's Arms, and her Face full of the
Marks of his eager Caresses. I have been assured by several Noblemen,
that one Day she threw herself out of an Arbour, under Pretence of
avoiding _Zeokinizul_'s Embraces with her bare Breast and loose Hair,
and said to them, very unconcernedly, for God's Sake see how this
Fornicator has handled me. She had now lost all Relish for these
delightful Parties of Pleasure, whilst they were to be in private, and
was continually importuning her Lover to chuse a Set of Associates.
_Kelirieu_, to compass his own Aim, seconded the Favorite's Desire with
such flattering Stories, that his Master recommended to him the Care of
finding out some Persons of both Sexes who were fit to bear a Part in
these Festivals of _Bacchus_, and the _Cytherean_ Deity. The Confident
laid hold of this Opportunity at length, to gratify _Lenertoula_'s
Impatience to be introduced to the King. Her Sister _Liamil_, who had
entertained no Suspicion at her Punctuality in shewing herself at Court,
was as easy with Regard to her being admitted as one of the Guests. But
_Zeokinizul_ was not so indifferent about her, for he fell violently in
Love with her at her first Appearance. _Lenertoula_ observed him very
attentively, and artfully avoided any Steps which might give him Reason
to conclude, that she was his own. The Monarch was caught in the Snare,
and when she perceived the Force of his Love was equal to her Wish, she
declar'd to him the Conditions on which alone she would yield herself up
to his Embraces. _Zeokinizul_ could refuse her nothing. Rank, Titles,
Riches, all was laid at her Feet; and _Lenertoula_ being now in no
Danger of Disappointments, or at least in a Condition to support them,
was under no Apprehension of her Intrigues becoming publick.

This second Act of Perfidiousness in her Sisters, fill'd _Liamil_ with
Rage. As she had imagined the King's Heart to be her Property by right
of Prescription, she bitterly reproach'd him for his Inconstancy. But
her Reign was over, for _Zeokinizul_ dismissed her coldly, without so
much as even debating the Matter with her, and within a few Hours, he
notified to her by one of his _Eunuchs_, that she should immediately
leave the Court. This was a Step of _Lenertoula_'s Policy. This new
Favourite, fearing lest her Sister, than whom none better knew the
King's Temper, might lay hold of one of his soft Moments, when he could
refuse nothing, to recover her Property. She objected some religious
Scruples which could not be satisfied but by removing _Liamil_. This
unfortunate Creature, who, after so long a Continuance in so high
Favour, had nothing left but the Sorrow for losing it, and the Shame of
having purchased it at the Price of her Honour, retired into a _Mosque_,
where she is said to have spent the Remainder of her Life in penitential
Devotions. I must, for my Part, be of Opinion, that her Grief was much
greater for the Loss of her Lover, than for having ever enjoy'd him.
However, tho' she had lost _Zeokinizul_'s Love, she felt his Generosity;
for he order'd all her Debts to be discharg'd, and settled on her a very
large Annuity. _Lenertoula_ was so fully satisfied by such evident
Proofs of her Sovereign's Love, that she now consented to make him
happy. The Monarch's Desires were heightened by Enjoyment, which was
recompenced with the Power of disposing, according to her Fancy, Titles,
Posts, and Monies; so that she greatly exceeded all her Predecessors in
an unbounded Authority. _Jeflur_ was now no longer in a Condition to
contrive her Fall, as he had that of _Leutinemil_. He was too much
shock'd at the Sight of his approaching End; for a few Days more were to
terminate his Greatness. He employed them in salutary Counsels to his
Master in Relation to the Government of his Dominions. Yet he persisted
in his Perfidy and Ingratitude towards his best Friends, even till his
last Moments, by alienating the King from a _Mollak_, whom he had often
promised to recommend for his Successor. This old Minister died
unlamented by all but the King, who being ignorant of his Incapacity and
Mismanagement, especially in the last three Years of his Life, shewed a
sincere Sorrow for him, and ordered a stately Monument to be erected to
his Memory, in the royal _Mosque_ of the Capital of the Kingdom. But
when after having declared, that he would admit of no prime Minister,
and began to govern himself, he plainly saw how unworthy _Jeflur_ had
been of the great Trust reposed in him, he no longer lamented him; but
not to carry his Resentment too far, he only countermanded his Orders
for the Monument, and left the Ashes of his ignorant and treacherous
_Visier_, to remain in the obscure Corner where they had been deposited.

The Death of his Minister soon changed the Face of the whole Court.
_Zeokinizul_, who hitherto could not bear the least Application to
Business, now regularly shut himself up every Day for some Hours,
in order to consult Means to repair the Losses of the Nation, and
retrieve its Strength and Character. Now all Remembrance of its many
disheartening Miscarriages was soon lost in the Glory of his Conquests.
The chief Motive of this War, was to lessen the vast Acquisitions of the
Emperor of the _Maregins_. His Daughter the Queen of _Ghinoer_, who was
an aspiring, lofty, and resolute Princess, in contempt of the many
Treaties made to prevent it, insisted that her Sex did not exclude her
from inheriting all her Father's Dominions. Besides, an Army of tried
_Veterans_ which had served the late Emperor with so much Honour, her
heroic Courage, together with her extraordinary Beauty so universally
engaged the Hearts of her Subjects, that to a Man they offered to inlist
and support her Claim at all Events. _Zeokinizul_, very well knew, that
the Efforts of his whole Power would be requisite to humble such a
formidable Enemy; yet, had he not exerted himself above common
Measures, all would have been feeble and insufficient, on Account of the
Emptyness of the Treasury, the Decay of Trade, the Scarcity of Men, and
the Discontent of the People. To regain the Esteem of the _Kofirans_,
whom his Indolence, and the weak and wicked Ministration of _Jeflur_ had
alienated, he caused it to be declared, that he was resolved to head his
Army in Person: Surprising Turn, fortunate Instance of the Easiness and
Loyalty of his Subjects. All the King's Deviations, though of such bad
Consequences, were instantly forgotten. He had now been on the Throne
near thirty Years, yet they made this generous Change the Æra of his
Inauguration. Not a Murmur was heard, there was no longer any
Appearance, at least any Complaint of Distress. Old Noblemen came
with Pride from the farthest Provinces, to place their Sons in their
Sovereign's Houshold Troops. Farmers freely parted from their lusty
Children, though the helpful Companions of their Labours, and a part of
their last Farewel, was to fight manfully in the Presence of their King,
who so nobly would share in the Danger, for the Honour of the Nation.
In fine, _Zeokinizul_'s Amours, which had so greatly disgusted the
_Kofirans_, because they had been disappointed in the Effect they wish'd
and expected from them, were indifferent Matters to them, now he
manifested a Genius for Glory; instead of Ridicule and Invective about
his Irregularities, War was all the Subject of Discourse, and every one
according to the Fertility of his Invention, laid magnificent Schemes to
raise their King to an unparallell'd Glory. This general Complacency and
Zeal were duly reported to the King, who was not wanting to encourage so
good a Disposition; prompted by the Importance of answering their
endearing Idea of him, and verifying their Wishes, he shewed himself
such as really he was, but hitherto restrained and seduced by his crafty
_Visier_. Yet amidst these mighty Affairs, he was not totally diverted
from Love; for it never was held to be incompatible with the Desire of
Glory, and he always allotted his Time so properly, that neither of
these Passions encroached upon the other. His Fondness for _Lenertoula_
did not slacken his Pursuit of Glory, it rather tended to animate and
increase it, she being exorbitantly ambitious, and esteeming her Lover's
Laurels her own; upon a Persuasion that her Grandeur would increase with
the King's Power; then her Pride could not bear the Thought that the
Queen of _Ghinoer_ and her Allies should prescribe Laws to a Prince,
whom she would have under no Controul but her own.

The Magazines being at last formed, the Plan for the Campaign
determined, and the Troops at the general Rendezvous, _Zeokinizul_ set
out for the Army, which was to act against the _Bapasis_. Never did a
saved People shew greater Marks of Gratitude to a brave Father of his
Country at his Return from a dangerous War, than were shewn by the
affectionate _Kofirans_ to _Zeokinizul_, wherever he came.
_Lenertoula's_ accompanying him to the Army, seemed not to be minded.
The King, the King, was the Cry, and they would see nothing but the
King.

This Ardour induced the King unalterably to persevere in his Resolution
of committing the Welfare of so loyal a People to none but himself, and
during the Remainder of his Reign, whenever he has been advised to ease
himself of the Fatigue of Government, by deputing some faithful and able
Minister, this has always been his generous Answer, "The _Kofirans_ Love
me so as to shed their Blood in my Cause, and they are so dear to me,
that I cannot do less in Return than to watch myself over their
Welfare." There was not, among all the Generals of the Age, one of more
Bravery and Experience than he whom _Zeokinizul_ had appointed to serve
under him. Tho' he was a Foreigner, he was not the less belov'd by the
_Kofirans_; for as he was perfectly acquainted with their Customs and
Temper, he modell'd his Behaviour accordingly. This great Man was famous
for Military Qualifications, only, if so noble an Excess may be term'd a
Fault, he was perhaps too brave. But this Intrepidity, which in any
other Country would have hindered his Preferment, promoted it among the
_Kofirans_, and raised his Character with that People, who are all Fire
and Spirit. His Name was _Vameric_. He has been reproached with
interrupting the Actions of this Campaign, which was not so glorious as
its Opening had promised. It is certain, that this General, to make
_Zeokinizul_ more in Love with War, and to animate him by great
Successes, had weakened the other Armies, the better to enable that
under his Command to perform some signal Exploits, which gave the Enemy
an Opportunity to make an unexpected Irruption. A strong Army of the
Queen of _Ghinoer_, forced the Passes of the _Nhir_, and penetrated into
a Province of the _Kofirans_. This Misfortune stopp'd _Zeokinizul_ in
the midst of his rapid Conquests. He chose about twenty eight, or thirty
thousand of his best Troops, which he would lead in Person, to reinforce
a small Number, who, being far inferior to the Enemy, had been obliged
to shelter themselves under a Fortress. To encourage these brave Men in
their long and painful Marches, he travelled at their Rate; but he had
no sooner reached a Town near the Place appointed for the Junction of
his Forces, when he was seized with a Distemper which had a fatal
Appearance.

_Lenertoula_, who never would leave the Prince, was the Cause of it; for
how contrary to all Reason is it to attribute it to the Fatigue of the
March, _Zeokinizul_ having been inured to much greater in his continual
Huntings. As all the Courtiers in this Kingdom are Officers, and as the
Expedition these thirty thousand Soldiers were upon, required all their
Precaution and Activity, none but the Favourite was left for the Monarch
to divert himself with. But Conversation between two Lovers, who are
continually together, would soon become insipid, if they confined
themselves to common Topics. These Lovers were not so Phlegmatic, they
ardently repeated their Protestations to love each other with an eternal
Constancy. They mutually urged that the present Vehemence of their
Passions, was a Pledge of its unalterable Permanency. Then they
proceeded to sensible Proofs, and demonstrated, that the Conjunction of
two Bodies is an Emblem of the inseperable Union of two Souls. With
mutual Ardour, they repeated the Demonstration; till at last the
Demonstrator quite spent, sunk under the Fatigue of the Arguments. In
this Manner _Zeokinizul_ and _Lenertoula_ amused themselves, when he was
informed of the Barbarity with which his Enemies carried on the War in
his Country, at which he was deeply affected. The Impossibility of
quickly meeting them, made him very impatient; the Account of their
Forces added to this Uneasiness; in fine, Joy, Grief, Hope and Fear,
distracted his Heart, and the Shock of such opposite Motions was too
strong for his attenuated Body. A violent Disorder seiz'd upon his whole
Constitution, which was succeeded by such a Fever, whose first Symptoms
seem'd to presage Death.

This melancholy News was soon spread over the whole Kingdom. The
_Kofirans_ seem'd quite stupified at it; they fell into an inexpressible
Grief and Consternation at the Thoughts of losing such a Sovereign, and
at such a Juncture. The Queen, who by this Time had seen her Folly, and
heartily repented of the superstitious Credulity, by which she had lost
the Embraces of a real Husband in seeking those of an imaginary one,
left her Palace, and, prompted by Grief and Love, flew to the sick King.
She was still in Hopes, that the Deity meant only to alarm the Nation;
and therefore she was for forwarding by her Presence, and deserving by
her kind Offices, the happy Return of his Affection, which she did not
doubt would be the Effect of this Correction. All the People used to
gather about the Governor of _Kofir_'s House, and flock to the Palace,
where Expresses arriv'd every Hour, shewing such Concern, that their
Fate seem'd to depend on the Death or Recovery of _Zeokinizul_. Never
was there such an universal Affliction; never was a Father more lamented
by affectionate Children. They looked at each other with Tears in their
Eyes, and could not speak for sighing. Paleness and Dejection sat on
every Countenance. The Artificers had no Heart to work. All Diversions
and Shews were suspended, and that vast and splendid City, which seemed
the Center of Gaiety and Pleasure, was now changed into a general Scene
of Silence and Melancholy. Yet it was observed, that the _Imans_ and
_Dervises_ did not in the least sympathize with this publick
Consternation. Some will be apt to imagine, that these pious Men had a
divine Intimation that the King would not die. But whoever knows them,
will much rather conclude, that, like Physicians who are never better
pleased than in Times of general Sickness, they only concealed a selfish
Joy under the Mask of an affected Calmness; and it is really scarce
credible what Advantage they drew from this public Calamity. The King,
being given over by the Physicians, seemed to be lost without miraculous
Relief from Heaven, and as the meanest of his Subjects was not wanting
in his Endeavours to procure it, so that _Sesems_, which in that Country
are Devotions of about a Quarter of an Hour, perform'd by the _Imans_,
are known to have risen to such an Extortion, as not to be said under
two _Tomans_ each.

During the first Days of his Illness, _Lenertoula_ never left the royal
Patient's Bed, who also protested, that Death had nothing bitter to him,
but the leaving his Mistress and his Subjects. But no sooner was the
Monarch sensible of his desperate Condition, than a Cloud of awful Ideas
broke in upon his Mind. The Principles he had imbibed by Education,
revived in his Conscience. He reflected on all his Conduct to the
present Time, and the Thoughts of his being on the Point of passing into
another Life, impress'd on him strongly the Conditions on which his
Religion offers eternal Happiness. All _Kelirieu_'s Care to conceal
these penitential Dispositions, could not hinder their being known among
the Courtiers. The _Kam Kertras_, Grandson to the _Kam_ of _Anserol_,
late Regent, at the Instance of his Father, who was a very religious
Prince, resolv'd to make Use of them, in order to restore the Queen to
her Rights, and deprive the wicked _Lenertoula_ of her Usurpations.
Taking with him a _Mollak_, equally venerable for his Birth and Piety,
he went to the sick King's Apartment. _Kelirieu_ knowing how much it
concerned both him and her whom he served to hinder this Visit, dared to
refuse them Admittance, under Pretence that the King was going to sleep,
and would see no Body. Although the _Kam_ and the _Mollak_ plainly saw
through the Deceit, yet Regard to the melancholy Juncture, made them
quietly withdraw, in Hopes of a more lucky Opportunity, which yet they
never would have found, had they contented themselves with such Excuses.
They returned the same Day, and _Kelirieu_ gave them the same Answer,
which provoked the young Duke beyond Measure, being naturally very
fiery. What, said he, with a threatning Air, shall you, who are no
better than a Lacquey, dare to deny Admittance to your Master's nearest
Relation? and at once kick'd open the Door, and went forward into the
Apartment, followed by the _Mollak_.

Upon _Zeokinizul_'s asking the Meaning of that Noise and Bustle,
_Kelirieu_, who had acted without any such Orders from him, durst not
make any Answer, but the young _Kam_, whose Heat was not over, gave the
King such an Account of it, as made him very angry; for he not only
condescended to ask the _Kam_'s Pardon, but forbad _Kelirieu_ his
Presence. The judicious _Mollak_ laid hold of that Instant to discourse
of the Concerns of his Conscience to the dying Monarch; and as his own
Reflections, had beforehand suggested preparative Ideas of it, he was
the sooner brought to the wished for Contrition and Repentance.

The Behaviour of the _Mollak_ is certainly very praise-worthy, but it
would have been much more so, if after having, with a truly Apostolic
Zeal, pathetically represented to the Sovereign the Enormity of his
Crimes, the Certainty of his Death, and the Punishments to be dreaded
after such a licentious Life, he had stopp'd at bringing him to a due
Sense of Things, and strengthening him in such a pious Disposition, but
he shewed more Zeal than Discretion, for his Devotion being sharpened
with Resentment, made him imagine, that he was ruining _Lenertoula_
beyond Retrieve; whereas he was, in Reality, doing nothing less than
paving the Way for her greater Exaltation, in Case the King recovered.

Thus, under a Pretence that true Repentance required more than a
Detestation of what was past, and guarding against future Relapses, he
signified to _Zeokinizul_, that it was still his farther Duty to make
some signal Satisfaction for the Offence which he had given to the whole
Kingdom. That in order thereto, he must disapprove and abrogate all his
Grants and Favours to _Lenertoula_. _Zeokinizul_, who now was intent
only upon dying in the Religion of his Ancestors, pleasing his People,
and carrying their Esteem as well as their Grief with him to the Grave,
complied with all the _Mollak_'s Injunctions, ordered _Lenertoula_ to be
immediately dismissed the Court, with a Prohibition from ever appearing
in his Presence.

Having thus settled all the Affairs of his Conscience, _Zeokinizul_
became senseless, so that he was thought dead by all his Attendants. But
this sudden Alteration was the happy Crisis which saved his Life. During
this Interval of Inanition, the Mind recover'd its former Situation, and
freed itself from all its Anxieties. The Body performed its Functions,
and the Passages which all the Art of the Physicians could not relax,
opened of themselves, which was followed by such copious Evacuations as
saved the Patient. This joyful News spread itself rather quicker than
the other, so that it was as soon known at _Kofir_ that the King was out
of Danger, as that there was no Hopes of his Recovery.

In the mean Time, the Queen arrived. She made Use of the _Mollak_'s
pious Impressions, and tho' her Austerities and Vexations, together with
her advanced Age, had rendered her no tempting Spouse, yet the kind and
grateful Monarch was so taken with her Tenderness and Diligence, that he
vowed, that from this Time his Heart should be her's, and her's alone.
But that Man knows himself but very little, when he is in Danger; and
that the Assurances of Amendment which he then makes, are weak and
transitory when he has recover'd his Health, is what the Sequel of this
History will abundantly demonstrate.

_Zeokinizul_ was soon perfectly recovered, and then his Generals whose
Ardour had been restrain'd by Fear and Grief, soon made their Enemies
feel, that their King was restored to them, for they forced them to
repass the _Nhir_ with considerable Loss; and the most Skilful in
Military Affairs do not scruple to affirm, than if the _Kofirans_ had
not been headed by a General prudent even to a Fault, not so much as a
single Soldier would have been left to have given the Queen of _Ghinoer_
an Account of their Expedition. This General so deficient in the ardent
Bravery of his Country, was call'd _Leosanil_; he was afterwards
disgraced, and though his Age was still fit for Military Functions,
he was taken into the Cabinet, which was a fitter Theatre for his
Abilities; for there being out of the Reach of Swords and Guns, and left
to undisturbed Reflection, his Advice and Schemes were of excellent
Service. I now shall leave _Zeokinizul_ in the pure Embraces of his
Consort, and preparing to besiege a Place of Strength, to follow
_Lenertoula_ in her Disgrace.

She did not betray any great Confusion, when _Zeokinizul_'s harsh Order
was notified to her; but she little knew what she was to go through upon
the Road. She took a travelling Chariot, accompanied by her Sister, and
followed by a few Domestics. Here was an Instance of such Strokes with
which Fortune now and then seems to warn the Insolent and Ambitious.
After having led her Favorites to the Altars to be worshipped like petty
Deities, she afterwards drags them thither to be sacrificed like fatened
Victims.

This Woman, who lately saw the most illustrious among the _Kofirans_
cringe at her Feet, and practise the basest Submission to obtain only a
single Look, now sees herself exposed to the contemptuous Insults of the
very Meanest; the whole Nation combining to plant Daggers in her Heart
by their Reproaches and Shouts at her Downfal. It having been whispered
among the Country Folks, that _Lenertoula_ had occasioned the King's
Illness, and they being possess'd of a Notion, propagated by her
Enemies, that she had been bribed to poison the King, crowded all the
Roads in her Way, loading her with Curses and Invectives, threatning to
tear her to Pieces, had they not thought it would be a more galling
Punishment to her Pride, to let her pass on amidst the same Hisses and
Outrages of their Fellows, for above eighty Leagues successively. It was
next to a Miracle that she escaped with her Life, for she was put to all
Manner of Shifts and Precautions to deceive these furious Clowns who
vowed to revenge their King; whenever she came near any Town, she
stopp'd above half a League off, whilst one of her Out-riders went
before to take fresh Horses, and observe the Bye-roads, that thus she
might avoid the Tumults of the Inhabitants. At last she reach'd _Kofir_,
which she found disposed to receive her in the same rough Manner as the
Country had done. The whole Nation appeared determined against her. One
Day she happened, a little indiscretely, to take the Air in her Chariot,
while the Streets were full of People, who were celebrating the happy
Recovery of their King with all Kinds of Sports and Rejoicings. Possibly
she might flatter herself, that the easy _Kofirans_ seeing her appear
Abroad to join in the publick Festivity, would relinquish the Suspicions
they had harbour'd against her. But they were too inveterate, and the
Event was quite different, for had it not been for the Dexterity of her
Coachman, and the Swiftness of her Horses, she had infallibly fallen a
Victim to the Fury of the Populace. This hazardous Experience of their
Malice, brought her to lead a Life at _Kofir_ very different to her
Inclinations, being ashamed to shew herself in any Assembly, where she
must have been their Jest and Scorn, and much less daring to appear in
the public Walks. When she was not shut up in her Palace, she used to
amuse herself for a while in a Garden, which, tho' one of the finest in
all _Kofir_ was the least frequented. Here it was that such a mortifying
Accident befel her, as exceeded all the rest, and which sensibly shewed
her how low she was fallen from her former Grandeur.

It was as follows: An Officer who, tho' her Relation, had not felt the
happy Influences of her Favour, because he never made himself known to
her, which renders his Impoliteness, I may even say, his Brutality
inexcusable, resolving to give the finishing Stroke to her Anguish.

According to the gallant Custom of the _Kofirans_, he politely
approached towards _Lenertoula_, who was taking an Evening Walk, in
Company with her melancholy Sister, and wished for nothing more than for
a third Person to join them, whose Chearfulness might help to dissipate
the continual Gloominess of her Temper. After the first Compliments,
which are not short among this ceremonious People, the Gentleman
entertain'd the Ladies with the most refined Gallantry. He expressed
himself in so graceful and charming a Manner, that they were both
infinitely taken with his Conversation. _Lenertoula_, that he might talk
more at Ease, desired him to sit down by her upon a Bank of Turf, and
after some Questions on the Condition of his Fortune, offered him her
Services, if needful, for its Improvement. This Person, of all Men the
most rude and brutish, for he was insulting over the Disgrace of an
unfortunate Woman, who was extremely desirous of obliging him, and had
made him an Offer of an unusual Generosity. He gave her a full Answer to
the first Article. "I was a general Officer in the King's Army, said he
to her, where I served honourably for twenty Years. But having been
injured by the Ministry, I retired to my Estate, with which and some
small Marks of Distinction, which could not be denied my long Services,
I live contented." "But my Lord," interrupted _Lenertoula_, who was for
knowing how she stood in the Thoughts of People of Quality, "I am
surprized that you never address'd yourself to the Favourite, in order
to obtain, by Means of her Interests, the just Reward of your Services.
She took a Pleasure in countenancing Merit, and certainly such as yours
would have engag'd her Favour." "I, Madam," replied the Officer, with
Indignation, "should I make a Prostitute my Refuge? I am her Relation,
and it is the only Blot that I know of in our Family. I am too tender in
Point of Honour, to hold any Thing from the Hands of a Woman, who has so
notoriously trampled it under her Feet." At this _Lenertoula_ was indeed
as one thunder-struck. She endeavoured several Times to make some Reply
to this ungrateful Officer; but her Voice failed her. He left them, and
her Sister was obliged to call her Slaves to lead her to her Chariot, in
order to carry her back to her Palace.

_Zeokinizul_, in the mean Time, had crowned his Campaign, by taking the
important Fortress he had besieged. His Soldiers encouraged by his
Presence, had at once surmounted Nature, Art, a severe Season, and the
Efforts of a numerous and brave Garison. Having now nothing to do but
repose himself under his Laurels, he returned towards his Capital. Then
it was that his Subjects, in an Extacy of Loyalty, were seen to prepare
him a Reception answerable to their Love, and present the most affecting
and pleasing Sight to the Eyes of a Monarch, who aimed more at reigning
over their Hearts, than subduing them by Fear. If the News of his
Sickness had dispirited them, the News of his Approach rejoiced them.
But when they came to see him, their Transports were beyond all
Description, their Eyes overflowed with Tears of Joy and Affection,
whilst the Sky rung with their Acclamations. How happy is such a King
amidst such a People, and how formidable when he heads them against
their Enemies! _Zeokinizul_ stayed three Days at _Kofir_, as a Testimony
of his Regard for this cordial People, who also to shew their Sense of
so much Condescension, and to celebrate his Return, invented Variety of
polite Entertainments. The King and People seemed to strive who should
be kindest, for he gave Orders, that all the Inhabitants without
Exception, should have Admittance into his Presence, that they might
feast themselves with the delightful Sight which they had so
affectionately desired. It is affirmed, that the Idea of his late
Danger, from which he was often told, that nothing less than a Miracle
delivered him, being still strong upon his Mind, he had a real
Tenderness for the Queen, whom he had restored to all her Rights. They
were more than once surprized in such Attitudes as clearly shewed their
Reconciliation.

But how frail are Vows drawn from us only by Danger, how soon effaced by
Safety and Temptation! Scarce was _Zeokinizul_ returned to the Hurry,
Brilliancy, and Diversions of the Court, but those Impressions which it
was hoped would be as lasting as they were salutary, were by Degrees
soon dissipated. His Love for _Lenertoula_ appear'd to have been like a
sudden Fire, ready to burst out with greater Vehemence. At first he was
sorry for his using her so abruptly; than he began to frown on the
Advisers of her disgraceful Removal, and recall'd _Kelirieu_ and others
who had sided with his injured Favorite. _Kalontil_, Governor to the
Prince, the presumptive Heir of the Crown, was banished from Court, for
Reasons which were never thought fit to be made publick. Some imputed it
to his endangering his Pupil, by having brought him to his sick Father,
without any such order, and without Attendance. Others charge him with a
Project for aggrandizing himself upon the King's Death. But the most
knowing conclude, that he must have spoken ill of the Favorite, in order
to set the young Prince against her. _Zeokinizul_ seemed afterwards
mightily to affect Solitude, nor did even Hunting itself please him,
unless when he went without Company; which gave Occasion to suspect,
that there were some private Meetings carried on in order to a
Reconciliation with the Favourite, and to which _Kelirieu_ was only
privy. At last, weary of constraining his Temper, he complained openly
of the Abuse put upon him at a Time when he was incapable of Reflection,
and of the Indignity offered to his Honour, in urging him with terrible
Threatnings to disgracefully remove, and expose to Contempt and
Violences, a Person whose only Fault towards him was an Excess of Love.
He restored her to her Rank, Titles, and Privileges; but openly
declaring, that all this was only to prevent her former Commerce with
him proving her utter Ruin; for that he was determined not to keep her
any longer as a Mistress. Yet notwithstanding these Protestations,
private Measures were forming in order to procure as fond a
Reconciliation as ever. The Reality of these Assurances were soon
illustrated, when he broke the solemn Promise he had made to the
_Mollak_, and recall'd his dear _Lenertoula_. But this was too slender
a Reparation for what she had suffered. She required of _Zeokinizul_,
a more complete and signal Triumph. Immediately the pious, but
over-zealous _Mollak_ was dismissed the Court, and ordered to his
_Mosque_. A _Visier_ also whom the Favourite particularly hated, having
always opposed her Amour, was ordered personally to declare to her, that
_Zeokinizul_ again acknowledged her Mistress of his Heart, and only
waited her Orders, and a List of her Enemies, in order to revenge her to
the utmost. The _Visier_ obeyed; but at the same Time he took secure
Measures that he might not be upon the fatal List, and to prevent this
imperious Woman from abusing the King's Weakness, an infallible Poison
which he found Means to have given her, worked at the very Instant that
he went to perform his Commission. As she was soon violently seiz'd with
the Approaches of Death, it was believed by the Generality, who had no
Notion of foul Play, that _Lenertoula_ had been overcome by an Excess of
Joy, which is always more forcible than that of Grief, especially in
Women. Upon this Notion, a _Kofiran_ Wit made four Verses, which may be
thus rendered in _English_.

    _'Tis needless now my famous Blood to name,
    This Act alone will immortalize my Fame.
    My King, on gaining Life, return'd my Pow'r,
    For which I dy'd his Glory to restore._

It was thought for a long Time, that this would prove an inconsolable
Loss to _Zeokinizul_. He seemed to have no Ease, no Satisfaction, but in
heaping Gifts and Favours on all _Lenertoula_'s Relations, to manifest
how dear she was to him. However, the Marriage of his only Son, to a
Daughter of the King of _Jerebi_, his Relation, the Magnificence and
Diversions at the Celebration of the Ceremony, and the Congratulations
from all Parts, at last gave a chearful Turn to his Disposition; and he
wisely began to think, that the Honours he conferr'd on the Sister of
his dear Mistress, besides sixteen thousand _Tomans_ which he gave to
her Husband; together with a tender Remembrance, which he vow'd always
to retain for her Ashes, was amply fulfilling all that the most tender
Passion could require. His Courtiers, who were surprised to see his
Heart continue for a Time disengag'd and inaccessible to any new
Passion, were in daily Expectation of seeing the Liberty which he had so
happily recovered, offered up to some youthful Beauty. But the Court
Ladies strove so eagerly for this Prize, that their over Forwardness
made him averse to having an Intrigue with any. They were ignorant that
Resistance inflames Desire, and he at that Time scorned Enjoyments too
easily procured. _Kelirieu_ in the mean Time grew uneasy at his Master's
Indifference, as it deprived him of the most substantial Emoluments of
his Post. He saw his Favours entirely depended on his being subservient
to the King's Pleasures, so that he spared for nothing in order to
restore that Employment which he had executed so much to his Master's
Satisfaction, and his own Advantage. The Nuptials of the young Prince
opened a Way to it. Nothing can equal the Joy, Magnificence, and
Splendour, which appeared on that Occasion. The City of _Kofir_
distinguished itself above all others in the Kingdom; for as it has not
its equal for Largeness and Riches, so it surpassed them all in the
Eclat of its Zeal and Affection for the Royal Family. In twelve of the
most remarkable Parts of the City, there were large and superb Saloons,
where all without Distinction, were admitted to dance. There was a
Profusion of Refreshments of all Kinds. The best Musicians had Orders to
attend. The Sound of such an infinite Number of Instruments, accompanied
with harmonious Voices, added to the Murmurs of the Fountains of Wine
which were playing every where, inspired such a rapturous Gaiety to
numberless Crouds of People, that no Stranger, however, acquainted with
the Affairs of this Kingdom, could, at that Time of excessive Mirth,
have imagined, that it had for many Years been involved in a bloody and
expensive War.

This Season of universal Joy, Love chose to captivate again
_Zeokinizul_, after such an Interval of boasted Liberty. The chief
Inhabitants of _Kofir_, who are a distinct Body from the Nobility, the
Magistracy, and the Citizens, had decorated in the most superb Manner
the Sessions House for a Ball, to which they invited the King and royal
Pair. Every one was admitted in their Mask Habits, to give the Citizens
an Opportunity of shewing their Wives the Magnificence, Gallantries, and
Diversions of the Court, which at other Times is out of their Power.
Accordingly _Zeokinizul_, attended by all his Courtiers, came to this
Ball, in Habits as strange as they were elegant. The Sight of such a
beautiful Assembly, struck him with a delightful Surprise. Here was no
painted Allurements, no artificial Charms, such as he was daily
conversant with in his Palace. All here was pure Nature, which seem'd to
have chosen this Day to present him with a Sight of her most beautiful
Productions. The Beauty, the Air, the Motion, and Youth of these lovely
Objects was so enchanting, that they looked like the heavenly _Houris_.
_Zeokinizul_ was enchanted at the Sight of such a brilliant Assembly,
his Eyes wandered from Beauty to Beauty, till they seemed at once to fix
on a young Lady of a distinguished Appearance. She was in the Habit of
an _Amazon_, with her Bow and Quiver hanging at her Shoulders. Her
flaxen Hair, which shone with Diamonds, floated in Ringlets, and her
charming Breast half naked, ravish'd the Sight. "Lovely Huntress," said
the Monarch, "unhappy those whom your Arrows pierce, their Wounds are
Mortal."---- This Speech gave the Charmer a fair Field for returning
such an Answer as might inflame _Zeokinizul_; but whether she did not
dream of such a Conquest, or Presence of Mind failed her, she ran and
hid herself among the Maskers. This Disappointment was in some Measure
relieved by a Company of twenty young Persons, who began a Dance, which
was much in Vogue at that Time, but first invented in the King of
_Alniob_'s Country. They perform'd it so gracefully, that he stood like
a Man deprived of his Senses. The Charms of each of these beautiful
Dancers, threw him into his first Hesitation, which would soon have been
ended, had any one of them uncovered her Face. It is past all Doubt,
that the Heart of _Zeokinizul_, which longed for an Object, would have
received the Impression with Transport. He went to one of the Ends of
the Saloon, where Women of an ordinary Rank were seated in a Kind of
Amphitheatre. Their Dress was in nothing inferior to those of a higher
Rank; and besides, they had those fresh healthful Countenances, which
being the Result of Temperance, and a plain Way of living, was not to be
found among the Quality. _Zeokinizul_ stood viewing them, but his Hour
was come. Love waited for him under a Mask, and she who wore it was now
going to let this mischievous Deity fly into _Zeokinizul_'s Heart. She
was a young Woman, of a brown Complexion, lately married to a freedman,
who having deserv'd his Master's Favour by nocturnal Services, had,
together with his Liberty, obtained a Post among those who robb'd the
Prince, and plunder'd the People. They are called _Omeriserufs_, or
Rogues of the second Class. She, whom Love had already appointed for
Favourite, under Pretence of pulling something out of her Pocket, dropt
her Handkerchief, and as it is said, purposely. _Zeokinizul_ hastily
took it up; and, as he could not reach her Seat, he toss'd it to her in
the most polite Manner. A confused Murmur immediately spread thro' the
Saloon, with these Words, _The Handkerchief is thrown_. The King was too
much taken up with viewing the Person to whom he had been so
complaisant, to take any Notice of such Whisperings. The Charms she
display'd in taking off her Mask, and her genteel Manner of her thanking
him for the Honour, fill'd him with such passionate Love, that he even
there gave her some Intimations how much he was taken with her Beauty.
After this Declaration, he soon left the Ball, for having received such
a Wound, he wanted to be in private with his Confident, in order to
consult about his new Love. _Kelirieu_ had already prevented his
Master's Orders, for as he narrowly watched him, he perceived which of
the Company had captivated him, and immediately informed himself of her
Rank and Condition.

_Zeokinizul_ was transported with Joy at _Kelirieu_'s Report of his
Enquiries. He made himself sure, that the Husband of this young Person,
being one of those Set of Men, who Mind nothing but Riches, would not
only resign his conjugal Rights, but would even be brought to sollicit
his Spouse to resign herself up to the King's Embraces, and herein he
was not mistaken. But the Difficulty was to induce the Seller's Wife to
be a Party in such a scandalous Contract; for tho' she was of low
Extraction, she had an Elevation of Mind, a Purity of Virtue, which
would have done Honour to the highest. She could not indeed help being
inwardly pleased that she had tried her Charms with such Success upon
her Sovereign, and the dazzling Idea of beholding _Zeokinizul_ laying at
her Feet, all his Greatness and Power, her Husband made a _Bassa_ of the
second Rank, her Name exchanged for one of the most illustrious, were
Circumstances which the natural Desires in Women of shining even in the
smallest Matters, would not allow her to be insensible; yet this
Sensibility did not greatly hasten the Lover's Happiness; for, as her
Duty united her to a Husband, from whom her Inclinations alienated her,
she was for distinguishing herself from all that had gone before her,
and reducing the Monarch to go through the entire Play of Love. But such
a formal Method was insupportable to him, for being used to conquer upon
the very first Appearance of his Desire, his Heart was for some Time
distracted with strong Conflicts between Love and Resentment, without a
decisive Victory on either Side. Sometimes he looked upon the Resistance
of his new Mistress, as an insolent Affront to Majesty; at other Times
this same Resistance inflamed him the more, and he pleased himself with
the Thoughts of subduing that obstinate Virtue which she affected. All
_Kelirieu_'s Artifices were at an End, and when he was passionately
urg'd by the King, he was at a Loss for any farther Expedient. However,
in such a critical Juncture, he determined to make one last Effort, in
order to bring the beautiful _Vorompdap_ to his Lure, and if he fail'd,
to engage _Zeokinizul_ to forget her in the Arms of another, who knew
the true Value of a Monarch's Affections.

Being persuaded that every Woman who has once listened to a Lover,
cannot bear the Thoughts of losing him, but makes Use of every Art in
order to fix his Constancy, he waited upon her in Person, and said, with
an Air of Concern, At last, charming _Kismare_, your Rigour has
disgusted the _Sultan_, so as to make him give over his Addresses. Weary
of the Delays and Obstacles you was constantly raising against his
Passion, he has offered it to another, notwithstanding all my Endeavours
to secure him, by the highest Praises of your Charms, and making your
very Resistance, a Motive for his farther Pursuits. A Person, not indeed
of your perfect Beauty, but of a more indulgent Temper, captivates this
Monarch, and I apprehend, that her obliging and artful Behaviour to her
Lover, will for ever deprive you of a Heart which you might have kept
at your Devotion. _Kelirieu_, whilst he was speaking, did not fail to
observe the young _Vorompdap_'s Countenance, and had the Pleasure of
discerning the Vexation which she strove in vain to conceal. She was
some Time without returning an Answer, but after composing herself, and
putting a good Air upon the Confusion which the Thoughts of a Rival had
excited, I could never have imagined, said she, with an affected
Indifference, which, however, could not deceive the artful _Kelirieu_,
No, I never could have imagined, that after so many Marks and
Protestations of a sincere Affection, _Zeokinizul_, could have deceived
me in such a Manner. However, I am free from the Reproaches of a
criminal Uneasiness to gratify his Desires. Charming _Kismare_, replied
_Kelirieu_, had you shewed the Compliance which is due to a Monarch's
Love, I presume to swear by his Head, that he would never have proved
inconstant. But no Lover, and especially a King, will ever be satisfied
with an ideal Love. Kindness cherishes the Flame, but Unkindness
quenches it. But if you have still any Value for _Zeokinizul_'s Heart,
you still may avert the Blow which seems to trouble you. I, replied she,
smartly, I, troubled at the King's Alteration! very far from it. On the
contrary, I bless interposing Heaven, that it happened before Gratitude
had prevail'd upon me to make him a Sacrifice of my Person, and, what is
still dearer, my Virtue. Alas! added she, sheding some Tears, which
flowed in Spite of her, that fatal Instant was drawing near. If it be
so, replied _Kelirieu_, I pity you for having undesignedly lost an
Enjoyment so necessary to your own Repose. For, added he, softly, I can
discover through all your Affectations, that you really love the King.
Your Heart is wounded, and only with-held by airy and unseasonable
Scruples. Well, yes, answered she, I do love him. I do not endeavour to
conceal it from you. Good God! what Woman in my Place could forbear.
But, how can I commit such a publick Adultery. A publick Adultery,
replied _Kelirieu_, with a seeming Amazement, what Blockhead has put
such Fancies into your Head. But this Crime so justly condemned both by
divine and human Laws, consists in the Injury done to a Man, whose Wife
against his Will, or without his Knowledge, admits a Gallant to her
Embraces? But, lovely _Kismare_, how different is your Case! Will not
your Husband quit all Pretentions to your Person? Has he not releas'd
you from the Vow of being only his? Since his Consent could unite you to
him, shall his positive Order be of less Validity to separate you from
him, and unite you to another; and that upon such an important Occasion,
when Riches, Titles, and Power are to reward his Cession, and your
Acquiescence? Believe me, charming _Vorompdap_, our _Imans_ have adapted
our Religion to their own Views and Passions, without Regard to that
genuine and perfect Model, the Will of God. The Vow of Celibacy, upon
which they value themselves, as renouncing Marriage, would be an
insupportable Yoke to them, it would be soon shaken of, were it not for
their Hopes, which indeed are too often verified, of taking Advantage of
the Misunderstandings betwixt the Husband and Wife, whose Bands they are
taught to believe indissoluble. It is on this Account, that they are
constantly magnifying Conjugal Duties, and lay so much Stress on their
punctual Observation. Consider only what is done in other Nations,
no less wise and religious than ourselves. Divorces among them are
permitted, as frequently essential to the well being of Society. That
sacred Book the _Liegnelau_, cannot be supposed to contradict and
overthrow the _Bileb_, of which it is in a great Measure the
Accomplishment, and _Suesi_ whom you worship, being the Messenger of the
great God, would not offer to abrogate his Institutions. Thus the Point
is clear, and now look upon yourself as a Woman who is about forming a
second Contract, being legally, religiously, and honourably discharged
from the former. _Zeokinizul_ is equally at Liberty, for the State and
Temper of the Queen invalidate their Marriage. So, that only a few
Formalities are wanting for your Union with the King, and you know,
Formalities among the more understanding Part of the World, are often
dispensed with, as tiresome rather than necessary. The Consent of both
Parties has always been the only Point insisted on as essential.

These Proofs, which in the Mouth of a _Mollak_, would have been laugh'd
at, produced the designed Effect from _Kelirieu_. The young _Kismare_
was shaken, but not overthrown by them; she still insisted against
plunging herself into such shocking Scandal. This seemed a very slender
Objection to _Kelirieu_, who immediately replyed to it. Consider, says
he, the _Kams_ of _Meani_ and _Tesoulou_, do they bear any Marks of
their Mother's Scandal? Was a great Monarch's Love accounted a Disgrace
to a beautiful Lady? If you was acquainted with the first Ages of our
Monarchy, you would be satisfied, that they never made any Difference
between the Children of Love, and those born in lawful Marriage, as the
_Imans_ are pleased to call it. A King at your Feet, Courtiers waiting
respectfully on your Orders, a Nation's Treasure at your Disposal, can
there be Contempt and Scandal amid such Advantages? Do not alarm your
Mind with Monsters of your own forming, only for the Sake of opposing
them. Consent to make _Zeokinizul_ happy, and I will lay him at your
Feet, more deeply in Love than ever. These Representations made a strong
Impression upon the young Favourite, whom the Eloquence of her own Heart
had already half convinced. She still stood upon some Punctilio's; but
when _Kelirieu_, which was his last Resource, intimated to her the
Danger which might accrue to her Husband from her Obstinacy, this drew
from her an absolute Consent. This last Circumstance was certainly the
best adapted to fix her; for the new _Kismare_, like all the rest of his
Fraternity, was making the most of his Time in the Management of the
Finances, and relying on his Spouse's Favour, he was above taking proper
Precautions to conceal or palliate his Imbezzlements. _Kelirieu_ took
Care to fill _Vorompdap_ with Apprehensions, that _Zeokinizul_ would
infallibly call him to an Account, the most favourable Consequence
whereof, would be a Confiscation of all his Substance. It was then high
Time to come to a Resolution. Thus _Kelirieu_ happily completed his
Negotiation. And having appointed the Time and Place for the first
Interview, he hastened, flushed with Joy, to congratulate his Master on
this Victory, which was the more delightful, as it had been attended
with such a Train of Difficulties.

In the mean Time this new Intrigue, no more than the former, could not
diminish _Zeokinizul_'s strict Attention to the several Exigencies of
the State. His wise Orders had been so exactly executed throughout his
Empire, that his Armies were fit for Action even before the Spring. He
headed in Person the most considerable, which was destined for the
Conquest of the _Bapasis_, being still commanded by the brave _Vameric_,
whose prudent Conduct towards the End of the last Campaign had been
admired by his very Enemies. The Favourite followed the King as
_Lenertoula_ had done, whom she certainly equalled both in Love and
Honour. The Campaign was opened with the Siege of a Town which the great
_Zeokitarezul_ had fortified at a prodigious Expence, which, besides a
strong regular Wall and Outworks, had a Citadel which was accounted by
the Connoisseurs, a Master-piece of Fortification. It must have been
even an unsurmountable Barrier to the _Kofirans_, in case they reduced
the City. With this View their Attacks were carried on with all
imaginary Vigour. On the other Hand, this Place being as it were the Key
of the Country, the Keeping of it was of such Importance to the Enemies
of _Zeokinizul_, that they resolv'd to hazard every Thing in order to
its Relief. The King of _Alniob_, the Provinces _Junet_, and the Queen
of _Ghinoer_, Sovereign of the _Bapasis_, joined all their Forces, of
which the chief Command was conferr'd on the _Kam_ of _Lundamberk_,
youngest Son to the King of _Alniob_, a Prince of a martial Disposition,
and of the greatest Bravery. His Ardour for Glory made him long to
encounter the King of the _Kofirans_, and his only Son, a young Prince
of the greatest Expectations, who could forsake the Embraces of a
youthful Bride, to attend his Father, and learn the Art of War under
_Vameric_, in the midst of Fatigues and Dangers. The Impetuosity of the
_Kam_ of _Lundamberk_, would not allow him to conform to the wise
Counsels of the experienced Generals of his Army, who were for delaying
the Battle 'till he had got the Advantage of the Ground, as he was
inferiour to them in Numbers. He would not be ruled by their
Representations, but, led on by his evil Genius, he came and offered
Battle to _Zeokinizul_, whose Forces were already come out of their
Lines, and drawn up in order to receive him.

As these Sheets bear the Title of the Amours of _Zeokinizul_, I may
perhaps be censured for giving a Detail of a Battle which seems quite
foreign to this Work; but as it occasioned several Vexations to the
Favourite, and having been omitted by every other Writer, I believe the
Reader will not be displeased at my relating such Particulars as have
come to my Knowledge.

There was great Fault found with _Vameric_'s Dispositions. It was
reported, that he was so full of the Victory, that he took not the
least Care to secure a Retreat. Behind his Lines was a large River
call'd the _Tueska_, over which he had laid but one Bridge, which, in
Case of a Defeat, must infallibly have broken down with the Weight of
the flying Troops; the Consequence of which must have been their total
Destruction. All this is a known and undeniable Truth. But _Vameric_ was
acquainted with the Spirit of the Nation which he commanded. He knew
that they would not fly before all the Forces in the World, when they
were fighting in their King's Presence. Then, what Occasion was there
for Bridges to favour a Retreat, when every single Man was resolv'd to
die, or conquer? Besides in one Night's Time he had cast up three
Trenches, of which the two first were sufficient to defend them against
the first Attack of the Enemy, which is always the most violent. The
third would be an impenetrable Defence against their weak and broken
Forces. Another considerable Advantage was, the dividing the Army into
small Bodies, which must extremely harass the Enemy, as they must be
under a Necessity of attacking but one at a Time. Whatever Confidence
_Zeokinizul_ reposed in _Vameric_, he would share both in the Command
and Danger. This hazardous Circumstance threw the Favourite into
inexpressible Agonies. But neither her Tears nor her Intreaties, so
prevalent at all other Times, were unable to restrain the resolute
Monarch. He and his Son were present during the whole Action, and in so
much Danger, that several were killed near them. At last, Victory
declared itself in his Favour, and the young Prince of _Alniob_, tho' he
exerted the utmost Courage and was seconded with an intrepid Valour, by
his Soldiers, who loved him entirely, was obliged to retreat. But tho'
this young Lion was defeated, he still struck his Enemies with Terror,
for after such an Experience of his Valour, they apprehended that he
would next Day renew the Action, which he certainly would have done, had
it not been for the Opposition of his Generals.

_Zeokinizul_, after the Victory, applied himself to shew the Conquered
how highly he esteemed their Courage. It was ordered, that the same Care
should be taken of their wounded, as of his own Soldiers. The imprudent
and scandalous Report of some barbarous Orders issued by the Prince of
_Alniob_, in Case of his Success, made not the least Impression on this
magnanimous King, and all _Africa_ joined in owning that the _Kam_ of
_Lundamberk_ and his Allies, could not have a more worthy Conqueror than
_Zeokinizul_. The Congratulations of his dear _Kismare_ were still
wanting, to complete the Joy and Honours of this Victory. He hastened,
transported with Love, to lay his Laurels at her Feet, and tell her
that he was animated by her charming Idea, in the midst of all the
Horrors of the Battle. Here was a fresh and very worthy Motive to
increase her Tenderness towards him. But, who can know a Woman? This
Instant was to be the Period of it, or at least to put it to a severe
Trial.

A young Prisoner, one of the most illustrious of the Nobility of
_Alniob_, having desired Admittance to _Zeokinizul_, was introduced to
him in his Tent, where he was sitting with the Favourite. She was struck
at the Sight of him, as indeed there never was any Man fitter to make a
Woman unfaithful, and justify her Infidelity. His Mein and Air spoke the
Hero, and his Address to the Monarch declared, that his Sentiments were
answerable. "Sire, said he, all our Efforts have not hindered Victory
from declaring itself for you. Tho' I can no longer continue fighting
with my brave Fellow-Soldiers, I could wish not to remain among mine
Enemies. Your Highness is no Stranger to Love, and it is that which
calls me back to my own Country. Be pleased therefore, to grant me
Permission to return, which will not a little augment your Glory, that I
shall there appear in Chains instead of those Trophies which I hop'd to
have adorn'd my Return." The majestic Air with which this young
Warriour delivered himself, moved _Zeokinizul_, who immediately
answered, "You are at full Liberty to depart, and may Love do you more
Justice than Fortune." This Generosity of _Zeokinizul_, was planting a
Dagger in the Favourite's Heart, who had already conceived too great a
Passion for the Prisoner, to consent so readily to his Departure. Her
Passion hindered her from reflecting on the Consequences which might
flow from it, and turning towards the Monarch, she said, "Sire, let not
your extreme Generosity betray your Interest. When this young Warriour
is again among his Countrymen, he may engage them to come and attack you
a second Time. He has seen"---- "Be it so, Madam," interrupted
_Zeokinizul_, "I can never have too many Opportunities of making
Heroes." She blush'd at this Answer, and _Kelirieu_, who perceived it,
readily guessing that the Departure of this young Prisoner was not
agreeable to her Inclinations, laid hold of the Opportunity of
_Zeokinizul_'s going out to give some Orders, of offering her his
Service. "Madam, said he, if I am not mistaken, I apprehend this young
Prisoner has renewed in your Mind some painful Idea; be pleased to
disclose the Secret to me, you shall find I will prove a faithful
Servant, devoted to all your Views and Inclinations. Is it your Pleasure
that this Prisoner should go or Stay? I will find a Method of making
him consent to either, as you shall direct." "Ah, let him go replied
she, my dear _Kelirieu_, let him go, his Presence is so dangerous, that
any longer Stay would, I fear, make me become ungrateful and faithless
to my generous Prince. How charming he is! did you ever before see so
graceful a Person? How serene and noble is his Deportment, in the midst
of Misfortunes! However, possibly as a Prisoner, he may stand in need of
Money, go and offer him these two hundred Pieces of Gold, that he may
return to his Country in a Manner suitable to his Rank and Merit, and
bring me back an Account in what Manner he received them."

_Kelirieu_ was of such a restless Vivacity, that he could not be
contented without Intrigues, which made him eagerly apply himself to
forming another. Having found out the fortunate Prisoner, he put the
Purse into his Hands with these Words. "Virtue, my Lord, is equally
cherished by both Sexes among us, and as a Proof of it, here are two
hundred Pieces of Gold, which you are desired to accept of from a very
beautiful Lady." "I should be unworthy the least of her Thoughts,
replied the Prisoner, were I to refuse her Favour, which this Juncture
has render'd necessary. If her Name be not a Secret, I would beg the
Favour of you, my Lord, to introduce me, that I might pay my
Acknowledgements to this generous Lady." "She would, perhaps ask you for
something more, replied _Kelirieu_." "Ah, returned the Stranger, that is
not in my Power to grant. As I have not seen her, I can, without the
least Affront to her Beauty, preserve my Heart for the present dear
Possessour of it. Be pleased then, my Lord, to tell her, that I depart
full of the warmest Gratitude; and, since I am so fortunate as to have
the illustrious _Kam_ of _Kelirieu_ in my Interest, I beg him to be
assured, that upon my Return into my Country, as it is my highest Duty,
so it shall be my first Care, to make suitable Returns for his
Generosity to a Stranger, whom his polite Behaviour entirely frees from
the Meanness of receiving a Favour, which he would have refused from any
other Hand." _Kelirieu_, perceiving he entirely mistook his Intentions,
did not think proper to explain himself, and after taking his Leave, he
returned to make a Report to the Favourite of his unlucky Commission.
She was piqued at his Refusal, but making a Virtue of Necessity, she
endeavoured to efface the sudden Impression which he had made upon her
Heart. Fruitless Endeavours, his Idea was always present to her
Imagination. Neither Gratitude to the King, Diversions, nor Resentment,
could remove it, 'till by a most fortunate Accident, this haughty Rebel
became her Admirer, which soon terminated in the Gratification of her
Desires. But as the History of this Amour has no necessary Connection
with that which I am writing, I shall leave the several Incidents with
which it was attended, to be taken Notice of by some other Writer, only
observing, that this young _Alniobian_ returning some Years after, into
the Country of the _Kofirans_, it was his Fortune to be united for ever
to his generous Benefactress, whom the Death of her Husband, and
_Zeokinizul_'s Indifference, left at her own Disposal. This Prince
perceived some Alterations in the Favourite, which were at first
excused, under Pretence of some feign'd Indispositions, and the Monarch
was so easy as to take her Word without any farther Examination into the
Truth of her Excuses.

At the End of the Campaign, _Zeokinizul_ return'd to his Palace,
to exchange the Fatigues of War, for the Embraces of Love, and make
Preparations for new Conquests, if his Enemies should reject the Peace
which he had offered them, on such equitable Conditions as contained
nothing of the Haughtiness of a Conqueror. The King's Presence brought
back to the Court all the Pleasures and Diversions, of which there had
been no Appearance during his Expedition. There was nothing but Balls,
Feasts, and magnificent Parties of Pleasure. His Fondness would not
allow him at any Time to be long absent from his Favourite. He
endeavoured by every Token of Affection to convince her that she had
found the Means to fix his Heart unalterably, and this might have been
really the Case, had he been taken up continually with Affairs of the
War, so as to have had but a small Portion of Time for his Pleasures.
But this not being the Season for Military Operations allowed him too
much Time for Indulgence, and the Monarch's Heart was not to be fixed by
any single Passion. The beautiful _Vorompdap_ exerted herself to the
utmost, in order to prolong the Continuance of her Reign; but this was
the very Occasion of her Overthrow.

The Daughter of one of the first Noblemen of the Kingdom appear'd at
Court. This angelic Creature had spent the first Years of her Youth in a
_Mosque_ of holy Women, who, to make themselves amends for the Vow they
have taken to renounce the World, employ themselves in breeding up young
Ladies according to its current Maxims, and most fashionable Practices.
There was no beholding her youthful Charms, tho' not yet arrived at
their full Perfection, without Admiration. A _Bassa_ of the first Rank,
thought her entirely deserving of his Homage. Accordingly he paid his
Addresses to her, and in a short Time was so happy as to gain her
Consent. Some weighty Motives however, oblig'd them to keep their
Intimacy private; but Love cannot be conceal'd, Discretion and
Tenderness being seldom found together. _Zeokinizul_ perceiv'd that the
young _Bassa_, who till then had talked loudly against Love, was become
more pensive than usual. He himself had too much Experience not to guess
the Source of this Alteration. He mildly banter'd him upon it, and
diverted himself with raillying him for a Sensibility, which he often
had boasted he would ever resist. There was no Way for the young _Bassa_
to make the King give over these stinging Ironies, but by discovering
his Passion. The Excess of his Love made him unhappily Eloquent in the
Description of its charming Object. _Zeokinizul_, was inflamed by such a
beautiful Description; and, having designedly provoked him, by saying,
that as the Picture was drawn by the Pencil of a Lover, he suspected the
Likeness; the imprudent _Bassa_ forgot to whom he was speaking, and how
reserv'd he ought to have been with a Prince of such amorous
Disposition, he offered to justify all he had said of his Mistress. This
was the very Thing _Zeokinizul_ wanted. The Offer was agreed to, and
this enchanting Object brought into his Presence. The King no sooner saw
her, but he loved her. The Idea of a Rival so dearly loved, did not
occasion any Despair in the King of being happy; and, as a King makes
Love in a different Manner from a Subject, instead of making his
Mistress forget the young _Bassa_ by Presents, and other Endearments,
he made Use of his Prerogative, by sending him away on an honourable
Pretence. He also took sure Measures to deprive him of the melancholy
Comfort of taking his Leave of her, and to prevent those two Lovers from
maintaining their mutual Affections by a Correspondence of Letters,
which would confirm _Nasica_ (for so was this adorable Lady called) in
rejecting his Passion. At hearing of the _Bassa_'s Departure, her Heart
immediately became a Prey to Grief, Jealousy and Resentment; and
imputing his Conduct to his Indifference, she resolv'd to banish him
from her Remembrance, or if this was impossible, yet, at least, she
would appear to have done so. _Zeokinizul_, was soon informed of the
disorder'd State of her Mind. Few Confidents are to be found, who can
withstand the Solicitations of a King. She whom _Nasica_ had chosen, was
one of the weakest. She discover'd to the King, the Rise, Increase, and
several other Circumstances of her Mistress's Love for the young
_Bassa_, and gave him a full Account of the Grief and Resentment she had
shewn at his unexpected Departure.

In order to give these Emotions Time to arrive at such a Height, as to
subdue Love, _Zeokinizul_ very carefully avoided speaking one Word to
_Nasica_ of his Passion for her. However, as often as he happen'd to
see her, he never fail'd passing a Compliment upon her Beauty, but it
was always with such Calmness and Moderation, as was so far from being
thought to proceed from Love, that it was only accounted a proper
Complaisance in the Prince, who was willing to do Justice to such a
celebrated Beauty. The young _Bassa_, being ignorant that his Letters
were intercepted, had wrote several in so soft and persuasive a Style,
as to alarm _Zeokinizul_, and make him redouble his Precautions to
prevent any of them from falling into the Hands of those to whom they
were directed. But the Confidence he had of his Mistress's Affection,
not allowing him to suspect that _Nasica_ could prove faithless, began
to think that some third Person interposed in their Correspondence.
After having long consider'd who could be this jealous Rival who thus
deprived him of his only remaining Comfort, his Suspicions fell upon his
Master. When he called to Mind the Suddenness of his being sent away in
an Affair which required no such Haste, it was but too evident, and his
Doubts increased to a Certainty. His whole Dangers and Misfortunes
immediately presented themselves to his View. He was not ignorant that
it was an unpardonable Crime to be a Rival to his Monarch, had his Love
been unsuccessful; what then could be expected, when his Happiness was
the sole Obstacle to his Sovereign's Love? However, not valuing his
Disgrace, provided his Mistress continued faithful, he wrote her a
Letter in the most moving Terms, representing to her, that a Crown ought
to come in no Competition with Love; that it was the Heart only which
ought to engage a Lady, who has a true Sense of that delicate Passion;
that upon this Principle he yielded the Preference to _Zeokinizul_, if
his Love was more pure, more respectful, or more perfect than his own.
This Letter was committed to an old Servant, in whom he placed the
greatest Confidence; but the Misfortune was, that this Slave's good
Qualities were mixed with several Vices, and particularly Drunkenness.
Being come to a Place where he was to change his Horse, he resolved to
rest himself a while, and empty some Bottles. This was the very Place
where the Spies of his Master's Rival used to intercept his Letters.
They knew by his Habit, that he belonged to the young _Bassa_, which was
enough to make them mistrust him. They went up to him, and after some
Excuses for their Freedom, invited him to drink of their Liquor. One of
them offer'd to bear him Company as far as _Kofir_, as he was going to
that City. The Slave overjoy'd at meeting with a Fellow Traveller, and
relying on the Swiftness of his Horse, staid here longer than he ought.
The Wine overpower'd him, and his artful Companion plying him with
Bumpers, soon disabled him from going any farther. The Sot fell asleep,
his Pockets were searched, and the Letter was known by the Direction to
be one of those which they were order'd to intercept. One of them
immediately set out to carry it to him who had appointed the Ambuscade,
and he flew to deliver it to _Zeokinizul_. As the young _Bassa_ appeared
to know who was his Rival, suitable Measures were to be taken, and such
an Answer sent to him as might throw him into Despair, and make him
abandon a Passion which was now become dangerous. That it might have the
better Effect, _Nasica_'s Hand was exactly imitated, and every
discouraging Argument forcibly urged. This counterfeited Letter gave him
to understand, in the Name of his Mistress, that a crowned Lover being
more acceptable to her than a private Subject, she strictly commanded
him never to write, or speak one Word more of his presumptuous Passion.

This little Artifice proved of very happy Consequence to _Zeokinizul_.
The young _Bassa_, who had a most respectful Regard for him, thought it
became him to return Contempt for Contempt. His Answer was carefully
deliver'd to the King, who could not but be highly pleased that the
Credulity of his Rival should promote his Love. To complete his
Satisfaction, he ordered a Letter to be writ to _Nasica_, in which her
Lover freely exhorts her to take him for a Patern, and make another
Choice. All these Batteries being so well disposed, _Zeokinizul_ began
to think of disclosing himself. He gave a Ball to his whole Court,
in order to favour his Design, at which all the Ladies having an
Opportunity of entertaining themselves with their favourite Diversions
were highly delighted, and full of Gaiety. _Nasica_ alone, seem'd
insensible in the midst of all these Entertainments. She retired at a
Distance to avoid the Conversation of the gallant Nobility. The soft
Languor of her Eyes sufficiently declar'd the Sorrow of her Heart, and
that the proper Person was wanting to dissipate it. _Zeokinizul_, chose
this Time to begin his Addresses. Charming _Nasica_, says he, his Eyes
sparkling with Love, what Disquietudes are those to which you seem to
abandon yourself. Is there any Mortal so happy as to cause them? I do
not think, Sire, return'd she, that what your Highness calls
Disquietudes in me, can Interest you so far as to ask me the Occasion of
them.---- Ah, Gods! not be interested, replied the transported Monarch,
can you doubt of it, have not my Countenance, my Eyes, even my very
Silence, which I have respectfully observ'd till now, have not all these
informed you, that my Happiness entirely depends on your Repose and
Contentment. Let not the charming _Nasica_ be angry, continued he,
perceiving, that she heard him with Resentment, I love you indeed, but
my Passion is so pure, so submissive, that it can give no just Offence
to your severe Vertue. I little imagined, interrupted she, that all
these splendid Entertainments of the Court concealed any Design of
throwing me into such alarming Apprehensions. Alarming Apprehensions!
replied the King, is it then Matter of Grief to the loveliest Person now
present, that her Charms have captivated her Sovereign? Yes, Sire,
replied _Nasica_, resolutely, your Highness can only offer me a guilty
Passion, and I would incur your utmost Displeasure, I would die, rather
than condescend to it. Judge yourself, Sire, whether I have not Cause to
be alarmed. But no, my Fears are too hasty. The great _Zeokinizul_ is
too just and generous to harbour a Thought of disgracing a Family which
has always served him with Zeal and Honour, and it was merely to try his
Subject, that he has demean'd himself to offer such Discourse to her.
Immediately making a respectful Courtesy, she returned to the Circle of
the Ladies.

_Zeokinizul_, was not a little piqued at the Manner in which _Nasica_
had received the Declaration of his Love. He expected that Modesty and
Reservedness would have been her only Defence, and that, at least, she
would have spared reproaching him with such disagreeable Truths. After
having for a long Time watched all Opportunities of seeing and speaking
to her, finding himself disappointed and rejected, he lost all Patience,
so as not to care whether his Addresses to her were heard by the whole
Court, or not. One Day, as she was talking with the Ladies of Honour in
the Queen's Anti-Chamber, he came to her. A proper Respect made them all
withdraw, and the Monarch laid hold of this Occasion to renew his
Protestations. But all his ardent Entreaties had no more Success than
his first Declaration. _Nasica_'s Modesty disengaged her with Honour
from so delicate a Situation. _Zeokinizul_ admired her Constancy, and
tho' he despair'd of ever gaining her, yet he could not prevail upon
himself to give over seeing her.

In the mean Time, the young _Bassa_'s Resentment began to subside, and
he became sensible, that what he had mistaken for Indifference, was only
Love disguised and agitated with the most cruel Disquietude for the Fate
of his dear _Nasica_. This State of Anxiety grew insupportable, he would
be informed of the Truth at any Rate, and being at a Loss whom to trust,
since the most faithful of his Slaves had fail'd of reaching _Nasica_'s
House, he resolv'd to go thither in Person. All the Dangers which he ran
in disobeying his Sovereign's Orders, were too weak a Check for his
Passion, and he set out with a Willingness to perish, provided he could
once more throw himself at the Feet of the Object of his Love. After
many Hazards of being known and stopp'd, tho' under a Disguise, he
happily arrived at _Kofir_. But after a few Days employ'd in contriving
Means for an Interview with his Mistress, whom he had informed of his
Arrival, by a Letter convey'd to her by an old Governess, which
contain'd a Vindication of himself as well as his Surprise at her
Behaviour, he was known, and immediately surrounded by the Spies, placed
by the King to watch him, and whose Diligence was to be highly rewarded.
He stood upon his Defence, but being over-power'd, he was carried to one
of the Court Prisons. _Zeokinizul_, whose Passion had stifled his
natural Sentiments of Humanity, was pleased to hear that his Rival lay
in Chains. His Disobedience to the Royal Orders afforded a specious
Pretence for putting him to Death, and the King's Heart was immediately
inclined to such a cruel Expedient; but how was he struck, when
_Nasica_, being inform'd of the dreadful Condition of her Lover, threw
herself at his Feet all in Tears, conjuring him that the same Stroke
might put an End to both their unfortunate Lives. Let him live, Sire,
cried she, mournfully, or order that Death may unite us both in the
Grave. If your Highness be offended at the Refusal of my Heart, it was
no longer mine, Love having disposed of it in Favour of the unhappy
_Bassa_, who is now to fall your Victim. But his Views were honourable,
nor were mine less innocent. Let your Highness pronounce the Decree of
his Destiny, mine is inseperably annexed to it whatever it be.

_Zeokinizul_ was moved with such exalted Virtue, and being naturally
tender and compassionate, he was grieved at seeing the Afflictions of
two Lovers whom he himself had render'd unhappy. A Ray of Wisdom opened
his Eyes, and restored him to himself. He raised up _Nasica_, and gave
Orders himself for the Preparations of her Marriage with the young
_Bassa_, who afterwards became one of his chief Favourites.

So difficult an Act of Justice against himself, is one of the most
glorious Periods of this Monarch's Reign. His Love for _Nasica_ settled
in a tender Friendship for this virtuous Lady, and soon after taking a
Disgust at the Commerce of Women, he fixed a Resolution to abandon it
entirely. His People became his whole Care. They adored him for the
Wisdom and Goodness of his Administration during the Remainder of his
Reign, which was much shorter than they desired. He endeavoured by his
Instructions and Examples, to leave in his Son a worthy Successor, whose
Virtues might keep up a lasting Idea of him. Such noble Cares were not
disappointed, for the Name of the great _Zeokinizul_, and the
illustrious Heir of his Crown, will be held in immortal Remembrance
among the grateful _Kofirans_.




A KEY

For the better understanding the Amours of Zeokinizul.


Anagrams.            French.                     English.

Africa               Europe                      Europe
Alniob               Albion _ou_ Angleterre      Albion _or_ England
Alnobiens            Albioniens _ou_ Anglois     Albionians _or_ English
Anserol (_Kam_)      Duc d'Orleans               Duke of Orleans
Bapasis              Païs-Bas                    Low Countries.
Bileb                Bible
Duesois              Suedois                     Swedes
Ghinoer              Hongrie                     Hungary
Ginarkan             Carignan
Goilaus              Gaulois                     Gaules
Goplone              Pologne                     Poland
Guernonies           Norvegiens                  Norwegians
Houris               Dames                       Ladies
Jeflur               Fleury
Jerebi               Iberie _ou_ Espagne         Iberia _or_ Spain
Imans                Prêtres                     Priests
Junes Provinces      Provinces-Unies             United-Provinces
Kalontil             Chatillon
Kam                  Duc _ou_ Prince             Duke _or_ Prince
Katenos              Toscane                     Tuscany
Kelirieu             Richelieu
Kertras              Chartres
Kigenpi              Pequigny
Kismar               Marquis                     Marquis
Kismare              Marquise                    Marchioness
Kofir                Paris
Kofirans             François                    French
Kranfs               Francs                      Franks
Lenertoula           La Tournelle
Leosanil             Noailles
Leutinemil           Vintimille
Liamil               Mailly
Liegnelau            l'Evangile                  the Gospel
Lundamberk           Cumberland
Manoris              Romains                     Romans
Maregins             Germains _ou_ Allemand      Germans
Meani                du Maine
A Mollak,            le Cardinal Richelieu
  p. 4.
Another Mollak,      le Card. Mazarin
  p. 5.
An old Mollak,       le Card. Fleury
  pag. 13.
Mollak,              l'Evêque de Soissons        the Bishop of Soissons
  p. 49, and 50.
Mosque               Couvent                     Convent
Neitilane            Italienne                   Italian
Nhir                 Rhin                        Rhine
Nodais               Danois                      Danes
Omeriseroufs         Sousfermiers
d'Ourtavan           Vantadour
Pamenralt            Parlement
Pepa                 le Pape                     the Pope
Reinarol             Lorraine
Sesems               Messes                      Masses
Sicidem              Medicis
Sokans               Saxons
Suesi                Jesus
Tesoulou             Toulouse
Vameric              Maurice, _Comte de Saxe_
A Visir, p. 9.       _le Comte de_ Maurepas
Vorompdap            Pompadour
Vosaïe               Savoïe                      Savoy
Zeoteirizul          Louis treize                Lewis the XIII.
Zokitarezoul         Louis quatorze              Lewis the XIV.
Zeokinizul           Louis quinze                Lewis the XV.


_FINIS._



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMOURS OF ZEOKINIZUL, KING OF
THE KOFIRANS***


******* This file should be named 18472-8.txt or 18472-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/8/4/7/18472



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
