Project Gutenberg's The Swiss Family Robinson, by Johann David Wyss

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Swiss Family Robinson
       A Translation from the Original German

Author: Johann David Wyss

Editor: Johann Rudolf Wyss

Illustrator: Walter S. Rogers

Translator: William Henry Giles Kingston

Release Date: December 19, 2012 [EBook #41659]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SWISS FAMILY ROBINSON ***




Produced by Tor Martin Kristiansen, Kara Shallenberg, Asad
Razzaki and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's Note.

The title page of this edition is a bit confusing. The author of the
original work 'Der Schweizerische Robinson' was Johann David Wyss, and
it was edited by his son Johann Rudolf Wyss. This edition was translated
by William Henry Giles Kingston.


[Illustration: IT WAS TAKING WONDERFUL, FLYING LEAPS.]

_The Swiss Family Robinson._ _Frontispiece_--(_Page 88_)


            THE SWISS FAMILY
               ROBINSON

 A Translation from the Original German

                  BY
          JOHANN RUDOLF WYSS

               EDITED BY
        WILLIAM H. G. KINGSTON

            ILLUSTRATED BY
           WALTER S. ROGERS

           GROSSET & DUNLAP
         PUBLISHERS  NEW YORK

 PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




CONTENTS.


 CHAPTER I.

                                                                     PAGE

 Storm-tossed--Wrecked--Deserted--Supper--We make swimming-belts for
   the children--An anxious night--The gale moderates--We examine
   our cargo--Jack introduces two new acquaintances--How shall we
   get on shore?--Jack's plan--We adopt it--The use of a lever--Our
   tub-boat completed--Another night on the wreck--We collect the
   cargo--And embark--Jack's friends will not be left behind--Steer
   for the shore--Once more on land--We erect a tent--Glue
   soup--Jack makes the acquaintance of a lobster--Ernest shirks the
   water--Oysters and salt--How shall we eat our soup?--Ernest
   solves the difficulty--Fritz returns--The sucking pig--How to
   open an oyster and how to eat it--The dogs devour the
   agouti--Fritz's anger--Our first night in the new country,           1


 CHAPTER II.

 A morning consultation--Breakfast--Away on an expedition--Over the
   stream and through the grass--An unexpected reinforcement--Search
   in vain for our comrades--Rest by a stream--Fritz finds a "round
   bird's nest"--Natural history of a cocoanut--Calabash trees--The
   use of gourds--How to make a bottle--A lovely but lonely
   scene--Sugar-canes--Monkeys of use--Cocoanut milk turned to
   champagne--Turk kills an unfortunate mother monkey--Carry the
   orphan home--Display our treasures--A sumptuous supper--Ernest's
   penguin--Champagne turned to vinegar--A fight with jackals--A
   curious sentinel--A visit to the wreck--We rig our craft--Stow a
   cargo--Sleep on board--Floats for our herd--We embark--Encounter
   a shark--Land--Relate our adventures,                               19


 CHAPTER III.

 The mother relates her adventures--Proposes that we should build a
   nest--How Jack treated the jackal skin--How the boys were
   surprised by a bustard--How they found the mangrove tree--How
   the dogs caught the crabs--We discuss the possibility of making a
   house in the tree--To bed once more--We start for the wreck--The
   shark again--Return to land--Franz's crawfish--Bridge
   building--We pack up--A family removing in patriarchal style--A
   prickly enemy--Jack shoots it--We reach our new home--Fritz rids
   our poultry of an enemy--Little Franz finds the figs--Dinner--We
   prepare materials for our nest--Flamingoes--Roast and tame--The
   use of trigonometry--A cord carried over the bough--The rope
   ladder made--We mount our tree--Sleep under the roots--The
   building of the nest--Retire to roost for the first time,           44


 CHAPTER IV.

 A day of rest--A parable for the young people--Quiet
   recreation--Geographical nomenclature--The margay and porcupine
   skins made of use--An expedition to Tentholm--Potatoes,
   potatoes--Tropical vegetation--The use of the karatas--Jack's
   greediness and its punishment--Ernest discovers cochineal--Arrive
   at Tentholm--The poultry rebellious--Return to
   Falconhurst--Ernest roused out early--We collect wood for a
   sledge--Master Knips turns thief--Franz's plan for the saving of
   ammunition--Ernest and I take the sledge to Tentholm--Ernest's
   laziness exemplified--He catches a salmon--We start for
   home--Kill a kangaroo--And cook it,                                 73


 CHAPTER V.

 Jack and Ernest disappear--Fritz and I start for the wreck--The
   boys' ambuscade--We form a raft--Ransack the vessel--Again
   embark--A turtle in sight--Fritz harpoons it--The turtle acts as
   "Steam Tug"--Safe ashore--Return home--Jack's clay field--A fresh
   discovery--The mother's cellar--A trip to the wreck--The
   pinnace--Jack's raid on the Lilliputians--A secret revealed--A
   new method of grinding flour--Wholesome or
   poisonous?--Bread-making in earnest,                                92


 CHAPTER VI

 Now for the pinnace--Repeated visits to the wreck--The pinnace
   built--How shall we cut her out--The difficulty solved--We fit
   her out--Fire a salute--The mother's surprise--We visit
   Falconhurst--Attend to our fruit trees--Athletics--The lasso--An
   excursion--A bustard captured--Ernest discovers a magician--Jack
   fights him--The Liane Rouge--We turn carvers--Ernest's alarm--The
   old sow again--We discover a sleeping beauty--Return with it to
   the camp--Knips pronounces our apples "good"--Return to
   Falconhurst,                                                       108


 CHAPTER VII.

 Fritz and I return to the Calabash Wood--Fritz shoots a ruffed
   grouse--We come across waxberry bushes--Sociable grosbeaks--Fritz
   captures a parrot--A lecture on ants--Caoutchouc trees--The
   sago-palm and the edible worms--Return with sugar-canes to
   Falconhurst--Candle-making--How to make butter without a
   churn--Plant trees and adorn Tentholm--Last visit to the
   wreck--The first ducklings on the island--Falconhurst again--An
   excursion--We pitch our tent--Fritz and Jack ascend the cocoanut
   trees--Ernest brings us a delicacy--Loss of Grizzle--Jack and I
   go in pursuit--Giant bamboos--Encounter with buffaloes--The
   buffalo calf--Find a jackal's lair--Reach our camp--What happened
   in our absence--Fritz's pet--Sago manufacture--Meet with our sow
   and her family again--How Ernest tamed the eagle,                  127


 CHAPTER VIII.

 Prop our young trees--A lecture on grafting--A new idea
   broached--Why should we not build stairs within the trunk of our
   tree?--Jack finds one objection--I make a beehive, and we drive
   the bees from the tree--Stair-making--Additions to our family of
   domestic animals--The education of the "pets"--Shoemaking--We
   lead water from the stream to Falconhurst--A strange animal
   approaches--Our old ass and his companion--The onager
   captured--Provisioning our winter quarters--Capture of ruffed
   grouse--We discover flax--The rainy season,                        151


 CHAPTER IX.

 Spring again--We begin to hew a cave--Jack makes a discovery--We
   drive the foul air from the cavern--The mother and her boys join
   us--We explore the cave--Fit it up as our winter quarters--The
   herring-bank--We catch seals--Fishing on a grand scale--Isinglass
   and caviare--We visit our plantations--An expedition to
   establish a colony--The building of "Woodlands"--Jack and Fritz
   return to Falconhurst for provisions--Ernest and I explore--A
   "beast with a bill"--We build a canoe--Franz undertakes the
   education of Grumble--We continue our work at the cave--Carpet
   making--Thanksgiving-day--A startling salute--Athletics and
   shooting--Prize giving--Manufacture of birdlime--Fritz and Jack
   ride off for caoutchouc--Shoot a crane and badger--Find
   "Woodlands" turned upside down by monkeys--Discover ginseng,       168


 CHAPTER X.

 Birdlime--A midnight raid--The massacre at Woodlands--Capture of
   Molucca pigeons--A pigeon-house--Fritz and I prepare a conjuring
   trick--Great success of our experiment--Lichen and nutmegs
   discovered--Jack's adventure--The loom manufactured--Winter
   stores prepared--The rainy season sets in--Interior of our house
   arranged--We study languages--The return of spring--A stranded
   whale--An account of coral--We go to work on the whale's
   carcass--Remarks on the habits of the whale,                       199


 CHAPTER XI.

 The blubber of the whale boiled and stored--A unique
   machine--Expedition to Prospect Hill--Whale's tongue is voted no
   delicacy--We land on Whale Island--Jack discovers a strange
   skeleton--Turtle turning--Towed ashore--The loom
   completed--Return of the herring shoals--Basket making--We
   manufacture a sedan chair--Ernest's wild ride therein--A boa
   constrictor appears--He retreats to the marsh--Suspense--Poor
   Grizzle's fate--An awful scene--Death of the monster--An account
   of snakes--Remedies for poisoned bites--Ernest writes Grizzle's
   epitaph--The serpent stuffed and placed in the museum,             222


 CHAPTER XII.

 We examine the marsh--A cave discovered--We find the floor covered
   with fuller's earth--Discharge our pistols--Jack's fright--Ernest
   captures an eel--An expedition toward the Gap--Visit Falconhurst
   and Woodlands and examine the country round--Franz shoots a
   capybara--Ernest and Knips fight the rats--A lecture on
   musk--Cinnamon apples--A peccary hunt--We prepare the peccary
   meat--Disasters at Prospect Hill--An exploring expedition through
   the Gap--We find our barrier broken down--Across the
   desert--Strange objects in the distance--An account of
   ostriches--An ostrich slain--We discover the nest--A mud
   tortoise--We encounter bears--A desperate fight--Back again to
   camp--We skin the bears and smoke their flesh--Pepper
   found--Three of the boys start on an expedition--I discover talc,  242


 CHAPTER XIII.

 The boys return and give an account of their adventures--How they
   captured the antelopes--How Fritz caught the rabbits and Jack
   rode down the gazelles--How they followed the honey bird and Jack
   tried to rob the bees' byke--We sup on the bears' paws--Across
   the desert again--Sight three ostriches--The male bird
   captured--We secure him between Storm and Grumble--The mother's
   astonishment at our new pet--Return to Woodlands--Home again--We
   establish colonies on Shark and Whale Islands--Turn our attention
   to agriculture--The difficulties of ostrich training--My patent
   saddle and bridle--I exercise my ingenuity in various trades,      268


 CHAPTER XIV.

 The rainy season again--The building of the cajack--The mother
   invents a swimming dress--A visit to our colonies--Mysterious
   seaweed--The mother's surprise--A visit to Whale
   Island--Mischievous pigs--The three boys return from a day's
   hunting--They display their treasures--A new skinning
   apparatus--We make a crushing machine--An early harvest--We
   prepare a threshing floor--Reaping in Italian fashion--Threshing
   also in Italian fashion--Return of the herring shoals,             284


 CHAPTER XV.

 Trial of the cajack--Fritz kills a walrus--We carry home its
   head--The storm--Where is Fritz?--Safe at last--The fishing
   season--An expedition proposed--Three of the boys start for
   Woodlands--Pigeon post--Encounter with a hyena--Wood Lake
   explored--A tapir--Prospect Hill pillaged--A tragedy--The boys in
   danger--We join them--We build a summer house--Discover the cacao
   plant--Fritz ascends the stream--He sees elephants and
   hippopotami--Jack's "moist secret"--We return to Rockburg--Grace
   and Beauty--Shark Island is fortified,                             297


 CHAPTER XVI.

 Ten years afterward--Our farms and farmyards--Fritz makes a voyage
   of discovery--Cape Minster and the swallows' nest--Pearl
   oysters--A magnificent bay--The strange message--An excursion to
   Pearl Bay--Fritz proposes to search for the stranger, and
   prepares his canoe for her reception--The pearl fishery--An
   encounter with a wild boar--Jack's accident--Truffles--A midnight
   alarm--The lion and his mate--Our enemies overcome--Juno's
   death--We set sail for Rockburg--Fritz leaves us,                  317


 CHAPTER XVII.

 Juno's epitaph--Fritz does not appear--We start in search of him--A
   cachalot whale--The unexpected appearance of a savage--Fritz in a
   dusky disguise--He leads us to Fair Isle, and shows us the
   wonders therein--The stranger--Fritz narrates his adventures--How
   he saw toucans--Encountered a tiger--Lost Pounce--Found the
   Smoking Rock, and Jenny Montrose--The history of the
   stranger--Wolves dispute our right to the whale--Coco joins his
   brethren--Jack and Jenny search for the truant--We leave Pearl
   Bay--A hearty reception--A visit to Falconhurst--Jack displays
   our stud--The rainy season again,                                  338


 CHAPTER XVIII.

 Spring and its accompanying work--The mysterious guns--Who fired
   them--A storm--Fritz and I reconnoiter--The English brig--We
   visit her in the yacht--Captain Littlestone--We are cordially
   welcomed--Mr. Wolston and his family--An earnest
   consultation--Our visitors at Rockburg--The supper--Who is for
   Europe and who for New Switzerland?--The decision--Farewell,       358




        THE
 SWISS FAMILY ROBINSON




CHAPTER I.

 Storm-tossed--Wrecked--Deserted--Supper--We make swimming-belts for
     the children--An anxious night--The gale moderates--We examine our
     cargo--Jack introduces two new acquaintances--How shall we get on
     shore?--Jack's plan--We adopt it--The use of a lever--Our tug-boat
     completed--Another night on the wreck--We collect the cargo--And
     embark--Jack's friends will not be left behind--Steer for the
     shore--Once more on land--We erect a tent--Glue soup--Jack makes
     the acquaintance of a lobster--Ernest shirks the water--Oysters
     and salt--How shall we eat our soup?--Ernest solves the
     difficulty--Fritz returns--The sucking pig--How to open an oyster
     and how to eat it--The dogs devour the agouti--Fritz's anger--Our
     first night in the new country.


For many days we had been tempest-tossed. Six times had the darkness
closed over a wild and terrific scene, and returning light as often
brought but renewed distress, for the raging storm increased in fury
until on the seventh day all hope was lost.

We were driven completely out of our course; no conjecture could be
formed as to our whereabouts. The crew had lost heart, and were utterly
exhausted by incessant labor.

The riven masts had gone by the board, leaks had been sprung in every
direction, and the water, which rushed in, gained upon us rapidly.

Instead of reckless oaths, the seamen now uttered frantic cries to God
for mercy, mingled with strange and often ludicrous vows, to be
performed should deliverance be granted.

Every man on board alternately commended his soul to his Creator, and
strove to bethink himself of some means of saving his life.

My heart sank as I looked round upon my family in the midst of these
horrors. Our four young sons were overpowered by terror. "Dear
children," said I, "if the Lord will, he can save us even from this
fearful peril; if not, let us calmly yield our lives into his hand, and
think of the joy and blessedness of finding ourselves forever and ever
united in that happy home above."

At these words my weeping wife looked bravely up, and, as the boys
clustered round her, she began to cheer and encourage them with calm and
loving words. I rejoiced to see her fortitude, though my heart was ready
to break as I gazed on my dear ones.

We knelt down together, one after another praying with deep earnestness
and emotion. Fritz, in particular, besought help and deliverance for his
dear parents and brothers, as though quite forgetting himself.

Our hearts were soothed by the never-failing comfort of child-like,
confiding prayer, and the horror of our situation seemed less
overwhelming. "Ah," thought I, "the Lord will hear our prayer! He will
help us."

Amid the roar of the thundering waves I suddenly heard the cry of "Land,
land!" while at the same instant the ship struck with a frightful shock,
which threw every one to the deck, and seemed to threaten her immediate
destruction.

Dreadful sounds betokened the breaking up of the ship, and the roaring
waters poured in on all sides:

Then the voice of the captain was heard above the tumult shouting,
"Lower away the boats! We are lost!"

"Lost!" I exclaimed, and the word went like a dagger to my heart; but
seeing my children's terror renewed, I composed myself, calling out
cheerfully, "Take courage, my boys! we are all above water yet. There is
the land not far off; let us do our best to reach it. You know God
helps those that help themselves!" With that, I left them and went on
deck. What was my horror when through the foam and spray I beheld the
only remaining boat leave the ship, the last of the seamen spring into
her and push off, regardless of my cries and entreaties that we might be
allowed to share their slender chance of preserving their lives. My
voice was drowned in the howling of the blast; and even had the crew
wished it, the return of the boat was impossible.

Casting my eyes despairingly around, I became gradually aware that our
position was by no means hopeless, inasmuch as the stern of the ship
containing our cabin was jammed between two high rocks, and was partly
raised from among the breakers which dashed the forepart to pieces. As
the clouds of mist and rain drove past, I could make out, through rents
in the vaporous curtain, a line of rocky coast, and rugged as it was, my
heart bounded toward it as a sign of help in the hour of need. Yet the
sense of our lonely and forsaken condition weighed heavily upon me as I
returned to my family, constraining myself to say with a smile,
"Courage, dear ones! Although our good ship will never sail more, she is
so placed that our cabin will remain above water, and to-morrow, if the
wind and waves abate, I see no reason why we should not be able to get
ashore."

These few words had an immediate effect on the spirits of my children,
who at once regarded our problematical chance of escaping as a happy
certainty, and began to enjoy the relief from the violent pitching and
rolling of the vessel.

My wife, however, perceived my distress and anxiety, in spite of my
forced composure, and I made her comprehend our real situation, greatly
fearing the effect of the intelligence on her nerves. Not for a moment
did her courage and trust in Providence forsake her, and on seeing this,
my fortitude revived.

"We must find some food, and take a good supper," said she, "it will
never do to grow faint by fasting too long. We shall require our utmost
strength to-morrow."

Night drew on apace, the storm was as fierce as ever, and at intervals
we were startled by crashes announcing further damage to our unfortunate
ship.

"God will help us soon now, won't he, father?" said my youngest child.

"You silly little thing," said Fritz, my eldest son, sharply, "don't you
know that we must not settle what God is to do for us? We must have
patience and wait his time."

"Very well said, had it been said kindly, Fritz, my boy. You too often
speak harshly to your brothers, although you may not mean to do so."

A good meal being now ready, my youngsters ate heartily, and retiring to
rest were speedily fast asleep. Fritz, who was of an age to be aware of
the real danger we were in, kept watch with us. After a long silence,
"Father," said he, "don't you think we might contrive swimming belts for
mother and the boys? with those we might all escape to land, for you and
I can swim."

"Your idea is so good," answered I, "that I shall arrange something at
once, in case of an accident during the night."

We immediately searched about for what would answer the purpose, and
fortunately got hold of a number of empty flasks and tin canisters,
which we connected two and two together so as to form floats
sufficiently buoyant to support a person in the water, and my wife and
young sons each willingly put one on. I then provided myself with
matches, knives, cord, and other portable articles, trusting that,
should the vessel go to pieces before daylight, we might gain the shore
not wholly destitute.

Fritz, as well as his brothers, now slept soundly. Throughout the night
my wife and I maintained our prayerful watch, dreading at every fresh
sound some fatal change in the position of the wreck.

At length the faint dawn of day appeared, the long, weary night was
over, and with thankful hearts we perceived that the gale had began to
moderate; blue sky was seen above us, and the lovely hues of sunrise
adorned the eastern horizon.

I aroused the boys, and we assembled on the remaining portion of the
deck, when they, to their surprise, discovered that no one else was on
board.

"Hallo, papa! what has become of everybody? Are the sailors gone? Have
they taken away the boats? Oh, papa! why did they leave us behind? What
can we do by ourselves?"

"My good children," I replied, "we must not despair, although we seem
deserted. See how those on whose skill and good faith we depended have
left us cruelly to our fate in the hour of danger. God will never do so.
He has not forsaken us, and we will trust him still. Only let us bestir
ourselves, and each cheerily do his best. Who has anything to propose?"

"The sea will soon be calm enough for swimming," said Fritz.

"And that would be all very fine for you," exclaimed Ernest, "but think
of mother and the rest of us! Why not build a raft and all get on shore
together?"

"We should find it difficult, I think, to make a raft that would carry
us safe to shore. However, we must contrive something, and first let
each try to procure what will be of most use to us."

Away we all went to see what was to be found, I myself proceeding to
examine, as of great consequence, the supplies of provisions and fresh
water within our reach.

My wife took her youngest son, Franz, to help her to feed the
unfortunate animals on board, who were in a pitiful plight, having been
neglected for several days.

Fritz hastened to the arm chest, Ernest to look for tools: and Jack went
toward the captain's cabin, the door of which he no sooner opened than
out sprang two splendid large dogs, who testified their extreme delight
and gratitude by such tremendous bounds that they knocked their little
deliverer completely head over heels, frightening him nearly out of his
wits. Jack did not long yield either to fear or anger; he presently
recovered himself; the dogs seemed to ask pardon by vehemently licking
his face and hands, and so, seizing the larger by the ears, he jumped on
his back, and, to my great amusement, coolly rode to meet me as I came
up the hatchway.

When we reassembled in the cabin, we all displayed our treasures.

Fritz brought a couple of guns, shot belt, powder flasks, and plenty of
bullets.

Ernest produced a cap full of nails, an ax, and a hammer, while pincers,
chisels, and augers stuck out of all his pockets.

Little Franz carried a box, and eagerly began to show us the "nice sharp
little hooks" it contained. "Well done, Franz!" cried I; "these fish
hooks, which you, the youngest, have found, may contribute more than
anything else in the ship to save our lives by procuring food for us.
Fritz and Ernest, you have chosen well."

"Will you praise me too?" said my dear wife. "I have nothing to show,
but I can give you good news. Some useful animals are still alive; a
cow, a donkey, two goats, six sheep, a ram, and a fine sow. I was but
just in time to save their lives by taking food to them."

"All these things are excellent indeed," said I; "but my friend Jack
here has presented me with a couple of huge, hungry, useless dogs, who
will eat more than any of us."

"Oh, papa! they will be of use! Why, they will help us to hunt when we
get on shore!"

"No doubt they will, if ever we do get on shore, Jack; but I must say I
don't know how it is to be done."

"Can't we each get into a big tub, and float there?" returned he. "I
have often sailed splendidly like that, round the pond at home."

"My child, you have hit on a capital idea," cried I. "Now, Ernest, let
me have your tools, hammers, nails, saws, augers, and ax; and then make
haste to collect any tubs you can find!"

We very soon found four large casks, made of sound wood, and strongly
bound with iron hoops; they were floating with many other things in the
water in the hold, but we managed to fish them out, and drag them to a
suitable place for launching them. They were exactly what I wanted, and
I succeeded in sawing them across the middle. Hard work it was, and we
were glad enough to stop and refresh ourselves with wine and biscuits.

My eight tubs now stood ranged in a row near the water's edge, and I
looked at them with great satisfaction; to my surprise, my wife did not
seem to share my pleasure!

"I shall never," said she, "muster courage to get into one of these!"

"Do not be too sure of that, dear wife; when you see my contrivance
completed, you will perhaps prefer it to this immovable wreck."

I next procured a long, thin plank, on which my tubs could be fixed, and
the two ends of this I bent upward so as to form a keel. Other two
planks were nailed along the sides of the tubs; they also being
flexible, were brought to a point at each end, and all firmly secured
and nailed together. I felt satisfied that in smooth water this craft
would be perfectly trustworthy. But when we thought all was ready for
the launch, we found, to our dismay, that the grand contrivance was so
heavy and clumsy, that even our united efforts could not move it an
inch.

"I must have a lever," cried I. "Run and fetch the capstan bar!"

Fritz quickly brought one, and, having formed rollers by cutting up a
long spar, I raised the fore part of my boat with the bar, and my sons
placed a roller under it.

"How is it, father," inquired Ernest, "that with that thing you alone
can do more than all of us together?"

I explained, as well as I could in a hurry, the principle of the lever;
and promised to have a long talk on the subject of Mechanics, should we
have a future opportunity.

I now made fast a long rope to the stern of our boat, attaching the
other end to a beam; then placing a second and third roller under it, we
once more began to push, this time with success, and soon our gallant
craft was safely launched: so swiftly indeed did she glide into the
water that, but for the rope, she would have passed beyond our reach.
The boys wished to jump in directly; but, alas, she leaned so much on
one side that they could not venture to do so.

Some heavy things being thrown in, however, the boat righted itself by
degrees, and the boys were so delighted that they struggled which should
first leap in to have the fun of sitting down in the tubs. But it was
plain to me at once that something more was required to make her
perfectly safe, so I contrived out-riggers to preserve the balance, by
nailing long poles across at the stem and stern, and fixing at the end
of each empty brandy casks. Then the boat appearing steady, I got in;
and turning it toward the most open side of the wreck, I cut and cleared
away obstructions, so as to leave a free passage for our departure, and
the boys brought oars to be ready for the voyage. This important
undertaking we were forced to postpone until the next day, as it was by
this time far too late to attempt it. It was not pleasant to have to
spend another night in so precarious a situation; but yielding to
necessity, we sat down to enjoy a comfortable supper, for during our
exciting and incessant work all day we had taken nothing but an
occasional biscuit and a little wine.

We prepared for rest in a much happier frame of mind than on the
preceding day, but I did not forget the possibility of a renewed storm,
and therefore made every one put on the belts as before.

I persuaded my wife (not without considerable difficulty), to put on a
sailor's dress, assuring her she would find it much more comfortable and
convenient for all she would have to go through. She at last consented
to do this, and left us for a short time, reappearing with much
embarrassment and many blushes, in a most becoming suit, which she had
found in a midshipman's chest. We all admired her costume, and any
awkwardness she felt soon began to pass off; then retiring to our
berths, peaceful sleep prepared us all for the exertions of the coming
day.

We rose up betimes, for sleep weighs lightly on the hopeful, as well as
on the anxious. After kneeling together in prayer, "Now, my beloved
ones," said I, "with God's help we are about to effect our escape. Let
the poor animals we must leave behind be well fed, and put plenty of
fodder within their reach: in a few days we may be able to return, and
save them likewise. After that, collect everything you can think of
which may be of use to us."

The boys joyfully obeyed me, and I selected from the large quantity of
stores they got together, canvas to make a tent, a chest of carpenter's
tools, guns, pistols, powder, shot, and bullets, rods and fishing
tackle, an iron pot, a case of portable soup, and another of biscuit.
These useful articles, of course, took the place of the ballast I had
hastily thrown in the day before.

With a hearty prayer for God's blessing, we now began to take our seats,
each in his tub. Just then we heard the cocks begin to crow, as though
to reproach us for deserting them. "Why should not the fowls go with
us!" exclaimed I. "If we find no food for _them_, they can be food for
_us_!" Ten hens and a couple of cocks were accordingly placed in one of
the tubs, and secured with some wire-netting over them.

The ducks and geese were set at liberty, and took to the water at once,
while the pigeons, rejoicing to find themselves on the wing, swiftly
made for the shore. My wife, who managed all this for me, kept us
waiting for her some little time, and came at last with a bag as big as
a pillow in her arms. "This is _my_ contribution," said she, throwing
the bag to little Franz, to be, as I thought, a cushion for him to sit
upon.

All being ready, we cast off, and moved away from the wreck. My good,
brave wife sat in the first compartment of the boat; next her was Franz,
a pretty little boy, nearly eight years old. Then came Fritz, a
handsome, spirited young fellow of fifteen; the two center tubs
contained the valuable cargo; then came our bold, thoughtless Jack; next
him Ernest, my second son, intelligent, well-formed, and rather
indolent. I myself, the anxious, loving father, stood in the stern,
endeavoring to guide the raft with its precious burden to a safe
landing-place.

The elder boys took the oars; every one wore a float belt, and had
something useful close to him in case of being thrown into the water.

The tide was flowing, which was a great help to the young oarsmen. We
emerged from the wreck and glided into the open sea. All eyes were
strained to get a full view of the land, and the boys pulled with a
will; but for some time we made no progress, as the boat kept turning
round and round, until I hit upon the right way to steer it, after which
we merrily made for the shore.

We had left two dogs, Turk and Juno, on the wreck, as being both large
mastiffs we did not care to have their additional weight on board our
craft; but when they saw us apparently deserting them, they set up a
piteous howl, and sprang into the sea. I was sorry to see this, for the
distance to the land was so great that I scarcely expected them to be
able to accomplish it. They followed us, however, and occasionally
resting their fore-paws on the out-riggers, kept up with us well. Jack
was inclined to deny them this, their only chance of safety. "Stop,"
said I, "that would be unkind as well as foolish; remember, the merciful
man regardeth the life of his beast."

Our passage, though tedious, was safe; but the nearer we approached the
shore the less inviting it appeared; the barren rocks seemed to threaten
us with misery and want.

Many casks, boxes, and bales of goods floated on the water around us.
Fritz and I managed to secure a couple of hogsheads, so as to tow them
alongside. With the prospect of famine before us, it was desirable to
lay hold of anything likely to contain provisions.

By and by we began to perceive that, between and beyond the cliffs,
green grass and trees were discernible. Fritz could distinguish many
tall palms, and Ernest hoped they would prove to be cocoanut trees, and
enjoyed the thoughts of drinking the refreshing milk.

"I am very sorry I never thought of bringing away the captain's
telescope," said I.

"Oh, look here, father!" cried Jack, drawing a little spyglass joyfully
out of his pocket.

By means of this glass, I made out that at some distance to the left the
coast was much more inviting; a strong current however, carried us
directly toward the frowning rocks, but I presently observed an opening,
where a stream flowed into the sea, and saw that our geese and ducks
were swimming toward this place. I steered after them into the creek,
and we found ourselves in a small bay or inlet where the water was
perfectly smooth and of moderate depth. The ground sloped gently upward
from the low banks to the cliffs, which here retired inland, leaving a
small plain, on which it was easy for us to land. Every one sprang
gladly out of the boat but little Franz, who, lying packed in his tub
like a potted shrimp, had to be lifted out by his mother.

The dogs had scrambled on shore before us; they received us with loud
barking and the wildest demonstrations of delight. The geese and ducks
kept up an incessant din, added to which was the screaming and croaking
of flamingoes and penguins, whose dominion we were invading. The noise
was deafening, but far from unwelcome to me, as I thought of the good
dinners the birds might furnish.

As soon as we could gather our children around us on dry land, we knelt
to offer thanks and praise for our merciful escape, and with full
hearts we commended ourselves to God's good keeping for the time to
come.

All hands then briskly fell to the work of unloading, and oh, how rich
we felt ourselves as we did so! The poultry we left at liberty to forage
for themselves, and set about finding a suitable place to erect a tent
in which to pass the night. This we speedily did; thrusting a long spar
into a hole in the rock, and supporting the other end by a pole firmly
planted in the ground, we formed a framework over which we stretched the
sailcloth we had brought; besides fastening this down with pegs, we
placed our heavy chest and boxes on the border of the canvas, and
arranged hooks so as to be able to close up the entrance during the
night.

When this was accomplished, the boys ran to collect moss and grass, to
spread in the tent for our beds, while I arranged a fireplace with some
large flat stones, near the brook which flowed close by. Dry twigs and
seaweed were soon in a blaze on the hearth; I filled the iron pot with
water, and giving my wife several cakes of the portable soup, she
established herself as our cook, with little Franz to help her.

He, thinking his mother was melting some glue for carpentering, was
eager to know "what papa was going to make next?"

"This is to be soup for your dinner, my child. Do you think these cakes
look like glue?"

"Yes, indeed I do!" replied Franz, "and I should not much like to taste
glue soup! don't you want some beef or mutton, mamma?"

"Where can I get it, dear!" said she, "we are a long way from a
butcher's shop! but these cakes are made of the juice of good meat,
boiled till it becomes a strong, stiff jelly--people take them when they
go to sea, because on a long voyage they can only have salt meat, which
will not make nice soup."

Fritz, meanwhile, leaving a loaded gun with me, took another himself,
and went along the rough coast to see what lay beyond the stream; this
fatiguing sort of walk not suiting Ernest's fancy, he sauntered down to
the beach, and Jack scrambled among the rocks, searching for shell-fish.

I was anxious to land the two casks which were floating alongside our
boat, but on attempting to do so, I found that I could not get them up
the bank on which we had landed, and was therefore obliged to look for a
more convenient spot. As I did so, I was startled by hearing Jack
shouting for help, as though in great danger. He was at some distance,
and I hurried toward him with a hatchet in my hand. The little fellow
stood screaming in a deep pool, and as I approached, I saw that a huge
lobster had caught his leg in its powerful claw. Poor Jack was in a
terrible fright; kick as he would, his enemy still clung on. I waded
into the water, and seizing the lobster firmly by the back, managed to
make it loosen its hold, and we brought it safe to land. Jack, having
speedily recovered his spirits, and anxious to take such a prize to his
mother, caught the lobster in both hands, but instantly received such a
severe blow from its tail that he flung it down, and passionately hit
the creature with a large stone. This display of temper vexed me. "You
are acting in a very childish way, my son," said I; "never strike an
enemy in a revengeful spirit." Once more lifting the lobster, Jack ran
triumphantly toward the tent.

"Mother, mother! a lobster, Ernest! look here, Franz! mind, he'll bite
you! Where's Fritz?" All came crowding round Jack and his prize,
wondering at its unusual size, and Ernest wanted his mother to make
lobster soup directly, by adding it to what she was now boiling.

She, however, begged to decline making any such experiment, and said she
preferred cooking one dish at a time. Having remarked that the scene of
Jack's adventure afforded a convenient place for getting my casks on
shore, I returned thither and succeeded in drawing them up on the beach,
where I set them on end, and for the present left them.

On my return I resumed the subject of Jack's lobster, and told him he
should have the offending claw all to himself, when it was ready to be
eaten, congratulating him on being the first to discover anything
useful.

"As to that," said Ernest, "I found something very good to eat, as well
as Jack, only I could not get at them without wetting my feet."

"Pooh!" cried Jack, "I know what he saw--nothing but some nasty mussels;
I saw them too. Who wants to eat trash like that! Lobster for me!"

"I believe them to be oysters, not mussels," returned Ernest calmly.

"Be good enough, my philosophical young friend, to fetch a few specimens
of these oysters in time for our next meal," said I; "we must all exert
ourselves, Ernest, for the common good, and pray never let me hear you
object to wetting your feet. See how quickly the sun has dried Jack and
me."

"I can bring some salt at the same time," said Ernest, "I remarked a
good deal lying in the crevices of the rocks; it tasted very pure and
good, and I concluded it was produced by the evaporation of sea water in
the sun."

"Extremely probable, learned sir," cried I; "but if you had brought a
bagful of this good salt instead of merely speculating so profoundly on
the subject, it would have been more to the purpose. Run and fetch some
directly."

It proved to be salt sure enough, although so impure that it seemed
useless, till my wife dissolved and strained it, when it became fit to
put in the soup.

"Why not use the sea water itself?" asked Jack.

"Because," said Ernest, "it is not only salt, but bitter too. Just try
it."

"Now," said my wife, tasting the soup with the stick with which she had
been stirring it, "dinner is ready, but where can Fritz be?" she
continued, a little anxiously.

"How are we to eat our soup when he does come?" I asked; "we have
neither plates nor spoons, and we can scarcely lift the boiling pot to
our mouths. We are in as uncomfortable a position as was the fox to
whom the stork served up a dinner in a jug with a long neck."

"Oh, for a few cocoanut shells!" sighed Ernest.

"Oh, for half a dozen plates and as many silver spoons!" rejoined I,
smiling.

"Really though, oyster-shells would do," said he, after a moment's
thought.

"True, that is an idea worth having! Off with you, my boys; get the
oysters and clean out a few shells. What though our spoons have no
handles, and we do burn our fingers a little in baling the soup out."

Jack was away and up to his knees in the water, in a moment, detaching
the oysters. Ernest followed more leisurely, and still unwilling to wet
his feet, stood by the margin of the pool and gathered in his
handkerchief the oysters his brother threw him; as he thus stood he
picked up and pocketed a large mussel shell for his own use. As they
returned with a good supply we heard a shout from Fritz in the distance;
we returned it joyfully, and he presently appeared before us, his hands
behind his back, and a look of disappointment upon his countenance.

"Unsuccessful!" said he.

"Really!" I replied; "never mind, my boy, better luck next time."

"Oh, Fritz!" exclaimed his brothers, who had looked behind him, "a
sucking-pig, a little sucking-pig. Where did you get it? How did you
shoot it? Do let us see it!"

Fritz then with sparkling eyes exhibited his prize.

"I am glad to see the results of your prowess, my boy," said I; "but I
cannot approve of deceit, even as a joke; stick to the truth in jest and
earnest."

Fritz then told us how he had been to the other side of the stream. "So
different from this," he said; "it is really a beautiful country, and
the shore, which runs down to the sea in a gentle slope, is covered with
all sorts of useful things from the wreck. Do let us go and collect
them. And, father, why should we not return to the wreck and bring off
some of the animals? Just think of what value the cow would be to us,
and what a pity it would be to lose her! Let us get her on shore, and we
will move over the stream, where she will have good pasturage, and we
shall be in the shade instead of on this desert, and father, I do
wish----"

"Stop, stop, my boy!" cried I. "All will be done in good time. To-morrow
and the day after will bring work of their own. And tell me, did you see
no traces of our shipmates?"

"Not a sign of them, either on land or sea, living or dead," he replied.

"But the sucking-pig," said Jack, "where did you get it?"

"It was one of several," said Fritz, "which I found on the shore; most
curious animals they are; they hopped rather than walked, and every now
and then would squat down on their legs and rub their snouts with their
fore-paws. Had not I been afraid of losing them all, I would have tried
to catch one alive, they seemed so tame."

Meanwhile Ernest had been carefully examining the animal in question.

"This is no pig," he said; "and except for its bristly skin, does not
look like one. See, its teeth are not like those of a pig, but rather
those of a squirrel. In fact," he continued, looking at Fritz, "your
sucking-pig is an agouti."

"Dear me," said Fritz; "listen to the great professor lecturing! He is
going to prove that a pig is not a pig!"

"You need not be so quick to laugh at your brother," said I, in my turn;
"he is quite right. I, too, know the agouti by descriptions and
pictures, and there is little doubt that this is a specimen. The little
animal is a native of North America, where it makes its nest under the
roots of trees, and lives upon fruit. But, Ernest, the agouti not only
looks something like a pig, but most decidedly grunts like a porker."

While we were thus talking, Jack had been vainly endeavoring to open an
oyster with his large knife. "Here is a simpler way," said I, placing
an oyster on the fire; it immediately opened. "Now," I continued, "who
will try this delicacy?" All at first hesitated to partake of them, so
unattractive did they appear. Jack, however, tightly closing his eyes
and making a face as though about to take medicine, gulped one down. We
followed his example, one after the other, each doing so rather to
provide himself with a spoon than with any hope of cultivating a taste
for oysters.

Our spoons were now ready, and gathering round the pot we dipped them
in, not, however, without sundry scalded fingers. Ernest then drew from
his pocket the large shell he had procured for his own use, and scooping
up a good quantity of soup he put it down to cool, smiling at his own
foresight.

"Prudence should be exercised for others," I remarked; "your cool soup
will do capitally for the dogs, my boy; take it to them, and then come
and eat like the rest of us."

Ernest winced at this, but silently taking up his shell he placed it on
the ground before the hungry dogs, who lapped up its contents in a
moment; he then returned, and we all went merrily on with our dinner.
While we were thus busily employed, we suddenly discovered that our
dogs, not satisfied with their mouthful of soup, had espied the agouti,
and were rapidly devouring it. Fritz, seizing his gun, flew to rescue it
from their hungry jaws, and before I could prevent him, struck one of
them with such force that his gun was bent. The poor beasts ran off
howling, followed by a shower of stones from Fritz, who shouted and
yelled at them so fiercely that his mother was actually terrified. I
followed him, and as soon as he would listen to me, represented to him
how despicable, as well as wicked, was such an outbreak, of temper:
"for," said I, "you have hurt, if not actually wounded, the dogs; you
have distressed and terrified your mother, and spoiled your gun."

Though Fritz's passion was easily aroused, it never lasted long, and
speedily recovering himself, immediately he entreated his mother's
pardon, and expressed his sorrow for his fault.

By this time the sun was sinking beneath the horizon, and the poultry,
which had been straying to some little distance, gathered round us, and
began to pick up the crumbs of biscuit which had fallen during our
repast. My wife hereupon drew from her mysterious bag some handfuls of
oats, peas, and other grain, and with them began to feed the poultry.
She at the same time showed me several other seeds of various
vegetables. "That was indeed thoughtful," said I; "but pray be careful
of what will be of such value to us; we can bring plenty of damaged
biscuits from the wreck, which, though of no use as food for us, will
suit the fowls very well indeed."

The pigeons now flew up to crevices in the rocks, the fowls perched
themselves on our tent pole, and the ducks and geese waddled off,
cackling and quacking, to the marshy margin of the river. We, too, were
ready for repose, and having loaded our guns, and offered up our prayers
to God, thanking Him for His many mercies to us, we commended ourselves
to His protecting care, and as the last ray of light departed, closed
our tent and lay down to rest.

The children remarked the suddenness of nightfall, for indeed there had
been little or no twilight. This convinced me that we must be not far
from the equator, for twilight results from the refraction of the sun's
rays: the more obliquely these rays fall, the farther does the partial
light extend; while the more perpendicularly they strike the earth, the
longer do they continue their undiminished force, until, when the sun
sinks, they totally disappear, thus producing sudden darkness.




CHAPTER II.

 A morning consultation--Breakfast--Away on an expedition--Over the
     stream and through the grass--An unexpected reinforcement--Search
     in vain for our comrades--Rest by a stream--Fritz finds a "round
     bird's nest"--Natural history of a cocoanut--Calabash trees--The
     use of gourds--How to make a bottle--A lovely but lonely
     scene--Sugar-canes--Monkeys of use--Cocoanut milk turned to
     champagne--Turk kills an unfortunate mother monkey--Carry the
     orphan home--Display our treasures--A sumptuous supper--Ernest's
     penguin--Champagne turned to vinegar--A fight with jackals--A
     curious sentinel--A visit to the wreck--We rig our craft--Stow a
     cargo--Sleep on board--Floats for our herd--We embark--Encounter a
     shark--Land--Relate our adventures.


We should have been badly off without the shelter of our tent, for the
night proved as cold as the day had been hot, but we managed to sleep
comfortably, every one being thoroughly fatigued by the labors of the
day. The voice of our vigilant cock, which, as he loudly saluted the
rising moon, was the last sound I heard at night, roused me at daybreak,
and I then awoke my wife, that in the quiet interval while yet our
children slept, we might take counsel together on our situation and
prospects. It was plain to both of us that, in the first place, we
should ascertain if possible the fate of our late companions, and then
examine into the nature and resources of the country on which we were
stranded.

We therefore came to the resolution that, as soon as we had breakfasted,
Fritz and I should start on an expedition with these objects in view,
while my wife remained near our landing-place with the three younger
boys.

"Rouse up, rouse up, my boys," cried I, awakening the children
cheerfully. "Come and help your mother to get breakfast ready."

"As to that," said she smiling, "we can but set on the pot, and boil
some more soup!"

"Why, you forget Jack's fine lobster!" replied I. "What has become of
it, Jack?"

"It has been safe in this hole in the rock all night, father. You see, I
thought, as the dogs seem to like good things, they might take a fancy
to that, as well as to the agouti."

"A very sensible precaution," remarked I. "I believe even my heedless
Jack will learn wisdom in time. It is well the lobster is so large, for
we shall want to take part with us on our excursion to-day."

At the mention of an excursion, the four children were wild with
delight, and capering around me, clapped their hands for joy.

"Steady there, steady!" said I, "you cannot expect all to go. Such an
expedition as this would be too dangerous and fatiguing for you younger
ones. Fritz and I will go alone this time, with one of the dogs, leaving
the other to defend you."

We then armed ourselves, each taking a gun and a game bag; Fritz in
addition sticking a pair of pistols in his belt, and I a small hatchet
in mine; breakfast being over, we stowed away the remainder of the
lobster and some biscuits, with a flask of water, and were ready for a
start.

"Stop!" I exclaimed, "we have still left something very important
undone."

"Surely not," said Fritz.

"Yes," said I, "we have not yet joined in morning prayer. We are only
too ready, amid the cares and pleasures of this life, to forget the God
to whom we owe all things." Then having commended ourselves to his
protecting care, I took leave of my wife and children, and bidding them
not wander far from the boat and tent, we parted not without some
anxiety on either side, for we knew not what might assail us in this
unknown region.

We now found that the banks of the stream were on both sides so rocky
that we could get down to the stream by only one narrow passage, and
there was no corresponding path on the other side. I was glad to see
this, however, for I now knew that my wife and children were on a
comparatively inaccessible spot, the other side of the tent being
protected by steep and precipitous cliffs. Fritz and I pursued our way
up the stream until we reached a point where the waters fell from a
considerable height in a cascade, and where several large rocks lay half
covered by the water; by means of these we succeeded in crossing the
stream in safety. We thus had the sea on our left, and a long line of
rocky heights, here and there adorned with clumps of trees, stretching
away inland to the right. We had forced our way scarcely fifty yards
through the long rank grass, which was here partly withered by the sun
and much tangled, when we heard behind us a rustling, and on looking
round saw the grass waving to and fro, as if some animal were passing
through it. Fritz instantly turned and brought his gun to his shoulder,
ready to fire the moment the beast should appear. I was much pleased
with my son's coolness and presence of mind, for it showed me that I
might thoroughly rely upon him on any future occasion when real danger
might occur; this time, however, no savage beast rushed out, but our
trusty dog Turk, whom in our anxiety at parting we had forgotten, and
who had been sent after us, doubtless, by my thoughtful wife.

From this little incident, however, we saw how dangerous was our
position, and how difficult escape would be should any fierce beast
steal upon us unawares: we therefore hastened to make our way to the
open seashore. Here the scene which presented itself was indeed
delightful. A background of hills, the green waving grass, the pleasant
groups of trees stretching here and there to the very water's edge,
formed a lovely prospect. On the smooth sand we searched carefully for
any trace of our hapless companions, but not the mark of a footstep
could we find.

"Shall I fire a shot or two?" said Fritz; "that would bring our
companions, if they are within hearing."

"It would indeed," I said, "or any savages that may be here. No, no; let
us search diligently, but as quietly as possible."

"But why, father, should we trouble ourselves about them at all? They
left us to shift for ourselves, and I for one don't care to set eyes on
them again."

"You are wrong, my boy," said I. "In the first place, we should not
return evil for evil; then, again, they might be of great assistance to
us in building a house of some sort; and lastly, you must remember that
they took nothing with them from the vessel, and may be perishing of
hunger."

Thus talking, we pushed on until we came to a pleasant grove which
stretched down to the water's edge; here we halted to rest, seating
ourselves under a large tree, by a rivulet which murmured and splashed
along its pebbly bed into the great ocean before us. A thousand
gayly-plumaged birds flew twittering above us, and Fritz and I gazed up
at them.

My son suddenly started up.

"A monkey," he exclaimed; "I am nearly sure I saw a monkey."

As he spoke he sprang round to the other side of the tree, and in doing
so stumbled over a round substance, which he handed to me, remarking, as
he did so, that it was a round bird's nest, of which he had often heard.

"You may have done so," said I, laughing, "but you need not necessarily
conclude that every round hairy thing is a bird's nest; this, for
instance, is not one, but a cocoanut."

We split open the nut, but, to our disgust, found the kernel dry and
uneatable.

"Hullo," cried Fritz, "I always thought a cocoanut was full of delicious
sweet liquid, like almond milk."

"So it is," I replied, "when young and fresh, but as it ripens the milk
becomes congealed, and in course of time is solidified into a kernel.
This kernel then dries as you see here, but when the nut falls on
favorable soil, the germ within the kernel swells until it bursts
through the shell, and, taking root, springs up a new tree."

"I do not understand," said Fritz, "how the little germ manages to get
through this great thick shell, which is not like an almond or hazel
nutshell, that is divided down the middle already."

"Nature provides for all things," I answered, taking up the pieces.
"Look here, do you see these three round holes near the stalk? it is
through them that the germ obtains egress. Now let us find a good nut if
we can."

As cocoanuts must be over-ripe before they fall naturally from the tree,
it was not without difficulty that we obtained one in which the kernel
was not dried up. When we succeeded, however, we were so refreshed by
the fruit that we could defer the repast we called our dinner until
later in the day, and so spare our stock of provisions.

Continuing our way through a thicket, and which was so densely overgrown
with lianas that we had to clear a passage with our hatchets, we again
emerged on the seashore beyond, and found an open view, the forest
sweeping inland, while on the space before us stood at intervals single
trees of remarkable appearance.

These at once attracted Fritz's observant eye, and he pointed, to them,
exclaiming,

"Oh, what absurd-looking trees, father! See what strange bumps there are
on the trunks."

We approached to examine them, and I recognized them as calabash trees,
the fruit of which grows in this curious way on the stems, and is a
species of gourd, from the hard rind of which bowls, spoons, and bottles
can be made. "The savages," I remarked, "are said to form these things
most ingeniously, using them to contain liquids: indeed, they actually
cook food in them."

"Oh, but that is impossible," returned Fritz. "I am quite sure this
rind would be burnt through directly it was set on the fire."

"I did not say it was set on the fire at all. When the gourd has been
divided in two, and the shell or rind emptied of its contents, it was
filled with water, into which the fish, or whatever is to be cooked, is
put; red hot stones are added until the water boils; the food becomes
fit to eat, and the gourd-rind remains uninjured."

"That is a very clever plan: very simple too. I daresay I should have
hit on it, if I had tried," said Fritz.

"The friends of Columbus thought it very easy to make an egg stand upon
its end when he had shown them how to do it. But now suppose we prepare
some of these calabashes, that they may be ready for use when we take
them home."

Fritz instantly took up one of the gourds, and tried to split it equally
with his knife, but in vain: the blade slipped, and the calabash was cut
jaggedly. "What a nuisance!" said Fritz, flinging it down, "the thing is
spoiled; and yet it seemed so simple to divide it properly."

"Stay," said I; "you are too impatient, those pieces are not useless. Do
you try to fashion from them a spoon or two while I provide a dish."

I then took from my pocket a piece of string, which I tied tightly round
a gourd, as near one end of it as I could; then tapping the string with
the back of my knife, it penetrated the outer shell. When this was
accomplished, I tied the string yet tighter; and drawing the ends with
all my might, the gourd fell, divided exactly as I wished.

"That is clever!" cried Fritz. "What in the world put that plan into
your head?"

"It is a plan," I replied, "which the negroes adopt, as I have learned
from reading books of travel."

"Well, it certainly makes a capital soup-tureen, and a soup-plate too,"
said Fritz, examining the gourd. "But supposing you had wanted to make a
bottle, how would you have set to work?"

"It would be an easier operation than this, if possible. All that is
necessary is to cut a round hole at one end, then to scoop out the
interior, and to drop in several shot or stones; when these are shaken,
any remaining portions of the fruit are detached, and the gourd is
thoroughly cleaned, and the bottle completed."

"That would not make a very convenient bottle though, father; it would
be more like a barrel."

"True, my boy; if you want a more shapely vessel, you must take it in
hand when it is younger. To give it a neck, for instance, you must tie a
bandage round the young gourd while it is still on the tree, and then
all will swell but that part which you have checked."

As I spoke, I filled the gourds with sand, and left them to dry; marking
the spot that we might return for them on our way back.

For three hours or more we pushed forward, keeping a sharp lookout on
either side for any trace of our companions, till we reached a bold
promontory, stretching some way into the sea, from whose rocky summit I
knew that we should obtain a good and comprehensive view of the
surrounding country. With little difficulty we reached the top, but the
most careful survey of the beautiful landscape failed to show us the
slightest sign or trace of human beings. Before us stretched a wide and
lovely bay, fringed with yellow sands, either side extending into the
distance, and almost lost to view in two shadowy promontories; inclosed
by these two arms lay a sheet of rippling water, which reflected in its
depths the glorious sun above. The scene inland was no less beautiful;
and yet Fritz and I both felt a shade of loneliness stealing over us as
we gazed on its utter solitude.

"Cheer up, Fritz, my boy," said I presently. "Remember that we chose a
settler's life long ago, before we left our own dear country; we
certainly did not expect to be so entirely alone--but what matters a few
people, more or less? With God's help, let us endeavor to live here
contentedly, thankful that we were not cast upon some bare and
inhospitable island. But come, the heat here is getting unbearable; let
us find some shady place before we are completely broiled away."

We descended the hill and made for a clump of palm trees, which we saw
at a little distance. To reach this, we had to pass through a dense
thicket of reeds, no pleasant or easy task; for, besides the difficulty
of forcing our way through, I feared at every step that we might tread
on some venomous snake. Sending Turk in advance, I cut one of the reeds,
thinking it would be a more useful weapon against a reptile than my gun.
I had carried it but a little way, when I noticed a thick juice exuding
from one end. I tasted it, and to my delight found it sweet and
pleasant. I at once knew that I was standing amongst sugar-canes.
Wishing Fritz to make the same discovery, I advised him to cut a cane
for his defense; he did so, and as he beat the ground before him, the
reed split, and his hand was covered with the juice. He carefully
touched the cane with the tip of his tongue, then, finding the juice
sweet, he did so again with less hesitation; and a moment afterward
sprang back to me exclaiming:

"Oh, father, sugar-canes! sugar-canes! Taste it. Oh, how delicious, how
delightful! do let us take a lot home to mother," he continued, sucking
eagerly at the cane.

"Gently there," said I, "take breath a moment, moderation in all things,
remember. Cut some to take home if you like, only don't take more than
you can conveniently carry."

In spite of my warning, my son cut a dozen or more of the largest canes,
and stripping them of their leaves, carried them under his arm. We then
pushed through the cane-brake, and reached the clump of palms for which
we had been making; as we entered it a troop of monkeys, who had been
disporting themselves on the ground, sprang up, chattering and
grimacing, and before we could clearly distinguish them were at the very
top of the trees.

Fritz was so provoked by their impertinent gestures that he raised his
gun and would have shot one of the poor beasts.

"Stay," cried I, "never take the life of any animal needlessly. A live
monkey up in that tree is of more use to us than a dozen dead ones at
our feet, as I will show you."

Saying this, I gathered a handful of small stones, and threw them up
toward the apes. The stones did not go near them, but influenced by
their instinctive mania for imitation, they instantly seized all the
cocoanuts within their reach, and sent a perfect hail of them down upon
us.

Fritz was delighted with my stratagem, and rushing forward picked up
some of the finest of the nuts. We drank the milk they contained,
drawing it through the holes, which I pierced, and then, splitting the
nuts open with the hatchet, ate the cream which lined their shells.
After this delicious meal, we thoroughly despised the lobster we had
been carrying, and threw it to Turk, who ate it gratefully; but far from
being satisfied, the poor beast began to gnaw the ends of the
sugar-canes, and to beg for cocoanut. I slung a couple of the nuts over
my shoulder, fastening them together by their stalks, and Fritz having
resumed his burden, we began our homeward march.

I soon discovered that Fritz found the weight of his canes considerably
more than he expected: he shifted them from shoulder to shoulder, then
for a while carried them under his arm, and finally stopped short with a
sigh. "I had no idea," he said, "that a few reeds would be so heavy."

"Never mind, my boy," I said, "patience and courage! Do you not remember
the story of Æsop and his breadbasket, how heavy he found it when he
started, and how light at the end of his journey? Let us each take a
fresh staff, and then fasten the bundle crosswise with your gun."

We did so, and once more stepped forward. Fritz presently noticed that I
from time to time sucked the end of my cane.

"Oh, come," said he, "that's a capital plan of yours, father, I'll do
that too."

So saying, he began to suck most vigorously, but not a drop of the juice
could he extract. "How is this?" he asked. "How do you get the juice
out, father?"

"Think a little," I replied, "you are quite as capable as I am of
finding out the way, even if you do not know the real reason of your
failure."

"Oh, of course," said he, "it is like trying to suck marrow from a
marrow-bone, without making a hole at the other end."

"Quite right," I said, "you form a vacuum in your mouth and the end of
your tube, and expect the air to force down the liquid from the other
end which it cannot possibly enter."

Fritz was speedily perfect in the accomplishment of sucking sugar-cane,
discovering by experience the necessity for a fresh cut at each joint or
knot in the cane, through which the juice would not flow; he talked of
the pleasure of initiating his brothers in the art, and of how Ernest
would enjoy the cocoanut milk, with which he had filled his flask.

"My dear boy," said I, "you need not have added that to your load; the
chances are it is vinegar by the time we get home. In the heat of the
sun, it will ferment soon after being drawn from the nut."

"Vinegar! Oh, that would be a horrid bore! I must look directly, and see
how it is getting on," cried Fritz, hastily swinging the flask from his
shoulder, and tugging out the cork. With a loud "pop" the contents came
forth, foaming like champagne.

"There now!" said I, laughing as he tasted this new luxury, "you will
have to exercise moderation again, friend Fritz! I daresay it is
delicious, but it will go to your head, if you venture deep into your
flask."

"My dear father, you cannot think how good it is! Do take some. Vinegar,
indeed! This is like excellent wine."

We were both invigorated by this unexpected draught, and went on so
merrily after it, that the distance to the place where we had left our
gourd-dishes seemed less than we expected. We found them quite dry, and
very light and easy to carry.

Just as we had passed through the grove in which we had breakfasted,
Turk suddenly darted away from us and sprang furiously among a troop of
monkeys, which were gamboling playfully on the turf at a little distance
from the trees. They were taken by surprise completely, and the dog, now
really ravenous from hunger, had seized and was fiercely tearing one to
pieces before we could approach the spot.

His luckless victim was the mother of a tiny little monkey, which, being
on her back when the dog flew at her, hindered her flight. The little
creature attempted to hide among the grass, and in trembling fear
watched its mother. On perceiving Turk's bloodthirsty design, Fritz had
eagerly rushed to the rescue, flinging away all he was carrying, and
losing his hat in his haste. All to no purpose as far as the poor mother
ape was concerned, and a laughable scene ensued, for no sooner did the
young monkey catch sight of him, than at one bound it was on his
shoulders, and, holding fast by his thick curly hair, it firmly kept its
seat in spite of all he could do to dislodge it. He screamed and plunged
about as he endeavored to shake or pull the creature off, but all in
vain; it only clung the closer to his neck, making the most absurd
grimaces.

I laughed so much at this ridiculous scene, that I could scarcely assist
my terrified boy out of his awkward predicament.

At last, by coaxing the monkey, offering it a bit of biscuit; and
gradually disentangling its small sinewy paws from the curls it grasped
so tightly, I managed to relieve poor Fritz, who then looked with
interest at the baby ape, no bigger than a kitten, as it lay in my arms.

"What a jolly little fellow it is!" exclaimed he, "do let me try to rear
it, father. I daresay cocoanut milk would do until we can bring the cow
and the goats from the wreck. If he lives he might be useful to us. I
believe monkeys instinctively know what fruits are wholesome and what
are poisonous."

"Well," said I, "let the little orphan be yours. You bravely and kindly
exerted yourself to save the mother's life; now you must train her child
carefully, for unless you do so its natural instinct will prove
mischievous instead of useful to us."

Turk was meanwhile devouring with great satisfaction the little animal's
unfortunate mother. I could not grudge it him, and continued hunger
might have made him dangerous to ourselves. We did not think it
necessary to wait until he had dined, so we prepared to resume our
march.

The tiny ape seated itself in the coolest way imaginable on Fritz's
shoulder, I helped to carry his canes, and we were on some distance
before Turk overtook us, looking uncommonly well pleased, and licking
his chops as though recalling the memory of his feast.

He took no notice of the monkey, but it was very uneasy at sight of him,
and scrambled down into Fritz's arms, which was so inconvenient to him
that he devised a plan to relieve himself of his burden. Calling Turk,
and seriously enjoining obedience, he seated the monkey on his back,
securing it there with a cord, and then putting a second string round
the dog's neck that he might lead him, he put a loop of the knot into
the comical rider's hand, saying gravely: "Having slain the parent, Mr.
Turk, you will please to carry the son."

At first this arrangement mightily displeased them both, but by and by
they yielded to it quietly; the monkey especially amused by riding along
with the air of a person perfectly at his ease.

"We look just like a couple of mountebanks on their way to a fair with
animals to exhibit," said I. "What an outcry the children will make when
we appear!"

My son inquired to what species of the monkey tribe I thought his
_protégé_ belonged, which led to a good deal of talk on the subject, and
conversation beguiling the way, we found ourselves ere long on the
rocky margin of the stream and close to the rest of our party.

Juno was the first to be aware of our approach, and gave notice of it by
loud barking, to which Turk replied with such hearty good will, that his
little rider, terrified at the noise his steed was making, slipped from
under the cord and fled to his refuge on Fritz's shoulder, where he
regained his composure and settled himself comfortably.

Turk, who by this time knew where he was, finding himself free dashed
forward to rejoin his friends, and announce our coming.

One after another our dear ones came running to the opposite bank,
testifying in various ways their delight at our return, and hastening up
on their side of the river, as we on ours, to the ford at which we had
crossed in the morning. We were quickly on the other side, and, full of
joy and affection, our happy party was once more united.

The boys suddenly perceiving the little animal which was clinging close
to their brother, in alarm at the tumult of voices, shouted in ecstasy:

"A monkey! a monkey! oh, how splendid! Where did Fritz find him? What
may we give him to eat? Oh, what a bundle of sticks! Look at those
curious, great nuts father has got!"

We could neither check this confused torrent of questions, nor get in a
word in answer to them.

At length, when the excitement subsided a little, I was able to say a
few words with a chance of being listened to. "I am truly thankful to
see you all safe and well, and, thank God, our expedition has been very
satisfactory, except that we have entirely failed to discover any trace
of our shipmates."

"If it be the will of God," said my wife, "to leave us alone on this
solitary place, let us be content; and rejoice that we are all together
in safety."

"Now we want to hear all your adventures, and let us relieve you of
your burdens," added she, taking my game bag.

Jack shouldered my gun, Ernest took the cocoanuts, and little Franz
carried the gourds; Fritz distributed the sugar-canes amongst his
brothers, and handing Ernest his gun replaced the monkey on Turk's back.
Ernest soon found the burden with which Fritz had laden him too heavy
for his taste. His mother perceiving this, offered to relieve him of
part of the load. He gave up willingly the cocoanuts, but no sooner had
he done so than his elder brother exclaimed:

"Hullo, Ernest, you surely do not know what you are parting with; did
you really intend to hand over those good cocoanuts without so much as
tasting them?"

"What? ho! are they really cocoanuts?" cried Ernest. "Do let me take
them again, mother, do let me look at them."

"No, thank you," replied my wife with a smile. "I have no wish to see
you again overburdened."

"Oh, but I have only to throw away these sticks, which are of no use,
and then I can easily carry them."

"Worse and worse," said Fritz; "I have a particular regard for those
heavy, useless sticks. Did you ever hear of sugar-canes?"

The words were scarcely out of his mouth when Ernest began to suck
vigorously at the end of the cane, with no better result, however, than
Fritz had obtained as we were on the march.

"Here," said Fritz, "let me show you the trick of it," and he speedily
set all the youngsters to work extracting the luscious juice.

My wife, as a prudent housekeeper, was no less delighted than the
children with this discovery; the sight of the dishes also pleased her
greatly, for she longed to see us eat once more like civilized beings.
We went into the kitchen and there found preparations for a truly
sumptuous meal. Two forked sticks were planted in the ground on either
side of the fire; on these rested a rod from which hung several
tempting looking fish; opposite them hung a goose from a similar
contrivance, slowly roasting while the gravy dropped into a large shell
placed beneath it. In the center sat the great pot, from which issued
the smell of a most delicious soup. To crown this splendid array, stood
an open hogshead full of Dutch cheeses. All this was very pleasant to
two hungry travelers, but I was about to beg my wife to spare the
poultry until our stock should have increased, when she, perceiving my
thought, quickly relieved my anxiety. "This is not one of our geese,"
she said, "but a wild bird Ernest killed."

"Yes," said Ernest, "it is a penguin, I think; it let me get quite
close, so that I knocked it on the head with a stick. Here are its head
and feet, which I preserved to show you; the bill is, you see, narrow
and curved downward, and the feet are webbed. It had funny little bits
of useless wings, and its eyes looked so solemnly and sedately at me
that I was almost ashamed to kill it. Do you not think it must have been
a penguin?"

"I have little doubt on the matter, my boy," and I was about to make a
few remarks on the habits of this bird, when my wife interrupted me and
begged us to come to dinner, and continue our natural history
conversation at some future time. We then sat down before the appetizing
meal prepared for us, our gourds coming for the first time into use, and
having done it full justice, produced the cocoanuts by way of dessert.

"Here is better food for your little friend," said I to Fritz, who had
been vainly endeavoring to persuade the monkey to taste dainty morsels
of the food we had been eating; "the poor little animal has been
accustomed to nothing but its mother's milk; fetch me a saw, one of
you."

I then, after extracting the milk of the nuts from their natural holes,
carefully cut the shells in half, thus providing several more useful
basins. The monkey was perfectly satisfied with the milk, and eagerly
sucked the corner of a handkerchief dipped in it. Fritz now suddenly
recollected his delicious wine, and producing his flask, begged his
mother to taste it. "Try it first yourself," said I; Fritz did so, and I
instantly saw by his countenance that the liquor had passed through the
first stage of fermentation and had become vinegar.

"Never mind, my boy," said my prudent wife, when she learned the cause
of his wry faces, "we have wine already; but no vinegar; I am really
pleased at the transformation."

The sun was now rapidly sinking behind the horizon, and the poultry,
retiring for the night, warned us that we must follow their example.
Having offered up our prayers, we lay down on our beds, the monkey
crouched down between Jack and Fritz, and we were all soon fast asleep.

We did not, however, long enjoy this repose; a loud barking from our
dogs, who were on guard outside the tent, awakened us, and the
fluttering and cackling of our poultry warned us that a foe was
approaching. Fritz and I sprang up, and seizing our guns rushed out.
There we found a desperate combat going on; our gallant dogs, surrounded
by a dozen or more large jackals, were fighting bravely. Four of their
opponents lay dead, but the others were in no way deterred by the fate
of their comrades. Fritz and I, however, sent bullets through the heads
of a couple more, and the rest galloped off. Turk and Juno did not
intend that they should escape so cheaply, and pursuing them, they
caught, killed, and devoured another of the animals, regardless of their
near relationship. Fritz wished to save one of the jackals that he might
be able to show it to his brothers in the morning; dragging, therefore,
the one that he had shot near the tent, he concealed it, and we once
more returned to our beds.

Soundly and peacefully we slept until cock-crow next morning, when my
wife and I awoke, and began to discuss the business of the day.

"It seems absolutely necessary, my dear wife," I began "to return at
once to the wreck while it is yet calm, that we may save the poor
animals left there, and bring on shore many articles of infinite value
to us, which, if we do not now recover, we may finally lose entirely. On
the other hand, I feel that there is an immense deal to be done on
shore, and that I ought not to leave you in such an insecure shelter as
this tent."

"Return to the wreck by all means," replied my wife, cheerfully.
"Patience, order, and perseverance will help us through all our work,
and I agree with you that a visit to the wreck is without doubt our
first duty. Come, let us wake the children, and set to work without
delay."

They were soon roused, and Fritz, overcoming his drowsiness before the
others, ran out for his jackal; it was cold and stiff from the night
air, and he placed it on its legs before the tent, in a most life-like
attitude, and stood by to watch the effect upon the family. The dogs
were the first to perceive their enemy, and growling, seemed inclined to
dispose of the animal as they had disposed of its brethren in the night,
but Fritz called them off. The noise the dogs made, however, had the
effect of bringing out the younger children, and many were the
exclamations they made at the sight of the strange animal.

"A yellow dog!" cried Franz.

"A wolf!" exclaimed Jack.

"It is a striped fox," said Ernest.

"Hullo," said Fritz. "The greatest men may make mistakes. Our Professor
does not know a jackal when he sees one."

"But really," continued Ernest, examining the animal, "I think it is a
fox."

"Very well, very well," retorted Fritz, "no doubt you know better than
your father! He thinks it is a jackal."

"Come, boys," said I, "no more of this quarreling; you are none of you
very far wrong, for the jackal partakes of the nature of all three, dog,
wolf, and fox."

The monkey had come out on Jack's shoulder, but no sooner did it catch
sight of the jackal, than it fled precipitately back into the tent, and
hid itself in a heap of moss until nothing was visible but the tip of
its little nose. Jack soothed and comforted the frightened little
animal, and I then summoned them all to prayers, soon after which we
began our breakfast. So severely had we dealt with our supper the
previous night that we had little to eat but the biscuits, which were so
dry and hard, that, hungry as we were, we could not swallow much. Fritz
and I took some cheese to help them down, while my wife and younger sons
soaked theirs in water. Ernest roamed down to the shore, and looked
about for shell-fish. Presently he returned with a few whelks. "Ah,"
said he, "if we had but some butter." "My boy," I replied, "your
perpetual IF, IF, quite annoys me; why do you not sit down and eat
cheese like the rest of us." "Not while I can get butter," he said; "see
here, father," and he pointed to a large cask, "that barrel contains
butter of some sort or another, for it is oozing out at the end."

"Really, Ernest," I said, "we are indebted to you. I will open the
cask." So saying, I took a knife and carefully cut a small hole, so that
I could extract the butter without exposing the mass of it to the
effects of the air and heat. Filling a cocoanut shell, we once more sat
down, and toasting our biscuits before the fire, spread them with the
good Dutch butter. We found this vastly better than the dry biscuits,
and while we were thus employed I noticed that the two dogs were lying
unusually quiet by my side. I at first attributed this drowsiness to
their large meal during the night, but I soon discovered that it arose
from a different cause; the faithful animals had not escaped unhurt from
their late combat, but had received several deep and painful wounds,
especially about the neck. The dogs began to lick each other on the
places which they could not reach with their own tongues, and my wife
carefully dressed the wounds with butter, from which she had extracted
the salt by washing.

A sudden thought now struck Ernest, and he wisely remarked, that if we
were to make spiked collars for the dogs, they would in future escape
such dangerous wounds. "Oh, yes," exclaimed Jack, "and I will make them;
may I not, father?"

"Try, by all means, my little fellow," said I, "and persuade your mother
to assist you; and now, Fritz," I continued, "we must be starting, for
you and I are to make a trip to the wreck." I begged the party who were
to remain on shore to keep together as much as possible, and having
arranged a set of signals with my wife, that we might exchange
communications, asked a blessing on our enterprise. I erected a signal
post, and, while Fritz was making preparations for our departure,
hoisted a strip of sailcloth as a flag; this flag was to remain hoisted
so long as all was well on shore, but should our return be desired,
three shots were to be fired and the flag lowered.

All was now ready, and warning my wife that we might find it necessary
to remain all night on the vessel, we tenderly bade adieu and embarked.
Except our guns and ammunition, we were taking nothing, that we might
leave as much space as possible for the stowage of a large cargo. Fritz,
however, had resolved to bring his little monkey, that he might obtain
milk for it as soon as possible. We had not got far from the shore, when
I perceived that a current from the river set in directly for the
vessel, and though my nautical knowledge was not great, I succeeded in
steering the boat into the favorable stream, which carried us nearly
three-fourths of our passage with little or no trouble to ourselves;
then, by dint of hard pulling, we accomplished the whole distance, and
entering through the breach, gladly made fast our boat and stepped on
board. Our first care was to see the animals, who greeted us with
joy--lowing, bellowing, and bleating as we approached; not that the poor
beasts were hungry, for they were all still well supplied with food, but
they were apparently pleased by the mere sight of human beings. Fritz
then placed his monkey by one of the goats, and the little animal
immediately sucked the milk with evident relish, chattering and grinning
all the while; the monkey provided for, we refreshed ourselves with
some wine and biscuits. "Now," said I, "we have plenty to do; where
shall we begin?"

"Let us fix a mast and sail to our boat," answered Fritz; "for the
current which brought us out will not take us back, whereas the fresh
breeze we met would help us immensely had we but a sail."

"Capital thought," I replied; "let us set to work at once."

I chose a stout spar to serve as a mast, and having made a hole in a
plank nailed across one of the tubs, we, with the help of a rope and a
couple of blocks, stepped it and secured it with stays. We then
discovered a lugsail, which had belonged to one of the ships' boats;
this we hoisted; and our craft was ready to sail. Fritz begged me to
decorate the masthead with a red streamer, to give our vessel a more
finished appearance. Smiling at this childish but natural vanity, I
complied with his request. I then contrived a rudder, that I might be
able to steer the boat; for though I knew that an oar would serve the
purpose, it was cumbrous and inconvenient. While I was thus employed,
Fritz examined the shore with his glass, and soon announced that the
flag was flying and all was well.

So much time had now slipped away that we found we could not return that
night, as I had wished. We signaled our intention of remaining on board,
and then spent the rest of our time in taking out the stones we had
placed in the boat for ballast, and stowed in their place heavy articles
of value to us. The ship had sailed for the purpose of supplying a young
colony, she had therefore on board every conceivable article we could
desire in our present situation; our only difficulty, indeed, was to
make a wise selection. A large quantity of powder and shot we first
secured, and as Fritz considered that we could not have too many
weapons, we added three excellent guns, and a whole armful of swords,
daggers, and knives. We remembered that knives and forks were
necessary, we therefore laid in a large stock of them, and kitchen
utensils of all sorts. Exploring the captain's cabin, we discovered a
service of silver plate and a cellaret of good old wine; we then went
over the stores, and supplied ourselves with potted meats, portable
soups, Westphalian hams, sausages, a bag of maize and wheat, and a
quantity of other seeds and vegetables. I then added a barrel of sulphur
for matches, and as much cordage as I could find. All this--with nails,
tools, and agricultural implements--completed our cargo, and sank our
boat so low that I should have been obliged to lighten her had not the
sea been calm.

Night drew on, and a large fire, lighted by those on shore, showed us
that all was well. We replied by hoisting four ship's lanterns, and two
shots announced to us that our signal was perceived; then, with a
heartfelt prayer for the safety of our dear ones on shore, we retired to
our boat, and Fritz, at all events, was soon sound asleep. For a while I
could not sleep; the thought of my wife and children--alone and
unprotected, save by the great dogs--disturbed my rest.

The night at length passed away. At daybreak Fritz and I arose and went
on deck. I brought the telescope to bear upon the shore, and with
pleasure saw the flag still waving in the morning breeze; while I kept
the glass directed to the land, I saw the door of the tent open, and my
wife appear and look steadfastly toward us.

I at once hoisted a white flag, and in reply the flag on shore was
thrice dipped. Oh, what a weight seemed lifted from my heart as I saw
the signal!

"Fritz," I said, "I am not now in such haste to get back, and begin to
feel compassion for all these poor beasts. I wish we could devise some
means for getting them on shore."

"We might make a raft," suggested Fritz, "and take off one or two at a
time."

"True," I replied; "it is easy enough to say, 'make a raft,' but to do
it is quite another thing."

"Well," said Fritz, "I can think of nothing else, unless indeed we make
them such swimming belts as you made for the children."

"Really, my boy, that idea is worth having. I am not joking, indeed," I
continued, as I saw him smile; "we may get every one of the animals
ashore in that way."

So saying, I caught a fine sheep, and proceeded to put our plan into
execution. I first fastened a broad piece of linen round its belly, and
to this attached some corks and empty tins; then, with Fritz's help, I
flung the animal into the sea--it sank, but a moment afterward rose and
floated famously.

"Hurrah!" exclaimed Fritz, "we will treat them all like that." We then
rapidly caught the other animals and provided them, one after the other,
with a similar contrivance. The cow and ass gave us more trouble than
did the others, as for them we required something more buoyant than the
mere cork; we at last found some empty casks and fastened two to each
animal by thongs passed under its belly. This done, the whole herd were
ready to start, and we brought the ass to one of the ports to be the
first to be launched. After some maneuvering we got him in a convenient
position, and then a sudden heave sent him plunging into the sea. He
sank, and then, buoyed up by the casks, emerged head and back from the
water. The cow, sheep, and goats followed him one after the other, and
then the sow alone remained. She seemed, however, determined not to
leave the ship; she kicked, struggled, and squealed so violently, that I
really thought we should be obliged to abandon her; at length, after
much trouble, we succeeded in sending her out of the port after the
others, and when once in the water, such was the old lady's energy that
she quickly distanced them, and was the first to reach the shore.

We had fastened to the horns or neck of each animal a cord with a float
attached to the end, and now embarking, we gathered up these floats, set
sail, and steered for shore, drawing our herd after us.

Delighted with the successful accomplishment of our task, we got out
some biscuits and enjoyed a midday meal; then, while Fritz amused
himself with his monkey, I took up my glass and tried to make out how
our dear ones on shore were employing themselves. As I was thus engaged,
a sudden shout from Fritz surprised me. I glanced up; there stood Fritz
with his gun to his shoulder, pointing it at a huge shark; the monster
was making for one of the finest sheep; he turned on his side to seize
his prey; as the white of his belly appeared Fritz fired. The shot took
effect, and our enemy disappeared, leaving a trace of blood on the calm
water.

"Well done, my boy," I cried, "you will become a crack shot one of these
days; but I trust you will not often have such dangerous game to shoot."
Fritz's eyes sparkled at his success and my praise, and reloading his
gun carefully watched the water. But the shark did not again appear,
and, borne onward by the breeze, we quickly neared the shore. Steering
the boat to a convenient landing place, I cast off the ropes which
secured the animals, and let them get ashore as best they might.

There was no sign of my wife or children when we stepped on land, but a
few moments afterward they appeared, and with a shout of joy ran toward
us. We were thankful to be once more united, and after asking and
replying to a few preliminary questions, proceeded to release our herd
from their swimming belts, which, though so useful in the water, were
exceedingly inconvenient on shore. My wife was astonished at the
apparatus.

"How clever you are!" said she.

"I am not the inventor," I replied; "the honor is due to Fritz. He not
only thought of this plan for bringing off the animals, but saved one,
at least, of them from a most fearful death." And I then told them how
bravely he had encountered the shark.

My wife was delighted with her son's success, but declared that she
would dread our trips to the vessel more than ever, knowing that such
savage fish inhabited the waters.

Fritz, Ernest, and I began the work of unloading our craft, while Jack,
seeing that the poor donkey was still encumbered with his swimming belt,
tried to free him from it. But the donkey would not stand quiet, and the
child's fingers were not strong enough to loosen the cordage; finally,
therefore, he scrambled upon the animal's back, and urging him on with
hand and foot, trotted toward us.

"Come, my boy," I said, "no one must be idle here, even for a moment;
you will have riding practice enough hereafter; dismount and come and
help us."

Jack was soon on his feet. "But I have not been idle all day," he said;
"look here!" and he pointed to a belt round his waist. It was a broad
belt of yellow hair, in which he had stuck a couple of pistols and a
knife. "And see," he added, "what I have made for the dogs. Here, Juno!
Turk!" the dogs came bounding up at his call, and I saw that they were
each supplied with a collar of the same skin, in which were fastened
nails, which bristled round their necks in a most formidable manner.

"Capital, capital! my boy," said I, "but where did you get your
materials, and who helped you?"

"Except in cutting the skin," said my wife, "he had no assistance, and
as for the materials, Fritz's jackal supplied us with the skin, and the
needles and thread came out of my wonderful bag. You little think how
many useful things may be had from that same bag; it is woman's duty and
nature, you know, to see after trifles."

Fritz evidently did not approve of the use to which his jackal's hide
had been devoted, and holding his nose, begged his little brother to
keep at a distance. "Really, Jack," he said, "you should have cured the
hide before you used it; the smell is disgusting; don't come near me."

"It is not the hide that smells at all," retorted Jack, "it is your
nasty jackal itself, that you left in the sun."

"Now, boys," said I, "no quarreling here; do you, Jack, help your
brother to drag the carcass to the sea, and if your belt smells after
that you must take it off and dry it better."

The jackal was dragged off, and we then finished our work of unloading
our boat. When this was accomplished we started for our tent, and
finding no preparation for supper, I said, "Fritz, let us have a
Westphalian ham."

"Ernest," said my wife, smiling, "let us see if we cannot conjure up
some eggs."

Fritz got out a splendid ham and carried it to his mother triumphantly,
while Ernest set before me a dozen white balls with parchment-like
coverings.

"Turtles' eggs!" said I. "Well done, Ernest! where did you get them?"

"That," replied my wife, "shall be told in due course when we relate our
adventures; now we will see what they will do toward making a supper for
you; with these and your ham I do not think we shall starve."

Leaving my wife to prepare supper, we returned to the shore and brought
up what of the cargo we had left there; then, having collected our herd
of animals, we returned to the tent.

The meal which awaited us was as unlike the first supper we had there
enjoyed as possible. My wife had improvised a table of a board laid on
two casks; on this was spread a white damask tablecloth, on which were
placed knives, forks, spoons, and plates for each person. A tureen of
good soup first appeared, followed by a capital omelette, then slices of
the ham; and finally some Dutch cheese, butter, and biscuits, with a
bottle of the captain's Canary wine, completed the repast.

While we thus regaled ourselves, I related to my wife our adventures,
and then begged she would remember her promise and tell me all that had
happened in my absence.




CHAPTER III.

 The mother relates her adventures--Proposes that we should build a
     nest--How Jack treated the jackal skin--How the boys were
     surprised by a bustard--How they found the mangrove tree--How the
     dogs caught the crabs--We discuss the possibility of making a
     house in the tree--To bed once more--We start for the wreck--The
     shark again--Return to land--Franz's crawfish--Bridge
     building--We pack up--A family removing in patriarchal style--A
     prickly enemy--Jack shoots it--We reach our new home--Fritz rids
     our poultry of an enemy--Little Franz finds the figs--Dinner--We
     prepare materials for our nest--Flamingoes--Roast and tame--The
     use of trigonometry--A cord carried over the bough--The rope
     ladder made--We mount our tree--Sleep under the roots--The
     building of the nest--Retire to roost for the first time.


"I will spare you a description," said my wife, "of our first day's
occupations; truth to tell, I spent the time chiefly in anxious thought
and watching your progress and signals. I rose very early this morning,
and with the utmost joy perceiving your signal that all was right,
hastened to reply to it, and then, while my sons yet slumbered, I sat
down and began to consider how our position could be improved. 'For it
is perfectly impossible,' said I to myself, 'to live much longer where
we are now. The sun beats burningly the lifelong day on this bare, rocky
spot, our only shelter is this poor tent, beneath the canvas of which
the heat is even more oppressive than on the open shore. Why should not
I and my little boys exert ourselves as well as my husband and Fritz?
Why should not we too try to accomplish something useful? If we could
but exchange this melancholy and unwholesome abode for a pleasant, shady
dwelling place, we should all improve in health and spirits. Among those
delightful woods and groves where Fritz and his father saw so many
charming things, I feel sure there must be some little retreat where we
could establish ourselves comfortably; there must be, and I will find
it.'

"By this time the boys were up, and I observed Jack very quietly and
busily occupied with his knife about the spot where Fritz's jackal lay.
Watching his proceedings, I saw that he had cut two long, narrow strips
of the animal's skin, which he cleaned and scraped very carefully, and
then taking a handful of great nails out of his pocket, he stuck them
through the skin, points outward, after which he cut strips of canvas
sailcloth, twice as broad as the thongs, doubled them, and laid them on
the raw side of the skin, so as to cover the broad, flat nail heads. At
this point of the performance, Master Jack came to me with the agreeable
request that I would kindly stitch the canvas and (moist) skin together
for him. I gave him needles and thread, but could not think of depriving
him of the pleasure of doing it himself.

"However, when I saw how good-humoredly he persevered in the work with
his awkward, unskilled fingers, I took pity on him, and conquering the
disgust I felt, finished lining the skin dog-collars he had so
ingeniously contrived. After this, I was called upon to complete in the
same way a fine belt of skin he had made for himself. I advised him to
think of some means by which the skin might be kept from shrinking.

"Ernest, although rather treating Jack's manufacture with ridicule,
proposed a sensible enough plan, which Jack forthwith put into
execution. He nailed the skin, stretched flat, on a board, and put it in
the sun to dry.

"My scheme of a journey was agreed to joyously by my young companions.
Preparations were instantly set on foot; weapons and provisions
provided; the two elder boys carrying guns, while they gave me charge of
the water flask, and a small hatchet.

"Leaving everything in as good order as we could at the tent, we
proceeded toward the stream, accompanied by the dogs. Turk, who had
accompanied you on your first expedition, seemed immediately to
understand that we wished to pursue the same route, and proudly led the
way.

"As I looked at my two young sons, each with his gun, and considered how
much the safety of the party depended on these little fellows, I felt
grateful to you, dear husband, for having acquainted them in childhood
with the use of firearms.

"Filling our water-jar, we crossed the stream, and went on to the
height, from whence, as you described, a lovely prospect is obtained, at
the sight of which a pleasurable sensation of buoyant hope, to which I
had long been a stranger, awoke within my breast.

"A pretty little wood in the distance attracted my notice particularly,
and thither we directed our course. But soon finding it impossible to
force our way through the tall, strong grass, which grew in dense
luxuriance higher than the children's heads, we turned toward the open
beach on our left, and following it, we reached a point much nearer the
little woods, when, quitting the strand, we made toward it.

"We had not entirely escaped the tall grass, however, and with the
utmost fatigue and difficulty, were struggling through the reeds, when
suddenly a great rushing noise terrified us all dreadfully. A very large
and powerful bird sprang upward on the wing. Both boys attempted to take
aim, but the bird was far away before they were ready to fire.

"'Oh, dear, what a pity!' exclaimed Ernest; 'now if I had only had my
light gun, and if the bird had not flown quite so fast, I should have
brought him down directly!'

"'Oh yes,' said I, 'no doubt you would be a capital sportsman, if only
your game would always give you time to make ready comfortably.'

"'But I had no notion that anything was going to fly up just at our feet
like that,' cried he.

"'A good shot,' I replied, 'must be prepared for surprises; neither
wild birds nor wild beasts will send you notice that they are about to
fly or to run.'

"'What sort of bird can it have been?' inquired Jack.

"'Oh, it certainly must have been an eagle,' answered little Franz, 'it
was so very big!'

"'Just as if every big bird must be an eagle!' replied Ernest, in a tone
of derision.

"'Let's see where he was sitting, at all events!' said I.

"Jack sprang toward the place, and instantly a second bird, rather
larger than the first, rushed upward into the air, with a most startling
noise.

"The boys stood staring upward, perfectly stupefied, while I laughed
heartily, saying, 'Well, you are first-rate sportsmen, to be sure! You
certainly will keep my larder famously well supplied!'

"At this, Ernest colored up, and looked inclined to cry, while Jack put
on a comical face, pulled off his cap, and with a low bow, called after
the fugitive:

"'Adieu for the present, sir! I live in hopes of another meeting!'

"On searching the ground carefully, we discovered a rude sort of nest
made untidily of dry grass. It was empty, although we perceived broken
egg shells at no great distance, and concluded that the young brood had
escaped among the grass, which, in fact, we could see was waving at a
little distance, as the little birds ran through it.

"'Now look here, Franz,' said Ernest, presently, 'just consider how this
bird could by any possibility have been an eagle. Eagles never build on
the ground, neither can their young leave the nest and run as soon as
they are out of the egg. That is a peculiarity of the gallinaceous tribe
of birds alone, to which then these must belong. The species, I think,
is indicated by the white belly and dull red color of the wing coverts
which I observed in these specimens, and I believe them to be bustards,
especially as I noticed in the largest the fine mustache-like feathers
over the beak, peculiar to the great bustard.'

"'My dear boy!' I said, 'your eyes were actively employed, I must
confess, if your fingers were unready with the gun. And after all, it is
just as well, perhaps, that we have not thrown the bustard's family into
mourning.'

"Thus chatting, we at length approached my pretty wood. Numbers of birds
fluttered and sang among the high branches, but I did not encourage the
boys in their wish to try to shoot any of the happy little creatures. We
were lost in admiration of the trees in this grove, and I cannot
describe to you how wonderful they are, nor can you form the least idea
of their enormous size without seeing them yourself. What we had been
calling a wood proved to be a group of about a dozen trees only, and,
what was strange, the roots sustained the massive trunks exalted in the
air, forming strong arches, and props and stays all around each
individual stem, which was firmly rooted in the center.

"I gave Jack some twine, and scrambling up one of the curious open-air
roots, he succeeded in measuring round the trunk itself, and made it out
to be about eighteen yards. I saw no sort of fruit, but the foliage is
thick and abundant, throwing delicious shade on the ground beneath,
which is carpeted with soft green herbage, and entirely free from
thorns, briars, or bushes of any kind. It is the most charming resting
place that ever was seen, and I and the boys enjoyed our midday meal
immensely in this glorious palace of the woods, so grateful to our
senses after the glare and heat of our journey thither. The dogs joined
us after a while. They had lingered behind on the seashore, and I was
surprised to see them lie down and go comfortably to sleep without
begging for food, as they do usually when we eat.

"The longer we remained in this enchanting place, the more did it charm
my fancy; and if we could but manage to live in some sort of dwelling up
among the branches of those grand, noble trees, I should feel perfectly
safe and happy. It seemed to me absurd to suppose we should ever find
another place half so lovely, so I determined to search no further, but
return to the beach and see if anything from the wreck had been cast up
by the waves, which we could carry away with us.

"Before starting, Jack persuaded me to sit quietly a little longer, and
finish making his belt and the spike-collars for the dogs, for you must
know that the child had actually been carrying the board on which these
were stretched all this time, so that they should get the full benefit
of the sun. As they were now quite dry, I completed them easily, and
Jack girded on the belt with great pride, placing his pistols in it, and
marching about in the most self-important style, while Ernest fitted the
collars on the two dogs.

"On reaching the shore, we found it strewed with many articles,
doubtless of value, but all too heavy for us to lift. We rolled some
casks, however, beyond high-water mark, and dragged a chest or two also
higher on the beach; and, while doing so, observed that our dogs were
busy among the rocks. They were carefully watching the crevices and
pools, and every now and then would pounce downward and seize something
which they swallowed with apparent relish.

"'They are eating crabs,' said Jack. 'No wonder they have not seemed
hungry lately.'

"And, sure enough, they were catching the little green crabs with which
the water abounded. These, however, did not apparently entirely satisfy
them.

"Some time afterward, just as we were about to turn inland toward the
ford, we noticed that Juno was scraping in the sand, and turning up some
round substances, which she hastily devoured. Ernest went to see what
these were, and reported in his calm way that the dog had found turtles'
eggs.

"'Oh,' cried I, 'then let us by all means share in the booty!' Mrs.
Juno, however, did not at all approve of this, and it was with some
difficulty that we drove her aside while we gathered a couple of dozen
of eggs, stowing them in our provision bags.

"While thus employed, we caught sight of a sail which appeared to be
merrily approaching the shore beyond the cliffs. Ernest declared it must
be our raft. Little Franz, always having the fear of savages before his
eyes, began to look frightened, and for a moment I myself was doubtful
what to think.

"However, we hastened to the stream; and crossing it by the
stepping-stones, came in sight of the landing place, where we joyfully
met you.

"Now I hope you approve of the proceedings of your exploring party, and
that to-morrow you will do me the favor of packing everything up, and
taking us away to live among my splendid trees."

"Aye, little wife," said I; "so that is your idea of comfort and
security, is it? A tree, I do not know how many feet high, on which we
are to perch and roost like the birds? If we had but wings or a balloon,
it would, I own, be a capital plan."

"Laugh as much as you like," returned my wife, "my idea is not so absurd
as you make it out. We should be safe up there from jackals' visits
during the night. And I know I have seen at home, in Switzerland, quite
a pretty arbor, with a strong floor, up among the branches of a lime
tree, and we went up a staircase to reach it. Why could not we contrive
a place like that, where we could sleep safely at night?"

"I will consider the idea seriously, my wife," said I; "perhaps
something may come of it, after all! Meantime, as we have finished our
supper, and night is coming on, let us commend ourselves to Almighty
protection and retire to rest."

Beneath the shelter of our tent, we all slept soundly, like marmots,
until break of day; when, my wife and I awaking, we took counsel
together as to future proceedings.

Referring to the task she had the previous evening proposed for me, I
remarked that to undertake it would involve so many difficulties that
it was highly necessary to look closely into the subject.

"In the first place," said I, "I am unwilling hastily to quit a spot to
which I am convinced we were providentially led as a landing place. See
how secure it is; guarded on all sides by these high cliffs, and
accessible only by the narrow passage to the ford, while from this point
it is so easy to reach the ship that the whole of the valuable cargo is
at our disposal. Suppose we decide to stay patiently here for the
present--until, at least, we have brought on shore everything we
possibly can?"

"I agree with you to a certain extent, dear husband," replied she; "but
you do not know how dreadfully the heat among the rocks tries me. It is
almost intolerable to us who remain here all day, while you and Fritz
are away out at sea or wandering among the shady woods, where cool
fruits refresh, and fair scenes delight you. As to the contents of the
ship, an immense deal has been cast ashore, and I would much rather give
up all the remainder, and be spared the painful anxiety it gives me when
you even talk of venturing again on the faithless deep."

"Well, I must admit that there is much right on your side," I continued;
"suppose we were to remove to your chosen abode, and make this rocky
fastness our magazine and place of retreat in case of danger. I could
easily render it more secure, by blasting portions of the rock with
gunpowder. But a bridge must be constructed in the first place, to
enable us to cross bag and baggage."

"Oh, I shall be parched to death before we can leave this place if a
bridge has to be made," cried my wife impatiently. "Why not just take
our things on our backs and wade across as we have done already? The cow
and the donkey could carry a great deal."

"That they will have to do, in whatever fashion we make the move," said
I; "but bags and baskets we must have, to put things in, and if you will
turn your attention to providing those, I will set about the bridge at
once. It will be wanted not once but continually; the stream will
probably swell and be impassable at times, and even as it is, an
accident might happen."

"Well! well!" cried my wife, "I submit to your opinion; only pray set
about it without delay, for I long to be off. It is an excellent idea to
make a strong place among the cliffs here; the gunpowder especially, I
shall be delighted to see stored here when we go away, for it is
frightfully dangerous to keep so much as we have close to our
habitation."

"Gunpowder is indeed the most dangerous and at the same time the most
useful thing we have," said I, "and for both these reasons we must be
especially careful of it. In time I will hollow out a place in the rock
where we can store it safe from either fire or damp."

By this morning's consultation we had settled the weighty question of
our change of abode, and also chalked out work for the day.

When the children heard of the proposed move their joy was boundless;
they began at once to talk of it as our "journey to the Promised Land,"
and only regretted that time must be "wasted," as they said, in
bridge-building before it could be undertaken.

Every one being impatient for breakfast that work might be begun at
once, the cow and goats were milked, and, having enjoyed a comfortable
meal of biscuit boiled in milk, I prepared to start for the wreck, in
order to obtain planks for the proposed bridge. Ernest, as well as
Fritz, accompanied me, and we were soon within the influence of the
current, and were carried swiftly out to sea. Fritz was steering, and we
had no sooner passed beyond the islet at the entrance of the bay, so as
to come in sight of its seaward beach, than we were astonished to see a
countless multitude of sea birds, gulls, and others, which rose like a
cloud into the air, disturbed by our approach, and deafened us by their
wild and screaming cries. Fritz caught up his gun, and would have sent a
shot among them had I permitted it. I was curious to find out what could
be the attraction for all this swarm of feathered fowl; and, availing
myself of a fresh breeze from the sea, I set the sail and directed our
course toward the island.

The swelling sail and flying pennant charmed Ernest, while Fritz bent
his keen eyes eagerly toward the sandy shore, where the flocks of birds
were again settling.

Presently he shouted: "Aha! now I see what they are after! They have got
a huge monster of a fish there and a proper feast they are making! Let's
have a nearer look at it, father!"

We could not take our boat very close in, but we managed to effect a
landing at a short distance from the festive scene; and, securing the
raft by casting a rope round a large stone, we cautiously drew near the
object of interest.

It proved to be a monstrous fish on whose flesh these multitudes of
birds were ravenously feeding; and it was extraordinary to watch the
ferocity, the envy, the gluttony, and all manner of evil passions,
exhibited among the guests at this banquet.

"There was nothing on this sandy beach when we passed yesterday, I am
certain, father," said Fritz. "It seems strange to see this creature
stranded here."

"Why, Fritz!" cried Ernest, "it must be the shark! your shark, you know!
I believe I can see where you hit him in the head."

"You are right, I do believe, Ernest," said I, "though I think your
imagination only can distinguish the gunshot wound among all the pecking
and tearing of the voracious birds there. Just look, boys, at those
terrific jaws, beneath the strangely projecting snout. See the rows upon
rows of murderous teeth, and thank God we were delivered from them! Let
us try if we can induce these greedy birds to spare us a bit of the
shark's skin; it is extremely rough, and when dry may be used like a
file."

Ernest drew the ramrod from his gun, and charged so manfully into the
crowd, that striking right and left he speedily killed several, while
most of the others took to flight. Fritz detached some broad strips of
skin with his knife, and we returned toward the boat.

Perceiving with satisfaction that the shore was strewn with just the
sort of boards and planks I wanted, I lost no time in collecting them;
and, forming a raft to tow after us, we were in a short time able to
direct our course homeward, without visiting the wreck at all. As we
sailed along, extremely well pleased with our good fortune, Fritz, by my
direction, nailed part of the shark's skin flat on boards to dry in the
sun, and the rest on the rounded mast.

"Will that be a good plan, father?" inquired he, "it will be quite bent
and crooked when it hardens."

"That is just what I want it to be," said I, "we may happen to find it
useful in that form as well as flat. It would be beautiful shagreen if
we could smooth and polish it."

"I thought," remarked Ernest, "that shagreen was made from asses' hide."

"And you thought rightly," said I. "The best shagreen is prepared in
Turkey, Persia, and Tartary, from the skins of horses and asses. In
these skins, the roughness is produced artificially; while the skin is
newly flayed and still soft, hard grains of corn are spread on the under
surface, and pressed into it as it dries. These grains are afterward
removed, and the roughness imparted to the appearance of the skin
remains indelibly; shagreen is useful in polishing joiners' work, and it
is made in France from the rough skin of a hideous creature called the
angel-fish."

"Angel-fish!" exclaimed Fritz; "what a name to give to anything
'hideous,' father!"

"There are bad angels as well as good ones," observed Ernest, in his
dry, quiet way; "it is better to leave people to see for themselves
which is meant."

By this time we were close in shore; and, lowering the sail, we soon
had our craft, with the raft in tow, safely moored to the bank.

No one was in sight, not a sound to be heard, so with united voice we
gave a loud cheery halloo, which after a while was answered in shrill
tones, and the mother, with her two boys, came running from behind the
rocks between us and the stream, each carrying a small bundle in a
handkerchief, while little Franz held aloft a landing net.

Our return so soon was quite unexpected, and they anxiously inquired the
reason, which we soon explained; and then the mysterious bundles were
opened, and a great number of fine crawfish displayed; whose efforts to
escape by scuttling away in every direction, directly they were placed
in a heap on the ground, caused immense fun and laughter as the boys
pursued and brought them back, only to find others scrambling off in a
dozen different ways.

"Now, father, have we not done well to-day!" cried Jack, "did you ever
see such splendid crawfish? Oh, there were thousands of them, and I am
sure we have got two hundred here at least. Just look at their claws!"

"No doubt you were the discoverer of these fine crabs, eh, Jack?" said
I.

"No! fancy young Franz being the lucky man!" answered he. "He and I went
toward the stream while mother was busy, just to look for a good place
for the bridge. Franz was picking up pebbles and alabasters, some
because they were so pretty, some to strike sparks with in the dark, and
some, he insisted, were 'gold.' 'Jack! Jack!' cried he presently, 'come
and see the crabs on Fritz's jackal!' You know we threw it away there,
and to be sure it was swarming with these creatures. Are you glad we
have found them, father? Will they be good to eat?"

"Very excellent, my boy, and we may be thankful that food for our wants
is thus provided day by day."

When each party had related the day's adventures, and while the mother
was cooking the crawfish, we went to bring our store of planks to land.
Even this apparently simple operation required thought, and I had to
improvise rope-harness for the cow and the donkey, by which we could
make them drag each board separately from the water's edge to the margin
of the stream.

Jack showed me where he thought the bridge should be, and I certainly
saw no better place, as the banks were at that point tolerably close to
one another, steep, and of about equal height.

"How shall we find out if our planks are long enough to reach across?"
said I. "A surveyor's table would be useful now."

"What do you say to a ball of string, father?" said Ernest. "Tie one end
to a stone, throw it across, then draw it back and measure the line!"

Adopting my son's idea, we speedily ascertained the distance across to
be eighteen feet. Then allowing three feet more at each side, I
calculated twenty-four feet as the necessary length of the boards.

The question as to how the planks were to be laid across was a difficult
one. We resolved to discuss it during dinner, to which we were now
summoned. And my wife, as we sat resting, displayed to me her
needlework. With hard labor she had made two large canvas bags for the
ass to carry. Having no suitable needle, she had been obliged to bore
the hole for each stitch with a nail, and gained great praise for her
ingenuity and patience. Dinner was quickly dispatched, as we were all
eager to continue our engineering work. A scheme had occurred to me for
conveying one end of a plank across the water, and I set about it in
this way. There fortunately were one or two trees close to the stream on
either side. I attached a rope pretty near one end of a beam, and slung
it loosely to the tree beside us; then, fastening a long rope to the
other end, I crossed with it by means of broken rocks and stones, and
having a pulley and block, I soon arranged the rope on a strong limb of
the opposite tree, again returning with the end to our own side.

Now putting my idea to the proof, I brought the ass and the cow, and
fastening this rope to the harness I had previously contrived for them,
I drove them steadily away from the bank. To my great satisfaction, and
the surprise and delight of the boys, the end of the plank which had
been laid alongside the stream began gently to move, rose higher,
turned, and soon projecting over the water, continued to advance, until,
having described the segment of a circle, it reached the opposite bank;
I stopped my team, the plank rested on the ground, the bridge was made!
So at least thought Fritz and Jack, who in a moment were lightly running
across the narrow way, shouting joyfully as they sprang to the other
side.

Our way was now comparatively easy. A second and third plank were laid
beside the first; and when these were carefully secured at each end to
the ground and to the trees, we very quickly laid short boards side by
side across the beams, the boys nailing them lightly down as I sawed
them in lengths; and when this was done, our bridge was pronounced
complete. Nothing could exceed the excitement of the children. They
danced to and fro on the wonderful structure, singing, shouting, and
cutting the wildest capers.

I must confess I heartily sympathized with their triumphant feelings.

Now that the work was done, we began to feel how much we were fatigued,
and gladly returned to our tent for refreshment and repose.

Next morning, while we breakfasted, I made a little speech to my sons on
the subject of the important move we were about to make, wishing to
impress them with a sense of the absolute necessity of great caution.

"Remember," said I, "that, although you all begin to feel very much at
your ease here, we are yet complete strangers to a variety of dangers
which may surprise us unawares. I charge you, therefore, to maintain
good order, and keep together on the march. No darting off into
by-ways, Jack. No lingering behind to philosophize, Ernest. And now all
hands to work."

The greatest activity instantly prevailed in our camp. Some collected
provisions, others packed kitchen utensils, tools, ropes, and hammocks,
arranging them as burdens for the cow and ass. My wife pleaded for a
seat on the latter for her little Franz, and assuring me likewise that
she could not possibly leave the poultry, even for a night, nor exist an
hour without her magic bag, I agreed to do my best to please her,
without downright cruelty to the animals.

Away ran the children to catch the cocks and hens. Great chasing,
fluttering, and cackling ensued; but with no success whatever, until the
mother recalled her panting sons; and scattering some handfuls of grain
within the open tent, soon decoyed the fowls and pigeons into the
enclosure; where, when the curtain was dropped, they were easily caught,
tied together, and placed on the cow. This amiable and phlegmatic animal
had stood calmly chewing the cud, while package after package was
disposed on her broad back, nor did she now object even to this noisy
addition to her load. I placed a couple of half-hoops over all; and,
spreading sailcloth on them, put the fowls in darkness, and they rapidly
became quiet; and the cow, with the appearance of having a small wagon
on her back, was ready to start.

Franz was firmly seated on the ass, amidst bags and bundles of all sorts
and sizes; they rose about him like cushions and pillows, and his curly
head rested on the precious magic bag, which surmounted all the rest.

Having filled the tent with the things we left behind, closing it
carefully, and ranging chests and casks around it, we were finally ready
to be off, each well equipped and in the highest spirits.

Fritz and his mother led the van.

Franz (the young cavalier) and the sober-minded cow followed them
closely.

Jack conducted the goats; one of these had also a rider, for Knips,[A]
the monkey, was seated on his foster-mother, whose patience was sorely
tried by his restlessness and playful tricks.

[A] German, Knipps, a mannikin.

The sheep were under Ernest's care, and I brought up the rear of this
patriarchal band, while the dogs kept constantly running backward and
forward in the character of aides-de-camp.

"We seem delightfully like those simple and pastoral tribes I have read
of," said Ernest, as we proceeded, "whose whole lives are spent in
shifting from place to place, without any wish to settle."

"Yes," said I. "Among the Arabs, Tartars, and some other Eastern
nations, this mode of life is natural. They for that reason are called
Nomads.

"These tribes are amply provided with camels and horses, and effect
their journeys more quickly and conveniently than we are likely to do
with these deliberate quadrupeds of ours. Whatever you young folks may
think, I suspect your mother and I will be quite satisfied with one such
undertaking. At least I hope she will be contented with the nest she
intends me to build for her up in her wonderful trees."

With honest pride I introduced my wife to my bridge, and after receiving
from her what I considered well-merited praise for my skill in its
construction, we passed over it in grand procession, re-enforced
unexpectedly on the opposite side by the arrival of our cross-grained
old sow. The perverse creature had obstinately resisted our attempts to
bring her with us, but finding herself deserted, had followed of her own
accord, testifying in the most unmistakable manner, by angry grunts and
squeals, her entire disapproval of our proceedings.

I soon found we must, as before, turn down to the sea beach, for not
only did the rank grass impede our progress, but it also tempted the
animals to break away from us, and, but for our watchful dogs, we might
have lost several of them.

On the firm open sands we were making good way, when, to my annoyance,
both our dogs suddenly left us, and springing into the thick cover to
our right, commenced a furious barking, following by howling as if in
fear and violent pain.

Not for a moment doubting that some dangerous animal was at hand, I
hastened to the spot, remarking as I went the characteristic behavior of
my three sons.

Fritz cocked his gun and advanced boldly, but with caution.

Ernest looked disconcerted, and drew back, but got ready to fire.

While Jack hurried after Fritz without so much as unslinging his gun
from his shoulders.

Before I could come up with them, I heard Jack shouting excitedly,

"Father! father! come quickly! a huge porcupine! a most enormous
porcupine!"

Sure enough, the dogs were rushing round and round a porcupine, and
having attempted to seize it, were already severely wounded by its
quills. Each time they came near, the creature, with a rattling noise,
bristled up its spines.

Somewhat to my amusement, while we were looking at the curious defence
this creature was making, little Jack stepped close up to it, with a
pocket pistol in his hand, and shot it dead, making sure of it by a
couple of heavy raps on the head, and then giving way to a burst of
boyish exultation, he called upon us to help to convey his prize to his
mother. This it was by no means easy to do. Sundry attempts resulted in
bloody fingers, till Jack, taking his pocket handkerchief, and fastening
one corner round its neck, ran off, dragging it after him to where his
mother awaited us.

"Hullo, mother! here's a jolly beast, isn't it? I shot it, and it's good
to eat! Father says so! I only wish you had seen how it terrified the
dogs, and heard the rattling and rustling of its spines. Oh, it is a
fearful creature!"

Ernest, examining it carefully, pronounced its incisor teeth, its ears
and feet, to resemble those of the human race, and pointed out the
curious crest of stiff hairs on its head and neck.

"I have read of another species," said he, "called the tuft-tailed
porcupine, which must be even more curious looking than this is. It has
short, flat quills, and a scaly tail ending in an extraordinary tuft,
like a bunch of narrow strips of parchment. It cannot be such a
disagreeable enemy to encounter as this fellow."

"Were you not afraid, Jack," asked I, "lest the porcupine should cast
some of his quills like darts at you?"

"Of course not," returned he, "I know well enough that is nothing but a
fable!"

"A fable!" said I; "why, look at your mother! she is drawing five or six
spines out of each of the dogs!"

"Ah, those stuck into them when they so fiercely fell upon it in their
attack. Those are the short quills, and seem very slightly fixed in its
skin. The long quills bent aside when Juno pressed against them."

"You are perfectly right, my boy," said I; "there is no truth in the old
idea of shooting out the spines. But now, shall we leave this prickly
booty of yours, or attempt to take it with us?"

"Oh, please father, let us take it! Why, it is good to eat!"

Smiling at the child's eagerness, and willing to please him, I made a
somewhat awkward bundle of the porcupine, wrapping it in several folds
of cloth, and added it to the donkey's load.

Our party then resumed the march, which, with little interruption, was
continued steadily, until we came in sight of our future place of
residence.

The wonderful appearance of the enormous trees, and the calm beauty of
the spot altogether, fully came up to the enthusiastic description which
had been given me. And my wife gladly heard me say that, if an abode
could be contrived among the branches, it would be the safest and most
charming home in the world.

We hastily unloaded the ass and cow, securing them, as well as the sheep
and goats, by tying their forefeet loosely together. The doves and
poultry were set at liberty, and we sat down to rest among the soft
herbage while we laid our plans for the night.

Fritz soon left us, but presently two shots were fired, and he appeared
holding a fine tiger cat by the hind legs, which, with the intensest
delight, he exhibited to each in turn.

"Well done, Fritz!" cried I. "Our cocks and hens would have had an
unfortunate night of it but for this lucky shot of yours. It is to be
hoped he has left no companion near at hand. You must be on the
lookout."

"How curious it seems," remarked Ernest, "that God should create hurtful
animals like this."

"To our feeble and narrow vision many of the ways of the Infinite and
Eternal Mind are incomprehensible," I replied. "What our limited reason
cannot grasp, let us be content to acknowledge as the workings of
Almighty power and wisdom, and thankfully trust in that 'Rock,' which,
were it not higher than we, would afford no sense of security to the
immortal soul. That animals should prey upon one another is a means of
preserving a due balance in the world of nature, and in many ways these
beasts of prey are also useful to man. What beautiful and warm furs are
procured by hunters just in those countries where no other covering
would defend the inhabitants from the wintery cold!--as, for instance,
the skins of bears, wolverines, and arctic foxes, wild cats, and many
others."

"The skin of the seal, or sea dog, is also valuable," said Ernest.

"It is," I replied, "and in its own element that creature preys on fish
as the dog did on land animals before his race become domesticated by
man. But now, Fritz, tell us how you obtained your prize."

"Observing that something moved among the branches," said he, "I went
softly around the tree with my gun, and making sure the creature was a
wild cat, I fired and brought it down. It was severely wounded, but,
rising in a fury, it attempted to climb the tree, when I, luckily having
a loaded pistol, gave it a quietus. And do tell me, father, what sort of
a cat it is."

"It is a mercy the brute did not fly at your throat instead of
attempting to escape," said I. "It belongs to a fierce and bloodthirsty
race--that of the ocelots or tiger cats, natives of the tropical parts
of America. I should say this was a margay, and it would have proved a
cruel foe, not only of our poultry, but also of our sheep and goats. I
am well pleased that you have rid us of it."

"May I have the beautiful skin, father? And will you tell me what will
be the best use to make of it?"

"I advise you to skin the animal very carefully, and of the handsome
black and yellow tail make a hunting-belt for yourself. The paws--let me
see--why, I fancy the paws might be made famous cases for knife, fork
and spoon, and look well hanging from the belt. The skin of the body you
had better preserve until you find some suitable use for it."

"Oh, father, what a splendid plan!" cried Jack; "do tell me some good
use for my porcupine."

"I think its feet may make cases also; at least, you may try. The
quills, I am sure, may be used for packing needles, and for tipping
arrows, and I should try to make defensive armor for the dogs out of the
rest. They may fall in with foes more dangerous than any we have yet
seen."

"To be sure, father, the very thing!" shouted Jack, in high glee. "I
have seen pictures of boar hunts, in which the dogs were protected by a
sort of leather coat of mail. That will be grand!"

After giving this advice, I got no peace until I had shown my boys how
to act upon it, and in a short time each had his prize fastened up by
the hind legs, and carefully slitting the skin, was stripping it from
the carcass.

Ernest, meanwhile, was fetching large flat stones in order to form a
fireplace, while Franz gathered sticks, as his mother was anxious to
prepare some food.

"What sort of a tree do you suppose this to be, father?" inquired
Ernest, seeing me examining that under which we were encamping. "Is not
the leaf something like the walnut?"

"There is a resemblance, but in my opinion these gigantic trees must be
mangroves or wild figs. I have heard their enormous height described,
and also the peculiarity of the arching roots supporting the main trunk
raised above the soil."

Just then little Franz came up with a large bundle of sticks, and his
mouth full of something he was eating with evident satisfaction.

"Oh, mother!" cried he, "this is so good! So delicious!"

"Greedy little boy!" exclaimed she in a fright. "What have you got
there? Don't swallow it, whatever you do. Very likely it is poisonous!
Spit it all out this minute!" And the anxious mother quickly extracted
from the rosy little mouth the remains of a small fig.

"Where did you find this?" said I.

"There are thousands lying among the grass yonder," replied the little
boy. "They taste very nice. I thought poison was nasty. Do you think
they will hurt me? The pigeons and the hens are gobbling them up with
all their might and main, papa!"

"I think you have no cause for alarm, dear wife," I said. "The trees
seem to be the fig-bearing mangrove of the Antilles. But remember,
Franz, you must never eat anything without first showing it to me, never
mind how good it seems. If birds and monkeys eat a fruit or vegetable,
it is usually safe to believe it wholesome," added I, turning to the
other boys, who, instantly taking the hint, coaxed Franz to give them
the figs he still had in his pocket, and ran to offer them to Knips, who
was closely watching the skinning of the tiger cat and porcupine,
apparently giving his opinion on the subject with much chattering and
gesticulation.

"Here, Knips, allow me to present you with a fig!" cried Jack, holding
one out to the funny little creature.

Knips took it readily, and after turning it about, and sniffing and
smelling it, he popped it into his mouth, with such a droll grimace of
delight and satisfaction that the boys all laughed and clapped their
hands, crying "Bravo, Knips! you know a good thing when you see it,
don't you, old fellow! Hurrah!"

My wife, with her mind set at rest on the question of the figs, now
continued her preparations for dinner.

The flesh of the margay was given to the dogs, but part of the porcupine
was put on the fire to boil, while we reserved the rest for roasting.

I employed myself in contriving needles for my wife's work, by boring
holes at one end of the quills, which I did by means of a red hot nail,
and I soon had a nice packet of various sizes, which pleased her
immensely. I also laid plans for making proper harness for our beasts of
burden, but could not attempt to begin that while so many wants more
pressing demanded attention.

We examined the different trees, and chose one which seemed most suited
to our purpose. The branches spread at a great height above us, and I
made the boys try if it were possible to throw sticks or stones over one
of these, my intention being to construct a rope ladder if we could once
succeed in getting a string across a strong bough.

Finding we could not succeed in that way, I resolved other schemes in my
mind, and meantime went with Jack and Fritz to a small brook close by,
where I showed them how to place the skins to steep and soften in the
water, with stones placed on them to keep them beneath the surface.

When dinner was over, I prepared our night quarters. I first slung our
hammocks from the roots of the tree, which, meeting above us, formed an
arched roof, then covering the whole with sailcloth, we made a temporary
tent, which would at least keep off the night damps and noxious insects.

Leaving my wife engaged in making a set of harness for the ass and cow,
whose strength I intended to employ the following day in drawing the
beams up to our tree, I walked down with Fritz and Ernest to the beach
to look for wood suitable for building our new abode, and also to
discover, if possible, some light rods to form a ladder. For some time
we hunted in vain, nothing but rough drift wood was to be seen, utterly
unfit for our purpose. Ernest at length pointed out a quantity of
bamboos, half buried in the sand. These were exactly what I wanted, and
stripping them of their leaves I cut them into lengths of about five
feet each; these I bound in bundles to carry to the tree, and then began
to look about for some slight reeds to serve as arrows.

I presently saw what I required in a copse at a little distance. We
advanced cautiously lest the thicket should contain some wild beast or
venomous serpent. Juno rushed ahead; as she did so a flock of
flamingoes, which had been quietly feeding, rose in the air. Fritz,
instantly firing, brought a couple of the birds to the ground, the rest
of the squadron sailing away in perfect order, their plumage continually
changing, as they flew, from beautiful rose to pure white, as
alternately their snowy wings and rosy breasts were visible. One of
those which fell was perfectly dead, but the other appeared only
slightly wounded in the wing, for it made off across the swampy ground.
I attempted to follow, but soon found that progress was impossible on
the marsh; Juno, however, chased the bird and, seizing it, speedily
brought it to my feet. Fritz and Ernest were delighted at the sight of
our prize.

"What a handsome bird!" exclaimed they. "Is it much hurt? Let us tame it
and let it run about with the fowls."

"Its plumage is much more brilliant than that of the dead one," remarked
Fritz.

"Yes," said Ernest, "this is a full grown bird, while yours is younger;
it is some years before they reach perfection. See what long active legs
it has, like those of a stork, while with its great webbed feet it can
swim faster than a goose. Earth, air, or water is all the same to the
flamingo, it is equally at home in any one of the three."

"Well," said Fritz, "let us take the dead one to mother and get her to
introduce it to the other element, and see what it will make of that; if
it is young and tender, as you say, it should make a delicious roast."

Fritz and Ernest then carried the birds and bamboos to the trees, while
I proceeded to cut my reeds. I chose those which had flowered, knowing
that they were harder, and having cut a sufficient quantity of these, I
selected one or two of the tallest canes I could find to assist me in
measuring the height of the tree. I then bound them together and
returned to my family.

"Do you mean to keep this great hungry bird Fritz has brought?" said my
wife, "it is another mouth to feed, remember, and provisions are still
scarce."

"Luckily," I replied, "the flamingo will not eat grain like our poultry,
but will be quite satisfied with insects, fish, and little crabs, which
it will pick up for itself. Pray reassure yourself, therefore, and let
me see to the poor bird's wound."

So saying, I procured some wine and butter and anointed the wing, which
though hurt was not broken. I bound it up, and then took the bird to the
stream, where I fastened it by a long cord to a stake and left it to
shift for itself. In a few days the wound was healed, and the bird,
subdued by kind treatment, became rapidly tame.

While I was thus employed my sons were endeavoring to ascertain the
height of the lowest branch of the tree from the ground. They had
fastened together the long reeds I had brought, and were trying to
measure the distance with them, but in vain; they soon found that were
the rods ten times their length they could not touch the branch.

"Hullo, my boys," I said, when I discovered what they were about, "that
is not the way to set to work. Geometry will simplify the operation
considerably; with its help the altitude of the highest mountains are
ascertained. We may, therefore, easily find the height of the branch."

So saying, I measured out a certain distance from the base of the tree
and marked the spot, and then by means of a rod whose length I knew, and
imaginary lines, I calculated the angle subtended by the trunk of the
tree from the ground to the root of the branch. This done, I was able to
discover the height required, and, to the astonishment of the younger
children, announced that we should henceforth live thirty feet above the
ground. This I wanted to know, that I might construct a ladder of the
necessary length.

Telling Fritz to collect all our cord, and the others to roll all the
twine into a ball, I sat down, and taking the reeds, speedily
manufactured half a dozen arrows and feathered them from the dead
flamingo. I then took a strong bamboo, bent it, and strung it so as to
form a bow. When the boys saw what I had done they were delighted, and
begged to have the pleasure of firing the first shot.

"No, no!" said I, "I did not make this for mere pleasure, nor is it even
intended as a weapon, the arrows are pointless. Elizabeth," I continued
to my wife, "can you supply me with a ball of stout thread from your
wonderful bag?"

"Certainly," replied she, "I think a ball of thread was the first thing
to enter the bag," and diving her hand deep in, she drew out the very
thing I wanted.

"Now, boys," I said, "I am going to fire the first shot," and I fastened
one end of the thread to one of my arrows and aimed at a large branch
above me. The arrow flew upward and bore the thread over the branch and
fell at our feet. Thus was the first step in our undertaking
accomplished. Now for the rope ladder!

Fritz had obtained two coils of cord, each about forty feet in length;
these we stretched on the ground side by side; then Fritz cut the
bamboos into pieces of two feet for the steps of the ladder, and as he
handed them to me, I passed them through knots which I had prepared in
the ropes, while Jack fixed each end with a nail driven through the
wood. When the ladder was finished, I carried over the bough a rope by
which it might be hauled up. This done, I fixed the lower end of the
ladder firmly to the ground by means of stakes, and was all ready for an
ascent. The boys, who had been watching me with intense interest, were
each eager to be first.

"Jack shall have the honor," said I, "as he is the lightest; so up with
you, my boy, and do not break your neck."

Jack, who was as active as a monkey, sprang up the ladder and quickly
gained the top.

"Three cheers for the nest!" he exclaimed, waving his cap. "Hurrah,
hurrah, hurrah for our jolly nest! What a grand house we will have up
here; come along, Fritz!"

His brother was soon by his side, and with a hammer and nails secured
the ladder yet more securely. I followed with an ax, and took a survey
of the tree. It was admirably suited to our purpose; the branches were
very strong and so closely interwoven that no beams would be required to
form a flooring, but when some of the boughs were lopped and cleared
away, a few planks would be quite sufficient.

I now called for a pulley, which my wife fastened to the cord hanging
beside the ladder. I hauled it up, and finding the boys rather in my
way, told them to go down, while I proceeded to fasten the pulley to a
stout branch above me, that we might be able to haul up the beams we
should require the next day. I then made other preparations, that there
might be no delay on the morrow, and a bright moon having arisen, I by
its light continued working until I was quite worn out, and then at
length descended. I reached the ground, but to my surprise found that
the two boys were not there. They had not been seen. A moment afterward,
however, all anxiety was dispelled, for among the topmost boughs I heard
their young voices raised in the evening hymn. Instead of descending,
they had, while I was busy, climbed upward, and had been sitting in
silent admiration of the moonlight scene, high above me. They now joined
us, and my wife showed me the results of her labor. She had made two
complete sets of harness. I congratulated her upon her success, and we
then sat down to supper. On a cloth spread out upon the grass were
arranged a roast shoulder of porcupine, a delicious bowl of soup made
from a piece of the same animal, cheese, butter, and biscuits, forming a
most tempting repast. Having done this ample justice, we collected our
cattle, and the pigeons and fowls having retired to roost on the
neighboring trees, and on the steps of our ladder, we made up a glorious
fire to keep off any prowling wild beasts, and ourselves lay down. The
children, in spite of the novelty of the hammocks, were quickly asleep.
In vain I tried to follow their example; a thousand anxious thoughts
presented themselves, and as quickly as I dispelled them others rose in
their place. The night wore on, and I was still awake; the fire burned
low, and I rose and replenished it with dry fuel. Then again I climbed
into my hammock, and toward morning fell asleep.

Early next morning we were astir, and dispersed to our various
occupations. My wife milked the goats and cow, while we gave the animals
their food, after which we went down to the beach to collect more wood
for our building operations. To the larger beams we harnessed the cow
and ass, while we ourselves dragged up the remainder. Fritz and I then
ascended the tree, and finished the preparations I had begun the night
before, all useless boughs we lopped off, leaving a few about six feet
from the floor, from which we might sling our hammocks, and others still
higher, to support a temporary roof of sailcloth. My wife made fast the
planks to a rope passed through the block I had fixed to the boughs
above us, and by this means Fritz and I hauled them up. These we
arranged side by side on the foundation of boughs, so as to form a
smooth solid floor, and round this platform built a bulwark of planks,
and then throwing the sailcloth over the higher branches, we drew it
down and firmly nailed it. Our house was thus enclosed on three sides,
for behind the great trunk protected us, while the front was left open
to admit the fresh sea breeze which blew directly in. We then hauled up
our hammocks and bedding and slung them from the branches we had left
for that purpose. A few hours of daylight still remaining, we cleared
the floor of leaves and chips, and then descended to fashion a table and
a few benches from the remainder of the wood. After working like slaves
all day, Fritz and I flung ourselves on the grass, while my wife
arranged supper on the table we had made.

"Come," said she at length, "come and taste flamingo stew, and tell me
how you like it. Ernest assured me that it would be much better stewed
than roasted, and I have been following his directions."

Laughing at the idea of Ernest turning scientific cook, we sat down. The
fowls gathered round us to pick up the crumbs, and the tame flamingo
joined them, while Master Knips skipped about from one to the other,
chattering and mimicking our gestures continually. To my wife's joy, the
sow appeared shortly after, and was presented with all the milk that
remained from the day's stock that she might be persuaded to return
every night.

"For," said my wife, "this surplus milk is really of no use to us, as it
will be sour before the morning in this hot climate."

"You are quite right," I replied, "but we must contrive to make it of
use. The next time Fritz and I return to the wreck we will bring off a
churn among the other things we require."

"Must you really go again to that dreadful wreck?" said my wife
shuddering. "You have no idea how anxious I am when you are away there."

"Go we must, I am afraid," I replied, "but not for a day or two yet.
Come, it is getting late. We and the chickens must go to roost."

We lit our watch-fires, and, leaving the dogs on guard below, ascended
the ladder. Fritz, Ernest, and Jack were up in a moment. Their mother
followed very cautiously, for though she had originated the idea of
building a nest, she yet hesitated to entrust herself at such a terrific
height from the ground. When she was safely landed in the house, taking
little Franz on my back, I let go the fastenings which secured the lower
end of the ladder to the ground, and swinging to and fro, slowly
ascended.

Then for the first time we stood all together in our new home. I drew up
the ladder, and, with a greater sense of security than I had enjoyed
since we landed on the island, offered up our evening prayer, and
retired for the night.




CHAPTER IV.

 A day of rest--A parable for the young people--Quiet
     recreation--Geographical nomenclature--The margay and porcupine
     skins made of use--An expedition to Tentholm--Potatoes,
     potatoes--Tropical vegetation--The use of the karatas--Jack's
     greediness and its punishment--Ernest discovers cochineal--Arrive
     at Tentholm--The poultry rebellious--Return to Falconhurst--Ernest
     roused out early--We collect wood for a sledge--Master Knips turns
     thief--Franz's plan for the saving of ammunition--Ernest and I
     take the sledge to Tentholm--Ernest's laziness exemplified--He
     catches a salmon--We start for home--Kill a kangaroo--And cook it.


Next morning all were early awake, and the children sprang about the
tree like young monkeys.

"What shall we begin to do, father?" they cried. "What do you want us to
do to-day?"

"Rest, my boys," I replied, "rest."

"Rest?" repeated they. "Why should we rest?"

"'Six days shalt thou labor and do all that thou hast to do, but on the
seventh, thou shalt do no manner of work.' This is the seventh day," I
replied, "on it, therefore, let us rest."

"What, is it really Sunday?" asked Jack; "how jolly! oh, I won't do any
work, but I'll take a bow and arrow and shoot, and we'll climb about the
tree and have fun all day."

"That is not resting," said I, "that is not the way you are accustomed
to spend the Lord's day."

"No! but then we can't go to church here, and there is nothing else to
do."

"We can worship here as well as at home," said I.

"But there is no church, no clergyman, and no organ," said Franz.

"The leafy shade of this great tree is far more beautiful than any
church," I said; "there will we worship our Creator. Come, boys, down
with you: turn our dining hall into a breakfast room."

The children, one by one, slipped down the ladder.

"My dear Elizabeth," said I, "this morning we will devote to the service
of the Lord, and by means of a parable, I will endeavor to give the
children some serious thoughts; but, without books, or the possibility
of any of the usual Sunday occupations, we cannot keep them quiet the
whole day; afterward, therefore, I shall allow them to pursue any
innocent recreation they choose, and in the cool of the evening we will
take a walk."

My wife entirely agreed with my proposal, and having breakfasted, the
family assembled round me, as we sat in the pleasant shade on the fresh,
soft green grass.

After singing some hymns and offering heartfelt prayers to the Almighty
giver of all good, I told the children I would relate to them a parable
instead of preaching a sermon.

"Oh, that would be delightful! I like the parables in the Bible better
than anything," said Frank. "When can we hear you read out of the Bible
again, father?"

"Ah, my little boy, your words reproach me," returned I. "While eagerly
striving to procure from the ship what would feed our bodies and provide
for _their_ comfort, I blush to think that I have neglected the Bread of
Life, the word of God. I shall search for a Bible on my next return to
the wreck: although our own books were nearly all destroyed, I am pretty
sure to find one."

At these words my wife arose, and fetching her magic bag, she drew from
it a copy of the Holy Scriptures, which I thankfully received from her
hand; and, after reading aloud from its sacred pages, I spoke as
follows:

"A Great King, ruling in power and splendor over a vast realm of light
and love, possessed within its boundaries a desolate and unfruitful
island. This spot he made the object of his special care; and, lavishing
on it all the varied resources of his might and goodness, it bloomed in
beauty, and became the happy residence of a band of colonists, who were
charged not only with the cultivation and improvement of the soil, but
each, individually, was bound to cherish in his soul the spirit of love
and true allegiance to his Sovereign. While this faithful union was
maintained, the colony flourished; and the noblest virtues exalted and
rendered happy the existence of every member of the race. That a
discontented and rebellious spirit should ever have infected these
fortunate subjects of so loving a master, seems incredible, yet so it
was; disobedience and pride brought misery and punishment, the fair
prospects of the colony were blighted, the labors of the colonists were
unblessed, and total separation from the parent kingdom seemed
inevitable. A message of pardon--of free forgiveness--was nevertheless
accorded to these rebels; and to all who, humbly accepting it, molded
their future lives to the will of the Great King (now revealed in a
character even more gracious than before), was held out the promise of
removal at last from among the ruins caused by the great rebellion, to
the glory and undimmed splendor of the realm of Light and Blessedness."

Having interested the children, I then, leaving allegory, pressed simply
and earnestly home to each young heart the truths I sought to teach;
and, with a short prayer for a blessing on my words, brought the service
to a close.

After a thoughtful pause, we separated, and each employed himself as he
felt disposed.

I took some arrows and endeavored to point them with porcupine quills.

Franz came to beg me to make a little bow and arrow for him to shoot
with, while Fritz asked my advice about the tiger cat skin and the cases
he was to contrive from it. Jack assisted with the arrow making, and
inserting a sharp spine at one end of each reed made it fast with
pack-thread, and began to wish for glue to insure its remaining firm.

"O Jack! Mamma's soup is as sticky as anything!" cried Franz; "shall I
run and ask for a cake of it?"

"No, no, little goose! better look for some real glue in the tool-box."

"There he will find glue, to be sure," said I, "and the soup would
scarcely have answered your purpose. But Jack, my boy, I do not like to
hear you ridicule your little brother's ideas. Some of the most valuable
discoveries have been the result of thoughts which originally appeared
no wiser than his."

While thus directing and assisting my sons, we were surprised by hearing
a shot just over our heads; at the same moment two small birds fell dead
at our feet, and looking up, we beheld Ernest among the branches, as
bending his face joyfully toward us, he cried, "Well hit! well hit! a
good shot, wasn't it?"

Then slipping down the ladder, and picking up the birds, he brought them
to me. One was a kind of thrush, the other a small dove called the
ortolan, and esteemed a very great delicacy on account of its exquisite
flavor. As the figs on which these birds came to feed were only just
beginning to ripen, it was probable that they would soon flock in
numbers to our trees; and by waiting until we could procure them in
large quantities, we might provide ourselves with valuable food for the
rainy season, by placing them, when half cooked, in cases with melted
lard or butter poured over them.

By this time Jack had pointed a good supply of arrows, and industriously
practiced archery. I finished the bow and arrows for Franz, and expected
to be left in peace; but the young man next demanded a quiver, and I had
to invent that also, to complete his equipment. It was easily done by
stripping a piece of bark from a small tree, fitting a flat side and a
bottom to it, and then a string. Attaching it to his shoulders, the
youthful hunter filled it with arrows and went off; looking, as his
mother said, like an innocent little Cupid, bent on conquest.

Not long after this, we were summoned to dinner, and all right willingly
obeyed the call.

During the meal I interested the boys very much by proposing to decide
on suitable names for the different spots we had visited on this coast.

"For," said I, "it will become more and more troublesome to explain what
we mean, unless we do so. Beside which, we shall feel much more at home
if we can talk as people do in inhabited countries: instead of saying,
for instance, 'the little island at the mouth of our bay, where we found
the dead shark,' 'the large stream near our tent, across which we made
the bridge,' 'that wood where we found cocoanuts, and caught the
monkey,' and so on. Let us begin by naming the bay in which we landed.
What shall we call it?"

"Oyster Bay," said Fritz.

"No, no!--Lobster Bay," cried Jack, "in memory of the old fellow who
took a fancy to my leg!"

"I think," observed his mother, "that, in token of gratitude for our
escape, we should call it Safety Bay."

This name met with general approbation, and was forthwith fixed upon.

Other names were quickly chosen. Our first place of abode we called
Tentholm; the islet in the bay, Shark's Island; and the reedy swamp,
Flamingo Marsh. It was some time before the serious question of a name
for our leafy castle could be decided. But finally it was entitled
Falconhurst;[B] and we then rapidly named the remaining points: Prospect
Hill, the eminence we first ascended; Cape Disappointment, from whose
rocky heights we had strained our eyes in vain search for our ship's
company; and Jackal River, as a name for the large stream at our landing
place, concluded our geographical nomenclature.

[B] _Horst_, in German, means "nest" or "eyrie."

In the afternoon the boys went on with their various employments. Fritz
finished his cases, and Jack asked my assistance in carrying out his
plan of making a cuirass for Turk out of the porcupine skin. After
thoroughly cleansing the inside, we cut and fitted it round the body of
the patient dog; then when strings were sewn on and it became tolerably
dry, he was armed with this ingenious coat of mail, and a most singular
figure he cut!

Juno strongly objected to his friendly approaches, and got out of his
way as fast as she could; and it was clear that he would easily put to
flight the fiercest animal he might encounter, while protected by armor
at once defensive and offensive.

I determined to make also a helmet for Jack out of the remainder of the
skin, which to his infinite delight I speedily did.

Amid these interesting occupations the evening drew on, and after a
pleasant walk among the sweet glades near our abode, we closed our
Sabbath day with prayer and a glad hymn of praise, retiring to rest with
peaceful hearts.

Next morning, I proposed an expedition to Tentholm, saying I wished to
make my way thither by a different route. We left the tree well armed; I
and my three elder sons each carrying a gun and game bag, while little
Franz was equipped with his bow and quiver full of arrows. A most
curious party we formed: Fritz, adorned with his belt of margayskin, and
Jack, with his extraordinary head-dress, looked like a couple of young
savages. Their mother and I walked together: she, of the whole party,
being the only one unarmed, carried a jar in which to get butter from
Tentholm; we were preceded by the dogs--Turk armed most effectually with
his cuirass of porcupine skin, and Juno keeping at a respectful distance
from so formidable a companion. Master Knips fully intended to mount his
charger as usual; but when he saw him arrayed apparently in a new skin,
he approached him carefully, and touching him with one paw, discovered
that such a hide would make anything but an agreeable seat; the grimace
he made was most comical, and chattering vociferously he bounded toward
Juno, skipped on her back, seated himself, and soon appeared perfectly
reconciled to the change of steed. The flamingo saw us starting, and,
having been much petted during the last day or two, considered himself
entitled to accompany us; for some time he kept beside the children,
following first one and then another as they explored the wood on either
side; their irregular course, however, at length disgusted him, and,
abandoning them, he walked sedately by my side. We strolled on in the
cool air, following the course of the stream; the great trees
overshadowed us, and the cool, green sward stretched away between them
at our feet. The boys roamed ahead of me, intent on exploration.
Presently I heard a joyful shout, and saw Ernest running at full speed
toward me, followed by his brothers. In his hand he held a plant, and,
panting for breath, and with sparkling eyes, he held it up to me.

"Potatoes! potatoes! father," he gasped out.

"Yes," said Jack, "acres and acres of potatoes!"

"My dear Ernest," said I, for there was no mistaking the flower and
leaf, and the light clear-green bulbous roots, "you have indeed made a
discovery; with the potato we shall never starve."

"But come and look at them," said Jack, "come and feast your eyes on
thousands of potatoes."

We hurried to the spot: there, spread out before us, was a great tract
of ground, covered with the precious plant.

"It would have been rather difficult," remarked Jack, "not to have
discovered such a great field."

"Very likely," replied Ernest, smiling; "but I doubt if you would have
discovered that it was a potato field."

"Perhaps not," said Jack, "you are quite welcome, at all events, to the
honor of the discovery; I'll have the honor of being the first to get a
supply of them." So saying, he dug up, with hands and knife, a number of
plants, and filled his game bag with the roots. The monkey followed his
example, and scratching away with his paws most cleverly, soon had a
heap beside him. So delighted were we with the discovery, and so eager
were we to possess a large supply of the roots, that we stopped not
digging until every bag, pouch, and pocket was filled. Some wished to
return at once to Falconhurst, to cook and taste our new acquisition;
but this I overruled, and we continued our march, heavily laden, but
delighted.

"How," said I, "can we thank the Giver of all these blessings,
sufficiently?"

"Oh," said Franz, "we can say, 'We thank thee, O Lord, for all thy
goodness and mercy; and bless us for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.'"

"That would not be sufficient," said Fritz. "Do you think it would be
enough, just to say to father and mother: 'Thank you for all you do,'
and not to show them we were really thankful, by loving them and doing
what we can to please them?"

"You are quite right, Fritz," said I; "Franz did not say all that was
necessary, he should have added, 'Give me grace to do Thy will, and to
obey Thee in all things.'"

As we thus talked, we reached the head of our streamlet, where it fell
from the rocks above in a beautiful, sparkling, splashing cascade. We
crossed and entered the tall grass on the other side. We forced our way
through with difficulty, so thick and tangled were the reeds. Beyond
this, the landscape was most lovely. Rich tropical vegetation flourished
on every side: the tall, stately palms, surrounded by luxuriant ferns;
brilliant flowers and graceful creepers; the prickly cactus, shooting up
amidst them; aloe, jasmine, and sweet-scented vanilla; the Indian pea,
and above all the regal pine-apple, loaded the breath of the evening
breeze with their rich perfume. The boys were delighted with the
pine-apple, and so eagerly did they fall to, that my wife had to caution
them that there were no doctors on our territory, and if they became
ill, they would have to cure themselves as best they might.

This advice, however, seemed to have small effect on my sons, and
showing Knips what they wanted, they sent him after the ripest and best
fruit.

While they were thus employed, I examined the other shrubs and bushes.
Among these I presently noticed one which I knew well from description
to be the karatas.

"Come here, boys," I said; "here is something of far more value than
your pine-apples. Do you see that plant with long pointed leaves and
beautiful red flower? That is the karatas. The filaments of the leaves
make capital thread, while the leaves themselves, bruised, form an
invaluable salve. The pith of this wonderful plant may be used either
for tinder or bait for fish. Suppose, Ernest, you had been wrecked here,
how would you have made a fire without matches, or flint and steel?"

"As the savages do," replied he; "I would rub two pieces of wood
together until they kindled."

"Try it," I said; "but, if you please, try it when you have a whole day
before you, and no other work to be done, for I am certain it would be
night before you accomplish the feat. But see here," and I broke a dry
twig from the karatas, and peeling off the bark, laid the pith upon a
stone. I struck a couple of pebbles over it, and they emitting a spark,
the pith caught fire.

The boys were delighted with the experiment. I then drew some of the
threads from the leaves, and presented them to my wife.

"But what," said Fritz, "is the use of all these other prickly plants,
except to annoy one? Here, for instance, is a disagreeable little tree."

"That is an Indian fig," said I. "It grows best on dry, rocky ground;
for most of its nourishment is derived from the air. Its juice is used,
I believe, medicinally, while its fruit is pleasant and wholesome."

Master Jack was off in a moment when he heard of a new delicacy, and
attempted to gather some of the fruit, but in vain; the sharp thorns
defied his efforts, and with bleeding hands, and rueful countenance, he
returned. I removed the thorns from his hands, and making a sharp wooden
skewer, I thrust it into a fig, and quickly twisted it from its branch
and split it open with a knife, still holding it upon the skewer. The
rest followed my example, and we regaled ourselves upon the fruit, which
we found excellent. Ernest carefully examined the fig he was eating.
"What are these," he exclaimed presently; "little red insects! they
cling all over the fruit, and I cannot shake them off. Can they be
cochineal?"

He handed me the fig, and I examined it attentively.

"You are quite right, my boy," I said; "there is no doubt this is the
real cochineal. However, though it is worth its weight in gold to
European traders, it is of little use to us, I am afraid unless any of
you care to appear in gay colors. The cochineal you know, forms the most
lovely scarlet dye."

"No, thank you," said Jack; "but we will take a lot of it when we go
home again. Now let us find something more useful to us." And they
thereupon plied me incessantly with questions concerning every plant and
shrub we passed.

"Stop, stop," I said at length; "the most learned naturalist would be
much puzzled with many of these trees, and I who have never seen any of
them before, and know them merely by description, cannot pretend to tell
you the names, or explain to you the use of one-quarter of them."

Discussing, however, the properties of such shrubs as I did know, we at
length reached Tentholm. Everything was safe, and we set to work to
collect what we wanted. I opened the butter cask, from which my wife
filled her pot. Fritz saw after the ammunition, and Jack and Ernest ran
down to the beach to capture the geese and ducks. This they found no
easy matter, for the birds, left so long alone, were shy, and nothing
would induce them to come on shore and be caught. Ernest at length hit
upon an ingenious plan. He took some pieces of cheese, and tied them to
long strings. This bait he threw into the water, and the hungry ducks
instantly made a grab at it; then with a little skillful maneuvering he
drew them on shore. While Jack and he were thus busily employed
catching and tying the rebels together by the feet, we procured a fresh
supply of salt, which we packed upon Turk's back, first relieving him of
his coat of mail. The birds we fastened to our game bags, and carefully
closing the door of our tent, started homeward by the seashore. After a
cheerful and pleasant walk, we once more reached our woodland abode. I
released the birds and, clipping their wings to prevent their leaving
us, established them on the stream. Then, after a delicious supper of
potatoes, milk, and butter, we ascended our tree and turned in.

Having remarked a great deal of driftwood on the sands the preceding
evening, it occurred to me that it would be well to get some of it, and
make a kind of sledge, so that the labor of fetching what we wanted from
our stores at Tentholm might not fall so heavily on ourselves.

I awoke early, and roused Ernest as my assistant, wishing to encourage
him to overcome his natural fault of indolence. After a little
stretching and yawning, he got up cheerfully, pleased with the idea of
an expedition while the others still slept, and we made our way to the
beach, taking with us the donkey, who drew a large broad bough, which I
expected to find useful in bringing back our load.

As we went along, I remarked to Ernest that I supposed he was rather
sorry for himself, and grudged leaving his cozy hammock and pleasant
dreams at this untimely hour.

"Oh, father, do not laugh at my laziness! Indeed, I mean to cure myself
of it. I am very glad to go with you. I intended to shoot some more of
the ortolans this morning, but there will be plenty of time afterward.
The boys will be shooting at them, I daresay, but I don't expect they
will have any great luck."

"Why not, pray?" inquired I.

"I don't believe they will know what shot to use at first, and, besides,
they will most likely shoot upward at the birds and be sure to miss
them, on account of the great height and thickness of the branches and
foliage."

"Well, Ernest, you certainly possess the gifts of prudence and
reflection, as well as observation. These are valuable; but sudden
action is so often necessary in life, that I advise you to cultivate the
power of instantly perceiving and deciding what must be done in cases of
emergency. Presence of mind is a precious quality, which, although
natural in some characters, may be acquired in a certain degree by all
who train themselves to it."

Once on the seashore, our work was quickly accomplished, for, selecting
the wood I thought fit for my purpose, we laid it across the broad,
leafy branch, and, with some help from us, the donkey dragged a very
fair load of it homeward, with the addition of a small chest, which I
raised from among the sand, which nearly covered it.

We heard the boys popping away at the birds as we drew near. They
hastened to meet us, and inquired where we had been, looking curiously
at the chest, which I allowed them to open, while I asked my wife to
excuse our "absence without leave," and after submitting to her gentle
reprimand, I explained my plan for a sledge, which pleased her greatly,
and she already imagined it loaded with her hogshead of butter, and on
its way from Tentholm to Falconhurst.

The chest proved to be merely that of a common sailor, containing his
clothes, very much wetted by the sea water.

The boys exhibited an array of several dozen birds, and related, during
breakfast, the various incidents of failure and success which had
attended their guns. Ernest had rightfully guessed the mistakes they
would make, but practice was making them perfect, and they seemed
disposed to continue their sport, when their mother, assuring them that
she could not use more birds than those already killed, asked if I did
not think some means of snaring them might be contrived, as much powder
and shot would be expended if they fired on at this rate.

Entirely agreeing with this view of the subject, I desired the lads to
lay aside their guns for the present, and the younger ones readily
applied themselves to making snares of the long threads drawn from the
leaves of the karatas, in a simple way I taught them, while Fritz and
Ernest gave me substantial assistance in the manufacture of the new
sledge.

We were busily at work, when a tremendous disturbance among our fowls
led us to suppose that a fox or wild cat had got into their midst.

The cocks crowed defiantly, the hens fluttered and cackled in a state of
the wildest excitement. We hastened toward them, but Ernest remarking
Master Knips slipping away, as though conscious of some misdemeanor,
went to watch him, and presently caught him in the act of eating a
new-laid egg, which he had carried off and hidden among the grass and
roots. Ernest found several others. These were very welcome to my wife,
for hitherto the hens had not presented us with any eggs. Hereafter she
determined to imprison the monkey every morning until the eggs had been
collected.

Soon after this, as Jack was setting the newly made snares among the
branches, he discovered that a pair of our own pigeons were building in
the tree. It was very desirable to increase our stock of these pretty
birds, and I cautioned the boys against shooting near our tree while
they had nests there, and also with regard to the snares, which were
meant only to entrap the wild fig-eaters.

Although my sons were interested in setting the snares, they by no means
approved of the new order to economize the ammunition. No doubt they had
been discussing this hardship, for little Franz came to me with a
brilliant proposal of his own.

"Papa," said he, "why should not we begin to plant some powder and shot
immediately? It would be so much more useful than bare grain for the
fowls."

His brothers burst into a roar of laughter, and I must confess I found
it no easy matter to keep my countenance.

"Come, Ernest," said I; "now we have had our amusement, tell the little
fellow what gunpowder really is."

"It is not seed at all, Franz," Ernest explained. "Gunpowder is made of
charcoal, sulphur, and saltpeter, mixed cleverly together; so you see it
cannot be sown like corn, any more than shot can be planted like peas
and beans."

My carpentering meantime went on apace. In order to shape my sledge with
ends properly turned up in front, I had chosen wood which had been part
of the bow of the vessel, and was curved in the necessary way for my
purpose. Two pieces, perfectly similar, formed the sides of my sleigh,
or sledge, and I simply united these strongly by fixing short bars
across them. Then, when the ropes of the donkey's harness were attached
to the raised points in front, the equipage was complete and ready for
use.

My attention had been for some time wholly engrossed by my work, and I
only now observed that the mother and her little boys had been busily
plucking above two dozen of the wild birds, and were preparing to roast
them, spitted in a row on a long, narrow sword blade, belonging to one
of our ship's officers.

It seemed somewhat wasteful to cook so many at once; but my wife
explained that she was getting them ready for the butter-cask I was
going to fetch for her on the new sledge, as I had advised her to
preserve them half-cooked, and packed in butter.

Amused at her promptitude, I could do nothing less than promise to go
for her cask directly after dinner. For her part she resolved in our
absence to have a grand wash of linen and other clothes, and she advised
me to arrange regular baths for all the boys in future.

Early in the afternoon Ernest and I were ready to be off, equipped as
usual. Fritz presented us each with a neat case of margay skin to hang
at our girdles.

We harnessed both cow and ass to the sledge, and, accompanied by Juno,
cheerfully took our departure, choosing the way by the sands, and
reaching Tentholm without accident or adventure.

There unharnessing the animals, we began at once to load the sledge,
not only with the butter cask, but with a powder chest, a barrel of
cheese, and a variety of other articles--ball, shot, tools, and Turk's
armor, which had been left behind on our last visit.

Our work had so closely engaged our attention, that when we were ready
to leave it and go in search of a good bathing place, we discovered that
our two animals had wandered quite out of sight, having crossed the
bridge to reach the good pasture beyond the river.

I sent Ernest after them, and went alone to the extremity of the bay. It
terminated in bold and precipitous cliffs, which extended into the deep
water, and rose abruptly, so as to form an inaccessible wall of rock and
crag. Swampy ground, overgrown with large canes, intervened between me
and these cliffs. I cut a large bundle of the reeds, and returned to
Ernest. It was some time before I found him, comfortably extended full
length on the ground near the tent, and sleeping as sound as a top,
while the cow and the ass, grazing at will, were again making for the
bridge.

"Get up, Ernest, you lazy fellow!" exclaimed I, much annoyed; "why don't
you mind your business? Look at the animals! They will be over the river
again!"

"No fear of that, father," returned he, with the utmost composure. "I
have taken a couple of boards off the bridge. They won't pass the gap."

I could not help laughing at the ingenious device by which the boy had
spared himself all trouble; at the same time I observed that it is wrong
to waste the precious moments in sleep when duty has to be performed. I
then bid him go and collect some salt, which was wanted at home, while I
went to bathe.

On coming back, much refreshed, I again missed Ernest, and began to
wonder whether he was still gathering salt, or whether he had lain down
somewhere to finish his nap, when I heard him loudly calling:

"Father, father, I've caught a fish! an immense fellow he is. I can
scarcely hold him, he drags the line so!"

Hastening toward the spot, I saw the boy lying in the grass, on a point
of land close to the mouth of the stream, and with all his might keeping
hold of a rod. The line was strained to the utmost by the frantic
efforts of a very large fish, which was attempting to free itself from
the hook.

I quickly took the rod from him, and giving the fish more line, led him
by degrees into shallow water. Ernest ran in with his hatchet and killed
him.

It proved to be a salmon of full fifteen pounds weight, and I was
delighted to think of taking such a valuable prize to the mother.

"This is capital, Ernest!" cried I; "you have cleared yourself for once
of the charge of laziness! Let us now carry this splendid salmon to the
sledge. I will clean and pack it for the journey, that it may arrive in
good condition, while you go and take a bath in the sea."

All this being accomplished, we harnessed our beasts to the well-laden
vehicle, and replacing the boards on the bridge, commenced the journey
home.

We kept inland this time, and were skirting the borders of a grassy
thicket, when Juno suddenly left us, and plunging into the bushes, with
fierce barking hunted out, right in front of us, the most
singular-looking creature I ever beheld. It was taking wonderful flying
leaps, apparently in a sitting posture, and got over the ground at an
astonishing rate. I attempted to shoot it as it passed, but missed.
Ernest, who was behind me, observed its movements very coolly, and
seeing that the dog was puzzled, and that the animal, having paused, was
crouching among the grass, went cautiously nearer, fired at the spot he
had marked, and shot it dead.

The extraordinary appearance of this creature surprised us very much. It
was as large as a sheep, its head was shaped like that of a mouse; its
skin also was of a mouse color, it had long ears like a hare, and a tail
like a tiger's. The fore-paws resembled those of a squirrel, but they
seemed only half-grown, while the hind legs were enormous, and so long
that, when upright on them, the animal would look as if mounted on
stilts.

For some time we stood silently wondering at the remarkable creature
before us. I could not recollect to have seen or heard of any such.

"Well, father," said Ernest at last, "I should say this was about the
queerest beast to be met with anywhere. I am glad I knocked it over. How
they will all stare when I carry it home!"

"You have had a lucky day altogether, certainly," said I; "but I cannot
think what this animal can be. Examine its teeth, and let us see to what
class of mammalia it belongs. We may be led to guess at its name in that
way."

"I see four sharp incisor teeth, father--two upper, and two under, as a
squirrel has."

"Ah! then he is a rodent. What rodents can you remember, Ernest?"

"I do not know them all, but there are the mouse, the marmot, the
squirrel, the hare, the beaver, the jerboa----"

"The jerboa!" I exclaimed, "the jerboa! now we shall have it. This is
really very like a jerboa, only far larger. It must be a kangaroo, one
of the class of animals which has a pouch or purse beneath the body, in
which its young can take refuge. They were discovered in New Holland, by
the great Captain Cook, and I congratulate you on being the first to
obtain a specimen in New Switzerland!" I added, laughing, as I
extemporized the name.

The kangaroo was added to the already heavy load on our sledge, and we
proceeded slowly, arriving late at Falconhurst, but meeting with the
usual bright welcome.

Very eager and inquisitive were the glances turned toward the sledge,
for the load piled on it surpassed all expectation; we on our part
staring in equal surprise at the extraordinary rig of the young folks
who came to meet us.

One wore a long night-shirt, which, with a belt, was a convenient length
in front, but trailed behind in orthodox ghost fashion.

Another had on a very wide pair of trousers, braced up so short that
each little leg looked like the clapper in a bell.

The third, buttoned up in a pea-jacket which came down to his ankles,
looked for all the world like a walking portmanteau.

Amid much joking and laughter, the mother explained that she had been
washing all day, and while their clothes were drying, the boys amused
themselves by dressing up in things they found while rummaging the
sailor's chest, and had kept them on, that Ernest and I might see the
masquerade. It certainly amused us, but made me regret that so little
belonging to ourselves had been saved from the wreck, in consequence of
which the children had scarcely a change of linen.

Turning now to our new acquisitions, we excited great interest by
exhibiting each in turn; the large salmon, but more especially the
kangaroo, surprised and delighted every one.

Fritz alone wore a look expressive of dissatisfaction, and I saw that he
was envious of his younger brother's success. Vexed that so noble a
prize had fallen to Ernest's gun, instead of his own, he treated it
rather slightingly; but I could see that he was struggling against his
jealous feelings, and he, after a while, succeeded in recovering his
good humor, and joined pleasantly in the conversation.

"What a famous day's sport you have had altogether!" said he, coming
close up to me. "It will be my turn to go out with you next, will it
not, father? Just about here there is nothing to shoot, and I have found
it very dull."

"Still you have been doing your duty, my dear boy; you were entrusted
with the care of the family, and a youth of manly character will not
depend for happiness on mere excitement."

As the shades of night approached, we made haste to conclude the day's
work, by preparing the kangaroo, part for immediate use, and part for
salting. The animals were fed, and a plentiful allowance of salt made to
them. Our own supper of broiled salmon and potatoes was dispatched with
great appetite, and we retired, with thankful hearts, to sound and
well-earned repose.




CHAPTER V.

 Jack and Ernest disappear--Fritz and I start for the wreck--The boys
     ambuscade--We form a raft--Ransack the vessel--Again embark--A
     turtle in sight--Fritz harpoons it--The turtle acts as "Steam
     Tug"--Safe ashore--Return home--Jack's clay field--A fresh
     discovery--The mother's cellar--A trip to the wreck--The
     pinnace--Jack's raid on the Lilliputians--A secret revealed--A new
     method of grinding flour--Wholesome or poisonous?--Bread-making in
     earnest.


Next morning, while the breakfast was getting ready, I attended to the
beautiful skin of the kangaroo, which I was anxious to preserve entire;
and afterward, when Fritz had prepared everything in readiness for our
trip to the wreck, I called Ernest and Jack in order to give them some
parting injunctions. They, however, had disappeared directly after
breakfast, and their mother could only guess, that, as we required
potatoes, they might have gone to fetch a supply. I desired her to
reprove them, on their return, for starting away without leave; but, as
it appeared they had taken Turk, I satisfied myself that no harm was
likely to befall them, although it was not without reluctance that I
left my dear wife alone with little Franz, cheering her with hopes of
our speedy return with new treasures from the wreck.

Advancing steadily on our way, we crossed the bridge at Jackal River,
when suddenly, to our no small astonishment, Jack and Ernest burst out
of a hiding place where they had lain in wait for us, and were enchanted
with the startling effect of their unexpected appearance upon their
unsuspecting father and brother. It was evident that they fully believed
they might now go with us to the wreck.

To this notion I at once put a decided stop, although I could not find
in my heart to scold the two merry rogues for their thoughtless frolic,
more especially as I particularly wished to send back a message to my
wife. I told them they must hurry home, so as not to leave their mother
in suspense, although, as they were already so far, they might collect
some salt. And I instructed them to explain that, as my work on board
would take up a long time, she must try to bear with our absence for a
night. This I had meant to say when we parted, but my courage had
failed, knowing how much she would object to such a plan, and I had
resolved to return in the evening.

On consideration, however, of the importance of constructing a raft,
which was my intention in going, and finishing it without a second trip,
I determined to remain on board for the night, as the boys had,
unintentionally, given me the chance of sending a message to that
effect.

"Good-by, boys, take care of yourselves! we're off," shouted Fritz, as I
joined him in the tub-boat, and we shoved off.

The current carried us briskly out of the bay; we were very soon moored
safely alongside the wreck, and scrambling up her shattered sides, stood
on what remained of the deck, and began at once to lay our plans.

I wanted to make a raft fit to carry on shore a great variety of
articles far too large and heavy for our present boat. A number of empty
water casks seemed just what was required for a foundation; we closed
them tightly, pushed them overboard, and arranging twelve of them side
by side in rows of three, we firmly secured them together by means of
spars, and then proceeded to lay a good substantial floor of planks,
which was defended by a low bulwark. In this way we soon had a
first-rate raft, exactly suited to our purpose.

It would have been impossible to return to land that same evening, for
we were thoroughly fatigued by our labors, and had eaten only the light
refreshment we had brought in our wallets, scarcely desisting a moment
from our work.

Rejoicing that we were not expected home, we now made an excellent
supper from the ship's provisions, and then rested for the night on
spring mattresses, a perfect luxury to us, after our hard and narrow
hammocks.

Next morning we actively set about loading the raft and boat: first
carrying off the entire contents of our own cabins; and passing on to
the captain's room, we removed the furniture, as well as the doors and
window-frames, with their bolts, bars, and locks. We next took the
officers' chests, and those belonging to the carpenter and gunsmith; the
contents of these latter we had to remove in portions, as their weight
was far beyond our strength.

One large chest was filled with an assortment of fancy goods, and
reminded us of a jeweler's shop, so glittering was the display of gold
and silver watches, snuff-boxes, buckles, studs, chains, rings, and all
manner of trinkets; these, and a box of money, drew our attention for a
time; but more useful to us at present was a case of common knives and
forks, which I was glad to find, as more suited to us than the smart
silver ones we had previously taken on shore. To my delight we found,
most carefully packed, a number of young fruit trees: and we read on the
tickets attached to them the names, so pleasant to European ears, of the
apple, pear, chestnut, orange, almond, peach, apricot, plum, cherry, and
vine.

The cargo, which had been destined for the supply of a distant colony,
proved, in fact, a rich and almost inexhaustible treasure to us.
Ironmongery, plumber's tools, lead, paint, grindstones, cart wheels, and
all that was necessary for the work of a smith's forge, spades and
plowshares, sacks of maize, peas, oats, and wheat, a hand-mill, and also
the parts of a saw-mill so carefully numbered that, were we strong
enough, it would be easy to put it up, had been stowed away.

So bewildered were we by the wealth around us that for some time we
were at a loss as to what to remove to the raft. It would be impossible
to take everything; yet the first storm would complete the destruction
of the ship, and we should lose all we left behind. Selecting a number
of the most useful articles, however, including of course the grain and
the fruit trees, we gradually loaded our raft. Fishing lines, reels,
cordage, and a couple of harpoons were put on board, as well as a
mariner's compass.

Fritz, recollecting our encounter with the shark, placed the harpoons in
readiness; and amused me by seeming to picture himself a whaler,
flourishing his harpoon in most approved fashion.

Early in the afternoon, both our crafts were heavily laden, and we were
ready to make for the shore. The voyage was begun with considerable
anxiety, as, with the raft in tow, there was some danger of an accident.

But the sea being calm and the wind favorable, we found we could spread
the sail, and our progress was very satisfactory.

Presently, Fritz asked me for the telescope, as he had observed
something curious floating at a distance. Then handing it back, he
begged me to examine the object; which I soon discovered to be a turtle
asleep on the water, and of course unconscious of our approach.

"Do, father, steer toward it!" exclaimed he.

I accordingly did so, that he might have a nearer look at the creature.
Little did I suspect what was to follow. The lad's back was turned to
me, and the broad sail was between us, so that I could not perceive his
actions; when, all of a sudden, I experienced a shock, and the thrill of
line running through a reel. Before I had time to call out, a second
shock, and the sensation of the boat being rapidly drawn through the
water, alarmed me.

"Fritz, what are you about?" cried I, "you are sending us to the
bottom."

"I have him, hurrah! I have him safe!" shouted he, in eager excitement.

To my amazement, I perceived that he really had struck the tortoise with
a harpoon; a rope was attached to it, and the creature was running away
with us.

Lowering the sail and seizing my hatchet, I hastened forward, in order
to cut the line, and cast adrift at once turtle and harpoon.

"Father! do wait!" pleaded the boy, "there is no danger just yet? I
promise to cut the line myself the instant it is necessary! Let us catch
this turtle if we possibly can."

"My dear boy, the turtle will be a very dear bargain, if he upsets all
our goods into the sea, even if he does not drown us too. For Heaven's
sake be careful! I will wait a few minutes, but the minute there is
danger, cut the line."

As the turtle began to make for the open sea, I hoisted the sail again;
and, finding the opposition too much for it, the creature again directed
its course landward, drawing us rapidly after it. The part of the shore
for which the turtle was making was considerably to the left of our
usual landing place. The beach there shelved very gradually, and at some
distance from land we grounded with a sharp shock, but fortunately
without a capsize.

The turtle was evidently greatly exhausted, and no wonder, since it had
been acting the part of a steam tug, and had been dragging, at full
speed, a couple of heavily laden vessels. Its intention was to escape to
land; but I leaped into the water, and wading up to it, dispatched it
with my ax. Such was its tenacity of life, however, that it did not
cease its struggles, until I had actually severed its head from its
body.

As we were by no means far from Falconhurst, Fritz gave notice of our
approach by firing off his gun, as well as shouting loudly in his glee;
and, while we were yet engaged in securing our boats and getting the
turtle on shore, the whole family appeared in the distance, hastening
eagerly toward us; and our new prize, together with the well-laden boat
and raft, excited the liveliest interest; my wife's chief pleasure,
however, consisted in seeing us back, as our night's absence had
disturbed her, and she was horrified by the description of our dangerous
run in the wake of the fugitive turtle.

Being anxious to remove some of our goods before night, the boys ran off
to fetch the sledge; while I, having no anchor, contrived to moor the
boats by means of some of the heavy blocks of iron we had brought.

It required our united strength to get the turtle hoisted on to the
sledge, its weight being prodigious; we found it, indeed, with the
addition of the sapling fruit trees, quite a sufficient load.

We then made the best of our way home, chatting merrily about our
various adventures. The first thing to be done on arriving was to obtain
some of the turtle's flesh and cook it for supper. To my wife this
appeared necessarily a work of time, as well as of difficulty; but I
turned the beast on its back, and soon detached a portion of the meat
from the breast with a hatchet, by breaking the lower shell: and I then
directed that it should be cooked, with a little salt, shell and all.

"But let me first cut away this disgusting green fat," said my wife,
with a little shudder. "See how it sticks all over the meat. No one
could eat anything so nasty."

"Leave that fat, whatever you do!" exclaimed I. "Why, my dear, that is
the very best part, and the delight of the epicure. If there be really
too much, cut some off--it can be used as lard, and let the dogs make a
supper of the refuse."

"And the handsome shell!" cried Fritz; "I should like to make a
water-trough of that, to stand near the brook, and be kept always full
of clear water. How useful it would be!"

"That is a capital idea," I replied, "and we may manage it easily, if we
can find clay so as to make a firm foundation on which to place it."

"Oh, as to clay," said Jack, "I have a grand lump of clay there under
that root."

"Well done, my lad! when did you find it?"

"He found a bed of clay near the river this morning," said his mother,
"and came home in such a mess, I had regularly to scrape his clothes and
wash him thoroughly!"

"Well, mother, I can only tell you I should never in all my days have
found the clay, if I had not slipped and fallen among it."

"That I can well believe," returned his mother; "only, to hear your talk
this morning, one would have thought your discovery of clay the result
of very arduous search indeed."

"When you have ended the question of the clay and the turtle shell,"
said Ernest, "I should like to show you some roots I found to-day; they
are getting rather dry now. They look something like radishes, although
the plant itself was almost a bush; but I have not ventured to taste
them, although our old sow was devouring them at a great rate."

"In that you did wisely, my boy. Swine eat many things injurious to men.
Let me see your roots. How did you discover them?"

"I was rambling in the wood this morning, and came upon the sow, very
busy grubbing under a small bush, and eating something ravenously; so I
drove her away, and found a number of these roots, which I brought for
you to see."

"Indeed, Ernest," I exclaimed, after taking the roots in my hand and
considering them attentively, "I am inclined to believe that you have
really made a brilliant discovery! If this proves to be, as I expect,
the manioc root, we might lose every other eatable we possess, and yet
not starve. In the West Indies, cakes called cassava bread are made from
it; and, already having potatoes, we shall be very independent if we can
succeed in preparing flour from these roots. Great care must be taken in
the manufacture to express the juice, otherwise the flour may be
injurious and even poisonous.

"If we can collect a sufficient quantity, we will attempt bread-making.
I think I know how to set about it."

Finding there was still time to make another trip with the sledge, I
went off with the elder boys, leaving Franz with his mother; and we all
looked forward with satisfaction to the prospect of the princely supper
they were to have ready for us, for our day's work had been none of the
lightest.

"I have been thinking about my turtle, father," said Fritz, as we went
along; "is not the shell very valuable? Surely beautiful combs, boxes,
and a number of ornamental things are made of tortoise shell, and if so,
it seems a pity to use it for a water trough."

"Your turtle, Fritz, is only fit for eating, its shell is worthless
as regards ornament; whereas the species whose shell is prized so much
is unfit for food. Tortoise shell is subjected to the action of the
heat, the outer layer peels off, leaving a beautifully marked,
semi-transparent surface, which is susceptible of a very high polish."

The sledge quickly received its second load from the raft. Chests, four
cart-wheels, and the hand-mill were placed on it, with all manner of
smaller articles, and we lost no time in returning to Falconhurst.

The mother welcomed us joyfully, for she said we had been regularly
overworked during the last two days. "However, now you are come home to
rest," said she, "and you little think what refreshment awaits you here
in the shade. Come and see my cellar!" and she smilingly exhibited a
small cask, half sunk in the ground, and well sheltered with leaves and
branches.

"Ah! you wonder where this came from," continued the mother; "well, I
found it myself on the sands, to-day, while you were all absent; and
fancying it was wine of some sort, I got it up here on purpose to be
ready for you. The boys are most anxious to know what sort of wine it
will prove to be."

As the simplest method of ascertaining this, I inserted a straw at the
vent-hole, and presently announced, that in all my life I had never
enjoyed a more delicious draught of Canary sack. The mother was
immediately pleased to find that her exertions in my behalf had not been
thrown away, and the boys pressed around me, armed with straws and
begging for a taste.

After so strongly expressing my own enjoyment of the wine, it seemed
unreasonable to deny them this, and I let them come in turns, but was
speedily obliged to call a halt; for the rogues got so eager and excited
that I had to reprove them for their greediness, and warn them of the
risk they ran of being intoxicated. In fact, I blamed myself for
allowing them to have this strong wine as a beverage at all. They were
wholly unaccustomed to it, and were, besides, fatigued and very hungry.
Supper was more to the purpose; and, as the turtle proved delicious, it
was heartily enjoyed, and gave us strength to haul the mattresses we had
brought from the ship up into our sleeping rooms, so that very
refreshing slumbers closed the day.

Early next morning I got up without rousing any of the others, intending
to pay a visit to the beach; for I had my doubts about the safety of my
vessels on the open shore. The dogs were delighted when I descended the
ladder, and bounded to meet me; the cocks crowed and flapped their
wings; two pretty kids gamboled around; all was life and energy; the ass
alone seemed disinclined to begin the day, and as I especially required
his services, this was unfortunate. I put his morning dreams to flight,
however, and harnessed him to the sledge; the cow, as she had not been
milked, enjoyed the privilege of further repose, and, with the rest of
the family, I left her dozing.

My fears as to the safety of the boats were soon dispelled, for they
were all right; and, being in haste to return, the load I collected from
their freight was but a light one, and the donkey willingly trotted home
with it, he, as well as I, being uncommonly ready for breakfast.
Approaching the tree, not a sound was to be heard, not a soul was to be
seen, although it was broad day; and great was my good wife's surprise,
when, roused by the clatter and hullabaloo I made, she started up, and
became aware of the late hour!

"What can have made us oversleep ourselves like this?" she exclaimed.
"It must be the fault of those mattresses; they are delightful, but
really too lulling; see, the children are sound asleep still."

With much stretching and many yawns, the boys at last came tumbling down
from the tree, rubbing their eyes and seeming but half awake; Ernest
last, as usual.

"Come, my boys," said I, "this will never do! Your beds were too
luxurious last night, I see." In my own opinion, however, I felt there
was something else to blame besides the comfortable mattresses, and I
made a mental resolve that the captain's fine Canary should be dealt
with very sparingly in future. "So now for prayers and breakfast," I
continued, "and then off to work. I must have our cargo landed in time
to get the boats off with the next tide."

By dint of downright hard work, we accomplished this, and I got on board
with Fritz as soon as they were afloat; the rest turned homeward, but
Jack lingered behind with such imploring looks, that I could not resist
taking him with me.

My intention had been simply to take the vessels round to the harbor in
Safety Bay, but the calm sea and fine weather tempted me to make another
trip to the wreck. It took up more time than I expected, so that, when
on board, we could only make a further examination of the cargo, collect
a few portable articles, and then avail ourselves of the sea-breeze
which would fail us later in the evening.

To Jack the pleasure of hunting about in the hold was novel and
charming, and very soon a tremendous rattling and clattering heralded
his approach with a wheel-barrow, in the highest spirits at his good
fortune in having found such a capital thing in which to bring home
potatoes.

He was followed by Fritz, whose news was still more important. He had
found, carefully packed and enclosed within partitions, what appeared to
be the separate parts of a pinnace, with rigging and fittings complete,
even to a couple of small brass guns. This was a great discovery, and I
hastened to see if the lad was right. Indeed he was, but my pleasure was
qualified by a sense of the arduous task it would be to put such a craft
together so as to be fit for sea. For the present we had barely time to
get something to eat and hurry into the boat, where were collected our
new acquisitions, namely, a copper boiler, iron plates, tobacco-graters,
two grindstones, a small barrel of powder, and another of flints, two
wheel-barrows, besides Jack's, which he kept under his own especial
care.

As we drew near the shore, we were surprised to see a number of little
figures ranged in a row along the water's edge, and apparently gazing
fixedly at us. They seemed to wear dark coats and white waistcoats, and
stood quite still with their arms dropping by their sides, only every
now and then one would extend them gently, as though longing to embrace
us.

"Ah! here at last come the pigmy inhabitants of the country to welcome
us!" cried I, laughing.

"Oh, father!" exclaimed Jack, "I hope they are Lilliputians! I once read
in a book about them, so there must be such people, you know, only these
look rather too large."

"You must be content to give up the Lilliputians and accept penguins, my
dear Jack," said I. "We have not before seen them in such numbers, but
Ernest knocked one down, if you remember, soon after we landed. They can
neither fly nor run."

We were gradually approaching the land as I spoke, and no sooner was the
water shallow, than out sprang Jack from his tub, and wading ashore,
took the unsuspecting birds by surprise, and with his stick laid half a
dozen, right and left, either stunned or dead at his feet. The rest
escaped into the water, dived, and disappeared.

As these penguins are disagreeable food, on account of their strong,
oily taste, I was sorry Jack had attacked them; but going to examine
them when we landed, some of the fallen arose from their swoon, and
began solemnly to waddle away, upon which we caught them, and tying
their feet together with long grass, laid them on the sand to wait until
we were ready to start.

The three wheel-barrows then each received a load, the live penguins,
seated gravely, were trundled along by Jack, and away we went at a great
rate.

The usual noise of our approach set the dogs barking furiously, but
discovering us, they rushed forward with such forcible demonstrations of
delight, that poor little Jack, who, as it was, could scarcely manage
his barrow, was fairly upset, penguins and all. This was too much for
his patience, and it was absurd to see how he started up and cuffed them
soundly for their boisterous behavior.

This scene, and the examination of our burdens, caused great merriment:
the tobacco-grater and iron plates evidently puzzling everybody.

I sent the boys to catch some of our geese and ducks, and bid them
fasten a penguin to each by the leg, thinking that it was worth while to
try to tame them.

My wife had exerted herself in our absence to provide a good store of
potatoes, and also of manioc root. I admired her industry, and little
Franz said, "Ah, father! I wonder what you will say when mother and I
give you some Indian corn, and melons, and pumpkins, and cucumbers!"

"Now, you little chatterbox!" cried she, "you have let out my secret! I
was to have the pleasure of surprising your father when my plants were
growing up."

"Ah, the poor disappointed little mother!" said I. "Never mind! I am
charmed to hear about it. Only do tell me where did these seeds come
from?"

"Out of my magic bag, of course!" replied she. "And each time I have
gone for potatoes, I have sown seeds in the ground which was dug up to
get them; and I have planted potatoes also."

"Well done, you wise little woman!" I exclaimed. "Why, you are a model
of prudence and industry!"

"But," continued she, "I do not half like the appearance of those
tobacco-graters you have brought. Is it possible you are going to make
snuff? Do, pray, let us make sure of abundance of food for our mouths,
before we think of our noses!"

"Make your mind easy, my wife," said I. "I have not the remotest
intention of introducing the dirty, ridiculous habit of snuffing into
your family! Please to treat my graters with respect, however, because
they are to be the means of providing you with the first fresh bread you
have seen this many a long day."

"What possible connection can there be between bread and
tobacco-graters? I cannot imagine what you mean, and to talk of bread
where there are no ovens is only tantalizing."

"Ah, you must not expect real loaves," said I. "But on these flat iron
plates I can bake flat cakes or scones, which will be excellent bread; I
mean to try at once what I can do with Ernest's roots. And first of all,
I want you to make a nice strong canvas bag."

This the mother willingly undertook to do, but she evidently had not
much faith in my powers as a baker, and I saw her set on a good potful
of potatoes before beginning to work, as though to make sure of a meal
without depending on my bread.

Spreading a piece of sailcloth on the ground, I summoned my boys to set
to work. Each took a grater and a supply of well-washed manioc root, and
when all were seated round the cloth--"Once, twice, thrice! Off!" cried
I, beginning to rub a root as hard as I could against the rough surface
of my grater. My example was instantly followed by the whole party, amid
bursts of merriment, as each remarked the funny attitude and odd
gestures of his neighbors while vehemently rubbing, rasping, grating,
and grinding down the roots allotted to him. No one was tempted by the
look of the flour to stop and taste it, for in truth it looked much like
wet sawdust.

"Cassava bread is highly esteemed in many parts of the New World, and I
have heard that some Europeans there prefer it to the wheaten bread of
their own country. There are various species of manioc. One sort grows
quickly, and its roots ripen in a very short time. Another kind is of
somewhat slower growth. The roots of the third kind do not come to
maturity for two years. The two first are poisonous, if eaten raw, yet
they are preferred to the third, which is harmless, because they are so
much more fruitful, and the flour produced is excellent, if the
scrapings are carefully pressed."

"What is the good of pressing them, father?" inquired Ernest.

"It is in order to express the sap, which contains poison. The dry pith
is wholesome and nourishing. Still, I do not mean to taste my cakes,
until I have tried the effect on our fowls and the ape."

By this time our supply of roots being reduced to damp powder, the
canvas bag was filled with it, and tying it tightly up, I attempted to
squeeze it, but soon found that mechanical aid was necessary in order to
express the moisture. My arrangements for this purpose were as follows:
A strong, straight beam was made flat on one side, smooth planks were
laid across two of the lower roots of our tree; on these we placed the
sack, above the sack another plank, and over that the long beam; one end
was passed under a root near the sack, the other projected far forward.
And to that we attached all the heaviest weights we could think of, such
as an anvil, iron bars, and masses of lead. The consequent pressure on
the bag was enormous, and the sap flowed from it to the ground.

"Will this stuff keep any time?" inquired my wife, who came to see how
we were getting on. "Or must all this great bagful be used at once? In
that case we shall have to spend the whole of to-morrow in baking
cakes."

"Not at all," I replied; "once dry, the flour in barrels will keep fresh
a long time. We shall use a great deal of this, however, as you shall
see."

"Do you think we might begin now, father?" said Fritz. "There does not
seem the least moisture remaining."

"Certainly," said I. "But I shall only make one cake to-day for an
experiment; we must see how it agrees with Master Knips and the hens
before we set up a bakehouse in regular style."

I took out a couple of handfuls of flour for this purpose, and with a
stick loosened and stirred the remainder, which I intended should be
again pressed. While an iron plate, placed over a good fire, was getting
hot, I mixed the meal with water and a little salt, kneaded it well, and
forming a thickish cake, laid it on the hot plate, when one side
presently becoming a nice yellow-brown color, it was turned and was
quickly baked.

It smelt so delicious that the boys quite envied the two hens and the
monkey, who were selected as the subjects of this interesting
experiment, and they silently watched them gobbling up the bits of cake
I gave them, until Fritz turned to me, saying, "Suppose the cake is
poisonous, what effect will it have on the creatures? Will they be
stupefied, or will they suffer pain?"

"That depends upon the nature of the poison. Some cause violent pain, as
colchicum, hellebore, and aconite. Others produce stupefaction and
paralysis, as opium, hemlock, and prussic acid; while others again, as
strychnine, are followed by violent convulsions, or, as belladonna, by
delirium. The effects of course vary according to the quantity taken,
and such remedies should be applied as will best counteract the effect
of each poison: emetics in any case, to remove as much as possible of
the noxious substance, combined with oils and mucilaginous drinks to
soothe and protect the stomach in case of irritants; stimulants, such as
spirits, ammonia, or strong coffee to rouse from the stupor of the
narcotics; and sedative drugs, which are perhaps in themselves poisons,
to counteract the over stimulation of the nerves caused by the
convulsant poisons. But now let us think no more of poisons; here is
supper ready and we need not be afraid to eat roast penguin and
potatoes."

No sooner said than done; we left the fowls picking up the least crumb
they could find of the questionable food, and assembled to enjoy our
evening meal. The potatoes were, as usual, excellent, the penguin was
really not so bad as I expected, although fishy in taste and very tough.

Next morning every one expressed the tenderest concern as to the health
of Knips and the hens; and lively pleasure was in every countenance when
Jack, who ran first to make the visit inquiry, brought news of their
perfect good health and spirits.

No time was now to be lost, and the bread-baking commenced in earnest. A
large fire was kindled, the plates heated, the meal made into cakes,
each of the boys busily preparing his own, and watching the baking most
eagerly. Mistakes occurred, of course; some of the bread was burnt, some
not done enough; but a pile of nice, tempting cakes was at length ready,
and with plenty of good milk we breakfasted right royally, and in high
spirits at our success.

Soon after, while feeding the poultry with the fragments of the repast,
I observed that the captive penguins were quite at ease among them and
as tame as the geese and ducks; their bonds were therefore loosed, and
they were left as free as the other fowls.




CHAPTER VI.

 Now for the pinnace--Repeated visits to the wreck--The pinnace
     built--How shall we cut her out--The difficulty solved--We fit her
     out--Fire a salute--The mother's surprise--We visit
     Falconhurst--Attend to our fruit trees--Athletics--The lasso--An
     excursion--A bustard captured--Ernest discovers a magician--Jack
     fights him--The Liane Rouge--We turn carvers--Ernest's alarm--The
     old sow again--We discover a sleeping beauty--Return with it to
     the camp--Knips pronounces our apples "good"--Return to
     Falconhurst.


Having now discovered how to provide bread for my family, my thoughts
began to revert to the wreck and all the valuables yet contained within
it. Above all, I was bent on acquiring possession of the beautiful
pinnace, and aware that our united efforts would be required to do the
necessary work, I began to coax and persuade the mother to let me go in
force with all her boys except Franz.

She very unwillingly gave her consent at last, but not until I had
faithfully promised never to pass a night on board. I did so with
reluctance, and we parted, neither feeling quite satisfied with the
arrangement.

The boys were delighted to go in so large a party, and merrily carried
provision bags filled with cassava bread and potatoes.

Reaching Safety Bay without adventure we first paid a visit to the geese
and ducks which inhabited the marsh there, and having fed them and seen
they were thriving well, we buckled on each his cork belt, stepped into
the tub-boat, and, with the raft in tow, steered straight for the wreck.

When we got on board, I desired the boys to collect whatever came first
to hand, and load the raft to be ready for our return at night, and
then we made a minute inspection of the pinnace.

I came to the conclusion that difficulties, well-nigh insuperable, lay
between me and the safe possession of the beautiful little vessel. She
lay in a most un-get-at-able position at the further end of the hold,
stowed in so confined and narrow a space, that it was impossible to
think of fitting the parts together there. At the same time these parts
were so heavy, that removing them to a convenient place piece by piece
was equally out of the question.

I sent the boys away to amuse themselves by rummaging out anything they
liked to carry away, and sat down quietly to consider the matter.

As my eyes became used to the dim light which entered the compartment
through a chink or crevice here and there, I perceived how carefully
every part of the pinnace was arranged and marked with numbers, so that
if only I could bestow sufficient time on the work, and contrive space
in which to execute it, I might reasonably hope for success.

"Room! room to work in, boys! that's what we need in the first place!" I
cried, as my sons came to see what plan I had devised, for so great was
their reliance on me that they never doubted the pinnace was to be ours.

"Fetch axes, and let us break down the compartment and clear space all
round."

To work we all went, yet evening drew near, and but little impression
was made on the mass of woodwork around us. We had to acknowledge than
an immense amount of labor and perseverance would be required before we
could call ourselves the owners of the useful and elegant little craft,
which lay within this vast hulk like a fossil shell embedded in a rock.

Preparations for returning to shore were hastily made, and we landed
without much relish for the long walk to Falconhurst, when, to our great
surprise and pleasure, we found the mother and little Franz at Tentholm
awaiting us. She had resolved to take up her quarters there during the
time we should be engaged on the wreck. "In that way you will live
nearer your work, and I shall not quite lose sight of you!" said she,
with a pleasant smile.

"You are a good, sensible, kind wife," I exclaimed, delighted with her
plan, "and we shall work with the greater diligence, that you may return
as soon as possible to your dear Falconhurst."

"Come and see what we have brought you, mother!" cried Fritz; "a good
addition to your stores, is it not?" and he and his brothers exhibited
two small casks of butter, three of flour, corn, rice, and many other
articles welcome to our careful housewife.

Our days were now spent in hard work on board, first cutting and
clearing an open space round the pinnace, and then putting the parts
together. We started early and returned at night, bringing each time a
valuable freight from the old vessel.

At length, with incredible labor, all was completed. The pinnace stood
actually ready to be launched, but imprisoned within massive wooden
walls which defied our strength.

It seemed exactly as though the graceful vessel had awakened from sleep,
and was longing to spring into the free blue sea, and spread her wings
to the breeze. I could not bear to think that our success so far should
be followed by failure and disappointment. Yet no possible means of
setting her free could I conceive, and I was almost in despair, when an
idea occurred to me which, if I could carry it out, would effect her
release without further labor or delay.

Without explaining my purpose, I got a large cast-iron mortar, filled it
with gunpowder, secured a block of oak to the top, through which I
pierced a hole for the insertion of the match, and this great petard I
so placed, that when it exploded it should blow out the side of the
vessel next from which the pinnace lay. Then securing it with chains,
that the recoil might do no damage, I told the boys I was going ashore
earlier than usual, and calmly desired them to get into the boat. Then
lighting a match I had prepared, and which would burn some time before
reaching the powder, I hastened after them with a beating heart, and we
made for the land.

We brought the raft close in shore and began to unload it; the other
boat I did not haul up, but kept her ready to put off at a moment's
notice; my anxiety was unobserved by anyone, as I listened with strained
nerves for the expected sound. It came!--a flash! a mighty roar--a grand
burst of smoke!

My wife and children, terror-stricken, turned their eyes toward the sea,
whence the startling noise came, and then, in fear and wonder, looked to
me for some explanation. "Perhaps," said the mother, as I did not speak,
"perhaps you have left a light burning near some of the gunpowder, and
an explosion has taken place."

"Not at all unlikely," replied I quietly; "we had a fire below when we
were caulking the seams of the pinnace. I shall go off at once and see
what has happened. Will any one come?"

The boys needed no second invitation, but sprang into the boat, while I
lingered to reassure my wife by whispering a few words of explanation,
and then joining them, we pulled for the wreck at a more rapid rate than
we ever had done before.

No alternation had taken place in the side at which we usually boarded
her, and we pulled round to the further side, where a marvelous sight
awaited us. A huge rent appeared, the decks and bulwarks were torn open,
the water was covered with floating wreckage--all seemed in ruins; and
the compartment where the pinnace rested was fully revealed to view.
There sat the little beauty, to all appearance uninjured; and the boys,
whose attention was taken up with the melancholy scene of ruin and
confusion around them, were astonished to hear me shout in enthusiastic
delight: "Hurrah! she is ours! The lovely pinnace is won! we shall be
able to launch her easily after all. Come, boys, let us see if she has
suffered from the explosion which has set her free."

The boys gazed at me for a moment, and then guessing my secret, "You
planned it yourself, you clever, cunning father! Oh, that machine we
helped to make was on purpose to blow it up!" cried they; and eagerly
they followed me into the shattered opening, where, to my intense
satisfaction, I found everything as I could wish, and the captive in no
way a sufferer from the violent measures I had adopted for her
deliverance.

The boys were deeply interested in examining the effects of the
explosion, and in the explanation I gave them of the principle and
proper way to manage a petard.

It was evident that the launch could now be effected without much
trouble; I had been careful to place rollers beneath the keel, so that
by means of levers and pulleys we might, with our united strength, move
her forward toward the water. A rope was attached by which to regulate
the speed of the descent, and then, all hands putting their shoulders to
the work, the pinnace began to slide from the stocks, and finally
slipped gently and steadily into the water, where she floated as if
conscious it was her native element; while we, wild with excitement,
cheered and waved enthusiastically. We then only remained long enough to
secure our prize carefully at the most sheltered point, and went back to
Tentholm, where we accounted for the explosion; saying that having blown
away one side of the ship, we should be able to obtain the rest of its
contents with a very few more days' work.

These days were devoted to completing the rigging, the mounting of her
two little brass guns, and all necessary arrangements about the pinnace.
It was wonderful what martial ardor was awakened by the possession of a
vessel armed with two real guns. The boys chattered incessantly about
savages, fleets of canoes, attack, defense, and final annihilation of
the invaders.

I assured them that, brilliant as their victories would doubtless be, we
should have good cause to thank God if their fighting powers and
new-born valor were never put to the test.

The pinnace was fully equipped and ready to sail, while yet no idea of
the surprise we were preparing for her had dawned upon my wife, and I
permitted the boys, who had kept the secret so well, to fire a salute
when we entered the bay.

Casting off from the ship, and spreading the sail, our voyage began. The
pinnace glided swiftly through the water. I stood at the helm, Ernest
and Jack manned the guns, and Fritz gave the word of command, "Fire!"
Bang! bang! rattled out a thrilling report, which echoed and re-echoed
among the cliffs, followed by our shouts and hurrahs.

The mother and her little boy rushed hastily forward from near the tent,
and we could plainly see their alarm and astonishment; but speedily
recognizing us, they waved joyfully, and came quickly to the landing
place to meet us.

By skillful management we brought the pinnace near a projection of the
bank, and Fritz assisted his mother to come on board, where, breathless
with haste and excitement, she exclaimed, "You dear, horrid, wonderful
people, shall I scold you or praise you? You have frightened me out of
my wits! To see a beautiful little ship come sailing in was startling
enough, for I could not conceive who might be on board, but the report
of your guns made me tremble with fear--and had I not recognized your
voices directly after, I should have run away with Franz--Heaven knows
where! But have you really done all this work yourselves?" she
continued, when we had been forgiven for terrifying her with our
vainglorious salute. "What a charming little yacht! I should not be
afraid to sail in this myself."

After the pinnace had been shown off, and received the admiration she
deserved, while our industry, skill, and perseverance met with
boundless praise: "Now," said my wife, "you must come with me, and see
how little Franz and I have improved our time every day of your
absence."

We all landed, and with great curiosity followed the mother up the river
toward the cascade; where, to our astonishment, we found a garden neatly
laid out in beds and walks; and she continued, "We don't frighten people
by firing salutes in honor of our performances; although, by and by, I
too shall want fire in a peaceable form. Look at my beds of lettuce and
cabbages, my rows of beans and peas! Think what delicious dinners I
shall be able to cook for you, and give me credit for my diligence."

"My dear wife!" I exclaimed, "this is beautiful! You have done wonders!
Did you not find the work too hard?"

"The ground is light and easy to dig hereabouts," she replied. "I have
planted potatoes, and cassava roots; there is space for sugar-cane, and
the young fruit trees, and I shall want you to contrive to irrigate
them, by leading water from the cascades in hollow bamboos. Up by the
sheltering rocks I mean to have pine-apples and melons; they will look
splendid when they are spread there. To shelter the beds of European
vegetables from the heat of the sun, I have planted seeds of maize round
them. The shadow of the tall plants will afford protection from the
burning rays. Do you think that is a good plan?"

"I do, indeed; the whole arrangement is capital. Now, as sunset
approaches, we must return to the tent for supper and rest, for both of
which we are all quite ready."

The time passed in happy talk over our many new interests; every one had
the pleasant sensation which attends successful labor, as well as
experiencing the joy of affording unexpected pleasure to others; and I
especially pointed out to my sons how true, genuine happiness consists
in that, rather than in mere self-gratification.

Next morning, my wife said: "If you can exist on shore long enough to
visit Falconhurst, dear husband, I should like you to attend to the
little fruit trees. I fear they have been too much neglected. I have
watered them occasionally, and spread earth over the roots as they lay,
but I could not manage to plant them."

"You have done far more than I could have expected, my wife," I replied,
"and provided you do not ask me to give up the sea altogether, I most
willingly agree to your request, and will go to Falconhurst as soon as
the raft is unloaded, and everything safely arranged here."

Life on shore was an agreeable change for us all, and the boys actively
went to work, so that the stores were quickly brought up to the tent,
piled in order, and carefully covered with sailcloths, fastened down by
pegs all round. The pinnace being provided with an anchor, was properly
moored, and her elegant appearance quite altered the looks of our
harbor, hitherto occupied only by the grotesque tub boat, and flat,
uninteresting raft.

Taking an ample supply of everything we should require at Falconhurst,
we were soon comfortably reestablished in that charming abode, its
peaceful shade seeming more delightful than ever, after the heat and
hard work we had lately undergone.

Several Sundays had passed during our stay at Tentholm, and the welcome
Day of Rest now returned again, to be observed with heartfelt devotion
and grateful praise.

I did not attempt too much in the form of preaching, as I could not have
secured the attention of my hearers to any long-winded discourse, but
they were interested in the Bible reading and simple instructions I drew
from it, and their young voices joined sweetly in favorite hymns, which
my wife sang from memory.

In the evening I desired the boys to let me see their dexterity in
athletic exercises, such as running, leaping, wrestling, and climbing;
telling them they must keep up the practice of these things, so as to
grow strong, active men, powerful to repel and cope with danger, as well
as agile and swift-footed to escape from it. No man can be really
courageous and self-reliant without an inward consciousness of physical
power and capability.

"I want to see my sons strong, both morally and physically," said I;
"that means, little Franz," as the large blue eyes looked inquiringly up
at him, "brave to do what is good and right, and to hate evil, and
strong to work, hunt, and provide for themselves and others, and to
fight if necessary."

On the following day, the boys seeming disposed to carry out my wishes
by muscular exercise of all sorts, I encouraged them by saying I meant
to prepare a curious new weapon for them, only they must promise not to
neglect the practice of archery; as to their guns, I had no reason to
fear they would be laid aside.

Taking a long cord, I attached a leaden bullet to each end and had
instantly to answer a storm of questions as to what this could possibly
be for.

"This is a miniature lasso," said I; "the Mexicans, Patagonians, and
various tribes of South America, make use of this weapon in hunting,
with marvelous dexterity, only, having no bullets, they fasten stones to
their ropes, which are immensely longer than this. One end is swung
round and round the mounted hunter's head, and then cast with skill and
precision toward the animal he wishes to strike; immediately drawing it
back, he can repeat the blow, and either kill or wound his prey.
Frequently, however, the intention is to take the animal, wild horse, or
buffalo, or whatever it may be, alive; and in that case, the lasso is
thrown, while riding in hot pursuit, in such a way as to make the stone
twist many times round the neck, body, or legs of the fugitive,
arresting him even in full career."

"Oh, father, what a splendid contrivance! Will you try it now? There is
the donkey, father! do catch the donkey."

Not at all certain of my powers, I declined to practice upon a live
subject, but consented to make a trial of skill by aiming at the stump
of a tree at no great distance.

My success surpassed my own expectations; the stump was entwined by the
cord in such a way as to leave no doubt whatever as to the feasibility
of the wonderful performances I described; and I was assailed by
petitions from the boys, each anxious to possess a lasso of his own
without a moment's delay.

As the manufacture was simple, their wishes were speedily gratified, and
lasso practice became the order of the day.

Fritz, who was the most active and adroit, besides having, of course,
the greatest muscular strength, soon became skilled in the art.

That night a change came over the weather, and early next morning I
perceived that a gale of wind was getting up. From the height of our
trees I could see that the surface of the sea was in violent agitation.

It was with no small satisfaction that I thought of our hard-won
pinnace, safely moored in the harbor, and recollected that there was
nothing to call us to the wreck for the next few days.

My attention was by no means monopolized by my sons and their
amusements. The good mother had much to show me demanding my approval,
advice, or assistance, as the case might be.

A good supply of wild pigeons and ortolans had been snared, partly
cooked, and preserved in lard. Of these she showed me her small cask
well filled.

Then the nests of various pairs of tame pigeons were exhibited, but her
chief care was the unpromising condition of her dear little fruit trees,
for, having been forgotten, they were so dry and withered, that unless
planted without further delay, she feared we should lose them.

This needful work we set about, therefore, at once, proposing afterward
an excursion to the Calabash Wood, in order to manufacture a large
supply of vessels and utensils of all sorts and sizes.

Every one was inclined for this expedition; consequently the planting of
the orchard was carried on with surprising vigor, but was not completed
until toward evening; and then all sorts of arrangements were made for
an early start next day. The mother and Franz were to be of the party,
and their equipment took some time, for we meant to make a grand family
excursion, attended by our domestic pets and servants!

By sunrise we were all astir, and everything quickly made ready for a
start.

The sledge, loaded with ammunition and baskets of provisions, and drawn
by the donkey, was to be used for carrying home our gourd manufactures,
as well as any other prize we might fall in with.

Turk, as usual, headed the procession, clad in his coat of mail.

Then came the boys with their guns and game bags. Their mother and I
followed, and behind trotted Juno, not in very good spirits, poor dog!
because Master Knips, who had no idea of being left alone, must needs
ride on her back.

On this occasion I took two guns with me, one loaded with shot for game,
another with ball for our defense against beasts of prey.

Flamingo Marsh was quickly crossed, and the magnificent country beyond
lay extended in all its beauty and fertility before our eyes. It was new
to my wife and two of the boys, and the lovely prospect enchanted them.

Here Fritz and Jack turned aside into the bush, where presently loud
barking was followed by the quick report of a gun, and a large bird,
which had risen from thicket, fell heavily to the ground before us. Far
from resigning itself, however, to death or captivity, it sprung to its
feet, and, unable to fly, rushed away with extraordinary speed, hotly
pursued by the excited dog, while Fritz ran, panting, in the same
direction, and Juno, eager to join the chase, sprang aside so suddenly
that her rider was flung unceremoniously on the sand, as she darted to
intercept the retreat of the active bird. This she cleverly
accomplished, but its defense was maintained so fiercely, as it struck
out with its powerful legs and sharp claws, that neither Fritz nor the
dogs could master it.

I hastened to their assistance, and found Juno holding on nobly by the
wing she had seized, while the bird, which proved to be a magnificent
bustard, struggled and fought fiercely. Watching my opportunity, I threw
a large handkerchief over it, and with difficulty succeeded in binding
its legs and wings. It was borne in triumph to the rest of our party,
who meantime had been reclining on the sand.

"What have you got?" "What has Fritz shot?" cried the boys, starting up
at our approach. "A bustard! oh, that is splendid!"

"To be sure, it is the one we missed that day, don't you remember,
mother? Ah, ha! old fellow, you are done for this time!" said Jack.

"I think this is a hen bustard; it is the mother bird," said Ernest.

"Ah, yes, poor thing!" exclaimed my wife, in a tone of concern; "it is
most likely the same, and I know she had a brood of young birds, and now
they will be left unprotected and miserable. Had we not better let her
go?"

"Why, my dear, kind-hearted wife, that was weeks and weeks ago! Those
little birds are all strong and big by this time, and I dare say Mrs.
Bustard here has forgotten all about them. Besides, she is badly
wounded, and we must try to cure the hurt. If we succeed, she will be a
valuable addition to our poultry yard; if we cannot, you shall roast her
for dinner."

Resuming our march, we next arrived at the Monkey Grove, which was the
scene of the tragi-comic adventure by which Fritz became the guardian of
the orphan ape.

While he amused us all by a lively and graphic description of the scene,
Ernest was standing apart under a splendid cocoanut palm, gazing in
fixed admiration at the grand height of the stem, and its beautiful,
graceful crown of leaves. The cluster of nuts beneath these evidently
added interest to the spectacle, for, drawing quietly near him, I heard
a long-drawn sigh, and the words:

"It's awfully high! I wish one would fall down!"

Scarcely had he uttered these words, than, as if by magic, down plumped
a huge nut at his feet.

The boy was quite startled, and sprang aside, looking timidly upward,
when, to my surprise, down came another.

"Why, this is just like the fairy tale of the wishing-cap!" cried
Ernest. "My wish is granted as soon as formed!"

"I suspect the fairy in this instance is more anxious to pelt us and
drive us away than to bestow dainty gifts upon us," said I. "I think
there is most likely a cross-eyed old ape sitting up among those shadowy
leaves and branches."

We examined the nuts, thinking they were perhaps old ones, and had
fallen, in consequence, naturally, but they were not even quite ripe.

Anxious to discover what was in the tree, we all surrounded it, gaping
and gazing upward with curious eyes.

"Hullo! I see him!" shouted Fritz presently. "Oh, a hideous creature!
what can it be? flat, round, as big as a plate, and with a pair of
horrid claws! Here he comes! He is going to creep down the tree!"

At this, little Franz slipped behind his mother, Ernest took a glance
round to mark a place of retreat, Jack raised the butt-end of his gun,
and every eye was fixed on the trunk of the tree, down which a large
land-crab commenced a leisurely descent. As it approached within reach,
Jack hit at it boldly, when it suddenly dropped the remaining distance,
and opening its great claws, sidled after him with considerable
rapidity, upon which he fairly turned tail and ran. We all burst into a
roar of laughter, which soon made him face about, and then, to our
infinite amusement, the little fellow prepared for a fresh onset; laying
down all he was carrying, pulling off his jacket and spreading it wide
out in both hands, he returned to the charge, suddenly threw his garment
over the creature, wrapped it well round it, and then pummeled it with
all the strength of his fists.

For a few minutes I could do nothing but laugh, but then running to him
with my hatchet, I struck several sharp blows on his bundle, which we
opened carefully, and found within the land-crab perfectly dead.

"Well, this is an ugly rascal!" cried Jack; "if he hadn't been so
hideous, I should not have dealt so severely with him. I wasn't a bit
afraid. What is the creature's name?"

"This is a crab, a land-crab," said I, "of which there are many
varieties, and this, I think, is called a cocoanut crab, or at least it
deserves the name, for it is evidently very fond of eating these nuts,
since it takes the trouble to climb the trees for them; the difficulty
of getting at the kernel, too, is considerable. You showed no little
presence of mind, Jack, when you thought of catching it in your jacket;
in fact, it might have been more than a match for you otherwise, for
some are most determined fighters, and are very swift, too. Now let us
take it, as well as the nuts, to the sledge, and go on our way."

Progress became difficult, for we were constantly stopped in passing
through the wood, by having to cut away the hanging boughs and creeping
plants which interlaced them. Ernest was behind, and by-and-by called me
back to see what proved to be an important discovery; from the several
stalks of one of these creepers flowed clear cold water, and I
recognized the "liane rouge," which is known in America, and is so
precious to the thirsty hunter or traveler. This is truly one of God's
good gifts to man!

The boys were much delighted with this curious plant. "Only fancy,
mother," said Ernest, as he showed it to her, "how cheering and
refreshing to find this if one were lost and alone in a vast forest,
wandering for days and days without being near a natural spring of
water."

"But are you certain it is safe to drink this?" asked she.

I assured her it was so, and advised the boys to cut enough to quench
the thirst of the whole party, including our animals. This they did,
only finding it necessary, as with the sugar canes, to cut air holes
above the joints.

After struggling onward for a short time, we emerged from the thickets
into open ground, and saw the calabash trees in the distance. As we drew
near, their curious appearance and singular fruit caused much surprise
and also amusement, for we were speedily established among the trees,
where, as I chose and cut down the gourds most likely to be useful,
every one engaged merrily in the work of cutting, carving, sawing, and
scooping some manner of dish, bowl, cup, jar, or platter, according to
his several taste or ability.

We were to dine here, and after a time Fritz and Jack began to prepare a
fireplace, their great ambition being to heat the stones red hot, and
cook the crab in a hollow gourd. Their mother, therefore, left them to
their own devices, and attended to the hungry animals, unharnessing the
ass to graze, and giving cocoanut milk to the poor little monkey, who
had been obliged to travel in a covered basket for some time, lest he
should be lost in the woods. The wounded bustard had been completely
forgotten, and from heat and thirst was suffering greatly until her
friendly care revived it, and it was tied to a tree and allowed to move
about, its fierce spirit greatly tamed by adversity.

The cooking operations came to a stand soon after the fire was lighted,
for it appeared that we had no more water in the jars we had brought, so
the boys proposed to go in search of a spring. I agreed to accompany
them; Ernest also wished to join us, and as our intention was to
examine merely the surrounding wood, I saw no objection to leaving their
mother and Franz for a short time.

Very soon after our exploration began, Ernest, who was in front, turned
with a face of terror, shouting, "A wild boar! an immense wild boar,
father! Do come, quick!" And sure enough, I heard a loud snorting and
puffing as some large animal passed hastily through the thick underwood
beyond us. "After him lads, after him!" cried I, hurrying forward. "Call
the dogs! stand ready to fire!" And we pressed through the bushes to the
spot where Ernest had seen the creature. The ground was grubbed up, and
some potatoes lay about, showing that we had disturbed him at his
midday meal. Ernest and Jack were more disposed to gather the roots
than to follow up the chase. Fritz and I alone went after the dogs, who
eagerly pushed on, and by the sounds we heard had evidently attacked the
boar at no great distance. Terrific barking, snarling, and grunting
guided us to the scene of action, and we beheld our mastiffs one on each
side of a large respectable-looking pig, holding on by the great ears,
while the animal, on seeing us, appeared rather to beseech our
interference than to propose to offer a desperate resistance.

In a moment the truth became apparent! The captive grunter was no fierce
native of the forest, but our own runaway sow! Our excitement had been
wound to so high a pitch that the discovery was quite a shock, and we
felt half angry with the creature who had disappointed us; then the
absurdity of the whole thing made us laugh heartily, and calling off the
dogs, the old lady was released from her ignominious position. Our
laughter resounding through the wood, brought Ernest and Jack from their
potatoes, to see what was going on.

"Much use you two would have been suppose we had required help," cried
Fritz, as they recognized their old friend.

"Ah, well, you see," returned Jack, "Ernest and I had a sort of a kind
of presentiment that this was going to be the old sow. And just look at
our fine potatoes!"

A good deal of joking on the subject ensued, but was interrupted by
Ernest, who drew our attention to fruit resembling apples on the
surrounding bushes, and on the grass beneath them.

The sow was making amends for the fright and pain she had endured by
munching and crunching this fruit at a great rate. Fritz feared that it
might be the poisonous manchineel, against which I once warned them, but
on examining it, I was induced to pronounce a more favorable opinion,
and we collected a quantity in hopes that, if the monkey approved of it
as well as the old sow, we might be able to enjoy a feast ourselves.

All this time not a drop of water had we seen, and our own thirst
increasing, we felt eager to procure some before returning to our
resting-place.

Jack preceded us, and we made our way toward a high rock, which rose
above the thickets, when he suddenly startled us by a loud cry of "A
crocodile! father! father! A crocodile!"

"Nonsense, boy! A crocodile, of all things, in this dry, parched forest,
where we can't get so much as a mouthful of water!"

On advancing to where Jack stood, I perceived that his mistake was not
so very silly after all, for I beheld an iguana, one of the largest of
the lizard species, and a truly formidable-looking fellow. I was glad to
assure Jack that the strange creature he had found was perfectly
harmless, and that its flesh being esteemed a delicacy, it would be a
valuable prize to carry back with us.

In another moment Fritz would have fired, but arresting his hand, "Your
shot," I said, "would probably only wound the animal, and being
extremely tenacious of life, it would certainly escape; we must gain
possession of the sleeping beauty by a gentler method."

"You are not going to kiss it, are you, father?" asked Jack, with a
grin.

I tried to rebuke him for his impertinence, but, failing, I commenced
operations. I first attached a cord and running-noose to a stout stick,
and holding a light switch in my other hand, I began to approach the
creature with soft, slow steps, while the boys looked on with the utmost
curiosity.

Presently I began very softly to whistle a sweet, yet very lively air,
which I continued more and more distinctly as I drew near the lizard;
until, awaking, it seemed to listen with pleasure--raising its head as
though better to catch the sounds, or to discover whence they came.

When near enough, I began gently to stroke and tickle him with the wand,
continuing to whistle the prettiest tunes I could think of; and the
lizard gave signs of pleasurable contentment, stretching his limbs and
moving his tail in token of enjoyment.

Suddenly, availing myself of a movement of his head, I cast the noose
over it, drew the cord tight, and placing my foot on the body, I was
about to kill it by piercing the nostril--almost the only vulnerable
part in this singular reptile--when Jack received such a blow from its
tail, which was furiously driving in all directions, as sent him rolling
over like a ninepin. At the same time he opened his jaws, when the boys
took fright at the row of sharp teeth, and thinking that the sooner he
was dead the better, were for battering him with sticks; but I assuring
them my method would kill him more quickly and without pain, thrust my
rod into his nostril, on which the blood flowed and the lizard soon
expired.

The boys seemed to think me as wonderful a person as a snake charmer,
and the success of my stratagem, as well as of the means by which the
lizard was slain, called forth great admiration, since they had never
heard of the animal, nor of the method of capturing it so commonly
practised in the West Indies.

Now came the question of how we were to carry this unwieldy burden. I
had a great dislike to killing any creature and leaving it useless
behind me; so, without more ado, I fairly took it on my back, and
marched off with it.

As we came toward the Calabash Wood, we could hear the voices of the
deserted mother and child calling us in anxious tones; for indeed our
protracted absence alarmed them. We shouted joyously in reply, and our
appearance, as we issued from the woods, afforded them welcome relief
from their fears, although the dreadful creature on my back startled
them not a little.

There was so much to tell, so much to be seen, that for a time hunger
and thirst were forgotten; and no one thought even of the water we had
vainly gone in search of, until Master Knips, having slyly possessed
himself of some of our new-found apples, was discovered munching away
and enjoying them amazingly--which instantly gave the boys a strong wish
to eat some also; and as the bustard likewise pecked at them without
hesitation, I felt sure there could be no danger; and on tasting them, I
concluded it was the fruit of the guava, a West Indian plant, which we
were delighted to have.

Although refreshing, this fruit rather sharpened than appeased our
appetites, and we were glad to eat the provisions we had brought from
home, without waiting to cook anything, as we had originally intended.

It was, in fact, high time to move homeward, and we thought it best not
to encumber ourselves with the sledge and the greater part of its load,
but to leave it until the next day. The ass was laden with the iguana
and the bustard; and little Franz, tired as he was, looked in vain for a
spare seat on its back.

Our road home lay through a majestic forest of oak trees, beneath which
lay numberless acorns, some of which we gathered as we went along; and
at length, before night closed in, we all reached Falconhurst in safety.

When supper was ready, we were thankful to recruit our exhausted
strength by eating heartily of a piece of broiled iguana, with potatoes
and roast acorns, which tasted like excellent chestnuts.




CHAPTER VII.

 Fritz and I return to the Calabash Wood--Fritz shoots a ruffed
     grouse--We come across waxberry bushes--Sociable grosbeaks--Fritz
     captures a parrot--A lecture on ants--Caoutchouc trees--The
     sago-palm and the edible worms--Return with sugar-canes to
     Falconhurst--Candle-making--How to make butter without a
     churn--Plant trees and adorn Tentholm--Last visit to the
     wreck--The first ducklings on the island--Falconhurst again--An
     excursion--We pitch our tent--Fritz and Jack ascend the cocoanut
     trees--Ernest brings us a delicacy--Loss of Grizzle--Jack and I go
     in pursuit--Giant bamboos--Encounter with buffaloes--The buffalo
     calf--Find a jackal's lair--Reach our camp--What happened in our
     absence--Fritz's pet--Sago manufacture--Meet with our sow and her
     family again--How Ernest tamed the eagle.


The first thing to be done on the following day was to return to the
Calabash Wood, to fetch the sledge with the dishes, bowls, and baskets
we had made.

Fritz alone accompanied me. I desired the other boys to remain with
their mother, intending to explore beyond the chain of rocky hills, and
thinking a large party undesirable on the occasion.

Passing through the wood of evergreen oaks, we observed our sow feasting
on the acorns, evidently not a whit the worse for the fright we had
given her the previous day--in fact, she appeared more friendly disposed
toward us than usual, possibly considering us as her deliverers from the
jaws of the savage dogs.

Many birds tenanted this grove, and were undisturbed by our movements,
until Fritz fired and shot a beautiful bluejay and a couple of
parroquets, one a brilliant scarlet, the other green and gold.

Fritz was in the act of reloading his gun, when an unaccountable noise
struck our ears, and put us instantly on the alert, because it appeared
like the dull thumping sound of a muffled drum, and reminded us of the
possible presence of savages.

With the greatest caution we drew near the sound, concealing ourselves
among the low bushes and thick grass and creepers, until we reached an
open glade; where, standing on an old prostrate log, was a beautiful
bird, about the size of a cock, of a rich chestnut brown color, finely
mottled with dark brown and gray. On the shoulders were curious tufts of
velvety black feathers, glossed with green. He was ruffling his wings,
erecting his tail and neck feathers, strutting and wheeling about in a
most strange and stately fashion. After maneuvering for some time in
this manner, greatly to the edification of a party of birds resembling
him, but without any ruff, who, assembled round the stump, were enjoying
his performances, he spread out his tail like a fan, stiffened his
wings, and began to strike with them in short, rapid beats, faster and
faster, until a rumbling sound like very distant thunder was produced,
and the whirring wings enveloped him as in a cloud. This was the
drumming noise which had alarmed us, increased, as I imagine, by the
wing strokes falling at times on the decayed and hollow stump on which
the curious pantomime was acted.

I was watching it with the utmost interest, when a shot from behind me
was fired, and in a moment the play was at an end; my over-hasty son had
changed the pretty comedy into a sad and needless tragedy. The
enthusiastic drummer fell dead from his perch, and the crowd of admiring
companions fled in dismay.

The cruel interruption of a scene so rare and remarkable annoyed me
extremely, and I blamed Fritz for firing without my leave. I felt sure
the bird was the ruffed grouse, and a very fine specimen. We placed it
on the ass, which was patiently awaiting our return, and went on our
way.

The sledge was quite safe where we had left it; it was early in the
day, and I resolved to explore, as I had intended, a line of cliff and
rocky hills, which, at more or less distance from the seashore, extended
the whole length of coast known or visible to us.

I desired to discover an opening, if any existed, by which to penetrate
the interior of the country, or to ascertain positively that we were
walled in and isolated on this portion of the coast.

Leaving Calabash Wood behind us, we advanced over ground covered with
manioc, potatoes, and many plants unknown to us; pleasant streamlets
watered the fruitful soil, and the view on all sides was open and
agreeable.

Some bushes attracted my notice, loaded with small white berries, of
peculiar appearance like wax, and very sticky when plucked. I recognized
in this a plant called by botanists _Myrica cerifera_, and with much
pleasure explained to Fritz that, by melting and straining these
berries, we might easily succeed in making candles, and afford very
great satisfaction to the mother, who did not at all approve of having
to lay her work aside and retire to rest the moment the sun set. The
greenish wax to be obtained would be more brittle than beeswax, but it
would burn very fairly, and diffuse an agreeable perfume. Having the ass
with us, we lost no time in gathering berries enough to fill one of the
large canvas bags he carried, and we then continued our route.

Very soon we met with another natural curiosity, the curious appearance
of which surprised us much. This was the abode, under one roof, of a
whole colony of birds, about the size of yellow hammers, but of plain
brown plumage. The nests were built in a mass round the stem and among
the branches of a tree standing alone, and a kind of roof formed of
grass, straws, and fibers covered them all, and sheltered the community
from rain and the heat of the sun. There were numbers of openings into
the irregular sides of the group of dwellings, the nests resembling
different apartments in a house common to all; twigs and small branches
emerged here and there from the walls, and served as perches for the
young birds, and resting-places and posts of observation for all. The
general appearance of the establishment reminded us of a huge
bath-sponge. The feathered inhabitants swarmed in and out by thousands,
and we saw among them many beautiful little parrots, who seemed in many
instances to contest possession of the nest with the lawful owners.

Fritz, being an expert climber and exceedingly anxious to examine the
nests more closely, ascended the tree, hoping to obtain one or two young
birds, if any were hatched. He put his hand into several holes, which
were empty; but at last his intended theft and robbery met with repulse
and chastisement he little expected; for, reaching far back into the
nest, his finger was seized and sharply bitten by a very strong beak, so
that with a cry he withdrew his hand, and shook it vigorously to lessen
the pain. Recovering from the surprise, he again and more resolutely
seized the unkind bird, and, despite its shrieks and screams, drew it
from its retreat, crammed it into his pocket, buttoned up his coat, and
slid quickly to the ground, pursued by numbers of the captive's
relations, who darted from the other holes and flew round the robber,
screeching and pecking at him in a rage.

Fritz's prize was not one of the real owners of the nests, which were
those of the sociable grosbeak, but a very pretty small green parrot,
with which he was greatly pleased, and which he at once determined to
tame and teach to speak; for the present it was carefully remanded to
prison in his pocket.

This curious colony of birds afforded us matter for conversation as we
went on our way; their cheerful, sociable habits, and the instinct which
prompted them to unite in labor for the common good, appearing most
wonderful to us.

"Examples of the kind, however," said I, "are numerous, in various
classes of animals. Beavers, for instance, build and live together in a
very remarkable way. Among insects, bees, wasps, and ants are well known
as social architects; in like manner, the coral insect works wonders
beneath the ocean waves, by force of perseverance and united effort."

"I have often watched ants at work," said Fritz; "it is most amusing to
see how they carry on the various works and duties of their
commonwealth."

"Have you ever noticed how much trouble they take with the eggs?"
inquired I, to see how far he understood the process; "carrying them
about in the warmth of the sun until they are hatched?"

"Ah! that is rather the chrysalis of the antworm, or larva which is
produced from an egg. I know they are called ants' eggs, but, strictly
speaking, that is incorrect."

"You are perfectly right, my boy. Well, if you have taken so much
interest in watching the little ants of your native country, how
delighted and astonished you would be to see the wonders performed by
the vast tribes of large ants in foreign lands.

"Some of these build heaps or nests, four or six feet high and
proportionately broad, which are so strong and firm that they defy
equally sunshine and rain. They are, within, divided into regular
streets, galleries, vaults, and nurseries. So firmly are these mounds
built, that with interior alterations, a deserted one might be used for
a baking-oven.

"The ant, although respected since the days of King Solomon as a model
of industry, is not in itself an attractive insect.

"It exudes a sticky moisture, its smell is unpleasant, and it destroys
and devours whatever eatable comes in its way. Although, in our own
country it does little harm, the large ants of foreign lands are most
destructive and troublesome; it being very difficult to check their
depredations. Fortunately they have enemies by whose exertions their
numbers are kept down; birds, other insects, and even four-footed beasts
prey upon them. Chief among the latter is the ant-bear, or tamanoir, of
South America, a large creature six or seven feet in length, covered
with long coarse hair, drooping like a heavy plume over the hind
quarters. The head is wonderfully elongated and very narrow; it is
destitute of teeth, and the tongue resembles somewhat a great red
earth-worm. It has immensely strong curved claws, with which it tears
and breaks down and scratches to pieces the hard walls of the ant-heaps;
then, protruding its sticky tongue, it coils and twists it about among
the terrified millions disturbed by its attack; they adhere to this
horrible invader, and are drawn irresistibly backward into the hungry,
toothless jaws awaiting them.

"The little ant-eater is not more than about twenty-one inches in
length, has a shorter and more natural looking head, and fine silky fur.
It usually lives in trees."

I was pleased to find my memory served me so well on this subject, as it
interested my boy amazingly; and occupied us for a considerable time
while we traveled onward.

Arriving presently at a grove of tall trees, with very strong, broad
thick leaves, we paused to examine them; they bore a round, fig-like
fruit, full of little seeds and of a sour, harsh taste.

Fritz saw some gummy resin exuding from cracks in the bark, and it
reminded him of the boyish delight afforded by collecting gum from
cherry-trees at home, so that he must needs stop to scrape off as much
as he could. He rejoined me presently, attempting to soften what he had
collected in his hands; but finding it would not work like gum, he was
about to fling it away, when he suddenly found that he could stretch it
and that it sprang back to its original size.

"Oh, father, only look! this gum is quite elastic! Can it possibly be
india-rubber?"

"What!" cried I; "let me see it! a valuable discovery that would be,
indeed; and I do believe you are perfectly right!"

"Why would it be so very valuable, father?" inquired Fritz. "I have
only seen it used for rubbing out pencil marks."

"India-rubber," I replied, "or, more properly, caoutchouc, is a milky,
resinous juice which flows from certain trees in considerable quantities
when the stem is purposely tapped. These trees are indigenous to the
South American countries of Brazil, Guiana, and Cayenne. The natives,
who first obtained it, used to form bottles by smearing earthen flasks
with repeated coatings of the gum when just fresh from the trees, and
when hardened and sufficiently thick, they broke the mold, shook out the
fragments, and hung the bottles in the smoke, when they became firmer
and of a dark color. While moist, the savages were in the habit of
drawing rude figures and lines on the resin by way of ornament; these
marks you may have observed, for the bottles obtained from the natives
by the Spaniards and Portuguese have for years been brought to Europe,
and cut into portions to be sold for use in drawing. Caoutchouc can be
put to many uses, and I am delighted to have it here, as we shall, I
hope, be able to make it into different forms; first and foremost, I
shall try to manufacture boots and shoes."

Soon after making this discovery, we reached the cocoanut wood, and saw
the bay extending before us, and the great promontory we called Cape
Disappointment, which hitherto had always bounded our excursions.

In passing through the wood, I remarked a smaller sort of palm, which,
among its grand companions, I had not previously noticed. One of these
had been broken by the wind, and I saw that the pith had a peculiar
mealy appearance, and I felt convinced that this was the world-renowned
sago-palm.

In the pith I saw some fat worms or maggots, and suddenly recollected
that I had heard of them before as feeding on the sago, and that in the
West Indies they are eaten as a delicacy.

I felt inclined to try what they tasted like; so at once kindling a
fire, and placing some half-dozen, sprinkled with salt, on a little
wooden spit, I set them to roast.

Very soon rich fat began to drop from them, and they smelt so temptingly
good that all repugnance to the idea of eating worms vanished; and,
putting one like a pat of butter on a baked potato, I boldly swallowed
it and liked it so much that several others followed in the same way.
Fritz also summoned courage to partake of this novel food, which was a
savory addition to our dinner of baked potatoes.

Being once more ready to start, we found so dense a thicket in the
direct route that we turned aside without attempting to penetrate it,
and made our way toward the sugar brake near Cape Disappointment. This
we could not pass without cutting a handsome bundle of sugar-canes, and
the donkey carried that, in addition to the bag of wax berries.

In time we reached the sledge in Calabash Wood: the ass was unloaded,
everything placed on the sledge, and our patient beast began calmly and
readily to drag the burden he had hitherto borne on his back.

No further adventure befell us, and we arrived in the evening at
Falconhurst, where our welcome was as warm as usual--all we had to tell
listened to with the greatest interest, all we had to show most eagerly
examined, the pretty green parroquet enchanting the boys most
particularly.

An excellent supper was ready for us, and with thankful hearts we
enjoyed it together; then, ascending to our tree-castle, and drawing up
the ladder after us, we betook ourselves to the repose well earned and
greatly needed after this fatiguing day.

The idea of candle-making seemed to have taken the fancy of all the
boys; and next morning they woke, one after the other, with the word
candle on their lips. When they were thoroughly roused they continued to
talk candles; all breakfast-time, candles were the subject of
conversation; and after breakfast they would hear of nothing else but
setting to work at once and making candles.

"So be it," said I; "let us become chandlers."

I spoke confidently, but to tell the truth, I had in my own mind certain
misgivings as to the result of our experiment. In the first place, I
knew that we lacked a very important ingredient--animal fat, which is
necessary to make candles burn for any length of time with brilliancy.
Besides this, I rather doubted how far my memory would recall the
various operations necessary in the manufacture. Of all this, however, I
said nothing; and the boys, under my direction, were soon at work. We
first picked off the berries and threw them into a large shallow iron
vessel placed on the fire. The green, sweet-scented wax was rapidly
melted, rising to the surface of the juice yielded by the berries. This
we skimmed off and placed in a separate pot by the fire, ready for use;
repeating the operation several times, until we had collected sufficient
liquid wax for our purpose. I then took the wicks my wife had prepared,
and dipped them one after the other into the wax, handing them as I did
so to Fritz, who hung them up on a bush to dry. The coating they thus
obtained was not very thick; but, by repeating the operation several
times, they at length assumed very fair proportions, and became real
sturdy candles. Our wax being at an end, we hung these in a cool, shady
place to harden; and that same night we sat up like civilized beings
three whole hours after sunset, and Falconhurst was for the first time
brilliantly illuminated.

We were all delighted with the success of our experiment.

"You are indeed clever," said my wife; "I only wish that with your
ingenuity you would show me how to make butter. Day after day I have the
annoyance of seeing a large supply of good cream go bad under my very
eyes, simply because I have no use to which to put it. Invent a plan,
please do."

"I think that perhaps I can help you," I replied, after a little
consideration; "not that I can claim the honor of the invention of my
plan; that is due to the Hottentots. I will see what I can do. Jack,
bring me one of our gourd bottles."

I took the gourd, one of those I had previously prepared, with a small
hole at one end and well hollowed out and cleaned; this I partially
filled with cream and then corked up the hole tightly.

"Here, boys," said I, "you can continue the operation, while I turn
carpenter and make a cart to take the place of our sledge."

I gave them their directions, and then set about my own work. They fixed
four posts in the ground, and to them fastened a square piece of
sailcloth by four cords attached to the corners. In this cradle they
placed the gourd of cream, and each taking a side rolled it backward and
forward continuously for half an hour.

"Now," I cried, looking up from my work, "open the gourd and take the
contents to your mother, with my compliments."

They did so; and my good wife's eyes were delighted with the sight of a
large lump of capital fresh butter.

With my son's assistance the cart was in time completed; a clumsy
vehicle it was, but strong enough for any purpose to which we might put
it, and, as it proved, of immense use to us in collecting the harvest.

We then turned our attention to our fruit-trees, which we had planted in
a plot ready for transplanting. The walnut, cherry, and chestnut trees
we arranged in parallel rows, so as to form a shady avenue from
Falconhurst to Family-bridge; and between them we laid down a tolerable
road, that we might have no difficulty in reaching Tentholm, be the
weather bad as it might. We planted the vines round the arched roots of
our great mangrove, and the rest of the trees in suitable spots; some
near Falconhurst, and others away over Jackal River, to adorn Tentholm.
Tentholm had been the subject of serious thoughts to me for some time
past, and I now turned all my attention thither. It was not my ambition
to make it beautiful, but to form of it a safe place of refuge in a case
of emergency. My first care, therefore, was to plant a thick, prickly
hedge capable of protecting us from any wild animal, and forming a
tolerable obstacle to the attack of even savages, should they appear.
Not satisfied with this, however, we fortified the bridge, and on a
couple of hillocks mounted two guns which we brought from the wreck, and
with whose angry mouths we might bark defiance at any enemy, man or
beast.

Six weeks slipped away while we were thus busily occupied, six weeks of
hard, yet pleasant, labor. We greeted each Sunday and its accompanying
rest most gratefully, and on that day always, especially thanked God for
our continued health and safety. I soon saw that this hard work was
developing in the boys remarkable strength, and this I encouraged by
making them practise running, leaping, climbing, and swimming; I also
saw, however, that it was having a less satisfactory effect upon their
clothes, which, though a short time before remarkably neat, were now, in
spite of the busy mother's mending and patching, most untidy and
disreputable. I determined, therefore, to pay another visit to the
wreck, to replenish our wardrobe and to see how much longer the vessel
was likely to hold together. Three of the boys and I went off in the
pinnace. The old ship seemed in much the same condition as when we had
left her; a few more planks had gone, but that was all.

"Come, boys," cried I, "not an article of the slightest value must be
left on board; rummage her out to the very bottom of her hold."

They took me at my word: sailors' chests, bales of cloth and linen, a
couple of small guns, ball and shot, tables, benches, window shutters,
bolts and locks, barrels of pitch, all were soon in a heap on the deck.
We loaded the pinnace and went on shore. We soon returned with our
tub-boat in tow, and after a few more trips nothing was left on board.

"One more trip," said I to my wife, before we started again, "and there
will be the end of the brave ship which carried us from Switzerland. I
have left two barrels of gunpowder on board and mean to blow her up."

Before we lighted the fusee, I discovered a large copper cauldron which
I thought I might save. I made fast to it a couple of empty casks, that
when the ship went up it might float. The barrels were placed, the train
lighted, and we returned on shore.

The supper was laid outside the tent, at a spot from whence we might
obtain a good view of the wreck. Darkness came on. Suddenly a vivid
pillar of fire rose from the black waters, a sullen roar boomed across
the sea, and we knew that our good old ship was no more.

We had planned the destruction of the vessel; we knew that it was for
the best; and yet that night we went to bed with a feeling of sadness in
our hearts, as though we had lost a dear old friend.

Next morning all our sadness was dispelled, and it was with pleasure
that we saw the shore lined with a rich store of planks and beams, the
remnants of the wreck. I soon found, too, the copper cauldron which was
successfully floated by the casks; this I got on shore, and hauling it
up among the rocks, stored under it the powder casks we had landed the
day before. Collecting all these valuables gave us some little trouble,
and while we were thus engaged my wife brought us good news. She had
discovered that two ducks and a goose had each reared a large family
among the reeds by the river; and they presently appeared waddling past
us, apparently vastly well-pleased with their performance. We greeted
them joyfully.

"Hurrah!" cried Ernest, "we'll be able to afford duck and green peas
some day soon, and imagine we're once more civilized mortals."

The sight of these birds reminded me of our family at Falconhurst, and I
announced my intention of paying them a visit.

Every one was delighted and every one would come with me. As we
approached Falconhurst I noticed that several young trees in our avenue
were considerably bent by the wind, and this resolved me to make an
expedition next day to cut bamboos for their support. As Fritz was the
only one besides myself who had visited Cape Disappointment and the
surrounding country, my wife and the younger boys begged hard to be
allowed to accompany me. I consented; and next morning we started,
bringing with us the cart, drawn by the cow and ass, and laden with
everything necessary for an expedition of several days--a tent,
provisions, a large supply of ammunitions, and all sorts of implements
and utensils; for I intended to make a great collection of fruits and
the produce of different trees. It was a lovely morning, and passing
gayly through the plantations of potatoes, manioc, and cassavas, we came
to the nests of the sociable grosbeak, the sight of which charmed the
children immensely.

We reached the wax trees, and there I called a halt, for I wished to
gather a sack or two of the berries that we might renew our stock of
candles. The berries were soon plucked; and I stored them away among the
bushes, marking the spot that we might find them on our return.

"Now for the caoutchouc tree," said I; "now for the waterproof boots and
leggings to keep your feet dry, Ernest." To the caoutchouc tree we
directed our steps, and were soon busily engaged in stabbing the bark
and placing vessels beneath to catch the sap. We again moved forward;
and, crossing the palm wood, entered upon a delightful plain bounded on
one side by an extensive field of waving sugar-cane, on the other by a
thicket of bamboos and lovely palms, while in front stretched the
shining sea, calm and noiseless.

"How beautiful!" exclaimed Jack, "let us pitch our tent here and stay
here always instead of living at Falconhurst. It would be jolly."

"Very likely," replied I, "and so would be the attacks of wild beasts;
imagine a great tiger lying in wait in the thicket yonder, and pouncing
out on us at night. No, no, thank you, I much prefer our nest in the
tree, or our impregnable position at Tentholm. We must make this our
headquarters for the present, however; for, though perhaps dangerous, it
is the most convenient spot we shall find. Call a halt and pitch the
tent."

Our beasts were quickly unyoked, the tent arranged, a large fire lit,
supper started, and we dispersed in various directions, some to cut
bamboos, and some to collect sugar-cane. We then returned; and, as
supper was still not ready and the boys were hungry, they decided to
obtain some cocoanuts. This time, however, no assistance was to be had
from either monkeys or land-crabs, and they gazed up with longing eyes
at the fruit above them.

"We can climb," said Fritz, "up with you, boys."

Jack and he each rushed at one of the smooth, slippery trunks; right
vigorously they struggled upward, but to no purpose; before they had
accomplished one-quarter of the distance they found themselves slipping
rapidly to the ground.

"Here, you young athletes," cried I, "I foresaw this difficulty, and
have provided for it." So saying I held up buskins of shark's skin which
I had previously prepared, and which I now bound on to their legs. Thus
equipped they again attempted the ascent, and with a loop of rope passed
round their body and the trunk of the tree, quickly reached the summit.
My wife joined me, and together we watched the boys as they ascended
tree after tree, throwing down the best fruit from each.

They then returned and jestingly begged Ernest to produce the result of
his labor. The professor had been lying on the grass grazing at the
palms; but, on this sarcastic remark, he sprang to his feet.
"Willingly," he exclaimed, and seizing a pair of buskins, he quickly
donned them. "Give me a cocoanut shell," said he. I gave him one, and he
put it in his pocket. He ran to a tree, and, with an agility which
surprised us all, quickly reached the top. No sooner had he done so than
Fritz and Jack burst into a roar of laughter. He had swarmed a tree
which bore no nuts. Ernest apparently heard them; for, as it seemed in a
fit of anger, he drew his knife and severed the leafy crest, which fell
to the ground. I glanced up at him, surprised at such a display of
temper. But a bright smile greeted me, and in a merry tone he shouted:

"Jack, pick that palm-cabbage up and take it to your father; that is
only half my contribution, and it is worth all your nuts put together."

He spoke truly; the cabbage palm is rare, and the tuft of leaves at its
summit is greatly prized by the South Americans for its great delicacy
and highly nutritive qualities.

"Bravo!" I cried, "you have retrieved your character; come down and
receive the thanks of the company. What are you waiting up there for?"

"I am coming presently," he replied, "with the second half of my
contribution; I hope it will be as fully appreciated as the first."

In a short time he slipped down the tree, and, advancing to his mother,
presented her with the nutshell he had taken up with him.

"Here," he said, "is a wine which the greatest connoisseur would prize.
Taste it, mother."

The shell was filled with a clear, rosy liquor, bright and sparkling. My
wife tasted it. "Excellent, excellent," she exclaimed. "Your very good
health, my dear boy!"

We drank the rosy wine in turn, and Ernest received hearty thanks from
all.

It was getting late, and while we were enjoying our supper before our
tent, our donkey, who had been quietly browsing near us, suddenly set up
a loud bray, and, without the least apparent cause, pricked up his ears,
threw up his heels, and galloped off into the thicket of bamboos. We
followed for a short distance, and I sent the dogs in chase, but they
returned without our friend, and, as it was late, we were obliged to
abandon the chase.

I was annoyed by this incident, and even alarmed; for not only had we
lost the ass, but I knew not what had occasioned his sudden flight. I
knew not whether he was aware, by instinct, of the approach of some
fierce wild beast. I said nothing of this to my family, but, making up
an unusually large fire, I bade them sleep with their arms by their
sides, and we all lay down.

A bright morning awoke us early, and I rose and looked out, thinking
that perhaps our poor donkey might have been attracted by the light of
the fires, and had returned. Alas! not a sign of him was to be seen. As
we could not afford to lose so valuable a beast, I determined to leave
no attempt untried to regain him. We hurriedly breakfasted, and, as I
required the dogs to assist me in the search, I left my elder sons to
protect their mother, and bade Jack get ready for a day's march. This
arrangement delighted him, and we quickly set out.

For an hour or more we trudged onward, directed by the print of the
ass's hoofs. Sometimes we lost the track for a while, and then again
discovered it as we reached softer soil. Finally this guide failed us
altogether, for the donkey seemed to have joined in with a herd of some
larger animals, with whose hoof-prints his had mingled. I now almost
turned back in despair, but Jack urged me to continue the search; "For,"
said he, "if we once get upon a hill we shall see such a large herd, as
this must be, at almost any distance. Do let us go on, father."

I consented, and we again pushed forward, through bushes, and over
torrents, sometimes cutting our way with an ax, and sometimes plunging
knee-deep through a swamp. We at length reached the border of a wide
plain, and on it, in the distance, I could see a herd of animals
browsing on the rich grass. It struck me that it might be the very herd
to which our good donkey had joined himself; and, wishing to ascertain
whether this was so, I resolved to make a detour through a bamboo marsh,
and get as near as possible to the animals without disturbing them. The
bamboos were huge, many of them over thirty feet in height; and, as we
made our way through them, I remembered an account of the giant cane of
South America, which is greatly prized by the Indians on account of its
extreme usefulness; the reeds themselves make masts for their canoes,
while each joint will form a cask or box. I was delighted, for I had
little doubt that the bamboos we were among were of the same species. I
explained this to Jack, and as we discussed the possibility of cutting
one down and carrying a portion of it home, we reached the border of the
marsh, and emerged upon the plain. There we suddenly found ourselves
face to face with the herd which we sought--a herd of buffaloes. They
looked up and stared at us inquisitively, but without moving. Jack would
have fired, but I checked him. "Back to the thicket," I said, "and keep
back the dogs!"

We began to retreat, but before we were again under cover the dogs
joined us; and, in spite of our shouts and efforts to restrain them,
they dashed forward and seized a buffalo calf. This was a signal to the
whole herd to attack us. They bellowed loudly, pawed the ground, and
tore it up with their horns, and then dashed madly toward us. We had not
time to step behind a rock before the leader was upon us. So close was
he that my gun was useless. I drew a pistol and fired. He fell dead at
my feet. His fall checked the advance of the rest. They halted, snuffed
the air, turned tail, and galloped off across the plain. They were gone,
but the dogs still held gallantly to the calf. They dragged and tussled
with him, but with their utmost efforts they could not bring him to the
ground. How to assist them without shooting the poor beast I knew not;
and this I was unwilling to do, for I hoped that, if we could but
capture him alive, we might in time manage to tame him, and use him as a
beast of burden. Jack's clever little head, however, suddenly devised a
plan for their aid, and with his usual promptitude, he at once put it
into execution. He unwound the lasso, which was coiled round his body,
and, as the young bull flung up his heels, he cast, it and caught him by
his hind legs. The noose drew tight, and in a twinkling the beast was
upon the ground. We fastened the other end of the cord round a stout
bamboo, called off the dogs, and the animal was at our mercy.

"Now we have got him," said Jack, as he looked at the poor beast, lying
panting on the ground, "what are we to do with him?"

"I will show you," said I; "help me to fasten his forelegs together, and
you shall see the next operation."

The bull, thus secured, could not move; and while Jack held his head I
drew my knife and pierced the cartilage of his nose, and when the blood
flowed less freely, passed a stout cord through the hole. I felt some
repugnance at thus paining the animal, but it was a case of necessity,
and I could not hesitate. We united the ends of the cord, freed the
animal, set him upon his legs, and, subdued and overawed, he followed us
without resistance. I now turned my attention to the dead buffalo, but
as I could not then skin it, I contented myself with cutting off the
most delicate parts, its tongue, and a couple of steaks, and, packing
them in salt in my wallet, abandoned the rest to the dogs. They fell
upon it greedily, and we retired under the shade to enjoy a meal after
our hard work. The dogs, however, were not to have undisputed possession
of the carcass; vultures, crows, and other birds of prey, with that
marvelous instinct which always leads them to a dead body, quickly
filled the air, and, with discordant cries, swooped down upon the
buffalo. An amusing contest ensued; the dogs again and again drove off
the intruders, and they, as often, returned re-enforced by others who
swarmed to the spot. Jack, with his usual impetuosity, wished to send a
shot in among the robber band, but I prevented him, for I knew that the
bird or two he might kill would be of no use to us, while his shot would
not drive away the rest, even had we wished it. Both he and the dogs
were at length satisfied, and as it was getting late, I determined to
give up for the present the search for the ass, and to return to our
camp. We again made our way through the bamboos, but before we left the
thicket I cut down one of the smallest of the reeds, the largest of
whose joints would form capital little barrels, while those near the
tapering top would serve as molds for our next batch of candles.

The buffalo, with a dog on either side and the rope through his nose,
was following us passively, and we presently induced him to submit to a
package of our goods laid upon his back. We pushed rapidly forward, Jack
eager to display our latest acquisition. As we repassed the rocky bed of
a stream we had crossed in the morning, Juno dashed ahead, and was about
to rush into a cleft between the rocks, when the appearance of a large
jackal suddenly checked her further progress. Both dogs instantly flew
at the animal, and though she fought desperately, quickly overpowered
and throttled her. From the way the beast had shown fight, I concluded
that her young must be close by, probably within the very cleft Juno was
about to enter.

Directly Jack heard this, he wished to creep in and bring out the young
jackals. I hesitated to allow him to do so, for I thought it possible
that the male jackal might be still lying in wait within the cave. We
peered into the darkness, and, after a while, Jack declared he could
discern the little yellow jackals, and that he was quite sure the old
one was not there. He then crept in, followed closely by the dogs, and
presently emerged, bearing in his arms a handsome cub of a beautiful
golden yellow and about the size of a small cat. He was the only one of
the brood he had managed to save, for Turk and Juno, without pity for
their youth or beauty, had worried all the rest. I did not much regret
this, however, for I firmly believe that, had he saved them, Jack would
have insisted upon bringing up the whole litter. As it was, I considered
that one jackal was, with our young bull, quite sufficient an addition
to our livestock.

During the halt we had made I had fastened the buffalo to a small tree,
and as I was now again about to move on, I recognized it as the
dwarf-palm, whose long, sharp leaves form an excellent barrier if it is
planted as a hedge. I determined to return and get some young plants to
strengthen our hedge at Tentholm. It was late before we reached our
camp, where we found our family anxiously awaiting our return.

The sight of the new animals delighted the children immensely, and
in their opinion amply compensated for the loss of our poor donkey.
Jack had to answer a host of questions concerning their capture,
and to give a minute account of the affray with the buffaloes. This
he did, with graphic power certainly, but with so much boasting and
self-glorification that I was obliged to check him, and give a
plain and unvarnished account of the affair.

Suppertime arrived, and as we sat at that meal, for which Jack and I
were heartily thankful, my wife and her party proceeded to give an
account of their day's work.

Ernest had discovered a sago-palm, and had, after much labor, contrived
to fell it. Franz and his mother had collected dry wood, of which a huge
heap now stood before the tent, sufficient to keep up a fire all the
rest of the time we should stay on the spot. Fritz had gone off shooting
and had secured a good bag. While they had been thus variously employed,
a troop of apes had visited the tent, and when they returned, they found
the place ransacked and turned upside down. The provisions were eaten
and gnawed, the potatoes thrown about, the milk drunk and spilt; every
box had been peeped into, every pot and pan had been divested of its
lid; the palisade round the hut had been partly destroyed, nothing had
been left untouched. Industriously had the boys worked to repair the
damage, and when we returned not a sign was to be seen of the disorder.
No one would have guessed what had occurred from the delicious supper we
were eating.

After matters had been again arranged, Fritz had gone down to the shore,
and, among the rocks at Cape Disappointment, had discovered a young
eaglet which Ernest declared to be a Malabar or Indian eagle; he was
much pleased with his discovery, and I recommended him to bring the bird
up and try to train it to hunt as a falcon.

"Look here, though, boys," said I, "you are now collecting a good many
pets, and I am not going to have your mother troubled with the care of
them all; each must look after his own, and if I find one neglected,
whether beast or bird, I set it at liberty. Mark that and remember it!"

My wife looked greatly relieved at this announcement, and the boys
promised to obey my directions. Before we retired for the night I
prepared the buffalo meat I had brought. I lit a large fire of green
wood, and in the smoke of this thoroughly dried both the tongue and
steaks. We then properly secured all the animals, Jack took his little
pet in his arms, and we lay down and were soon fast asleep.

At daybreak we were on foot, and began to prepare for a return to
Falconhurst.

"You are not going to despise my sago, I hope," said Ernest; "you have
no idea what a trouble it was to cut it down, and I have been thinking
too, that, if we could but split the tree, we might make a couple of
long useful troughs, which might, I think, be made to carry water from
Jackal River to Tentholm. Is my plan worth consideration?"

"Indeed it is," I replied; "and at all events we must not abandon such a
valuable prize as a sago palm. I would put off our departure for a day
rather than leave it behind."

We went to the palm, and with the tools we had with us attempted to
split the trunk. We first sawed off the upper end, and then with an ax
and saw managed to insert a wedge. This accomplished, our task was less
difficult, for with a heavy mallet we forced the wedge in further and
further, until at length the trunk was split in twain. From one half of
the trunk we then removed the pith, disengaging it, with difficulty,
from the tough wood fibers; at each end, however, I left a portion of
the pith untouched, thus forming a trough in which to work the sago.

"Now, boys," said I, when we had removed the pith from the other half of
the trunk, "off with your coats and turn up your shirt-sleeves; I am
going to teach you to knead."

They were all delighted, and even little Franz begged to be allowed to
help. Ernest brought a couple of pitchers of water, and throwing it in
amongst the pith, we set to work quite heartily. As the dough was formed
and properly kneaded, I handed it to the mother, who spread it out on a
cloth in the sun to dry. This new occupation kept us busy until the
evening, and when it was at length completed we loaded the cart with the
sago, a store of cocoanuts, and our other possessions, that we might be
ready to start early on the following morning. As the sun rose above the
horizon, we packed up our tent and set forth, a goodly caravan. I
thought it unfair to the cow to make her drag such a load as we now had
alone, and determined if possible to make the young buffalo take the
place of our lost donkey: after some persuasion he consented, and soon
put his strength to the work and brought the cart along famously. As we
had the trough slung under the cart we had to choose the clearest
possible route, avoiding anything like a thicket; we, therefore, could
not pass directly by the candleberry and caoutchouc trees, and I sent
Ernest and Jack aside to visit the store we had made on our outward
journey.

They had not long been gone when I was alarmed by a most terrible noise,
accompanied by the furious barking of the dogs and shouts from Jack and
Ernest. Thinking that the boys had been attacked by some wild beasts, I
ran to their assistance. A most ludicrous scene awaited me when I
reached the spot. They were dancing and shouting round and round a
grassy glade, and I as nearly as possible followed their example, for in
the center, surrounded by a promising litter, lay our old sow, whose
squeals, previously so alarming, were now subsiding into comfortable
grunts of recognition. I did not join my boys in their triumphal dance,
but I was nevertheless very much pleased at the sight of the flourishing
family, and immediately returned to the cart to obtain biscuits and
potatoes for the benefit of the happy mother. Jack and Ernest meanwhile
pushed further on and brought back the sack of candleberries and the
caoutchouc, and as we could not then take the sow with us, we left her
alone with her family and proceeded to Falconhurst.

The animals were delighted to see us back again, and received us with
manifestations of joy, but looked askance at the new pets. The eagle
especially came in for shy glances, and promised to be no favorite.
Fritz, however, determined that his pet should at present do no harm,
secured him by the leg to a root of a fig tree and uncovered his eyes.
In a moment the aspect of the bird was changed; with his sight returned
all his savage instincts, he flapped his wings, raised his head, darted
to the full length of his chain, and before any one could prevent him
seized the unfortunate parrot, which stood near, and tore it to pieces.
Fritz's anger rose at the sight, and he was about to put an end to the
savage bird.

"Stop," said Ernest, "don't kill the poor creature, he is but following
his natural instincts; give him to me, and I will tame him."

Fritz hesitated. "No, no," he said, "I don't want really to kill the
bird, but I can't give him up; tell me how to tame him, and you shall
have Master Knips."

"Very well," replied Ernest, "I will tell you my plan, and if it
succeeds, I will accept Knips as a mark of your gratitude. Take a pipe
and tobacco, and send the smoke all around his head, so that he must
inhale it; by degrees he will become stupefied, and his savage nature
from that moment subdued."

Fritz was rather inclined to ridicule the plan, but, knowing that Ernest
generally had a good reason for anything of the sort that he proposed,
he consented to make the attempt. He soon seated himself beneath the
bird, who still struggled furiously, and puffed cloud after cloud
upward, and as each cloud circled round the eagle's head he became
quieter and quieter, until he sat quite still, gazing stupidly at the
young smoker.

"Capital!" cried Fritz, as he hooded the bird, "capital, Ernest; Knips
is yours."




CHAPTER VIII.

 Prop our young trees--A lecture on grafting--A new idea broached--Why
     should we not build stairs within the trunk of our tree?--Jack
     finds one objection--I make a beehive, and we drive the bees from
     the tree--Stair-making--Additions to our family of domestic
     animals--The education of the "pets"--Shoemaking--We lead water
     from the stream to Falconhurst--A strange animal approaches--Our
     old ass and his companion--The onager captured--Provisioning our
     winter quarters--Capture of ruffed grouse--We discover flax--The
     rainy season.


Next morning the boys and I started with the cart, laden with our
bundles of bamboos, to attend to the avenue of fruit trees. The buffalo
we left behind, for his services were not needed, and I wished the wound
in his nostrils to become completely cicatrized before I again put him
to work. We were not a moment too soon; many of the young trees, which
before threatened to fall, had now fulfilled their promise, and were
lying prostrate on the ground, others were bent, some few only remained
erect. We raised the trees, and digging deeply at their roots, drove in
stout bamboo props, to which we lashed them firmly with strong broad
fibers.

"Papa," said Franz, as we were thus engaged, and he handed me the fibers
as I required them, "are these wild or tame trees?"

"Oh, these are wild trees, most ferocious trees," laughed Jack, "and we
are tying them up lest they should run away, and in a little while we
will untie them and they will trot about after us and give us fruit
wherever we go. Oh, we will tame them; they shall have a ring through
their noses like the buffalo!"

"That's not true," replied Franz gravely, "but there _are_ wild and
tame trees, the wild ones grow out in the woods like the crab-apples,
and the tame ones in the garden like the pears and peaches at home.
Which are these, papa?"

"They are not wild," I replied, "but grafted or cultivated, or, as you
call them, tame trees. No European tree bears good fruit until it is
grafted!" I saw a puzzled look come over the little boy's face as he
heard this new word, and I hastened to explain it. "Grafting," I
continued, "is the process of inserting a slip or twig of a tree into
what is called an eye; that is, a knot or hole in the branch of another.
This twig or slip then grows and produces, not such fruit as the
original stock would have borne, but such as the tree from which it was
taken would have produced. Thus, if we have a sour crab tree, and an
apple tree bearing fine ribston pippins, we would take a slip of the
latter, insert it in an eye of the former, and in a year or two the
branch which would then grow would be laden with good apples."

"But," asked Ernest, "where did the slips of good fruit trees come from,
if none grow without grafting?"

"From foreign countries," I replied. "It is only in the cold climate of
our part of the world that they require this grafting; in many parts of
the world, in more southern latitudes than ours, the most luscious fruit
trees are indigenous to the soil, and flourish and bear sweet, wholesome
fruit, without the slightest care or attention being bestowed upon them;
while in England and Germany, and even in France, these same trees
require the utmost exertion of horticultural skill to make them bring
forth any fruit whatever. Thus, when the Romans invaded England they
found there nothing in the way of fruit trees but the crab-apple, nut
bushes, and bramble bushes, but by grafting on these, fine apples,
filberts, and raspberries were produced, and it was the same in our own
dear Switzerland--all our fruit trees were imported."

"Were cherries, father? May we not even call cherries Swiss? I always
thought they grew nowhere else."

"I am afraid we cannot even claim cherries as our own, not even the name
of them; they are called cherries from Cerasus, a state of Pontus, in
Asia, whence they were brought to Europe by Lucullus, a Roman general,
about seventy years before Christ. Hazelnuts also came from Pontus;
walnuts, again, came originally from Persia. As for grapes, they are of
the greatest antiquity. We hear, if you remember, of Noah cultivating
vines, and they have been brought from one place to another until they
now are to be found in most parts of the civilized world."

"Do you think all these trees will grow?" asked Fritz, as we crossed
Jackal River and entered our plantation at Tentholm: "here are lemons,
pomegranates, pistachio nuts, and mulberries."

"I have little doubt of it," I replied, "we are evidently within the
tropics, where such trees as these are sure to flourish. These pines,
now, come from France, Spain, and Italy; the olives from Armenia and
Palestine; the figs originally from the island of Chios; the peaches and
apricots from Persia; plums from Damascus in Syria, and the pears of all
sorts from Greece. However, if our countries have not been blessed in
the same way with fruit, we have been given wisdom and skill, which has
enabled us to import and cultivate the trees of other lands."

We thus talked and worked until every tree that required treatment was
provided with a stout bamboo prop, and then, with appetites which a
gourmand might well have envied, we returned to Falconhurst. I think the
good mother was almost alarmed at the way we fell upon the corned beef
and palm-cabbage she set before us, but at length these good things
produced the desired effect, and one after another declared himself
satisfied. As we sat reclining after our labor and digesting our dinner,
we discussed the various projects we had in contemplation. "I wish,"
said my wife, "that you would invent some other plan for climbing to the
nest above us; I think that the nest itself is perfect--I really wish
for nothing better, but I should like to be able to get to it without
scaling that dreadful ladder every time; could you not make a flight of
steps to reach it?"

I carefully thought over the project, and turned over every plan for its
accomplishment.

"It would be impossible, I am afraid," said I, "to make stairs outside,
but within the trunk it might be done. More than once have I thought
that this trunk might be hollow, or partly so, and if such be the case
our task would be comparatively easy. Did you not tell me the other day
that you noticed bees coming from a hole in the tree?"

"Oh, yes," said little Franz, "and I went to look at them and one flew
right against my face and stung me, and I almost cried, but I didn't."

"Brave little boy," said I. "Well, now, if the trunk be sufficiently
hollow to contain a swarm of bees, it may be, for all we can tell,
hollow the greater part of its length, for like the willow in our own
country it might draw all its nourishment through the bark, and in spite
of its real unsoundness retain a flourishing appearance."

Master Jack, practical as usual, instantly sprang to his feet to put my
conjecture to the proof. The rest followed his example, and they were
all soon climbing about like squirrels, peeping into the hole, and
tapping the wood to discover by sound how far down the cavity extended.

They forgot, in their eagerness, who were the tenants of this
interesting trunk. They were soon reminded of it, however, for the bees,
disturbed by this unusual noise, with an angry buzz burst out, and in an
instant attacked the causers of the annoyance; they swarmed round them,
stung them on the hands, face, and neck, settled in their hair, and
pursued them as they ran to me for assistance. It was with difficulty
that we got rid of the angry insects and were able to attend to the
boys. Jack, who had been the first to reach the hole, had fared the
worst, and was soon a most pitiable sight, his face swelled to an
extraordinary degree, and it was only by the constant application of
cold earth that the pain was alleviated. They were all eager to commence
an organized attack upon the bees at once, but for an hour or more, by
reason of their pain, they were unable to render me much assistance. In
the meanwhile I made my arrangements. I first took a large calabash
gourd, for I intended to make a beehive, that, when we had driven the
insects from their present abode, we might not lose them entirely. The
lower half of the gourd I flattened, I then cut an arched opening in the
front for a doorway, made a straw roof as a protection from the rain and
heat, and the little house was complete.

Nothing more, however, could then be done, for the irritated bees were
still angrily buzzing round the tree. I waited till dark, and then, when
all the bees had again returned to their trunk, with Fritz's assistance
I carefully stopped up every hole in the tree with wet clay, that the
bees might not issue forth next morning before we could begin
operations. Very early were we up and at work. I first took a hollow
cane, and inserted one end through the clay into the tree; down this
tube with pipe and tobacco I smoked most furiously.

The humming and buzzing that went on within was tremendous; the bees
evidently could not understand what was going to happen. I finished my
first pipeful, and putting my thumb over the end of the cane, I gave the
pipe to Fritz to refill. He did so and I again smoked. The buzzing was
now becoming less noisy, and was subsiding into a mere murmur. By the
time I had finished this second pipe all was still; the bees were
stupefied.

"Now then, Fritz," said I, "quick, with a hammer and chisel, and stand
here beside me."

He was up in a moment, and, together, we cut a small door by the side of
the hole; this door, however, we did not take out, but we left it
attached by one corner that it might be removed at a moment's notice;
then giving the bees a final dose of tobacco smoke, we opened it.

Carefully but rapidly we removed the insects, as they clung in clusters
to the sides of the tree, and placed them in the hive prepared for their
reception. As rapidly I then took every atom of wax and honey from their
storehouse, and put it in a cask I had made ready for the purpose.

The bees were now safely removed from the trunk, but I could not tell
whether, when they revived from their temporary stupor, they might not
refuse to occupy the house with which I had presented them, and insist
on returning to their old quarters. To prevent the possibility of this
occurrence, I took a quantity of tobacco, and placing it upon a board
nailed horizontally within the trunk, I lighted it and allowed it to
burn slowly, that the fumes might fill the cavity. It was well I did so,
for, as the bees returned to consciousness, they left their pretty hive
and buzzed away to the trunk of the tree. They seemed astonished at
finding this uninhabitable, and an immense deal of noisy humming ensued.
Round and round they flew, backward and forward between the gourd and
tree, now settling here and now there, until, at length, after due
consideration, they took possession of the hive and abandoned their
former habitation to us, the invaders of their territory. By the evening
they were quite quiet, and we ventured to open the cask in which we had
stored our plunder. We first separated the honey from the honeycomb and
poured it off into jars and pots; the rest we then took and threw into a
vessel of water placed over a slow fire. It soon boiled and the entire
mass became fluid. This we placed in a clean canvas bag, and subjected
to a heavy pressure. The honey was thus soon forced out, and we stored
it in a cask, and, though not perhaps quite equal to the former batch in
quality, it was yet capital. The wax that remained in the bag I also
carefully stored, for I knew it would be of great use to me in the
manufacture of candles. Then after a hard day's work we turned in.

The internal architecture of the tree had now to be attended to, and
early the following morning we prepared for the laborious task. A door
had first to be made, so at the base of the trunk we cut away the bark
and formed an opening just the size of the door we had brought from the
captain's cabin, and which, hinges and all, was ready to be hung. The
clearing of the rotten wood from the center of the trunk occupied us
some time, but at length we had the satisfaction of seeing it entirely
accomplished, and, as we stood below, we could look up the trunk, which
was like a great smooth funnel, and see the sky above. It was now ready
for the staircase, and first we erected in the center a stout sapling to
form an axis round which to build the spiral stairs; in this we cut
notches to receive the steps, and corresponding notches in the tree
itself to support the outer ends. The steps themselves we formed
carefully and neatly of planks from the wreck, and clenched them firmly
in their places with stout nails. Upward and upward we built, cutting
windows in the trunk as we required, to admit light and air, until we
were flush with the top of the center pole. On this pole we erected
another to reach the top of the tree, and securing it firmly, built in
the same way round it until we at length reached the level of the floor
of the nest above. To make the ascent of the stairs perfectly easy we
ran a hand-rail on either side, one round the center pillar, and the
other following the curve of the trunk.

This task occupied us a whole month, and by the end of that period, so
accustomed had we become to having a definite piece of work before us
that we began to consider what other great alteration we should
undertake. We were, however, of course not neglecting the details of our
colonial establishment. There were all the animals to be attended to;
the goats and sheep had both presented us with additions to our flock,
and these frisky youngsters had to be seen after; to prevent them
straying to any great distance--for we had no wish to lose them--we tied
round their necks little bells, which we had found on board the wreck,
and which would assist us to track them. Juno, too, had a fine litter
of puppies, but, in spite of the entreaties of the children, I could not
consent to keep more than two, and the rest disappeared in that
mysterious way in which puppies and kittens are wont to leave the earth.
To console the mother, as he said, but also, I suspect, to save himself
considerable trouble, Jack placed his little jackal beside the remaining
puppies, and, to his joy, found it readily adopted. The other pets were
also flourishing, and were being usefully trained. The buffalo, after
giving us much trouble, had now become perfectly domesticated, and was a
very useful beast of burden, besides being a capital steed for the boys.
They guided him by a bar thrust through the hole in his nose, which was
now perfectly healed, and this served the purpose just as a bit in the
mouth of a horse. I began his education by securing round him a broad
girth of buffalo hide and fastening to it various articles, to accustom
him to carrying a burden. By degrees he permitted this to be done
without making the slightest resistance, and soon carried the paniers,
before borne by the ass, readily and willingly.

I then made Master Knips sit upon his back and hold the reins I had
prepared for him, that the animal might become accustomed to the feeling
of a rider, and finally allowed Fritz himself to mount. The education of
the eagle was not neglected. Fritz every day shot small birds for his
food, and these he placed, sometimes between the wide-spreading horns of
the buffalo or goat, and, sometimes upon the back of the great bustard,
that he might become accustomed to pounce upon living prey. These
lessons had their due effect, and the bird, having been taught to obey
the voice and whistle of his master, he was soon allowed to bring down
small birds upon the wing, when he stooped and struck his quarry in most
sportsmanlike manner. We kept him well away from the poultry yard, lest
his natural instincts should show themselves and he should put an
untimely end to some of our feathered pets.

Neither was Master Knips allowed to remain idle, for Ernest, now that he
was in his possession, wished to train him to be of some use. With
Jack's help he made a little basket of rushes, which he so arranged with
straps that it might be easily fitted on to the monkey's back. Thus
equipped, he was taught to mount cocoanut palms and other lofty trees,
and to bring down their fruit in the hamper.

Jack was not so successful in his educational attempts. Fangs, as he had
christened his jackal, used his fangs, indeed, but only on his own
account; nothing could persuade him that the animals he caught were not
at once to be devoured, consequently poor Jack was never able to save
from his jaws anything but the tattered skin of his prey. Not
disheartened, however, he determined that Fangs could be trained, and
that he would train him.

These, and such like employment, afforded us the rest and recreation we
required while engaged in the laborious task of staircase building.

Among minor occupations, I applied myself to the improvement of our
candles. Though the former batch had greatly delighted us at first, yet
we were soon obliged to acknowledge that the light they gave was
imperfect, and their appearance was unsightly; my wife, too, begged me
to find some substitute for the threads of our cotton neckties, which I
had previously used as wicks. To give the proper shape and smoothness to
the candles, I determined to use the bamboo molds I had prepared. My
first idea was to pour the wax in at the end of the mold, and then when
the candles were cooled to slip them out; but I was soon convinced that
this plan would not succeed. I therefore determined to divide the molds
length-ways, and then having greased them well, we might pour the melted
wax into the two halves bound tightly together, and so be able to take
out the candles when cool without injuring them. The wicks were my next
difficulty, and as the mother positively refused to allow us to devote
our ties and handkerchiefs for the purpose, I took a piece of
inflammable wood from a tree, a native of the Antilles, which I thought
would serve our purpose; this I cut into long slips, and fixed in the
centers of the molds. My wife, too, prepared some wicks from the fibers
of the karata tree, which she declared would beat mine completely out of
the field. We put them to the proof.

On a large fire we placed a pot, in which we prepared our wax
mixture--half beeswax and half wax from the candleberries. The molds,
carefully prepared--half with karata fiber, and half with wooden splint
wicks--stood on their ends in a tub of cold water, ready to receive the
wax. They were filled; the wax cooled; the candles taken out and
subjected to the criticism of all hands. When night drew on, they were
formally tested. The decision was unanimous: neither gave such a good
light as those with the cotton wicks; but even my wife declared that the
light from mine was far preferable to that emitted by hers, for the
former, though rather flaring, burned brilliantly, while the latter gave
out such a feeble and flickering flame that it was almost useless.

I then turned shoemaker, for I had promised myself a pair of waterproof
boots, and now I determined to make them.

Taking a pair of socks, I filled them with sand and then coated
them over with a thin layer of clay to form a convenient mold; this
was soon hardened in the sun, and was ready for use. Layer after
layer of caoutchouc I brushed over it, allowing each layer to dry
before the next was put on, until at length I considered that the
shoes were of sufficient thickness. I dried them, broke out the
clay, secured with nails a strip of buffalo hide to the soles,
brushed that over with caoutchouc, and I had a pair of comfortable,
durable, respectable-looking waterproof boots.

I was delighted; orders poured in from all sides, and soon every one in
the family was likewise provided for.

One objection to Falconhurst was the absence of any spring close by, so
that the boys were obliged to bring water daily from the stream; and
this involving no little trouble, it was proposed that we should carry
the water by pipes from the stream to our present residence. A dam had
to be thrown across the river some way up stream, that the water might
be raised to a sufficient height to run to Falconhurst. From the
reservoir thus made we led the water down by pipes into the turtle's
shell, which we placed near our dwelling, and from which the superfluous
water flowed off through the hole made in it by Fritz's harpoon. This
was an immense convenience, and we formally inaugurated the trough by
washing therein a whole sack of potatoes. Thus day after day brought its
own work, and day after day saw that work completed. We had no time to
be idle, or to lament our separation from our fellow creatures.

One morning, as we were completing our spiral staircase, and giving it
such finish as we were capable of, we were suddenly alarmed by hearing a
most terrific noise, the roaring or bellowing of a wild beast; so
strange a sound was it, that I could not imagine by what animal it was
uttered.

Jack thought it perhaps a lion, Fritz hazarded a gorilla, while Ernest
gave it as his opinion, and I thought it possible that he was right,
that it was a hyena.

"Whatever it is," said I, "we must prepare to receive it; up with you
all to the nest while I secure the door."

Then arming the dogs with their collars, I sent them out to protect the
animals below, closed the door, and joined my family. Every gun was
loaded, every eye was upon the watch. The sound drew nearer, and then
all was still; nothing was to be seen. I determined to descend and
reconnoiter, and Fritz and I carefully crept down; with our guns at full
cock we glided among the trees; noiselessly and quickly we pushed on
further and further; suddenly, close by, we heard the terrific sound
again. Fritz raised his gun, but almost as quickly again dropped it,
and burst into a hearty fit of laughter. There was no mistaking those
dulcet tones--he-haw, he-haw, he-haw--resounded through the forest, and
our ass, braying his approach right merrily, appeared in sight. To our
surprise, however, our friend was not alone: behind him trotted another
animal, an ass no doubt, but slim and graceful as a horse. We watched
their movements anxiously.

"Fritz," I whispered, "that is an onager. Creep back to Falconhurst and
bring me a piece of cord--quietly now!"

While he was gone, I cut a bamboo and split it half-way down to form a
pair of pincers, which I knew would be of use to me should I get near
the animal. Fritz soon returned with the cord, and I was glad to observe
also brought some oats and salt. We made one end of the cord fast to a
tree, and at the other end made a running noose. Silently we watched the
animals as they approached, quietly browsing; Fritz then arose, holding
in one hand the noose and in the other some oats and salt. The ass,
seeing his favorite food thus held out, advanced to take it; Fritz
allowed him to do so, and he was soon munching contentedly. The
stranger, on seeing Fritz, started back; but finding her companion show
no signs of alarm, was reassured, and soon approached sniffing, and was
about to take some of the tempting food. In a moment the noose left
Fritz's adroit hand and fell round her neck; with a single bound she
sprang backward the full length of the cord, the noose drew tight, and
she fell to the earth half strangled. I at once ran up, loosened the
rope, and replaced it by a halter; and placing the pincers upon her
nose, secured her by two cords fastened between two trees, and then left
her to recover herself.

Every one hastened up to examine the beautiful animal as she rose to the
ground and cast fiery glances around. She lashed out with her heels on
every side; and, giving vent to angry snorts, struggled violently to get
free. All her endeavors were vain: the cords were stout, and after a
while she quieted down and stood exhausted and quivering. I then
approached: she suffered me to lead her to the roots of our tree, which
for the present formed our stables, and there I tied her up close to the
donkey, who was likewise prevented from playing truant.

Next morning I found the onager after her night's rest as wild as ever,
and as I looked at the handsome creature I almost despaired of ever
taming her proud spirit. Every expedient was tried, and at length, when
the animal was subdued by hunger, I thought I might venture to mount
her; and having given her the strongest curb and shackled her feet I
attempted to do so. She was as unruly as ever, and as a last expedient I
resolved to adopt a plan which, though cruel, was I knew attended with
wonderful success by the American Indians, by whom it is practiced.
Watching a favorable opportunity, I sprang upon the onager's back, and
seizing her long ear in my teeth, in spite of her kicking and plunging,
bit it through. The result was marvelous, the animal ceased plunging,
and, quivering violently, stood stock still. From that moment we were
her masters, the children mounted her one after the other, and she
carried them obediently and quietly. Proud, indeed, did I feel as I
watched this animal, which naturalists and travelers have declared to be
beyond the power of man to tame, guided hither and thither by my
youngest son.

Additions to our poultry yard reminded me of the necessity of providing
some substantial shelter for our animals before the rainy season came
on; three broods of chickens had been successfully hatched, and the
little creatures, forty in all, were my wife's pride and delight. We
began by making a roof over the vaulted roots of our tree, forming the
framework of bamboo canes, which we laid close together and bound
tightly down; others we fixed below as supports. The interstices were
filled up with clay and moss; and coating the whole over with a mixture
of tar and lime-water, we obtained a firm balcony, and a capital roof
impervious to the severest fall of rain. I ran a light rail round the
balcony to give it a more ornamental appearance, and below divided the
building into several compartments. Stables, poultry yard, hay and
provision lofts, dairy, kitchen, larder, and dining-hall were united
under one roof.

Our winter quarters were now completed, and we had but to store them
with food. Day after day we worked, bringing in provisions of every
description.

As we were one evening returning from gathering potatoes, it struck me
that we should take in a store of acorns; and sending the two younger
boys home with their mother and the cart, I took a large canvas bag, and
with Fritz and Ernest, the former mounted on his onager, and the latter
carrying his little favorite, Knips, made a detour toward the Acorn
Wood.

We reached the spot, tied Lightfoot to a neighboring tree, and began
rapidly to fill the sack. As we were thus engaged, Knips sprang suddenly
into a bush close by, from which, a moment afterward, issued such
strange cries that Ernest followed to see what could be the matter.

"Come!" he shouted; "come and help me! I've got a couple of birds and
their eggs. Quick! Ruffed grouse!"

We hurried to the spot. There was Ernest with a fluttering, screaming
bird in either hand; while, with his foot, he was endeavoring to prevent
his greedy little monkey from seizing the eggs. We quickly tied the legs
of the birds, and removing the eggs from the nest, placed them in
Ernest's hat; while he gathered some of the long, broad grass, with
which the nest was woven, and which grew luxuriantly around, for Franz
to play at sword-drill with. We then loaded the onager with the acorns,
and moved homeward. The eggs I covered carefully with dry moss, that
they might be kept warm, and as soon as possible I handed them over to
my wife, who managed the mother so cleverly that she induced her to
return to the eggs, and in a few days, to our great delight, we had
fifteen beautiful little Canadian chicks.

Franz was greatly pleased with the "swords" his brother brought him;
but having no small companion on whom to exercise his valor, he amused
himself for a short time in hewing down imaginary foes, and then cut the
reeds in slips, and plaited them to form a whip for Lightfoot. The
leaves seemed so pliable and strong that I examined them to see to what
further use they might be put. Their tissue was composed of long silky
fibers. A sudden thought struck me--this must be New Zealand flax. I
could not rest till I had announced this invaluable discovery to my
wife. She was no less delighted than I was.

"Bring me the leaves!" she exclaimed. "Oh, what a delightful discovery!
No one shall now be clothed in rags; just make me a spindle, and you
shall soon have shirts and stockings and trousers, all good homespun!
Quick, Fritz, and bring your mother more leaves!"

We could not help smiling at her eager zeal; but Fritz and Ernest sprang
on their steeds, and soon the onager and buffalo were galloping home
again, each laden with a great bundle of flax. The boys dismounted and
deposited their offering at their mother's feet.

"Capital!" she exclaimed. "I shall now show you that I am not at all
behindhand in ingenuity. This must be retted, carded, spun, and woven,
and then with scissors, needle, and thread I will make you any article
of clothing you choose."

We decided that Flamingo Marsh would be the best spot for the operation
of steeping or "retting" the flax, and next morning we set out thither
with the cart drawn by the ass, and laden with the bundles, between
which sat Franz and Knips, while the rest of us followed with spades and
hatchets. I described to my boys as we went along the process of
retting, and explained to them how steeping the flax leaves destroys the
useless membrane, while the strong fibers remain.

As we were employed in making beds for the flax and placing it in them,
we observed several nests of the flamingo. These are most curiously and
skillfully made of glutinous clay, so strong that they can neither be
overturned nor washed away. They are formed in the shape of blunted
cones, and placed point downward; at the upper and broader end is built
a little platform to contain the eggs, on which the female bird sits,
with her long legs in the water on either side, until the little birds
are hatched and can take to the water. For a fortnight we left the flax
to steep, and then taking it out and drying it thoroughly in the sun,
stored it for future use at Falconhurst.

Daily did we load our cart with provisions to be brought to our winter
quarters: manioc, potatoes, cocoanuts, sweet acorns, sugar-canes, were
all collected and stored in abundance--for grumbling thunder, lowering
skies, and sharp showers warned us that we had no time to lose. Our corn
was sowed, our animals housed, our provisions stored, when down came the
rain.

To continue in our nest we found impossible, and we were obliged to
retreat to the trunk, where we carried such of our domestic furniture as
might have been injured by the damp. Our dwelling was indeed crowded:
the animals and provisions were below, and our beds and household goods
around us, hemmed us in on every side; by dint of patience and better
packing, we obtained sufficient room to work and lie down in; by
degrees, too, we became accustomed to the continual noise of the animals
and the smell of the stables. The smoke from the fire, which we were
occasionally obliged to light, was not agreeable; but in time even that
seemed to become more bearable.

To make more space, we turned such animals as we had captured, and who
therefore might be imagined to know how to shift for themselves, outside
during the daytime, bringing them under the arched roofs only at night.
To perform this duty Fritz and I used to sally forth every evening, and
as regularly every evening did we return soaked to the skin. To obviate
this, the mother, who feared these continual wettings might injure our
health, contrived waterproofs: she brushed on several layers of
caoutchouc over stout shirts, to which she attached hoods; she then
fixed to these duck trousers, and thus prepared for each of us a
complete waterproof suit, clad in which we might brave the severest
rain.

In spite of our endeavors to keep ourselves busy, the time dragged
heavily. Our mornings were occupied in tending the animals; the boys
amused themselves with their pets, and assisted me in the manufacture of
carding-combs and a spindle for the mother. The combs I made with nails,
which I placed head downward on a sheet of tin about an inch wide;
holding the nails in their proper position I poured solder round their
heads to fix them to the tin, which I then folded down on either side of
them to keep them perfectly firm. In the evening, when our room was
illuminated with wax candles, I wrote a journal of all the events which
had occurred since our arrival in this foreign land; and, while the
mother was busy with her needle and Ernest making sketches of birds,
beasts, and flowers with which he had met during the past months, Fritz
and Jack taught little Franz to read.

Week after week rolled by. Week after week saw us still close prisoners.
Incessant rain battered down above us; constant gloom hung over the
desolate scene.




CHAPTER IX.

 Spring again--We begin to hew a cave--Jack makes a discovery--We drive
     the foul air from the cavern--The mother and her boys join us--We
     explore the cave--Fit it up as our winter quarters--The
     herring-bank--We catch seals--Fishing on a grand scale--Isinglass
     and caviare--We visit our plantations--An expedition to establish
     a colony--The building of "Woodlands"--Jack and Fritz return to
     Falconhurst for provisions--Ernest and I explore--A "beast with a
     bill"--We build a canoe--Franz undertakes the education of
     Grumble--We continue our work at the cave--Carpet
     making--Thanksgiving-day--A startling salute--Athletics and
     shooting--Prize giving--Manufacture of birdlime--Fritz and Jack
     ride off for caoutchouc--Shoot a crane and badger--Find
     "Woodlands" turned upside down by monkeys--Discover ginseng.


The winds at length were lulled, the sun shot his brilliant rays through
the riven clouds, the rain ceased to fall--spring had come. No prisoners
set at liberty could have felt more joy than we did as we stepped forth
from our winter abode, refreshed our eyes with the pleasant verdure
around us, and our ears with the merry songs of a thousand happy birds,
and drank in the pure, balmy air of spring.

Our plantations were thriving vigorously. The seed we had sown was
shooting through the moist earth. All nature was refreshed.

Our nest was our first care; filled with leaves and broken and torn by
the wind, it looked indeed dilapidated. We worked hard, and in a few
days it was again inhabitable. My wife begged that I would now start her
with the flax, and as early as possible I built a drying-oven, and then
prepared it for her use; I also, after some trouble, manufactured a
beetle-reel and spinning-wheel, and she and Franz were soon hard at
work, the little boy reeling off the thread his mother spun.

I was anxious to visit Tentholm, for I feared that much of our precious
stores might have suffered. Fritz and I made an excursion thither. The
damage done to Falconhurst was as nothing compared to the scene that
awaited us. The tent was blown to the ground, the canvas torn to rags,
the provisions soaked, and two casks of powder utterly destroyed. We
immediately spread such things as we hoped yet to preserve in the sun to
dry. The pinnace was safe, but our faithful tub-boat was dashed in
pieces, and the irreparable damage we had sustained made me resolve to
contrive some safer and more stable winter-quarters before the arrival
of the next rainy season. Fritz proposed that we should hollow out a
cave in the rock, and though the difficulties such an undertaking would
present appeared almost insurmountable, I yet determined to make the
attempt; we might not, I thought, hew out a cavern of sufficient size to
serve as a room, but we might at least make a cellar for the more
valuable and perishable of our stores.

Some days afterward we left Falconhurst with the cart laden with a cargo
of spades, hammers, chisels, pickaxes, and crowbars, and began our
undertaking. On the smooth face of the perpendicular rock I drew out in
chalk the size of the proposed entrance, and then, with minds bent on
success, we battered away. Six days of hard and incessant toil made but
little impression; I do not think that the hole would have been a
satisfactory shelter for even Master Knips; but we still did not
despair, and were presently rewarded by coming to softer and more
yielding substance; our work progressed, and our minds were relieved.

On the tenth day, as our persevering blows were falling heavily, Jack,
who was working diligently with a hammer and crowbar, shouted:

"Gone, father! Fritz, my bar has gone through the mountain!"

"Run around and get it," laughed Fritz; "perhaps it has dropped into
Europe--you must not lose a good crowbar."

"But, really, it is through; it went right through the rock; I heard it
crash down inside. Oh, do come and see!" he shouted excitedly.

We sprang to his side, and I thrust the handle of my hammer into the
hole he spoke of; it met with no opposition, I could turn it in any
direction I chose. Fritz handed me a long pole; I tried the depth with
that. Nothing could I feel. A thin wall, then, was all that intervened
between us and a great cavern.

With a shout of joy, the boys battered vigorously at the rock; piece by
piece fell, and soon the hole was large enough for us to enter. I
stepped near the aperture, and was about to make a further examination,
when a sudden rush of poisonous air turned me giddy, and shouting to my
sons to stand off, I leaned against the rock.

When I came to myself I explained to them the danger of approaching any
cavern or other place where the air has for a long time been stagnant.
"Unless air is incessantly renewed it becomes vitiated," I said, "and
fatal to those who breathe it. The safest way of restoring it to its
original state is to subject it to the action of fire, a few handfuls of
blazing hay thrown into this hole may, if the place is small,
sufficiently purify the air within to allow us to enter without danger."
We tried the experiment. The flame was extinguished the instant it
entered. Though bundles of blazing grass were thrown in, no difference
was made.

I saw that we must apply some more efficacious remedy, and sent the boys
for a chest of signal rockets we had brought from the wreck. We let fly
some dozens of these fiery serpents, which went whizzing in, and
disappeared at apparently a vast distance from us. Some flew like
radiant meteors round, lighted up the mighty circumference and
displayed, as by a magician's wand, a sparkling, glittering roof. They
looked like avenging dragons driving a foul, malignant fiend out of a
beauteous palace.

We waited for a little while after these experiments, and I then again
threw in lighted hay. It burned clearly; the air was purified.

Fritz and I enlarged the opening, while Jack, springing on his buffalo,
thundered away to Falconhurst to bear the great and astonishing news to
his mother.

Great must have been the effect of Jack's eloquence on those at home,
for the timbers of the bridge were soon again resounding under the swift
but heavy tramp of his steed; and he was quickly followed by the rest of
our party in the cart.

All were in the highest state of excitement. Jack had stowed in the cart
all the candles he could find, and we now, lighting these, shouldered
our arms and entered. I led the way, sounding the ground as I advanced
with a long pole, that we might not fall unexpectedly into any great
hole or chasm. Silently we marched--the mother, the boys, and even the
dogs seeming overawed with the grandeur and beauty of the scene. We were
in a grotto of diamonds--a vast cave of glittering crystal: the candles
reflected on the walls a golden light, bright as the stars of heaven,
while great crystal pillars rose from the floor like mighty trees,
mingling their branches high above us and drooping in hundreds of
stalactites, which sparkled and glittered with all the colors of the
rainbow.

The floor of this magnificent palace was formed of hard, dry sand, so
dry that I saw at once that we might safely take up our abode therein,
without the slightest fear of danger from damp.

From the appearance of the brilliant crystals round about us I suspected
their nature.

I tasted a piece. This was a cavern of rock salt. There was no doubt
about it--here was an unlimited supply of the best and purest salt! But
one thing detracted from my entire satisfaction and delight--large
crystals lay scattered here and there, which, detached from the roof,
had fallen to the ground; this, if apt to recur, would keep us in
constant peril. I examined some of the masses and discovered that they
had been all recently separated, and therefore concluded that the
concussion of the air occasioned by the rockets had caused their fall.
To satisfy ourselves, however, that there were no more pieces tottering
above us, we discharged our guns from the entrance, and watched the
effect. Nothing more fell--our magnificent abode was safe.

We returned to Falconhurst with minds full of wonder at our new
discovery, and plans for turning it to the best possible advantage.

Nothing was now talked of but the new house, how it should be arranged,
how it should be fitted up. The safety and comfort of Falconhurst, which
had at first seemed so great, now dwindled away in our opinion to
nothing; it should be kept up, we decided, merely as a summer residence,
while our cave should be formed into a winter house and impregnable
castle. Our attention was now fully occupied with this new house. Light
and air were to be admitted, so we hewed a row of windows in the rock,
where we fitted the window cases we had brought from the officers'
cabins. We brought the door, too, from Falconhurst, and fitted it in the
aperture we had made. The opening in the trunk of the tree I determined
to conceal with bark, as less likely to attract the notice of wild
beasts or savages should they approach during our absence. The cave
itself we divided into four parts: in front, a large compartment into
which the door opened, subdivided into our sitting, eating, and sleeping
apartments; the right-hand division containing our kitchen and workshop,
and the left our stables; behind all this, in the dark recesses of the
cave, was our storehouse and powder-magazine. Having already undergone
one rainy season, we knew well its discomforts, and thought of many
useful arrangements in the laying out of our dwelling. We did not intend
to be again smoke-dried; we therefore contrived a properly built fire
place and chimney; our stable arrangements, too, were better, and plenty
of space was left in our workshop that we should not be hampered in
even the most extensive operations.

Our frequent residence at Tentholm revealed to us several important
advantages which we had not foreseen. Numbers of splendid turtles often
came ashore to deposit their eggs in the sand, and their delicious flesh
afforded us many a sumptuous meal. When more than one of these creatures
appeared at a time, we used to cut off their retreat to the sea, and,
turning them on their backs, fasten them to a stake driven in close by
the water's edge, by a cord passed through a hole in their shell. We
thus had fresh turtle continually within our reach; for the animals
throve well thus secured, and appeared in as good condition, after
having been kept thus for several weeks, as others when freshly caught.
Lobsters, crabs, and mussels also abounded on the shore. But this was
not all; an additional surprise awaited us.

As we were one morning approaching Tentholm, we were attracted by a most
curious phenomenon. The waters out at sea appeared agitated by some
unseen movement, and as they heaved and boiled, their surface, struck by
the beams of the morning sun, seemed illuminated by flashes of fire.
Over the water where this disturbance was taking place hovered hundreds
of birds, screaming loudly, which ever and anon would dart downward,
some plunging beneath the water, some skimming the surface. Then again
they would rise and resume their harsh cries. The shining, sparkling
mass then rolled onward, and approached in a direct line our bay,
followed by the feathered flock above. We hurried down to the shore to
further examine this strange sight.

I was convinced as we approached that it was a shoal or bank of
herrings.

No sooner did I give utterance to my conjecture than I was assailed by a
host of questions concerning this herring-bank, what it was, and what
occasioned it.

"A herring-bank," I said, "is composed of an immense number of herrings
swimming together. I can scarcely express to you the huge size of this
living bank, which extends over a great area many fathoms deep. It is
followed by numbers of great ravenous fish, who devour quantities of the
herrings, while above hover birds, as you have just seen, ready to
pounce down on stragglers near the top. To escape these enemies, the
shoal makes for the nearest shore, and seeks safety in those shallows
where the large fish cannot follow. But here it meets with a third great
enemy. It may escape from the fish, and elude the vigilance of
sharp-sighted birds, but from the ingenuity of man it can find no
escape. In one year millions of these fish are caught, and yet the roes
of only a small number would be sufficient to supply as many fish
again."

Soon our fishery was in operation. Jack and Fritz stood in the water
with baskets, and baled out the fish, as one bales water with a bucket,
throwing them to us on the shore. As quickly as possible we cleaned
them, and placed them in casks with salt, first a layer of salt, and
then a layer of herrings, and so on, until we had ready many casks of
pickled fish.

As the barrels were filled, we closed them carefully, and rolled them
away to the cool vaults at the back of our cave.

Our good fortune, however, was not to end here. A day after the herring
fishery was over, and the shoal had left our bay, a great number of
seals appeared, attracted by the refuse of the herrings which we had
thrown into the sea. Though I feared they would not be suitable for our
table, we yet secured a score or two for the sake of their skins and
fat. The skins we drew carefully off for harness and clothing, and the
fat we boiled down for oil, which we put aside in casks for tanning,
soap-making, and burning in lamps.

These occupations interfered for some time with our work at Rock House;
but as soon as possible we again returned to our labor with renewed
vigor.

I had noticed that the salt crystals had for their base a species of
gypsum, which I knew might be made of great service to us in our
building operations as plaster.

As an experiment, I broke off some pieces, and, after subjecting them to
great heat, reduced them to powder. The plaster this formed with water
was smooth and white, and as I had then no particular use to which I
might put it, I plastered over some of the herring casks, that I might
be perfectly certain that all air was excluded. The remainder of the
casks I left as they were, for I presently intended to preserve their
contents by smoking. To do this, the boys and I built a small hut of
reeds and branches, and then we strung our herrings on lines across the
roof. On the floor we lit a great fire of brushwood and moss, which
threw out a dense smoke, curling in volumes round the fish, and they in
a few days seemed perfectly cured.

About a month after the appearance of the herrings, we were favored by a
visit from other shoals of fish. Jack espied them first, and called to
us that a lot of young whales were off the coast. We ran down and
discovered the bay apparently swarming with great sturgeons, salmon, and
trout, all making for the mouth of Jackal River, that they might ascend
it and deposit their spawn among the stones.

Jack was delighted at his discovery.

"Here are proper fish!" he exclaimed; "none of your paltry fry. How do
you preserve these sorts of fish? Potted, salted, or smoked?"

"Not so fast," said I, "not so fast; tell me how they are to be caught,
and I will tell you how they are to be cooked."

"Oh! I'll catch them fast enough," he replied, and darted off to Rock
House.

While I was still puzzling my brains as to how I should set to work, he
returned with his fishing apparatus in hand; a bow and arrow, and a ball
of twine.

At the arrow-head he had fastened a barbed spike, and had secured the
arrow to the end of the string. Armed with this weapon, he advanced to
the river's edge.

His arrow flew from the bow, and, to my surprise, struck one of the
largest fish in the side.

"Help, father, help!" he cried, as the great fish darted off, carrying
arrow and all with it; "help! or he will pull me into the water."

I ran to his assistance, and together we struggled with the finny
monster. He pulled tremendously, and lashed the water around him; but we
held the cord fast, and he had no chance of escape. Weaker and weaker
grew his struggles, and, at length, exhausted by his exertions and loss
of blood, he allowed us to draw him ashore.

He was a noble prize, and Fritz and Ernest, who came up just as we
completed his capture, were quite envious of Jack's success. Not to be
behindhand, they eagerly rushed off for weapons themselves.

We were soon all in the water, Fritz with a harpoon, Ernest with a rod
and line, and I myself, armed, like Neptune, with an iron trident, or
more properly speaking, perhaps, a pitchfork. Soon the shore was strewn
with a goodly number of the finest fish--monster after monster we drew
to land. At length Fritz, after harpooning a great sturgeon full eight
feet long, could not get the fish ashore; we all went to his assistance,
but our united efforts were unavailing.

"The buffalo!" proposed my wife, and off went Jack for Storm. Storm was
harnessed to the harpoon rope, and soon the monstrous fish lay panting
on the sand.

We at length, when we had captured as many fish as we could possibly
utilize, set about cleaning and preparing their flesh. Some we salted,
some we dried like the herrings, some we treated like the tunny of the
Mediterranean--we prepared them in oil. Of the roe of the sturgeon I
decided to form caviare, the great Russian dish. I removed from it all
the membranes by which it is surrounded, washed it in vinegar, salted
it, pressed out all the moisture caused by the wet-absorbing properties
of the salt, packed it in small barrels, and stowed it away in our
storehouse.

I knew that of the sturgeon's bladder the best isinglass is made, so
carefully collecting the air-bladders from all those we had killed, I
washed them and hung them up to stiffen. The outer coat or membrane I
then peeled off, cutting the remainder into strips, technically called
staples. These staples I placed in an iron pot over the fire, and when
they had been reduced to a proper consistency I strained off the glue
through a clean cloth, and spread it out on a slab of stone in thin
layers, letting them remain until they were dry. The substance I thus
obtained was beautifully transparent, and promised to serve as an
excellent substitute for glass in our window-frames.

Fortunately, in this beautiful climate little or no attention was
necessary to the kitchen garden, the seeds sprang up and nourished
without apparently the slightest regard for the time or season of the
year. Peas, beans, wheat, barley, rye, and Indian corn seemed constantly
ripe, while cucumbers, melons, and all sorts of other vegetables grew
luxuriantly. The success of our garden at Tentholm encouraged me to hope
that my experiment at Falconhurst had not failed, and one morning we
started to visit the spot.

As we passed by the field from which the potatoes had been dug, we found
it covered with barley, wheat, rye, and peas in profusion.

I turned to the mother in amazement.

"Where has this fine crop sprung from?" said I.

"From the earth," she replied laughing, "where Franz and I sowed the
seed I brought from the wreck. The ground was ready tilled by you and
the boys; all we had to do was to scatter the seed."

I was delighted at the sight, and it augured well, I thought, for the
success of my maize plantation. We hurried to the field. The crop had
indeed grown well, and, what was more, appeared to be duly appreciated.
A tremendous flock of feathered thieves rose as we approached. Among
them Fritz espied a few ruffed grouse, and, quick as thought, unhooding
his eagle, he started him off in chase, then sprung on his onager and
followed at full gallop. His noble bird marked out the finest grouse,
and, soaring high above it, stooped and bore his prey to the ground.
Fritz was close at hand, and springing through the bushes he saved the
bird from death, hooded the eagle's eyes, and returned triumphantly.
Jack had not stood idle, for slipping his pet, Fangs, he had started him
among some quails who remained upon the field, and to my surprise the
jackal secured some dozen of the birds, bringing them faithfully to his
master's feet.

We then turned our steps toward Falconhurst, where we were refreshed by
a most delicious drink the mother prepared for us: the stems of the
young Indian corn, crushed, strained, and mixed with water and the juice
of the sugar-cane.

We then made preparations for an excursion the following day, for I
wished to establish a sort of semi-civilized farm at some distance from
Falconhurst, where we might place some of our animals, which had become
too numerous with our limited means to supply them with food. In the
large cart, to which we harnessed the buffalo, cow, and ass, we placed a
dozen fowls, four young pigs, two couple of sheep, and as many goats,
and a pair of hens and one cock grouse. Fritz led the way on his onager,
and by a new track we forced a passage through the woods and tall
grasses toward Cape Disappointment.

The difficult march was at length over, and we emerged from the forest
upon a large plain covered with curious little bushes; the branches of
these little shrubs and the ground about them were covered with pure
white flakes.

"Snow! snow!" exclaimed Franz. "Oh, mother, come down from the cart and
play snowballs. This is jolly; much better than the ugly rain."

I was not surprised at the boy's mistake, for indeed the flakes did look
like snow; but before I could express my opinion, Fritz declared that
the plant must be a kind of dwarf cotton tree. We approached nearer and
found he was right--soft fine wool inclosed in pods, and still hanging
on the bushes or lying on the ground, abounded in every direction. We
had indeed discovered this valuable plant. The mother was charmed; and
gathering a great quantity in three capacious bags, we resumed our
journey.

Crossing the cotton field we ascended a pretty wooded hill. The view
from the summit was glorious: luxuriant grass at our feet stretching
down the hillside, dotted here and there with shady trees, among which
gushed down a sparkling brook, while below lay the rich green forest,
with the sea beyond.

What better situation could we hope to find for our new farm? Pasture,
water, shade, and shelter, all were here.

We pitched our tent, built our fireplace, and leaving the mother to
prepare our repast, Fritz and I selected a spot for the erection of our
shed. We soon found a group of trees so situated that the trunks would
serve as posts for our intended building. Thither we carried all our
tools, and then, as the day was far advanced, enjoyed our supper, and
lay down upon most comfortable beds, which the mother had prepared for
us with the cotton.

The group of trees we had selected was exactly suited to our purpose,
for it formed a regular rectilinear figure, the greatest side of which
faced the sea. I cut deep mortices in the trunks about ten feet from the
ground, and again ten feet higher up to form a second story. In these
mortices I inserted beams, thus forming a framework for my building, and
then, making a roof of laths, I overlaid it with bark, which I stripped
from a neighboring tree, and fixed with acacia thorns, and which would
effectually shoot off any amount of rain.

While clearing up the scraps of bark and other rubbish for fuel for our
fire, I noticed a peculiar smell, and stooping down I picked up pieces
of the bark, some of which, to my great surprise, I found was that of
the terebinth tree, and the rest that of the American fir. The goats,
too, made an important discovery among the same heap, for we found them
busily rooting out pieces of cinnamon, a most delicious and aromatic
spice.

"From the fir," said I to the boys, "we get turpentine and tar, and thus
it is that the fir tree becomes such a valuable article of commerce. So
we may look forward to preparing pitch for our yacht, with tar and oil,
you know, and cart-grease, too, with tar and fat. I do not know that you
will equally appreciate the terebinth tree. A gum issues from incisions
in the bark which hardens in the sun, and becomes as transparent as
amber; when burned it gives forth a most delicious perfume, and when
dissolved in spirits of wine, forms a beautiful transparent varnish."

The completion of our new farmhouse occupied us several days; we wove
strong lianas and other creepers together to form the walls to the
height of about six feet; the rest, up to the roof, we formed merely of
a latticework of laths to admit both air and light. Within we divided
the house into three parts; one subdivided into stalls for the animals;
a second fitted with perches for the birds, and a third, simply
furnished with a rough table and benches, to serve as a sleeping
apartment for ourselves, when we should find it necessary to pay the
place a visit. In a short time the dwelling was most comfortably
arranged, and as we daily filled the feeding troughs with the food the
animals best liked, they showed no inclination to desert the spot we had
chosen for them.

Yet, hard as we had worked, we found that the provisions we had brought
with us would be exhausted before we could hope to be able to leave the
farm. I therefore dispatched Jack and Fritz for fresh supplies.

During their absence, Ernest and I made a short excursion in the
neighborhood, that we might know more exactly the character of the
country near our farm.

Passing over a brook which flowed toward the wall of rocks, we reached
a large marsh, and as we walked round it, I noticed with delight that it
was covered with the rice plant growing wild in the greatest profusion.
Here and there only were there any ripe plants, and from these rose a
number of ruffed grouse, at which both Ernest and I let fly. Two fell,
and Fangs, who was with us, brought them to our feet. As we advanced,
Knips skipped from the back of his steed Juno and began to regale
himself on some fruit, at a short distance off; we followed the little
animal and found him devouring delicious strawberries. Having enjoyed
the fruit ourselves, we filled the hamper Knips always carried, and
secured the fruit from his pilfering paws with leaves fixed firmly down.

I then took a sample of the rice seeds to show the mother, and we
continued our journey.

Presently we reached the borders of the pretty lake which we had seen
beyond the swamp. The nearer aspect of its calm blue waters greatly
charmed us, and still more so the sight of numbers of black swans,
disporting themselves on the glassy surface, in which their stately
forms and graceful movements were reflected as in a mirror. It was
delightful to watch these splendid birds, old and young, swimming
together in the peaceful enjoyment of life, seeking their food, and
pursuing one another playfully in the water.

I could not think of breaking in upon their happy, beautiful existence
by firing among them, but our dog Juno was by no means so considerate;
for all at once I heard a plunge, and saw her drag out of the water a
most peculiar-looking creature, something like a small otter, but not
above twenty-two inches in length, which she would have torn to pieces
had we not hurried up and taken it from her.

This curious little animal was of a soft, dark brown color, the fur
being of a lighter shade under the body; its feet were furnished with
large claws, and also completely webbed, the head small, with deeply set
eyes and ears, and terminating in a broad flat bill like that of a
duck.

This singularity seemed to us so droll that we both laughed heartily,
feeling at the same time much puzzled to know what sort of animal it
could possibly be. For want of a better, we gave it the name of the
"Beast with a Bill," and Ernest willingly undertook to carry it, that it
might be stuffed and kept as a curiosity.

After this we returned to the farm, thinking our messengers might soon
arrive, and sure enough, in about a quarter of an hour Fritz and Jack
made their appearance at a brisk trot, and gave a circumstantial account
of their mission.

I was pleased to see that they had fulfilled their orders intelligently,
carrying out my intentions in the spirit and not blindly to the letter.

Next morning we quitted the farm (which we named Woodlands), after
providing amply for the wants of the animals, sheep, goats, and poultry
which we left there.

Shortly afterward, on entering a wood, we found it tenanted by an
enormous number of apes, who instantly assailed us, with showers of
fir-cones, uttering hideous and angry cries, and effectually checking
our progress, until we put them to flight by a couple of shots, which
not a little astonished their weak minds.

Fritz picked up some of their missiles, and, showing them to me, I
recognized the cone of the stone-pine.

"By all means gather some of these cones, boys," said I; "you will find
the kernel has a pleasant taste, like almonds, and from it we can, by
pressing, obtain an excellent oil. Therefore I should like to carry some
home with us."

A hill, which seemed to promise a good view from its summit, next
attracted my notice, and, on climbing it, we were more than repaid for
the exertion by the extensive and beautiful prospect which lay spread
before our eyes. The situation altogether was so agreeable, that here
also I resolved to make a settlement, to be visited occasionally, and,
after resting awhile and talking the matter over, we set to work to
build a cottage such as we had lately finished at Woodlands. Our
experience there enabled us to proceed quickly with the work, and in a
few days the rustic abode was completed, and received, by Ernest's
choice, the grand name of Prospect Hill.

My chief object in undertaking this expedition had been to discover some
tree from whose bark I could hope to make a useful light boat or canoe.
Hitherto I had met with none at all fit for my purpose, but, not
despairing of success, I began, when the cottage was built, to examine
carefully the surrounding woods, and, after considerable trouble, came
upon two magnificent, tall, straight trees, the bark of which seemed
something like that of the birch. Selecting one whose trunk was, to a
great height, free from branches, we attached to one of the lower of the
boughs the rope ladder we had with us, and Fritz, ascending it, cut the
bark through in a circle; I did the same at the foot of the tree, and
then, from between the circle we took a narrow perpendicular slip of
bark entirely out, so that we could introduce the proper tools by which
gradually to loosen and raise the main part, so as finally to separate
it from the tree uninjured and entire. This we found possible, because
the bark was moist and flexible. Great care and exertion was necessary,
as the bark became detached, to support it, until the whole was ready to
be let gently down upon the grass. This seemed a great achievement; but
our work was by no means ended, nor could we venture to desist from it
until, while the material was soft and pliable, we had formed it into
the shape we desired for the canoe.

In order to do this, I cut a long triangular piece out of each end of
the roll, and, placing the sloping parts one over the other, I drew the
ends into a pointed form and secured them with pegs and glue.

This successful proceeding had, however, widened the boat, and made it
too flat in the middle, so that it was necessary to put ropes round it,
and tighten them until the proper shape was restored before we could
allow it to dry in the sun.

This being all I could do without a greater variety of tools, I
determined to complete my work in a more convenient situation, and
forthwith dispatched Fritz and Jack with orders to bring the sledge
(which now ran on wheels taken from gun-carriages) that the canoe might
be transported direct to the vicinity of the harbor at Tentholm.

During their absence I fortunately found some wood naturally curved,
just suited for ribs to support and strengthen the sides of the boat.

When the two lads returned with the sledge, it was time to rest for the
night; but with early dawn we were again busily at work.

The sledge was loaded with the new boat, and everything else we could
pack into it, and we turned our steps homeward, finding the greatest
difficulty, however, in getting our vehicle through the woods. We
crossed the bamboo swamp, where I cut a fine mast for my boat, and came
at length to a small opening or defile in the ridge of rocks, where a
little torrent rushed from its source down into the larger stream
beyond; here we determined to make a halt, in order to erect a great
earth wall across the narrow gorge, which, being thickly planted with
prickly pear, Indian fig, and every thorny bush we could find, would in
time form an effectual barrier against the intrusion of wild beasts, the
cliffs being, to the best of our belief, in every other part
inaccessible. For our own convenience we retained a small winding-path
through this barrier, concealing and defending it with piles of branches
and thorns, and also we contrived a light drawbridge over the stream, so
that we rendered the pass altogether a very strong position, should we
ever have to act on the defensive.

This work occupied two days, and continuing on our way, we were glad to
rest at Falconhurst before arriving (quite tired and worn out) at
Tentholm.

It took some time to recruit our strength after this long and fatiguing
expedition, and then we vigorously resumed the task of finishing the
canoe. The arrangements, I flattered myself, were carried out in a
manner quite worthy of a ship builder; a mast, sails, and paddles were
fitted, but my final touch, although I prized it highly and considered
it a grand and original idea, would no doubt have excited only ridicule
and contempt had it been seen by a naval man. My contrivance was this: I
had a couple of large air-tight bags made of the skins of the dog-fish,
well tarred and pitched, inflated, and made fast on each side of the
boat, just above the level of the water. These floats, however much she
might be loaded, would effectually prevent either the sinking or
capsizing of my craft.

I may as well relate in this place what I omitted at the time of its
occurrence. During the rainy season our cow presented us with a
bull-calf, and that there might never be any difficulty in managing him,
I at a very early age pierced his nose and placed a short stick in it,
to be exchanged for a ring when he was old enough. The question now came
to be, who should be his master, and to what should we train him?

"Why not teach him," said Fritz, "to fight the wild animals, and defend
us, like the fighting bulls of the Hottentots? That would be really
useful!"

"I am sure I should much prefer a gentle bull to a fighting one!"
exclaimed his mother; "but do you mean to say tame oxen can be taught to
act rationally on the defensive?"

"I can but repeat what I have heard or read," replied I, as regards the
race of Hottentots who inhabit the south of Africa, among all sorts of
wild and ferocious animals.

"The wealth of these people consists solely in their flocks and herds,
and, for their protection, they train their bulls to act as guards.

"These courageous animals keep the rest from straying away, and when
danger threatens, they give instant notice of it, drive the herd
together in a mass, the calves and young cows being placed in the
center; around them the bulls and strong oxen make a formidable circle
with their horned heads turned to the front, offering determined
resistance to the fiercest foe.

"These fighting bulls will even sometimes rush with dreadful bellowing
to meet the enemy; and should it be a mighty lion or other strong and
daring monster, sacrifice their own lives in defense of the herd.

"It is said that formerly, when Hottentot tribes made war on one
another, it was not unusual to place a troop of these stout-hearted
warriors in the van of the little army, when their heroism led to
decisive victory on one side or the other.

"But," continued I, "although I can see you are all delighted with my
description of these fine, warlike animals, I think we had better train
this youngster to be a peaceable bull. Who is to have charge of him?"

Ernest thought it would be more amusing to train his monkey than a
calf. Jack, with the buffalo and his hunting jackal, had quite
enough on his hands. Fritz was content with the onager. Their
mother was voted mistress of the old gray donkey. And I myself
being superintendent-in-chief of the whole establishment of
animals, there remained only little Franz to whose special care the
calf could be committed.

"What say you, my boy--will you undertake to look after this little
fellow?"

"Oh, yes, father!" he replied. "Once you told me about a strong man, I
think his name was Milo, and he had a tiny calf, and he used to carry it
about everywhere. It grew bigger and bigger, but still he carried it
often, till at last he grew so strong that when it was quite a great big
ox, he could lift it as easily as ever. And so, you see, if I take care
of our wee calf and teach it to do what I like, perhaps when it grows
big I shall still be able to manage it, and then--oh, papa--do you think
I might ride upon it?"

I smiled at the child's simplicity, and his funny application of the
story of Milo of Cortona.

"The calf shall be yours, my boy. Make him as tame as you can, and we
will see about letting you mount him some day; but remember, he will be
a great bull long before you are nearly a man. Now, what will you call
him?"

"Shall I call him Grumble, father? Hear what a low muttering noise he
makes!"

"Grumble will do famously."

"Grumble, Grumble. Oh, it beats your buffalo's name hollow, Jack!"

"Not a bit," said he; "why, you can't compare the two names. Fancy
mother saying, 'Here comes Franz on Grumble, but Jack _riding on the
Storm_.' Oh, it sounds sublime!"

We named the two puppies Bruno and Fawn, and so ended this important
domestic business.

For two months we worked steadily at our salt-cave, in order to complete
the necessary arrangement of partition walls, so as to put the rooms and
stalls for the animals in comfortable order for the next long rainy
season, during which time, when other work would be at a standstill, we
could carry on many minor details for the improvement of the abode.

We leveled the floors first with clay; then spread gravel mixed with
melted gypsum over that, producing a smooth, hard surface, which did
very well for most of the apartments; but I was ambitious of having one
or two carpets, and set about making a kind of felt in the following
way:

I spread out a large piece of sailcloth, and covered it equally all over
with a strong liquid, made of glue and isinglass, which saturated it
thoroughly. On it we then laid wool and hair from the sheep and goats,
which had been carefully cleaned and prepared, and rolled and beat it
until it adhered tolerably smoothly to the cloth. Finally it became,
when perfectly dry, a covering for the floor of our sitting room by no
means to be despised.

One morning, just after these labors at the salt-cave were completed,
happening to awake unusually early, I turned my thoughts, as I lay
waiting for sunrise, to considering what length of time we had now
passed on this coast, and discovered, to my surprise, that the very next
day would be the anniversary of our escape from the wreck. My heart
swelled with gratitude to the gracious God, who had then granted us
deliverance, and ever since had loaded us with benefits; and I resolved
to set to-morrow apart as a day of thanksgiving, in joyful celebration
of the occasion.

My mind was full of indefinite plans when I rose, and the day's work
began as usual. I took care that everything should be cleaned, cleared,
and set in order both outside and inside our dwelling; none, however,
suspecting that there was any particular object in view. Other more
private preparations I also made for the next day. At supper I made the
coming event known to the assembled family.

"Good people, do you know that to-morrow is a very great and important
day? We shall have to keep it in honor of our merciful escape to this
land, and call it Thanksgiving-Day."

Every one was surprised to hear that we had already been twelve months
in the country--indeed, my wife believed I might be mistaken, until I
showed her how I had calculated regularly ever since the 31st of
January, on which day we were wrecked, by marking off in my almanac the
Sundays as they arrived for the remaining eleven months of that year.

"Since then," I added, "I have counted thirty-one days. This is the 1st
of February. We landed on the 2d, therefore to-morrow is the anniversary
of the day of our escape. As my bookseller has not sent me an almanac
for the present year, we must henceforth reckon for ourselves."

"Oh, that will be good fun for us," said Ernest. "We must have a long
stick, like Robinson Crusoe, and cut a notch in it every day, and count
them up every now and then, to see how the weeks and months and years go
by."

"That is all very well, if you know for certain the number of days in
each month, and in the year. What do you say, Ernest?"

"The year contains 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, and 45 seconds,"
returned he promptly.

"Perfectly correct!" said I, smiling; "but you would get in a mess with
those spare hours, minutes, and seconds in a year or two, wouldn't you?"

"Not at all! Every four years I would add them all together, make a day,
stick it into February, and call that year leap year."

"Well done, Professor Ernest! We must elect you astronomer royal in this
our kingdom, and let you superintend and regulate everything connected
with the lapse of time, clocks and watches included."

Before they went to sleep, I could hear my boys whispering among
themselves, about "father's mysterious allusions" to next day's festival
and rejoicings; but I offered no explanations, and went to sleep, little
guessing that the rogues had laid a counter-plot, far more surprising
than my simple plan for their diversion.

Nothing less than roar of artillery startled me from sleep at daybreak
next morning. I sprang up and found my wife as much alarmed as I was by
the noise, otherwise I should have been inclined to believe it fancy.

"Fritz! dress quickly and come with me!" cried I, turning to his
hammock. Lo, it was empty! neither he nor Jack were to be seen.

Altogether bewildered, I was hastily dressing, when their voices were
heard, and they rushed in shouting:

"Hurrah! didn't we rouse you with a right good thundering salute?"

But perceiving at a glance that we had been seriously alarmed, Fritz
hastened to apologize for the thoughtless way in which they had sought
to do honor to the Day of Thanksgiving, without considering that an
unexpected cannon-shot would startle us unpleasantly from our slumbers.

We readily forgave the authors of our alarm, in consideration of the
good intention which had prompted the deed, and, satisfied that the day
had at least been duly inaugurated, we all went quietly to breakfast.

Afterward we sat together for a long time, enjoying the calm beauty of
the morning, and talking of all that had taken place on the memorable
days of the storm a year ago; for I desired that the awful events of
that time should live in the remembrance of my children with a deepening
sense of gratitude for our deliverance. Therefore I read aloud passages
from my journal, as well as many beautiful verses from the Psalms,
expressive of joyful praise and thanksgiving, so that even the youngest
among us was impressed and solemnized at the recollections of escape
from a terrible death, and also led to bless and praise the name of the
Lord our Deliverer.

Dinner followed shortly after this happy service, and I then announced
for the afternoon a "Grand Display of Athletic Sports," in which I and
my wife were to be spectators and judges.

"Father, what a grand idea!"

"Oh, how jolly! Are we to run races?"

"And prizes! Will there be prizes, father?"

"The judges offer prizes for competition in every sort of manly
exercise," replied I. "Shooting, running, riding, leaping, climbing,
swimming; we will have an exhibition of your skill in all. Now for it!"

"Trumpeters! sound for the opening of the lists."

Uttering these last words in a stentorian voice and wildly waving my
arms toward a shady spot, where the ducks and geese were quietly
resting, had the absurd effect I intended.

Up they all started in a fright, gabbling and quacking loudly, to the
infinite amusement of the children, who began to bustle about in eager
preparations for the contest, and begging to know with what they were to
begin.

"Let us have shooting first, and the rest when the heat of the day
declines. Here is a mark I have got ready for you," said I, producing a
board roughly shaped like a kangaroo, and of about the size of one. This
target was admired, but Jack could not rest satisfied till he had added
ears, and a long leather strap for a tail.

It was then fixed in the attitude most characteristic of the creature,
and the distance for firing measured off. Each of the three competitors
was to fire twice.

Fritz hit the kangaroo's head each time; Ernest hit the body once; and
Jack, by a lucky chance, shot the ears clean away from the head, which
feat raised a shout of laughter.

A second trial with pistols ensued, in which Fritz again came off
victor.

Then desiring the competitors to load with small shot, I threw a little
board as high as I possibly could up in the air, each in turn aiming at
and endeavoring to hit it before it touched the ground.

In this I found to my surprise that the sedate Ernest succeeded quite as
well as his more impetuous brother Fritz.

As for Jack, his flying board escaped wholly uninjured.

After this followed archery, which I liked to encourage, foreseeing that
a time might come when ammunition would fail; and in this practice I saw
with pleasure that my elder sons were really skillful, while even little
Franz acquitted himself well.

A pause ensued, and then I started a running match.

Fritz, Ernest, and Jack were to run to Falconhurst, by the most direct
path. The first to reach the tree was to bring me, in proof of his
success, a penknife I had accidentally left on the table in my sleeping
room.

At a given signal, away went the racers in fine style. Fritz and Jack,
putting forth all their powers, took the lead at once, running in
advance of Ernest, who started at a good, steady pace, which I predicted
he would be better able to maintain than such a furious rate as his
brothers.

But long before we expected to see them back, a tremendous noise of
galloping caused us to look with surprise toward the bridge, and Jack
made his appearance, thundering along on his buffalo, with the onager
and the donkey tearing after him riderless, and the whole party in the
wildest spirits.

"Hullo!" cried I, "what sort of footrace do you call this, Master Jack?"

He shouted merrily as he dashed up to us; then flinging himself off and
saluting us in a playful way:

"I very soon saw," said he, "that I hadn't a chance; so renouncing all
idea of the prize, I caught Storm, and made him gallop home with me, to
be in time to see the others come puffing in. Lightfoot and old Grizzle
chose to join me--I never invited them!"

By and by the other boys arrived, Ernest holding up the knife in token
of being the winner; and after hearing all particulars about the
running, and that he had reached Falconhurst two minutes before Fritz,
we proceeded to test the climbing powers of the youthful athletes.

In this exercise Jack performed wonders. He ascended with remarkable
agility the highest palms whose stems he could clasp. And when he put on
his shark-skin buskins, which enabled him to take firm hold of larger
trees, he played antics like a squirrel or a monkey, peeping and
grinning at us, at first on one side of the stem, and then on the other,
in a most diverting way.

Fritz and Ernest climbed well, but could not come near the grace and
skill of their active and lively young brother.

Riding followed, and marvelous feats were performed, Fritz and Jack
proving themselves very equal in their management of their different
steeds.

I thought the riding was over, when little Franz appeared from the
stable in the cave, leading young Grumble, the bull-calf, with a neat
saddle of kangaroo hide, and a bridle passed through his nose ring.

The child saluted us with a pretty little air of confidence, exclaiming:

"Now, most learned judges, prepare to see something quite new and
wonderful! The great bull-tamer, Milo of Cortona, desires the honor of
exhibiting before you."

Then taking a whip and holding the end of a long cord, he made the
animal, at the word of command, walk, trot, and gallop in a circle round
him.

He afterward mounted, and showed off Grumble's somewhat awkward paces.

The sports were concluded by swimming matches, and the competitors found
a plunge in salt water very refreshing after their varied exertions.

Fritz showed himself a master in the art. At home in the element, no
moment betokened either exertion or weariness.

Ernest exhibited too much anxiety and effort, while Jack was far too
violent and hasty, and soon became exhausted.

Franz gave token of future skill.

By this time, as it was getting late, we returned to our dwelling, the
mother having preceded us in order to make arrangements for the ceremony
of prize-giving.

We found her seated in great state, with the prizes set out by her side.

The boys marched in pretending to play various instruments in imitation
of a band, and then all four, bowing respectfully, stood before her,
like the victors in a tournament of old, awaiting the reward of valor
from the Queen of Beauty, which she bestowed with a few words of praise
and encouragement.

Fritz, to his immense delight, received, as the prize for shooting and
swimming, a splendid double-barreled rifle, and a beautiful
hunting-knife.

To Ernest, as winner of the running match, was given a handsome gold
watch.

For climbing and riding, Jack had a pair of silver plated spurs, and a
riding whip, both of which gave him extraordinary pleasure.

Franz received a pair of stirrups, and a driving whip made of
rhinoceros hide, which we thought would be of use to him in the
character of bull-trainer.

When the ceremony was supposed to be over, I advanced, and solemnly
presented to my wife a lovely work-box, filled with every imaginable
requirement for a lady's work-table, which she accepted with equal
surprise and delight.

The whole entertainment afforded the boys such intense pleasure, and
their spirits rose to such a pitch, that nothing would serve them but
another salvo of artillery, in order to close with befitting dignity and
honor so great a day. They gave me no peace till they had leave to
squander some gunpowder, and then at last their excited feelings seeming
relieved, we were able to sit down to supper; shortly afterward we
joined in family worship and retired to rest.

Soon after the great festival of our grand Thanksgiving-Day I
recollected that it was now the time when, the figs at Falconhurst being
ripe, immense flocks of ortolans and wild pigeons were attracted
thither, and as we had found those preserved last year of the greatest
use among our stores of winter provisions, I would not miss the
opportunity of renewing our stock; and therefore, laying aside the
building work, we removed with all speed to our home in the tree, where
sure enough we found the first detachment of the birds already busy with
the fruit.

In order to spare ammunition, I resolved to concoct a strong sort of
birdlime, of which I had read in some account of the Palm Islanders, who
make it of fresh caoutchouc mixed with oil, and of so good a quality
that it has been known to catch even peacocks and turkeys.

Fritz and Jack were therefore dispatched to collect some fresh
caoutchouc from the trees, and as this involved a good gallop on Storm
and Lightfoot, they, nothing loth, set off.

They took a supply of calabashes, in which to bring the gum, and we
found it high time to manufacture a fresh stock of these useful vessels.
I was beginning to propose an expedition to the Gourd-tree Wood,
regretting the time it would take to go such a distance, when my wife
reminded me of her plantation near the potato field.

There to our joy we found that all the plants were flourishing, and
crops of gourds and pumpkins, in all stages of ripeness, covered the
ground.

Selecting a great number suited to our purpose, we hastened home, and
began the manufacture of basins, dishes, plates, flasks, and spoons of
all sorts and sizes, with even greater success than before.

When the riders returned with the caoutchouc, they brought several
novelties besides.

A crane, for example, shot by Fritz, and an animal which they called a
marmot, but which to me seemed much more like a badger.

Aniseed, turpentine, and wax berries for candles, they had also
collected, and a curious root which they introduced by the name of the
monkey plant.

"And pray wherefore 'monkey plant,' may I ask?"

"Well, for this reason, father," answered Fritz: "we came upon an open
space in the forest near Woodlands, and perceived a troop of monkeys,
apparently engaged, as Jack said, in cultivating the soil! Being curious
to make out what they were at, we tied up the dogs, as well as Storm and
Lightfoot, and crept near enough to see that the apes were most
industriously grubbing up and eating roots. This they did in a way that
nearly choked us with laughter, for when the root was rather hard to
pull up, and the leaves were torn off, they seized it firmly in their
teeth, and flung themselves fairly heels-over-head in the most ludicrous
fashion you ever saw, and up came the root, unable to resist the
leverage! Of course we wanted to see what this dainty morsel was like,
so we loosed the dogs, and the apes cleared out double quick, leaving
plenty of the roots about. We tasted them, and thought them very nice.
Will you try one?"

The plant was quite new to me, but I imagined it might be what is called
in China "ginseng," and there prized and valued beyond everything. The
children being curious to hear more about this ginseng, I continued:

"In China it is considered so strengthening and wholesome that it is
used as a sort of universal medicine, being supposed to prolong human
life.

"The emperor alone has the right to permit it to be gathered, and guards
are placed round land where it grows.

"Ginseng is to be found in Tartary, and has lately been discovered in
Canada; it is cultivated in Pennsylvania, because the Americans
introduce it secretly into China as smuggled merchandise."

Fritz then continued:

"After this we went on to Woodlands; but mercy on us! what a confusion
the place was in! Everything smashed or torn, and covered with mud and
dirt; the fowls terrified, the sheep and goats scattered, the contents
of the rooms dashed about as if a whirlwind had swept through the
house."

"What!" I exclaimed, while my wife looked horrified at the news,
conjuring up in her imagination hordes of savages who would soon come
and lay waste Falconhurst and Tentholm as well as Woodlands. "How can
that have happened? Did you discover the authors of all this mischief?"

"Oh," said Jack, "it was easy to see that those dreadful monkeys had
done it all. First they must have got into the yards and sheds, and
hunted the fowls and creatures about; and then I dare say the cunning
rascals put a little monkey in at some small opening, and bid him
unfasten the shutters--you know what nimble fingers they have. Then of
course the whole _posse_ of them swarmed into our nice tidy cottage and
skylarked with every single thing they could lay paws on, till perhaps
they got hungry all at once, and bethought them of the 'ginseng,' as you
call it, out in the woods yonder, where we found them so busy refreshing
themselves, the mischievous villains!"

"While we were gazing at all this ruin in a sort of bewilderment,"
pursued Fritz, "we heard a sound of rushing wings and strange ringing
cries, as of multitudes of birds passing high above us, and looking up
we perceived them flying quickly in a wedge-shaped flock at a great
height in the air. They began gradually to descend, taking the direction
of the lake, and separated into a number of small detachments, which
followed in a long, straight line, and at a slower rate, the movements
of the leaders, who appeared to be examining the neighborhood. We could
now see what large birds they must be, but dared not show ourselves or
follow them, lest they should take alarm.

"Presently, and with one accord, they quickened their motion, just as if
the band had begun to play a quick march after a slow one, and rapidly
descended to earth in a variety of lively ways, and near enough for us
to see that they must be cranes.

"Some alighted at once, while others hovered sportively over them. Many
darted to the ground, and, just touching it, would soar again upward
with a strong but somewhat heavy flight.

"After gamboling in this way for a time, the whole multitude, as though
at the word of command, alighted on the rice fields, and began to feast
on the fresh grain.

"We thought now was our time to get a shot at the cranes, and cautiously
approached; but they were too cunning to let themselves be surprised,
and we came unexpectedly upon their out-posts or sentinels, who
instantly sprang into the air, uttering loud, trumpet-like cries, upon
which the whole flock arose and followed them with a rush like a sudden
squall of wind. We were quite startled, and it was useless to attempt a
shot; but unwilling to miss the chance of securing at least one of the
birds, I hastily unhooded my eagle, and threw him into the air.

"With a piercing cry he soared away high above them, then shot downward
like an arrow, causing wild confusion among the cranes. The one which
the eagle attacked sought to defend itself; a struggle followed, and
they came together to the ground not far from where we stood.

"Hastening forward, to my grief I found the beautiful crane already
dead. The eagle, luckily unhurt, was rewarded with a small pigeon from
my game-bag.

"After this we went back to Woodlands, got some turpentine and a bag of
rice--and set off for home."

Fritz's interesting story being ended, and supper ready, we made trial
of the new roots, and found them very palatable, either boiled or
stewed; the monkey plant, however, if it really proved to be the ginseng
of the Chinese, would require to be used with caution, being of an
aromatic and heating nature.

We resolved to transplant a supply of both roots to our kitchen garden.




CHAPTER X.

 Birdlime--A midnight raid--The massacre at Woodlands--Capture of
     Molucca pigeons--A pigeon-house--Fritz and I prepare a conjuring
     trick--Great success of our experiment--Lichen and nutmegs
     discovered--Jack's adventure--The loom manufactured--Winter stores
     prepared--The rainy season sets in--Interior of our house
     arranged--We study languages--The return of spring--A stranded
     whale--An account of coral--We go to work on the whale's
     carcass--Remarks on the habits of the whale.


On the following morning we were early astir; and as soon as breakfast
was over, we went regularly to work with the birdlime. The tough,
adhesive mixture of caoutchouc, oil, and turpentine turned out well.

The boys brought rods, which I smeared over, and made them place among
the upper branches, where the fruit was plentiful, and the birds most
congregated.

The prodigious number of the pigeons, far beyond those of last year,
reminded me that we had not then, as now, witnessed their arrival at
their feeding-places, but had seen only the last body of the season, a
mere party of stragglers, compared to the masses which now weighed down
the branches of all the trees in the neighborhood.

The sweet acorns of the evergreen oaks were also patronized; large
flocks were then congregated; and from the state of the ground under the
trees it was evident that at night they roosted on the branches. Seeing
this, I determined to make a raid upon them by torchlight, after the
manner of the colonists in Virginia.

Meantime, the birdlime acted well: the pigeons alighting, stuck fast.
The more they fluttered and struggled, the more completely were they
bedaubed with the tenacious mixture, and at length, with piteous cries,
fell to the ground, bearing the sticks with them. The birds were then
removed, fresh lime spread, and the snare set again.

The boys quickly became able to carry on the work without my assistance;
so, leaving it to them, I went to prepare torches, with pine wood and
turpentine, for the night attack.

Jack presently brought a very pretty pigeon, unlike the rest, to show
me, as he felt unwilling to kill it; and seeing that it must be one of
our own European breed, which we wished to preserve until their numbers
greatly increased, I took the trembling captive, and gently cleansed its
feet and wings with oil and ashes from the stiff, sticky mess with which
it was bedaubed, placing it then in a wicker cage, and telling Jack to
bring me any others like it which were caught. This he did; and we
secured several pairs, greatly to my satisfaction, as having necessarily
let them go free when we landed, they had become quite wild and we
derived no advantage from them: whereas now we would have a cot, and
pigeon-pie whenever we liked.

When evening drew on, we set out for the wood of sweet acorns, provided
merely with long bamboo canes, torches, and canvas sacks.

These weapons appeared very curious and insufficient to the children;
but their use was speedily apparent; for darkness having come upon us
almost before we reached the wood, I lighted the torches, and perceived,
as I expected, that every branch was thickly laden with ortolans and
wild pigeons, who were roosting there in amazing numbers.

Suddenly aroused by the glare of light, confusion prevailed among the
terrified birds, who fluttered helplessly through the branches, dazzled
and bewildered, and many falling, even before we began to use the
sticks, were picked up, and put in the bags. When we beat and struck the
branches, it was as much as my wife and Franz could do to gather up the
quantities of pigeons that soon lay on the ground. The sacks were
speedily quite full. We turned homeward, and on reaching Falconhurst,
put our booty in safety, and gladly withdrew to rest.

The following day was wholly occupied in plucking, boiling, roasting,
and stewing, so that we could find time for nothing else; but next
morning a great expedition to Woodlands was arranged, that measures
might there be taken to prevent a repetition of the monkey invasion.

I hoped, could I but catch the mischievous rascals at their work of
destruction, to inflict upon them such a chastisement as would
effectually make them shun the neighborhood of our farm for the future.

My wife provided us with a good store of provisions, as we were likely
to be absent several days, while she, with Franz and Turk, remained at
home.

I took with me abundance of specially prepared birdlime, far stronger
than that which we used for the pigeons; a number of short posts, plenty
of string, and a supply of cocoanut shells and gourds.

The buffalo carried all these things, and one or two of the boys beside.
I myself bestrode the ass, and in due time we arrived at a convenient
spot in the forest, near Woodlands, well concealed by thick bushes and
underwood, where we made a little encampment, pitching the small tent,
and tethering the animals. The dogs, too, were tied up, lest they should
roam about and betray our presence.

We found the cottage quiet and deserted; and I lost no time in preparing
for the reception of visitors, hoping to be all ready for them and out
of sight before they arrived.

We drove the stakes lightly into the ground, so as to form an irregular
paling round the house, winding string in and out in all directions
between them thus making a kind of labyrinth, through which it would be
impossible to pass without touching either the stakes or the cords.

Everything was plentifully besmeared with birdlime, and basins of the
mixture were set in all directions, strewn with rice, maize, and other
dainties for bait.

Night came without any interruption to our proceedings; and all being
then accomplished, we retired to rest beneath the shelter of our little
tent.

Very early in the morning we heard a confused noise, such as we knew
betokened the approach of a large number of apes. We armed ourselves
with strong clubs and cudgels, and holding the dogs in leash, made our
way silently behind the thickets, till, ourselves unseen, we could
command a view of all that went on; and strange indeed was the scene
which ensued!

The noise of rustling, cracking, and creaking among the branches, with
horrid cries, and shrieks, and chattering, increased to a degree
sufficient to make us perfectly giddy; and then out from the forest
poured the whole disorderly rabble of monkeys, scrambling, springing,
leaping from the trees, racing and tumbling across the grassy space
toward the house; when, at once attracted by the novelties they saw,
they made for the jars and bowls.

They saw innumerable; but the confused, rapid way in which they swarmed
hither and thither, made it difficult to judge accurately of their
numbers. They dashed fearlessly through and over the palings in all
directions, some rushing at the eatables, some scrambling on to the
roof, where they commenced tugging at the wooden pegs, with a view to
forcing an entrance.

Gradually, however, as they rambled over the place, all in turn became
besmeared with our birdlime on head, paws, or back or breast. The
wretched predicament of the apes increased every instant.

Some sat down, and with the most ludicrous gestures, tried to clean
themselves. Others were hopelessly entangled in stakes and cordage,
which they trailed about after them, looking the picture of bewildered
despair.

Others, again, endeavored to help one another, and stuck fast together;
the more they pulled, and tugged, and kicked the worse became their
plight.

Many had the gourds and cocoanut shells lumbering and clattering about
with them, their paws having been caught when they sought to obtain the
rice or fruit we had put for bait.

Most ridiculous of all was the condition of one old fellow, who had
found a calabash containing palm wine, and, eagerly drinking it, was
immediately fitted with a mask, for the shell stuck to his forehead and
whiskers, of course covering his eyes; and he blundered about, cutting
the wildest capers in his efforts to get rid of the encumbrance.

Numbers took to flight; but, as we had spread birdlime on several of the
trees around, many apes found themselves fixed to, or hanging from the
branches, where they remained in woeful durance, struggling and
shrieking horribly.

The panic being now general, I loosed the three dogs, whose impatience
had been almost uncontrollable, and who now rushed to the attack of the
unfortunate monkeys, as though burning with zeal to execute justice upon
desperate criminals.

The place soon had the appearance of a ghastly battlefield; for we were
obliged to do our part with the clubs and sticks, till the din of
howling, yelling, barking, in every conceivable tone of rage and pain,
gave place to an awful silence, and we looked with a shudder on the
shocking spectacle around us.

At least forty apes lay mangled and dead, and the boys began to be quite
sad and down-hearted, till I, fully sharing their feelings, hastened to
turn their thoughts to active employment in removing and burying the
slain, burning the stakes, cordage, bowls, everything concerned in the
execution of our deadly stratagem.

After that we betook ourselves to the task of restoring order to our
dismantled cottage; and seeking for the scattered flock of sheep, goats,
and poultry, we gradually collected them, hoping to settle them once
more peacefully, in their yards and sheds.

While thus engaged, we repeatedly heard a sound as of something heavy
falling from a tree. On going to look, we found three splendid birds,
caught on some of the limed sticks we had placed loose in the branches.

Two of these proved to be a variety of the blue Molucca pigeon; the
third I assumed to be the Nicobar pigeon, having met with descriptions
of its resplendent green, bronze, and steely blue plumage; and I was
pleased to think of domesticating them, and establishing them as first
tenants of a suitable dwelling near the cave.

"First tenants, father!" said Fritz; "do you expect to catch more like
these?"

"Not exactly catch them; I mean to practise a secret art. Much can be
done by magic, Fritz!"

Further explanation I declined to give.

In a few days Woodlands was once more set in order, and everything
settled and comfortable, so that we returned without further adventure
to Falconhurst, where we were joyfully welcomed.

Every one agreed that we must go at once to Tentholm, to make the
proposed pigeon-house in the rock. Several other things there also
requiring our attention, we made arrangements for a prolonged stay.

My plan for the pigeon-house was to hollow out an ample space in the
cliff, facing toward Jackal River, and close to our rocky home, fitting
that up with partitions, perches, and nesting places; while a large
wooden front was fitted on to the opening, with entrance-holes, slides
or shutters, and a broad platform in front, where the birds could rest
and walk about.

When, after the work of a few weeks, we thought it was fit for
habitation, I set the other children to work at some distance from our
cavern, and summoning Fritz:

"Now, my faithful assistant," said I, "it is time to conjure the new
colonists to their settlement here. Yes," I continued, laughing at his
puzzled look, "I mean to play a regular pigeon-dealer's trick. You must
know such gentry are very ingenious, not only in keeping their own
pigeons safe, but in adding to their numbers by attracting those of
other people. All I want is some soft clay, aniseed, and salt, of which
I will compound a mixture which our birds will like very much, and the
smell of which will bring others to share it with them."

"I can easily get you those things, father."

"I shall want some oil of aniseed besides," said I, "to put on the
pigeon-holes, so that the birds' feathers may touch it as they may pass
in and out, and become scented with what will attract the wild pigeons.
This I can obtain by pounding aniseed; therefore, bring me the mortar
and some oil."

When this was strongly impregnated with the aromatic oil from the seeds
(for I did not propose to distill it in regular style), I strained it
through a cloth, pressing it strongly; the result answered my purpose,
and the scent would certainly remain for some days.

All my preparations being completed, the pigeons were installed in their
new residence, and the slides closed. The European birds were by this
time quite friendly with the three beautiful strangers; and when the
other boys came home, and scrambled up the ladder to peep in at a little
pane of glass I had fixed in front, they saw them all contentedly
picking up grain, and pecking at the "magic food," as Fritz called it,
although he did not betray my secret arts to his brothers.

Early on the third morning I aroused Fritz, and directed him to ascend
the rope ladder, and arrange a cord on the sliding door of the dovecot,
by which it could be opened or closed from below. Also he poured fresh
aniseed oil all about the entrance, after which we returned, and awoke
the rest of the family, telling them that if they liked to make haste,
they might see me let the pigeons fly.

Everybody came to the dovecot, understanding that some ceremony was to
attend the event, and I waved a wand with mock solemnity, while I
muttered a seeming incantation, and then gave Fritz a sign to draw up
the sliding panel.

Presently out popped the pretty heads of the captives, the soft eyes
glanced about in all directions; they withdrew, they ventured forth
again, they came timidly out on "the veranda," as little Franz expressed
it; then, as though suddenly startled, the whole party took wing, with
the shrill whizzing sound peculiar to the flight of pigeons, and
circling above us as they rose higher and higher, finally darting quite
out of sight.

While we were yet gazing after them, they reappeared, and settled
quietly on the dovecot; but as we congratulated ourselves on a return
which showed that they accepted this as a home, up sprang the three blue
pigeons, the noble foreigners, for whom chiefly I had planned the house,
and rising in circles high in air, winged their rapid way direct toward
Falconhurst.

Their departure had such an air of determination and resolve about it,
that I feared them lost to us forever.

Endeavoring to console ourselves by petting our four remaining birds, we
could not forget this disappointment, and all day long the dovecot
remained the center of attraction.

Nothing, however, was seen of the fugitive until about the middle of the
next day; when most of us were hard at work inside the cavern, Jack
sprang in full of excitement, exclaiming:

"He is there! He is come! he really is!"

"Who? Who is there? What do you mean?"

"The blue pigeon, to be sure! Hurrah! Hurrah!"

"Oh, nonsense!" said Ernest. "You want to play us a trick."

"Why should it be 'nonsense'?" cried I. "I fully believe we shall see
them all soon!"

Out ran everybody to the dovecot, and there, sure enough stood the
pretty fellow, but not alone, for he was billing and cooing to a mate, a
stranger of his own breed, apparently inviting her to enter his
dwelling; for he popped in and out of the door, bowing, sidling, and
cooing, in a most irresistible manner, until the shy little lady
yielded to his blandishments, and tripped daintily in. "Now, let's shut
the door."

"Pull the cord and close the panel!" shouted the boys, making a rush at
the string.

"Stop!" cried I, "let the string alone! I won't have you frighten the
little darlings. Besides, the others will be coming--would you shut the
door in their faces?"

"Here they come! here they come!" exclaimed Fritz, whose keen eye marked
the birds afar, and to our delight the second blue pigeon arrived,
likewise with a mate, whom, after a pretty little flirtation scene of
real and assumed modesty on her part, he succeeded in leading home.

The third and handsomest of the new pigeons was the last in making his
appearance. Perhaps he had greater difficulty than the others in finding
a mate as distinguished in rank and beauty as himself.

However, we fully expected them, and the boys talked of the arrival of
"Mr. and Mrs. Nicobar" as a matter of course.

Late in the day Franz and his mother went out to provide for supper, but
the child returned directly, exclaiming that we must hasten to the
dovecot to see something beautiful.

Accordingly a general rush was made out of the cave, and we saw with
delight that the third stranger also had returned with a lovely bride,
and encouraged by the presence of the first arrivals, they soon made
themselves at home.

In a short time nest-building commenced, and among the materials
collected by the birds, I observed a long gray moss or lichen, and
thought it might very possibly be the same which, in the West Indies, is
gathered from the bark of old trees, where it grows, and hangs in great
tuft-like beards, to be used instead of horse-hair for stuffing
mattresses.

My wife no sooner heard of it than her active brain devised fifty plans
for making it of use. Would we but collect enough, she would clean and
sort it, and there would be no end to the bolsters, pillows, saddles,
and cushions she would stuff with it.

For the discovery of nutmegs we had also to thank the pigeons, and they
were carefully planted in our orchard.

For some time no event of particular note occurred, until at length
Jack, as usual, got into a scrape, causing thereby no little excitement
at home.

He went off early on one of his own particular private expeditions.

He was in the habit of doing this that he might surprise us with some
new acquisition on his return.

This time, however, he came back in most wretched plight, covered with
mud and green slime; a great bundle of Spanish canes was on his back,
muddy and green like himself; he had lost a shoe, and altogether
presented a ludicrous picture of misery, at which we could have laughed
had he not seemed more ready to cry!

"My dear boy! what has happened to you? Where have you been?"

"Only in the swamp behind the powder magazine, father," replied he. "I
went to get reeds for my wicker-work, because I wanted to weave some
baskets and hencoops, and I saw such beauties a little way off in the
marsh, much finer than those close by the edge, that I tried to get at
them.

"I jumped from one firm spot to another, till at last I slipped and sank
over my ankles; I tried to get on toward the reeds, which were close by,
but in I went deeper and deeper, till I was above the knees in thick
soft mud, and there I stuck!

"I screamed and shouted, but nobody came, and I can tell you I was in a
regular fright.

"At last who should appear but my faithful Fangs! He knew my voice and
came close up to me, right over the swamp, but all the poor beast could
do was to help me to make a row; I wonder you did not hear us! The very
rocks rang, but nothing came of it, so despair drove me to think of an
expedient. I cut down all the reeds I could reach round and round me,
and bound them together into this bundle, which made a firm place on
which to lean, while I worked and kicked about to free my feet and legs,
and after much struggling, I managed to get astride on the reeds.

"There I sat, supported above the mud and slime, while Fangs ran yelping
backward and forward between me and the bank, seeming surprised I did
not follow. Suddenly I thought of catching hold of his tail. He dragged
and pulled, and I sprawled, and crawled, and waded, sometimes on my
reeds like a raft, sometimes lugging them along with me, till we luckily
got back to terra firma. But I had a near squeak for it, I can tell
you."

"A fortunate escape indeed, my boy!" cried I, "and I thank God for it.
Fangs has really acted a heroic part as your deliverer, and you have
shown great presence of mind. Now go with your mother, and get rid of
the slimy traces of your disaster! You have brought me splendid canes,
exactly what I want for a new scheme of mine."

The fact was, I meant to try to construct a loom for my wife, for I knew
she understood weaving, so I chose two fine strong reeds, and splitting
them carefully, bound them together again, that when dry they might be
quite straight and equal, and fit for a frame. Smaller reeds were cut
into pieces and sharpened, for the teeth of the comb. The boys did this
for me without in the least knowing their use, and great fun they made
of "father's monster toothpicks."

In time all the various parts of the loom were made ready, and put
together, my wife knowing nothing of it, while to the incessant
questions of the children, I replied mysteriously.

"Oh, it is an outlandish sort of musical instrument; mother will know
how to play upon it."

And when the time came for presenting it, her joy was only equaled by
the amusement and interest with which the children watched her
movements while "playing the loom," as they always said.

About this time, a beautiful little foal, a son of the onager, was added
to our stud, and as he promised to grow up strong and tractable, we soon
saw how useful he would be. The name of Swift was given to him, and he
was to be trained for my own riding.

The interior arrangements of the cavern being now well forward, I
applied myself to contriving an aqueduct, that fresh water might be led
close up to our cave, for it was a long way to go to fetch it from
Jackal River, and especially inconvenient on washing days. As I wanted
to do this before the rainy season began, I set about it at once.

Pipes of hollow bamboo answered the purpose well, and a large cask
formed the reservoir. The supply was good, and the comfort of having it
close at hand so great, that the mother declared she was as well pleased
with our engineering as if we had made her a fountain and marble basin
adorned with mermaids and dolphins.

Anticipating the setting in of the rains, I pressed forward all work
connected with stores for the winter, and great was the in-gathering of
roots, fruits, and grains, potatoes, rice, guavas, sweet acorns,
pine-cones; load after load arrived at the cavern, and the mother's
active needle was in constant requisition, as the demand for more sacks
and bags was incessant.

Casks and barrels of all sorts and sizes were pressed into the service,
until at last the raft was knocked to pieces, and its tubs made to do
duty in the storerooms.

The weather became very unsettled and stormy.

Heavy clouds gathered in the horizon, and passing storms of wind, with
thunder, lightning, and torrents of rain swept over the face of nature
from time to time.

The sea was in frequent commotion; heavy ground swells drove masses of
water hissing and foaming against the cliffs. Everything heralded the
approaching rains. All nature joined in sounding forth the solemn
overture to the grandest work of the year.

It was now near the beginning of the month of June, and we had twelve
weeks of bad weather before us.

We established some of the animals with ourselves at the salt cave. The
cow, the ass, Lightfoot, Storm, and the dogs, were all necessary to us,
while Knips, Fangs, and the eagle were sure to be a great amusement in
the long evenings.

The boys would ride over to Falconhurst very often to see that all was
in order there, and fetch anything required.

Much remained to be done in order to give the cave a comfortable
appearance, which became more desirable now that we had to live indoors.

The darkness of the inner regions annoyed me, and I set myself to invent
a remedy.

After some thought, I called in Jack's assistance, and we got a very
tall, strong bamboo, which would reach right up to the vaulted roof.
This we planted in the earthen floor, securing well by driving wedges in
round it. Jack ascended this pole very cleverly, taking with him a
hammer and chisel to enlarge a crevice in the roof so as to fix a
pulley, by means of which, when he descended, I drew up a large ship's
lantern, well supplied with oil, and as there were four wicks, it
afforded a very fair amount of light.

Several days were spent in arranging the different rooms.

Ernest and Franz undertook the library, fixing shelves, and setting
books in order.

Jack and his mother took in hand the sitting room and kitchen, while
Fritz and I, as better able for heavy work, arranged the workshops. The
carpenter's bench, the turning lathe, and a large chest of tools were
set in convenient places, and many tools and instruments hung on the
walls.

An adjoining chamber was fitted up as a forge, with fireplace, bellows,
and anvil, complete, all which we had found in the ship, packed,
together, and ready to set up.

When these great affairs were settled, we still found in all directions
work to be done. Shelves, tables, benches, movable steps, cupboards,
pegs, door handles, and bolts--there seemed no end to our requirements,
and we often thought of the enormous amount of work necessary to
maintain the comforts and conveniences of life which at home we had
received as matters of course.

But in reality, the more there was to do the better; and I never ceased
contriving fresh improvements, being fully aware of the importance of
constant employment as a means of strengthening and maintaining the
health of mind and body. This, indeed, with a consciousness of continual
progress toward a desirable end, is found to constitute the main element
of happiness.

Our rocky home was greatly improved by a wide porch which I made along
the whole front of our rooms and entrances, by leveling the ground to
form a terrace, and sheltering it with a veranda of bamboo, supported by
pillars of the same.

Ernest and Franz were highly successful as librarians.

The books, when unpacked and arranged, proved to be a most valuable
collection, capable of affording every sort of educational advantage.

Besides a variety of books of voyages, travels, divinity, and natural
history (several containing fine colored illustrations), there were
histories and scientific works, as well as standard fictions in several
languages; also a good assortment of maps, charts, mathematical and
astronomical instruments, and an excellent pair of globes.

I foresaw much interesting study on discovering that we possessed the
grammars and dictionaries of a great many languages, a subject for which
we all had a taste. With French we were well acquainted. Fritz and
Ernest had begun to learn English at school, and made further progress
during a visit to England. The mother, who had once been intimate with
a Dutch family, could speak that language pretty well.

After a great deal of discussion, we agreed to study different
languages, so that in the event of meeting with people of other nations,
there should be at least one of the family able to communicate with
them.

All determined to improve our knowledge of German and French.

The two elder boys were to study English and Dutch with their mother.

Ernest, already possessing considerable knowledge of Latin, wished to
continue to study it, so as to be able to make use of the many works on
natural history and medicine written in that language.

Jack announced that he meant to learn Spanish, "because it sounded so
grand and imposing."

I myself was interested in the Malay language, knowing it to be so
widely spoken in the islands of the Eastern Seas, and thinking it as
likely as any other to be useful to us.

Our family circle by and by represented Babel in miniature, for scraps
and fragments of all these tongues kept buzzing about our ears from
morning to night, each sporting his newly acquired word or sentence on
every possible occasion, propounding idioms and peculiar expressions
like riddles, to puzzle the rest.

In this way, the labor of learning was very considerably lightened, and
every one came to know a few words of each language.

Occasionally we amused ourselves by opening chests and packages hitherto
untouched, and brought unexpected treasures to light--mirrors,
wardrobes, a pair of console tables with polished marble tops, elegant
writing tables and handsome chairs, clocks of various descriptions, a
musical box, and a chronometer were found; and by degrees our abode was
fitted up like a palace, so that sometimes we wondered at ourselves, and
felt as though we were strutting about in borrowed plumes.

The children begged me to decide on a name for our salt-cave dwelling,
and that of Rockburg was chosen unanimously.

The weeks of imprisonment passed so rapidly, that no one found time hang
heavy on his hands.

Books occupied me so much that but little carpentering was done, yet I
made a yoke for the oxen, a pair of cotton wool carders, and a spinning
wheel for my wife.

As the rainy season drew to a close, the weather for a while became
wilder, and the storms fiercer than ever. Thunder roared, lightning
blazed, torrents rushed toward the sea, which came in raging billows to
meet them, lashed to fury by the tempests of wind which swept the
surface of the deep.

The uproar of the elements came to an end at last.

Nature resumed her attitude of repose, her smiling aspect of peaceful
beauty; and soon all traces of the ravages of floods and storms would
disappear beneath the luxuriant vegetation of the tropics.

Gladly quitting the sheltering walls of Rockburg to roam once more in
the open air, we crossed Jackal River, for a walk along the coast, and
presently Fritz with sharp eyes observed something on the small island
near Flamingo Marsh, which was, he said, long and rounded, resembling a
boat bottom upward.

Examining it with the telescope, I could form no other conjecture, and
we resolved to make it the object of an excursion next day, being
delighted to resume our old habit of starting in pursuit of adventure.

The boat was accordingly got in readiness; it required some repairs, and
fresh pitching, and then we made for the point of interest, indulging in
a variety of surmises as to what we should find.

It proved to be a huge, stranded whale.

The island being steep and rocky, it was necessary to be careful; but we
found a landing-place on the further side. The boys hurried by the
nearest way to the beach where lay the monster of the deep, while I
clambered to the highest point of the islet, which commanded a view of
the mainland, from Rockburg to Falconhurst.

On rejoining my sons, I found them only half-way to the great fish, and
as I drew near they shouted in high glee:

"Oh! father, just look at the glorious shells and coral branches we are
finding. How does it happen that there are such quantities?"

"Only consider how the recent storms have stirred the ocean to its
depths! No doubt thousands of shell-fish have been detached from their
rocks and dashed in all directions by the waves, which have thrown
ashore even so huge a creature as the whale yonder."

"Yes; isn't he a frightful great brute!" cried Fritz. "Ever so much
larger than he seemed from a distance. The worst of it is, one does not
well see what use to make of the huge carcase."

"Why, make train oil, to be sure," said Ernest. "I can't say he's a
beauty, though, and it is much pleasanter to gather these lovely shells,
than to cut up blubber."

"Well, let us amuse ourselves with them for the present," said I, "but
in the afternoon, when the sea is calmer, we will return with the
necessary implements, and see if we can turn the stranded whale to good
account."

We were soon ready to return to the boat, but Ernest had a fancy for
remaining alone on the island till we came back, and asked my permission
to do so, that he might experience, for an hour or two, the sensations
of Robinson Crusoe.

To this, however, I would not consent, assuring him that our fate, as a
solitary family, gave him quite sufficient idea of shipwreck on an
uninhabited island, and that his lively imagination must supply the
rest.

The boys found it hard work to row back, and began to beg of me to exert
my wonderful inventive powers in contriving some kind of rowing machine.

"You lazy fellows!" returned I; "give me the great clockwork out of a
church tower, perhaps I might be able to relieve your labors."

"Oh, father!" cried Fritz, "don't you know there are iron wheels in the
clockwork of the large kitchen-jacks? I'm sure mother would give them
up, and you could make something out of them, could you not?"

"By the time I have manufactured a rowing-machine out of a
roasting-jack, I think your arms will be pretty well inured to the use
of your oars! However, I am far from despising the hint, my dear Fritz."

"Is coral of any use?" demanded Jack suddenly.

"In former times it was pounded and used by chemists; but it is now
chiefly used for various ornaments, and made into beads for necklaces,
etc. As such, it is greatly prized by savages, and were we to fall in
with natives, we might very possibly find a store of coral useful in
bartering with them.

"For the present, we will arrange these treasures of the deep in our
library, and make them the beginning of a Museum of Natural History,
which will afford us equal pleasure and instruction."

"One might almost say that coral belongs at once to the animal,
vegetable, and mineral kingdoms," remarked Fritz; "it is hard like
stone, it has stems and branches like a shrub, and I believe tiny
insects inhabit the cells, do they not, father?"

"You are right, Fritz; coral consists of the calcareous cells of minute
animals, so built up as to form a tree-like structure.

"The coral fishery gives employment to many men in the Persian Gulf, the
Mediterranean Sea, and other places. The instrument commonly used
consists of two heavy beams of wood, secured together at right angles,
and loaded with stones. Hemp and netting are attached to the under side
of the beams, to the middle of which is fastened one end of a strong
rope, by which the apparatus is let down from a boat, and guided to the
spots where the coral is most abundant.

"The branches of the coral become entangled in the hemp and network;
they are broken off from the rock, and are drawn to the surface of the
water.

"Left undisturbed, these coral insects, laboring incessantly, raise
foundations, on which, in course of time, fertile islands appear,
clothed with verdure, and inhabited by man."

"Why, father, here we are at the landing place!" exclaimed Jack. "It has
seemed quite easy to pull since you began to tell us such interesting
things."

"Very interesting, indeed; but did you notice that the wind had changed,
Jack?" remarked Ernest as he shipped his oar.

The animated recital of our adventures, the sight of the lovely shells
and corals, and the proposed work for the afternoon, inspired the mother
and Franz with a great wish to accompany us.

To this I gladly consented, only stipulating that we should go provided
with food, water, and a compass. "For," said I, "the sea has only just
ceased from its raging, and being at the best of times of uncertain and
capricious nature, we may chance to be detained on the island, or forced
to land at a considerable distance from home."

Dinner was quickly dispatched, and preparations set on foot.

The more oil we could obtain the better, for a great deal was used in
the large lantern which burnt day and night in the recesses of the cave;
therefore all available casks and barrels were pressed into the service;
many, of course, once full of pickled herrings, potted pigeons, and
other winter stores, were now empty, and we took a goodly fleet of these
in tow.

Knives, hatchets, and the boys' climbing buskins, were put on board, and
we set forth, the labor of the oar being greater than ever, now that our
freight was so much increased.

The sea being calm, and the tide suiting better, we found it easy to
land close to the whale; my first care was to place the boat, as well as
the casks, in perfect security, after which we proceeded to a close
inspection of our prize.

Its enormous size quite startled my wife and her little boy; the length
being from sixty to sixty-five feet, and the girth between thirty and
forty, while the weight could not have been less than 50,000 pounds.

The color was a uniform velvety black, and the enormous head about
one-third of the length of the entire bulk, the eyes quite small, not
much larger than those of an ox, and the ears almost undiscernible.

The jaw opened very far back, and was nearly sixteen feet in length, the
most curious part of its structure being the remarkable substance known
as whalebone, masses of which appeared all along the jaws, solid at the
base, and splitting into a sort of fringe at the extremity. This
arrangement is for the purpose of aiding the whale in procuring its
food, and separating it from the water.

The tongue was remarkably large, soft, and full of oil; the opening of
the throat wonderfully small, scarcely two inches in diameter.

"Why, what can the monster eat?" exclaimed Fritz; "he never can swallow
a proper mouthful down this little gullet!"

"The mode of feeding adopted by the whale is so curious," I replied,
"that I must explain it to you before we begin work.

"This animal (for I should tell you that a whale is not a fish; he
possesses no gills, he breathes atmospheric air, and would be drowned if
too long detained below the surface of the water); this animal, then,
frequents those parts of the ocean best supplied with the various
creatures on which he feeds. Shrimps, small fish, lobsters, various
molluscs, and medusæ form his diet. Driving with open mouth through the
congregated shoals of these little creatures, the whale engulfs them by
millions in his enormous jaws, and continues his destructive course
until he has sufficiently charged his mouth with prey.

"Closing his jaws and forcing out, through the interstices of the
whalebone, the water which he has taken together with his prey, he
retains the captured animals, and swallows them at his leisure.

"The nostrils, or blow-holes, are placed, you see, on the upper part of
the head, in order that the whale may rise to breathe, and repose on the
surface of the sea, showing very little of his huge carcase.

"The breathings are called 'spoutings,' because a column of mixed vapor
and water is thrown from the blow-holes, sometimes to a height of twenty
feet.

"And now, boys, fasten on your buskins, and let me see if you can face
the work of climbing this slippery mountain of flesh, and cutting it
up."

Fritz and Jack stripped, and went to work directly, scrambling over the
back to the head, where they assisted me to cut away the lips, so as to
reach the whalebone, a large quantity of which was detached and carried
to the boat.

Ernest labored manfully at the creature's side, cutting out slabs of
blubber, while his mother and Franz helped as well as they could to put
it in casks.

Presently we had a multitude of unbidden guests.

The air was filled by the shrill screams and hoarse croaks and cries of
numbers of birds of prey, they flew around us in ever narrowing circles,
and becoming bolder as their voracity was excited by the near view of
the tempting prey, they alighted close to us, snatching morsels greedily
from under the very strokes of our knives and hatchets.

Our work was seriously interrupted by these feathered marauders, who,
after all, were no greater robbers than we ourselves. We kept them off
as well as we could by blows from our tools, and several were killed, my
wife taking possession of them immediately for the sake of the
feathers.

It was nearly time to leave the island, but first I stripped off a long
piece of the skin, to be used for traces, harness, and other
leather-work. It was about three-quarters of an inch thick, and very
soft and oily--but I knew it would shrink and be tough and durable.

I also took a part of the gums in which the roots of the baleen or
whalebone was still embedded, having read that this is considered quite
a delicacy, as well as the skin, which, when properly dressed and cut in
little cubes, like black dice, has been compared, by enthusiastic and
probably very hungry travelers, to cocoanut and cream-cheese.

The boys thought the tongue might prove equally palatable, but I valued
it only on account of the large quantity of oil it contained.

With a heavy freight we put to sea, and made what haste we could to
reach home, and cleanse our persons from the unpleasant traces of the
disgusting work in which we had spent the day.

Next morning we started at dawn.

My wife and Franz were left behind, for our proposed work was even more
horrible than that of the preceding day; they could not assist, and had
no inclination to witness it.

It was my intention to open the carcase completely, and, penetrating the
interior, to obtain various portions of the intestines, thinking that it
would be possible to convert the larger ones into vessels fit for
holding the oil. This time we laid aside our clothes and wore only
strong canvas trousers when we commenced operations, which were
vigorously carried on during the whole of the day; then, satisfied that
we could do so with a clear conscience, we abandoned the remains to the
birds of prey, and, with a full cargo, set sail for land.

On the way, it appeared to strike the boys (who had made not the
slightest objection to the singularly unpleasant task I had set them),
as very strange that I should wish to possess what they had been
working so hard to procure for me.

"What can have made you wish to bring away that brute's entrails,
father? Are they of any use?"

"There are countries," I replied, "where no wood grows of which to make
barrels, and no hemp for thread, string, and cordage. Necessity, the
mother of all the more valuable inventions, has taught the inhabitants
of these countries, Greenlanders, Esquimaux, and others, to think of
substitutes, and they use the intestines of the whale for one purpose,
the sinews and nerves for the other."

We were right glad to land, and get rid, for the present, of our
unpleasant materials, the further preparation of which was work in store
for the following day.

A refreshing bath, clean clothes, and supper, cheered us all up, and we
slept in peace.




CHAPTER XI.

 The blubber of the whale boiled and stored--A unique
     machine--Expedition to Prospect Hill--Whale's tongue is voted no
     delicacy--We land on Whale Island--Jack discovers a strange
     skeleton--Turtle turning--Towed ashore--The loom completed--Return
     of the herring shoals--Basket making--We manufacture a sedan
     chair--Ernest's wild ride therein--A boa constrictor appears--He
     retreats to the marsh--Suspense--Poor Grizzle's fate--An awful
     scene--Death of the monster--An account of snakes--Remedies for
     poisoned bites--Ernest writes Grizzle's epitaph--The serpent
     stuffed and placed in the museum.


"Now for the finishing up of this dirty job," cried I, merrily, as we
all woke up next morning at daybreak. And after the regular work was
done, we commenced operations by raising a stand or rough scaffold on
which the tubs full of blubber were placed and heavily pressed, so that
the purest and finest oil overflowed into vessels underneath.

The blubber was afterward boiled in a cauldron over a fire kindled at
some distance from our abode, and by skimming and straining through a
coarse cloth, we succeeded in obtaining a large supply of excellent
train-oil, which in casks, and bags made of the intestines, was safely
stowed away in the "cellar," as the children called our roughest
storeroom. This day's work was far from agreeable, and the dreadful
smell oppressed us all, more especially my poor wife, who, nevertheless,
endured it with her accustomed good temper. Although she very urgently
recommended that the new island should be the headquarters for another
colony, where, said she, "any animals we leave would be safe from apes
and other plunderers, and where you would find it so very convenient to
boil whale-blubber, strain train-oil, and the like."

This proposal met with hearty approval, especially from the boys, who
were always charmed with any new plan; and they were eager to act upon
it at once, but when I reminded them of the putrifying carcass which lay
there, they confessed it would be better to allow wind and storms, birds
and insects to do their work in purging the atmosphere, and reducing the
whale to a skeleton before we revisited the island.

The idea of a rowing-machine kept recurring to my brain. I determined to
attempt to make one.

I took an iron bar, which when laid across the middle of the boat
projected about a foot each way. I provided this bar in the middle with
ribbed machinery, and at each end with a sort of nave, in which, as in a
cart wheel, four flat spokes, or paddles, were fixed obliquely. These
were intended to do the rowers' part.

Then the jack was arranged to act upon the machinery in the middle of
the iron cross-bar, in such a way that one of its strong cogwheels bit
firmly into the ribs, so that, when it was wound up, it caused the bar
to revolve rapidly, of course turning with the paddles fixed at either
end, which consequently struck the water so as to propel the boat.

Although this contrivance left much to be desired in the way of
improvement, still when Fritz and I wound up the machinery, and went off
on a trial trip across the bay, we splashed along at such a famous rate,
that the shores rang with the cheers and clapping of the whole family,
delighted to behold what they considered my brilliant success.

Every one wanted to go on board, and take a cruise, but as it was
getting late, I could not consent. A trip next day, however, was
promised to Cape Disappointment and the little settlement of Prospect
Hill.

This proposal satisfied everybody. The evening was spent in preparing
the dresses, arms, and food which would be required, and we retired
early to rest.

Intending to be out all day, the house was left in good order, and we
departed on our expedition, provided, among other things, with spades
and mattocks, for I wished to get young cocoanut trees and shrubs of
different kinds, that, on our way back, we might land on Whale Island,
and begin our plantation there.

We directed our course toward the opposite side of the bay. The sea was
smooth, my rowing machine performed its work easily, and, leaving Safety
Bay and Shark Island behind us, we enjoyed at our ease the panorama of
all the coast scenery.

Landing near Prospect Hill, we moored the boat, and walked through the
woods to our little farm, obtaining some fresh cocoanuts, as well as
young plants, on the way.

Before coming in sight of the cottage at the farm, we heard the cocks
crow, and I experienced a sudden rush of emotion as the sound recalled,
in a degree painfully vivid, the recollection of many a ride and walk at
home, when we would be greeted by just such familiar sounds as we
approached some kind friend's house. Here, but for the unconscious
animals, utter solitude and silence prevailed, and I with my dear
family, whose visit would have been hailed with delight in so many
homes, advanced unnoticed to this lonely cottage. So long had been our
absence that our arrival created a perfect panic. The original animals
had forgotten us, and to their progeny, lambs, kids, and chickens, who
had never seen the face of man, we seemed an army of fierce foes.

The boys found it impossible to milk the goats, until, by the use of the
lasso, they captured them one after the other, bound their legs, then
giving them salt to lick, they soon obtained a supply of excellent milk,
which was poured from the cocoanut shells they used into calabash
flasks, so that we could take with us what was not required at dinner.

The fowls were enticed by handfuls of grain and rice, and my wife caught
as many as she wished for.

We were by this time very ready for dinner, and the cold provisions we
had with us were set forth, the chief dish consisting of the piece of
whale's tongue, which, by the boys' desire, had been cooked with a
special view to this entertainment.

But woeful was the disappointment when the tongue was tasted! One after
another, with dismal face, pronounced it "horrid stuff," begged for some
pickled herring to take away the taste of train-oil, and willingly
bestowed on Fangs the cherished dainty.

Fortunately there was a sufficient supply of other eatables, and the
fresh, delicious cocoanuts and goat's milk put every one in good humor
again.

While the mother packed everything up, Fritz and I got some sugar-cane
shoots which I wished to plant, and then we returned to the shore and
again embarked.

Before returning to Whale Island, I felt a strong wish to round Cape
Disappointment and survey the coast immediately beyond, but the
promontory maintained the character of its name, and we found that a
long sandbank, as well as hidden reefs and rocks, ran out a great way
into the sea.

Fritz espying breakers ahead, we put about at once, and aided by a light
breeze, directed our course toward Whale Island.

On landing, I began at once to plant the saplings we had brought. The
boys assisted me for a while, but wearied somewhat of the occupation,
and one after another went off in search of shells and coral, leaving
their mother and me to finish the work.

Presently Jack came back, shouting loudly:

"Father! Mother! do come and look. There is an enormous skeleton lying
here; the skeleton of some fearful great beast--a mammoth, I should
think."

"Why, Jack!" returned I, laughing, "have you forgot our old
acquaintance, the whale? What else could it be?"

"Oh, no, father, it is not the whale. This thing has not fish bones, but
real, good, honest, huge beast bones. I don't know what can have become
of the whale--floated out to sea, most likely. This mammoth is ever so
much bigger. Come and see!"

As I was about to follow the boy, a voice from another direction
suddenly cried:

"Father! father! a great enormous turtle! Please make haste. It is
waddling back to the sea as hard as it can go, and we can't stop it."

This appeal being more pressing, as well as more important than Jack's,
I snatched up an oar and hastened to their assistance.

Sure enough a large turtle was scrambling quickly toward the water, and
was within a few paces of it, although Ernest was valiantly holding on
by one of its hind legs.

I sprang down the bank, and making use of the oar as a lever, we
succeeded with some difficulty in turning the creature on its back.

It was a huge specimen, fully eight feet long, and being now quite
helpless, we left it sprawling, and went to inspect Jack's mammoth
skeleton, which, of course, proved to be neither more nor less than that
of the whale. I convinced him of the fact by pointing out the marks of
our feet on the ground, and the broken jaws where we had hacked out the
whalebone.

"What can have made you take up that fancy about a mammoth, my boy?"

"Ernest put it into my head, father. He said there seemed to be the
skeleton of an antediluvian monster there, so I ran to look closer, and
I never thought of the whale, when I saw no fish bones. I suppose Ernest
was joking."

"Whales are generally considered as fishes by those little acquainted
with the animal kingdom, but they belong to the class of mammals, which
comprises man, the monkey tribes, the bats, the dogs and cats, all
hoofed animals, whales and their allies, with other animals, the last on
the list being the sloth.

"The name by which they are distinguished is derived from the Latin word
'mamma,' a breast, and is given to them because all the species
belonging to this class are furnished with a set of organs called the
mammary glands, secreting the liquid known as milk, by which the young
are nourished.

"The bones of the whale differ from those of animals, simply in being of
a hollow construction, and filled with air so as to render the carcass
more buoyant. The bones of birds are also hollow, for the same reason,
and in all this we see conspicuously the wisdom and goodness of the
great Creator."

"What a marvelous structure it is, father!" said Fritz. "What a
ponderous mass of bones! Can we not make use of any of them?"

"Nothing strikes me at this moment; we will leave them to bleach here
yet awhile, and perhaps, by sawing them up afterward, make a few chairs,
or a reading desk for the museum. But now it is time to return home.
Bring the boat round to where the turtle awaits his fate; we must settle
how to deal with him."

It was soon decided that he must swim. I fastened the empty water-cask
to a long line, one end of which was made fast to the bow of the boat,
the other carefully passed round the neck and fore paws of the creature,
who was then lifted, so as to let him regain his feet, when he instantly
made for the water, plunged in, the cask floated after him, and
prevented his sinking. We were all on board in a moment; and the worthy
fellow, after vainly attempting to dive, set himself diligently to swim
right forward, towing us comfortably after him. I was ready to cut the
line on the least appearance of danger, and kept him on the course for
Safety Bay by striking the water with a boat-hook, right or left,
according as the turtle was disposed to turn too much one way or the
other.

The boys were delighted with the fun, and compared me to Neptune in his
car, drawn by dolphins, and accompanied by Amphitrite and attendant
Tritons.

We landed safely at the usual place, near Rockburg, and the turtle was
condemned and executed soon afterward; the shell, which was quite eight
feet long, and three broad, was, when cleaned and prepared, to form a
trough for the water supply at the cave, and the meat was carefully
salted, and stored up for many a good and savory meal.

It had been my intention to bring a piece of land under cultivation
before the next rainy season, to be sown with different sorts of grain;
but many unforeseen circumstances had intervened to hinder this, and our
animals, unaccustomed to the yoke, were not available for the plow.

I therefore gave up the idea for the present, and applied myself, with
Ernest's assistance, to completing the loom, which, although the
workmanship was clumsy, I succeeded in making quite fit for use. I had
fortunately in my younger days spent many hours in the workshops of
weavers and other artisans, and therefore I understood more than might
have been expected of their various crafts.

Paste or size was required to smear over the threads; but we could not
spare floor for such a purpose, and I used isinglass, which kept the
warp moist perfectly well, and spared us the necessity of setting up the
loom in a damp uncomfortable place, which has often to be done to
prevent the over-drying of the web.

Of this isinglass I also made thin plates, to be used as window-panes;
they were at least as transparent as horn, and when fixed deep in the
rock, and beyond the reach of rain, did good service in admitting light.

Success encouraging me to persevere, I next began harness-making; the
spoils of the chase having furnished us with plenty of leather, with
which I covered light frames of wood, using a hairy moss or lichen for
stuffing, and ere long the animals were equipped with saddles,
stirrups, bridles, yokes, and collars, to the very great satisfaction of
their youthful riders and drivers.

This occupation was followed by a great deal of work connected with the
annual return of the herring shoals, which now took place; to them
succeeding, as on former occasions, shoals of other fish, and many
seals. More than ever aware of the value of all these, we did not fail
to make good use of our opportunities, and captured large numbers.

The boys were getting anxious for another shooting expedition; but
before undertaking that, I wished to do some basket-making, as sacks
were beginning to fail us, and there was constant demand for baskets in
which to carry and keep our roots and fruits. Our first attempts were
clumsy enough; but, as usual, perseverance was rewarded, and we produced
a good supply of all sorts and sizes. One very large basket I furnished
with openings through which to pass a strong stick, so that it might,
when heavily laden, be carried by two persons.

No sooner did the children see the force of this idea, than they got a
bamboo, and popping little Franz into the basket, carried him about in
triumph.

This amusement suggested a fresh notion to Fritz. "Oh, father," cried
he, "don't you think we might make something like this for mother, and
carry her much more comfortably than jolting along in the cart?"

The boys shouted with glee at the proposal, and though their mother
thought the plan feasible enough, she confessed that she did not much
like the thoughts of sitting in the middle of a basket, and just looking
out now and then over the rim.

However, I assured her it should be a well-shaped, comfortable
sedan-chair, or litter; and the next question was how it should be
carried, since the boys could not play the part of Indian
palanquin-bearers, either with safety to their mother, or with any
pleasure to themselves.

"The bull and the buffalo!" cried Jack. "Why not use them for it? Let's
go and try them now!"

Off ran the boys, and in a short time the basket was securely hung
between Storm and Grumble. Fritz and Jack sprang into their saddles, and
Ernest very gingerly deposited himself in the "cradle," as Franz called
it; they set forth at a most sober pace, the animals, who were perfectly
docile, appearing only a little surprised at the new arrangement.

"Oh, it is so pleasant, mother, it is a delightful motion," cried
Ernest, as they passed us; "it swings and rocks really soothingly.
Quicker, Fritz! go quicker!" and the trot pleasing him equally well, the
pace gradually quickened, till the animals were going along at a rate
which shook and jolted the basket about most fearfully. Ernest called
and screamed in vain for a halt. His brothers thought it capital fun to
"shake up" the "professor," and made the circuit of the level ground
near Rockburg, finally pulling up in front of us, like performers
stopping to receive the applause of spectators.

It was impossible to help laughing, the scene was so ridiculous, but
Ernest was very angry with his brothers, his reproaches provoked high
words in reply, and a quarrel was imminent, but I interfered, and showed
them how easily a joke, carried too far, would lead to disputes and bad
feeling, urging them to avoid on all occasions any breach of the
good-fellowship and brotherly love which was the mainstay of our
strength and happiness.

Good humor was soon restored, Ernest himself helped to unharness the
beasts, and got some handfuls of salt and barley to reward their
exertions, saying that they must have some more palanquin-practice
another day.

I was seated with my wife and Fritz beneath the shade of the veranda,
engaged in wicker-work, and chatting pleasantly, when suddenly Fritz got
up, advanced a step or two, gazing fixedly along the avenue which led
from Jackal River, then he exclaimed:

"I see something so strange in the distance, father! What in the world
can it be? first it seems to be drawn in coils on the ground like a
cable, then uprises as if it were a little mast, then that sinks, and
the coils move along again. It is coming toward the bridge."

My wife took alarm at this description, and calling the other boys,
retreated into the cave, where I desired them to close up the entrances,
and keep watch with firearms at the upper windows. These were openings
we had made in the rock at some elevation, reached within by steps, and
a kind of gallery which passed along the front of the rooms.

Fritz remained by me while I examined the object through my spyglass.

"It is, as I feared, an enormous serpent!" cried I; "it advances
directly this way, and we shall be placed in the greatest possible
danger, for it will cross the bridge to a certainty."

"May we not attack it, father?" exclaimed the brave boy.

"Only with the greatest caution," returned I; "it is far too formidable,
and too tenacious of life, for us rashly to attempt its destruction.
Thank God, we are at Rockburg, where we can keep in safe retreat, while
we watch for an opportunity to destroy this frightful enemy. Go up to
your mother now, and assist in preparing the firearms; I will join you
directly, but I must further observe the monster's movements."

Fritz left me unwilling, while I continued to watch the serpent, which
was of gigantic size, and already much too near the bridge to admit of
the possibility of removing that means of access to our dwelling. I
recollected, too, how easily it would pass through the walls. The
reptile advanced with writhing and undulatory movements, from time to
time rearing its head to the height of fifteen or twenty feet, and
slowly turning it about, as though on the lookout for prey.

As it crossed the bridge, with a slow, suspicious motion, I withdrew,
and hastily rejoined my little party, which was preparing to garrison
our fortress in warlike array, but with considerable trepidation, which
my presence served in a measure to allay.

We placed ourselves at the upper openings, after strongly barricading
everything below, and, ourselves unseen, awaited with beating hearts the
further advance of the foe, which speedily became visible to us.

Its movements appeared to become uncertain, as though puzzled by the
trace of human habitation; it turned in different directions, coiling
and uncoiling, and frequently rearing its head, but keeping about the
middle of the space in front of the cave, when suddenly, as though
unable to resist doing so, one after another the boys fired, and even
their mother discharged her gun. The shots took not the slightest effect
beyond startling the monster, whose movements were accelerated. Fritz
and I also fired with steadier aim, but with the same want of success,
for the monster, passing on with a gliding motion, entered the reedy
marsh to the left, and entirely disappeared.

A wonderful weight seemed lifted from our hearts, while all eagerly
discussed the vast length and awful though magnificent appearance of the
serpent. I had recognized it as the boa constrictor. It was a vast
specimen, upward of thirty feet in length.

I explained to the children that its name in South America is Boaguacu;
the first syllable of that word, with the Latin addition, which
indicates that it kills its prey by pressure, or "constriction," gives
the name by which it is commonly known.

The near neighborhood of this terrific reptile occasioned me the utmost
anxiety; and I desired that no one should leave the house on any
pretense whatever, without my express permission.

During three whole days we were kept in suspense and fear, not daring to
stir above a few hundred steps from the door, although during all that
time the enemy showed no sign of his presence.

In fact, we might have been induced to think the boa had passed across
the swamp, and found his way by some cleft or chasm through the wall of
cliffs beyond, had not the restless behavior of our geese and ducks
given proof that he still lurked in the thicket of reeds which they were
accustomed to make their nightly resting place.

They swam anxiously about, and with much clapping of wings and disturbed
cackling showed their uneasiness; finally taking wing they crossed the
harbor, and took up their quarters on Shark Island.

My embarrassment increased, as time passed on. I could not venture to
attack with insufficient force a monstrous and formidable serpent
concealed in dense thickets amidst dangerous swamps; yet it was dreadful
to live in a state of blockade, cut off from all the important duties in
which we were engaged, and shut up with our animals in the unnatural
light of the cave, enduring constant anxiety and perturbation.

Out of this painful state we were at last delivered by none other than
our good old simple-hearted donkey; not, however, by the exercise of a
praiseworthy quality, such as the vigilance of the time-honored geese of
the Capitol, but by sheer stupidity.

Our situation was rendered the more critical from having no great stock
of provisions, or fodder for the animals; and the hay failing us on the
evening of the third day, I determined to set them at liberty by sending
them, under guidance of Fritz, across the river at the ford.

He was to ride Lightfoot, and they were to be fastened together until
safely over.

Next morning we began to prepare for this by tying them in a line, and
while so engaged my wife opened the door, when old Grizzle, who was
fresh and frolicsome after the long rest and regular feeding, suddenly
broke away from the halter, cut some awkward capers, then bolting out,
careened at full gallop straight for the marsh.

In vain we called him by name. Fritz would even have rushed after him,
had not I held him back. In another moment the ass was close to the
thicket, and with the cold shudder of horror, we beheld the snake rear
itself from its lair, the fiery eyes glanced around, the dark, deadly
jaws opened widely, the forked tongue darted greedily forth--poor
Grizzle's fate was sealed.

Becoming aware on a sudden of his danger, he stopped short, spread out
all four legs, and set up the most piteous and discordant bray that ever
wrung echo from the rocks.

Swift and straight as a fencer's thrust, the destroyer was upon him,
wound round him, entangled, enfolded, compressed him, all the while
cunningly avoiding the convulsive kicks of the agonized animal.

A cry of horror arose from the spectators of this miserable tragedy.

"Shoot him, father! oh, shoot him--do save poor Grizzle!"

"My children, it is impossible!" cried I. "Our old friend is lost to us
for ever! I have hopes, however, that when gorged with his prey we may
be able to attack the snake with some chance of success."

"But the horrible wretch is never going to swallow him all at once,
father?" cried Jack. "That will be too shocking!"

"Snakes have no grinders, but only fangs, therefore they cannot chew
their food, and must swallow it whole. But although the idea is
startling, it is not really more shocking than the rending, tearing, and
shedding of blood which occurs when the lions and tigers seize their
prey."

"But," said Franz, "how can the snake separate the flesh from the bones
without teeth? And is this kind of snake poisonous?"

"No, dear child," said I, "only fearfully strong and ferocious. And it
has no need to tear the flesh from the bones. It swallows them, skin,
hair, and all, and digests everything in its stomach."

"It seems utterly impossible that the broad ribs, the strong legs,
hoofs, and all, should go down that throat," exclaimed Fritz.

"Only see," I replied, "how the monster deals with his victim; closer
and more tightly he curls his crushing folds, the bones give way, he is
kneading him into a shapeless mass. He will soon begin to gorge his
prey, and slowly but surely it will disappear down that distended maw!"

The mother, with little Franz, found the scene all too horrible, and
hastened into the cave, trembling and distressed.

To the rest of us there seemed a fearful fascination in the dreadful
sight, and we could not move from the spot. I expected that the boa,
before swallowing his prey, would cover it with saliva, to aid in the
operation, although it struck me that its very slender forked tongue was
about the worst possible implement for such a purpose.

It was evident to us, however, that this popular idea was erroneous.

The act of lubricating the mass must have taken place during the process
of swallowing; certainly nothing was applied beforehand.

This wonderful performance lasted from seven in the morning until noon.
When the awkward morsel was entirely swallowed, the serpent lay stiff,
distorted, and apparently insensible along the edge of the marsh.

I felt that now or never was the moment for attack!

Calling on my sons to maintain their courage and presence of mind, I
left our retreat with a feeling of joyous emotion quite new to me, and
approached with rapid steps and leveled gun the outstretched form of the
serpent. Fritz followed me closely.

Jack, somewhat timidly, came several paces behind; while Ernest, after a
little hesitation, remained where he was.

The monster's body was stiff and motionless, which made its rolling and
fiery eyes and the slow, spasmodic undulations of it tail more fearful
by contrast.

We fired together, and both balls entered the skull; the light of the
eye was extinguished, and the only movement was in the further extremity
of the body, which rolled, writhed, coiled, and lashed from side to
side.

Advancing closer, we fired our pistols directly into its head, a
convulsive quiver ran through the mighty frame, and the boa constrictor
lay dead.

As we raised a cry of victory, Jack, desirous of a share in the glory of
conquest, ran close to the creature, firing his pistol into its side,
when he was sent sprawling over and over by a movement of its tail,
excited to a last galvanic effort by the shot.

Being in no way hurt, he speedily recovered his feet, and declared he
had given it its quietus.

"I hope the terrible noise you made just now was the signal of victory,"
said my wife, drawing near, with the utmost circumspection, and holding
Franz tightly by the hand. "I was half afraid to come, I assure you."

"See this dreadful creature dead at our feet; and let us thank God that
we have been able to destroy such an enemy."

"What's to be done with him now?" asked Jack.

"Let us get him stuffed," said Fritz, "and set him up in the museum
among our shells and corals."

"Did anybody ever think of eating serpents?" inquired Franz.

"Of course not!" said his mother. "Why, child, serpents are
poisonous--it would be very dangerous."

"Excuse me, my dear wife," said I. "First of all, the boa is not
poisonous; and then, besides that, the flesh of even poisonous snakes
can be eaten without danger; as, for instance, the rattlesnake, from
which can be made a strong and nourishing soup, tasting very like good
chicken broth--of course, the cook must be told to throw away the head,
containing the deadly fangs.

"It is remarkable that pigs do not fear poisonous snakes, but can kill
and eat them without injury. An instance of this occurs to my memory. A
vessel on Lake Superior, in North America, was wrecked on a small
island abounding in rattlesnakes, and for that reason uninhabited.

"The vessel had a cargo of live pigs. The crew escaped to the mainland
in a boat, but the pigs had to be left for some time, till the owner
could return to fetch them, but with the small hope of finding many left
alive.

"To his surprise, the animals were not only alive, but remarkably fat
and flourishing, while not a single rattlesnake remained on the island.
The pigs had clearly eaten the serpents."

"But might not some other cause have been assigned for their
disappearance?" asked Ernest. "Suppose, for example, that a great flight
of secretary birds had arrived, they might have cleared the island of
rattlesnakes."

"Oh, what is a secretary bird?" interrupted Franz. "I thought a
secretary meant a man who wrote letters."

"So it does, Franz, and the bird Ernest spoke of has curious long
feathers projecting from either side of its head, something like pens
stuck behind a man's ear; hence its name.

"It is perfectly true that it lives on snakes, lizards, toads, and
frogs, but, Ernest, I cannot give up my pigs; for, in the first place,
the secretary bird is an inhabitant of Southern Africa, and is never
seen in North America, neither does it ever fly in a flock; still, so
ravenous is its appetite, that, no doubt, even one or two, had they by
some miracle found themselves on Lake Superior, would have been able to
give a very good account of the deadly reptiles, and at least shared in
the glory of their extermination."

My wife having gone to prepare dinner, we continued talking as we rested
in the shade of some rocks, near the serpent, for a considerable time.
The open air was welcome to us after our long imprisonment: and we were,
besides, desirous to drive off any birds of prey who might be attracted
to the carcass, which we wished to preserve entire.

My boys questioned me closely on the subject of serpents in general; and
I described to them the action of the poison fangs; how they folded back
on the sides of the upper jaw; and how the poison-secreting glands and
reservoir are found at the back and sides of the head, giving to the
venomous serpents that peculiar width of head which is so unfailing a
characteristic.

"The fangs are hollow," said I, "and when the creature bites, the
pressure forces down a tiny drop of the liquid poison which enters the
wound, and, through the veins, quickly spreads over the entire system.
Sometimes, if taken in time, cures are effected, but in most cases the
bite of a serpent is followed by speedy death."

The children were much interested in my account of the snake-charmers of
India, how they fearlessly handle the most deadly of the serpent tribe,
the Cobra di Capello--or hooded cobra--cause them to move in time to
musical sounds from a small pipe, twine the reptile about their arms and
bare necks, and then, to prove that the poison fangs have not been
removed, make them bite a fowl, which soon dies from the effects.

"How is it possible to extract the fangs, father!" asked Ernest.

"No instrument is required," replied I; "I have read the account written
by a gentleman in India, who saw a snake-charmer catch a large cobra in
the jungle, and for the purpose of removing the fangs, hold up a cloth
at which the irritated snake flew, and the fangs being caught in it, the
man seized the reptile by the throat, extracted them, and then squeezed
out the poison, a clear oily substance, upon a leaf."

"What does the rattle of the rattlesnake look like? and how does it
sound?"

"At the tip of the tail are a number of curious, loose, horny structures
formed of the same substance as the scales. A very good idea of the
structure of the rattle may be formed by slipping a number of thimbles
loosely into each other.

"The rattlesnake lies coiled with its head flat, and the tip of its tail
elevated; when alarmed or irritated it gives a quivering movement to the
tail which causes the joints of the rattle to shake against each other
with a peculiar sound not easily described; all animals, even horses
newly brought from Europe, tremble at this noise, and try to escape."

"What is the best thing to be done for the bite of a serpent?" inquired
Fritz.

"Remedies are very various, very uncertain, and differ with the species
inflicting the bite.

"Suction, ammonia, oil, the use of the knife, application of fresh mold,
lunar caustic, leaves of certain plants, all these and more are
mentioned. There is a creeping plant, called _Aristolochia indica_, the
leaves of which have in repeated instances done wonders for fearful
bites. It is found in many parts of the world, but most plentifully in
the hotter regions.

"A mode of cure adopted by natives of India, Ceylon, and parts of
Africa, is by the application of a remarkable object called snake-stone.
These are described as flattish, something like half an almond with
squared ends, rather light, bearing a very high polish, and of an
intense jetty black.

"On being bitten by a cobra, the sufferer applies one of these 'stones'
to each puncture, where they adhere strongly for a time, five or six
minutes being about the average. They seem to absorb the blood as it
flows from the wound, and at last fall off, when the danger is
considered to be over.

"But now we must leave this fertile subject of discussion, and I can
only say I sincerely trust we may never have cause to resume it from the
appearance of another serpent here of any sort, size, or description.

"Come, Ernest, can you not give us an epitaph for our unfortunate friend
the donkey?

"We must afford him more honorable sepulture than he enjoys at present,
when we proceed, as we speedily must, to disembowel his murderer."

Ernest took the matter quite seriously, and planting his elbows on his
knees, he bent his thoughtful brow in his hands, and remained wrapt in
poetic meditation for about two minutes.

"I have it!" cried he; "but perhaps you will all laugh at me?"

"No, no, don't be shy, old fellow; spit it out!" and thus encouraged by
his brother, Ernest, with the blush of a modest author, began:

    "Beneath this stone poor Grizzle's bones are laid,
      A faithful ass he was, and loved by all.
    At length, his master's voice he disobeyed,
      And thereby came his melancholy fall.
    A monstrous serpent, springing from the grass,
      Seized, crushed, and swallowed him before our eyes
    But we, though yet we mourn our honest ass,
      Are grateful; for he thereby saved the lives
    Of all the human beings on this shore--
      A father, mother, and their children four."

"Hurrah for the epitaph! Well done, Ernest!" resounded on all sides, and
taking out a large red pencil I used for marking wood, the lines were
forthwith inscribed on a great flat stone, being, as I told the boy, the
very best poetry that had ever been written on our coast.

We then had dinner, and afterward went to work with the serpent.

The first operation was to recover the mangled remains of the ass, which
being effected, he was buried in the soft marshy ground close by, and
the hole filled up with fragments of rock.

Then we yoked Storm and Grumble to the serpent, and dragged it to a
convenient distance from Rockburg, where the process of skinning,
stuffing, and sewing up again afforded occupation of the deepest
interest to the boys for several days.

We took great pains to coil it round a pole in the museum, arranging
the head with the jaws wide open, so as to look as alarming as possible,
and contriving to make eyes and tongue sufficiently well to represent
nature; in fact, our dogs never passed the monster without growling, and
must have wondered at our taste in keeping such a pet.

Over the entrance leading to the museum and library were inscribed these
words:

    NO ADMITTANCE FOR ASSES.

The double meaning of this sentence pleased us all immensely.




CHAPTER XII.

 We examine the marsh--A cave discovered--We find the floor covered
     with fuller's earth--Discharge our pistols--Jack's fright--Ernest
     captures an eel--An expedition toward the Gap--Visit Falconhurst
     and Woodlands and examine the country round--Franz shoots a
     capybara--Ernest and Knips fight the rats--A lecture on
     musk--Cinnamon apples--A peccary hunt--We prepare the peccary
     meat--Disasters at Prospect Hill--An exploring expedition through
     the Gap--We find our barrier broken down across the
     desert--Strange objects in the distance--An account of
     ostriches--An ostrich slain--We discover the nest--A mud
     tortoise--We encounter bears--A desperate fight--Back again to
     camp--We skin the bears and smoke their flesh--Pepper found--Three
     of the boys start on an expedition--I discover talc.


The greatest danger to which we had yet been exposed was now over, but
there remained much anxiety in my mind lest another serpent might,
unseen by us, have entered the swamp, or might appear, as this had done,
from the country beyond Falconhurst.

I projected then two excursions, the first to make a thorough
examination of the thicket and morass; the next right away to the Gap,
through which alone the archenemy could have entered our territory.

On summoning my sons to accompany me to the marsh, I found neither
Ernest nor Jack very eager to do so, the latter vowing he had the cold
shivers each time he thought how his ribs might have been smashed by the
last flap of the snake's tail; but I did not yield to their reluctance,
and we finally set about crossing the marsh by placing planks and wicker
hurdles on the ground, and changing their places as we advanced.

Nothing was discovered beyond tracks in the reeds and the creature's
lair; where the rushes, grass, and bog-plants were beaten down.

Emerging beyond the thicket we found ourselves on firm ground, near the
precipitous wall of rock, and perceived a clear sparkling brook flowing
from an opening, which proved to be a cave or grotto of considerable
size.

The vaulted roof was covered with stalactites, while many formed stately
pillars, which seemed as though supporting the roof. The floor was
strewn with fine snow-white earth, with a smooth soapy feeling, which I
felt convinced was fuller's earth.

"Well, this is a pleasant discovery!" said I. "This is as good as soap
for washing, and will save me the trouble of turning soap-boiler."

Perceiving that the streamlet flowed from an opening of some width in
the inner rock, Fritz passed through, in order to trace it to its
source, presently shouting to me that the opening widened very much, and
begging me to follow him.

I did so, leaving the other boys in the outer cave, and fired a
pistol-shot--the reverberating echoes of which testified to the great
extent of the place; and lighting the bit of candle I always carried
with me, we advanced, the light burning clear and steadily, though
shedding a very feeble light in so vast a space.

Suddenly Fritz exclaimed:

"I verily believe this is a second cave of salt! See how the walls
glance! and how the light is reflected from the roof!"

"These cannot be salt crystals," said I; "the water which flows over
them leaves no track, and tastes quite sweet. I am rather inclined to
believe that we have penetrated into a cave of rock crystal!"

"Oh, how splendid! Then we have discovered a great treasure!"

"Certainly, if we could make any use of it; otherwise, in our situation,
it is about as valuable as the lump of gold found by good old Robinson
Crusoe."

"Anyhow, I will break off a piece for a specimen. See, here is a fine
bit, only rather dull, and not transparent; what a pity! I must knock
off another."

"You must go more carefully to work, or it will look as dull as the
first. You destroyed its true form, which is that of a pyramid, with six
sides or faces."

We remained some time in this interesting grotto, but our light burnt
low after we had examined it in different directions; and Fritz having
secured a large lump, which exhibited several crystals in perfection, we
quitted the place, Fritz discharging a farewell shot for the sake of
hearing the grand echoes.

On reaching the open air we saw poor Jack sobbing bitterly, but as soon
as we appeared he ran joyfully toward us, and threw himself into my
arms.

"My child, what is the matter?" I cried anxiously.

"Oh, I thought you were lost! I heard a noise twice, as if the rocks had
shattered down; and I thought you and Fritz were crushed in the ruins!
It was horrible! How glad I am to see you!"

I comforted the child, and explained the noises he had heard, inquiring
why he was alone?

"Ernest is over there among the reeds: I daresay he did not hear the
shots."

I found Ernest busily engaged in weaving a basket in which to catch
fish; he had devised it ingeniously, with a funnel-shaped entrance;
through which the fish passing would not easily find their way out, but
would remain swimming about in the wide part of the apparatus.

"I shot a young serpent while you were away, father," said he. "It lies
there covered with rushes; it is nearly four feet long, and as thick as
my arm."

"A serpent!" cried I, hurrying toward it in alarm, and fearing there
must be a brood of them in the swamp after all.

"A fine large eel, you mean, my boy. This will provide an excellent
supper for us to-night. I am glad you had the courage to kill it,
instead of taking to your heels and fleeing from the supposed serpent."

"Well, I thought it would be so horrid to be pursued and caught that I
preferred facing it; my shot took effect, but it was very difficult to
kill the creature outright, it moved about although its head was
smashed."

"The tenacity of life possessed by eels is very remarkable," I said. "I
have heard that the best mode of killing them is to grasp them by the
neck and slap their tails smartly against a stone or post."

We made our way back more easily by keeping close to the cliffs, where
the ground was firmer, and found the mother washing clothes at the
fountain. She rejoiced greatly at our safe return, and was much pleased
with the supply of fuller's earth, as she said there was now very little
soap left. The eel was cooked for supper, and during the evening a full
account was given of our passage through the swamp, and discovery of the
rock-crystal cavern.

It was most important to ascertain whether any serpent lurked among the
woods of our little territory between the cliffs and the sea.
Preparations were set on foot for the second and greater undertaking of
a search throughout the country beyond the river, as far as the Gap. I
wished all the family to go on the expedition, a decision which gave
universal satisfaction.

Intending to be engaged in this search for several weeks, we took the
small tent and a store of all sorts of necessary provisions, as well as
firearms, tools, cooking utensils, and torches.

All these things were packed on the cart, which was drawn by Storm and
Grumble. Jack and Franz mounted them, and acted at once the part of
riders and drivers. My wife sat comfortably in the cart, Fritz rode in
advance, while Ernest and I walked; we were protected in flank by the
dogs and Fangs, the tame jackal.

Directing our course toward Woodlands, we saw many traces of the
serpent's approach to Rockburg. In some places, where the soil was
loose, the trail, like a broad furrow, was very evident indeed.

At Falconhurst we made a halt, and were, as usual, welcomed by the
poultry, as well as by the sheep and goats.

We then passed on to Woodlands, where we arrived at nightfall. All was
peaceful and in good order; no track of the boa in that direction; no
signs of visits from mischievous apes; the little farm and its
inhabitants looked most flourishing.

Next day was passed in making a survey of the immediate neighborhood, at
the same time collecting a quantity of cotton, which was wanted for new
pillows and cushions. In the afternoon Franz was my companion, carrying
a small gun entrusted to him for the first time.

We took Fan and Bruno with us, and went slowly along the left bank of
the lake, winding our way among reedy thickets, which frequently turned
us aside a considerable distance from the water. The dogs hunted about
in all directions, and raised duck, snipe, and heron. These usually flew
directly across the lake so that Franz got no chance of a shot. He began
to get rather impatient, and proposed firing at the black swans we saw
sailing gracefully on the glassy surface of the lake.

Just then a harsh booming sound struck our ears. I paused in wonder as
to whence the noise proceeded, while Franz exclaimed, "Oh, father, can
that be Swift, our young onager?"

"It cannot possibly be Swift," said I; adding, after listening
attentively a minute or two, "I am inclined to think it must be the cry
of a bittern, a fine handsome bird of the nature of a heron."

"Oh! may I shoot it, father? But I wonder how a bird can make that
roaring noise! One would think it was an ox, it is more like lowing than
braying."

"The noise creatures make depends more on the construction of the
windpipe, its relation to the lungs and the strength of the muscles
which force out the breath, than on their size. As, for example, how
loud is the song of the nightingale and the little canary bird. Some
people say the bittern booms with his long bill partly thrust into the
boggy ground, which increases the hollow muffled sound of its very
peculiar cry."

Franz was very anxious that the first trophy of his gun should be so
rare a bird as the bittern; the dogs were sent into the wood, and we
waited some distance apart, in readiness to fire.

All at once there was a great rustling in the thicket, Franz fired, and
I heard his happy voice calling out:

"I've hit him! I've hit him!"

"What have you hit?" shouted I in return.

"A wild pig," said he; "but bigger than Fritz's."

"Aha! I see you remember the agouti! Perhaps it is not a hog at all but
one of our little pigs from the farm. What will the old sow say to you,
Franz?"

I soon joined my boy, and found him in transports of joy over an animal
certainly very much like a pig, although its snout was broad and blunt.
It was covered with bristles, had no tail, and in color was a yellowish
gray.

Examining it carefully, and noticing its webb feet and its curious
teeth, I decided that it must be a capybara, a water-loving animal of
South America, and Franz was overjoyed to find that he had shot "a new
creature," as he said. It was difficult to carry it home, but he very
sensibly proposed that we should open and clean the carcase, which would
make it lighter--and then putting it in a game bag, he carried it till
quite tired out; he then asked if I thought Bruno would let him strap it
on his back. We found the dog willing to bear the burden, and reached
Woodlands soon afterward.

There we were surprised to see Ernest surrounded by a number of large
rats which lay dead on the ground.

"Where can all these have come from?" exclaimed I. "Have you and your
mother been rat-hunting instead of gathering rice as you intended?"

"We came upon these creatures quite unexpectedly," he replied, "while in
the rice swamp. Knips, who was with us, sprang away to a kind of
long-shaped mound among the reeds, and pounced upon something, which
tried to escape into a hole. He chattered and gnashed his teeth, and the
creature hissed and squeaked, and running up I found he had got a big
rat by the tail; he would not let go, and the rat could not turn in the
narrow entrance to bite him, but I soon pulled it out and killed it with
my stick.

"The mound was a curious looking erection, so I broke it open with some
difficulty, and in doing this dislodged quite a dozen of the creatures.
Some I killed, but many plunged into the water and escaped.

"On examining their dwelling I found it a vaulted tunnel made of clay
and mud, and thickly lined with sedges, rushes, and water-lily leaves.

"There were other mounds or lodges close by, and seeking an entrance to
one I stretched my game bag across it, and then hammered on the roof
till a whole lot of rats sprang out, several right into the bag. I hit
away right and left, but began to repent of my audacity when I found the
whole community swarming about in the wildest excitement, some escaping,
but many stopping in bewilderment, while others actually attacked me.

"It was anything but pleasant, I assure you, and I began to think of
Bishop Hatto in the Mouse Tower on the Rhine. Knips liked it as little
as I did, and skipped about desperately to get out of their way, though
he now and then seized a rat by the neck in his teeth.

"Just as I began to shout for help, Juno came dashing through the reeds
and water, and made quick work with the enemy, all flying from her
attack.

"My mother had great difficulty in forcing her way through the marsh to
the scene of action, but reached me at last; and we collected all the
slain to show you, and for the sake of their skins."

This account excited my curiosity, and I went to examine the place
Ernest described: where I found, to my surprise, an arrangement much
like a beaver dam, though on a small scale, and less complete.

"You have discovered a colony of beaver rats," said I to Ernest, "so
called from their resemblance in skill and manner of life to that
wonderful creature.

"Muskrat, musquash, and ondatra are other names given to them. They
have, you see, webbed feet and flattened tails, and we shall find that
they carry two small glands containing the scented substance called
musk. The sooner we strip off the skins the better; they will be useful
for making caps."

We went back to the house, and met Fritz and Jack just returned from
their excursion, reporting that no trace of serpents, great or small,
had been met with.

Jack carried in his hat about a dozen eggs; and Fritz had shot a couple
of heath fowls, a cock and hen.

We sat down to supper, Franz eager to partake of his capybara. Even he
himself made a face at the peculiar flavor of the meat.

"It is the musk which you taste," said I; and I described to them the
various animals in which this strange liquid is found; the musk deer,
musk ox, crocodile, muskrat of India (also called coudeli, which taints
a corked bottle of wine, if it only runs across it), concluding with an
account of the civet, called also civet-cat.

"The civet," said I, "is a handsome black and white animal, and the
perfume obtained from it was formerly considered a valuable medicine; in
the present day it is used chiefly as a scent. This odoriferous
substance is secreted, _i. e._, formed, in a double glandular pouch near
the tail, and the Dutch keep the creature in captivity, so that it shall
afford them a continual supply.

"The method of removing the civet perfume is ingenious. The animal is
very quick and elastic in its movements, and having sharp teeth it is
not pleasant to handle. So it is put into a long, narrow cage in which
it cannot turn round, a horn spoon is then introduced, and the perfume,
a thick, oily stuff something like butter, is coolly scraped from the
pouch, the plundered civet being then released from strait durance,
until the supply is reformed."

Presently Jack ran for his game bag, producing some fruit which he had
forgotten. Several pale green apples, quite new to us, excited general
attention.

"Why, what are those? Are they good?" I asked.

"I hope so, for we sadly want something to take away the taste of
Franz's beast," said Jack: "but Fritz and I were afraid of eating some
awful poison or other, like the manchineel, so we brought them for the
inspection of the learned master Knips."

I took one and cut it in two, remarking that it contained a circle of
seeds or pips, instead of the stone of the manchineel. At that moment
Knips slyly came behind me, and snatching up one half, began to munch it
with the liveliest satisfaction, an example which the boys were so eager
to follow that a general scramble ensued, and I had some trouble in
securing a couple of apples for myself and their mother.

I imagined this to be the cinnamon apple of the Antilles.

Every one seeming wearied by the fatigues of the day, our mattresses and
pillows were arranged, and the inmates of Woodlands betook themselves to
repose.

With early light we commenced the next day's journey, directing our
course to a point between the sugar-brake and the Gap, where we had once
made a sort of arbor of the branches of trees; as this remained in
pretty good condition, we spread a sailcloth over the top of it, instead
of pitching the tent, and made it very comfortable quarters for the
short time I proposed to stay there.

Our object being to search the neighborhood for traces of the boa
constrictor, or any of his kindred, Fritz, Jack, and Franz went with me
to the sugar-cane brake, and satisfied ourselves that our enemy had not
been there. It was long since we had enjoyed the fresh juice of these
canes, and we were refreshing ourselves therewith, when a loud barking
of dogs, and loud rustling and rattling through the thicket of canes,
disturbed our pleasant occupation, and, as we could see nothing a yard
off where we stood, I hurried to the open ground, and with guns in
readiness we awaited what was coming.

In a few minutes a herd of creatures like little pigs issued from the
thicket, and made off in single file at a brisk trot; they were of a
uniform gray color, and showed short sharp tusks.

My trusty double-barrel speedily laid low two of the fugitives; the
others continued to follow the leader in line, scarcely turning aside to
pass the dead bodies of their comrades, and maintaining the same steady
pace, although Fritz and Jack also fired and killed several.

I felt certain that these were peccaries, and recollected that an
odoriferous gland in the back must be removed immediately, otherwise the
meat will become tainted, and quite unfit to eat. This operation, with
the help of my boys, I accordingly performed at once.

Presently, hearing shots in the direction of the hut where we had left
Ernest and his mother, I sent Jack to their assistance, desiring him to
fetch the cart, that the booty might be conveyed to our encampment,
employing the time of his absence in opening and cleaning the animals,
thus reducing their weight.

Ernest came back with Jack and the cart, and told us that the procession
of peccaries had passed near the hut, and that he, with Juno's help, had
secured three of them.

I was glad to hear this, as I had determined to cure a good supply of
hams, and we made haste to load the cart; the boys adorned it with
flowers and green boughs, and with songs of triumph which made the woods
ring they conveyed the valuable supply of game to the hut, where their
mother anxiously waited for us.

After dinner we set to work upon our pigs, singeing and scalding off the
bristles; I cut out the hams, divided the flitches, bestowed
considerable portions of the carcass on the dogs, and diligently
cleansed and salted the meat, while the boys prepared a shed, where it
was to be hung to be cured in the smoke of fires of green wood.

This unexpected business of course detained us in the place for some
time. On the second day, when the smoking shed was ready, the boys were
anxious to cook the smallest porker in the Otaheitian fashion. For this
purpose they dug a hole, in which they burned a quantity of dry grass,
sticks, and weeds, heating stones, which were placed round the sides of
the pit.

While the younger boys made ready the oven, Fritz singed and washed his
peccary, stuffing it with potatoes, onions, and herbs, and a good
sprinkling of salt and pepper.

He then sewed up the opening, and enveloped the pig in large leaves to
guard it from the ashes and dust of its cooking place.

The fire no longer blazed, but the embers and stones were glowing hot;
the pig was carefully placed in the hole, covered over with hot ashes,
and the hole with earth, so that it looked like a big mole heap.

Dinner was looked forward to with curiosity, as well as appetite; my
wife, as usual, distrusting our experiments, was not sanguine of
success, and made ready some plain food as a _pis aller_.

She was well pleased with the curing-hut, which was roomy enough to hang
all our hams and bacon. On a wide hearth in the middle we kindled a
large fire, which was kept constantly smouldering by heaping it with
damp grass and green wood. The hut being closed in above, the smoke
filled it, and penetrated the meat thoroughly; this process it had to
undergo for several days.

In a few hours Fritz gave notice that he was going to open his oven.

Great excitement prevailed as he removed the earth, turf, and stones,
and a delicious appetizing odor arose from the opening. It was the smell
of roast pork, certainly, but with a flavor of spices which surprised
me, until I thought of the leaves in which the food had been wrapped up.

The peccary was carefully raised, and when a few cinders were picked
off, it looked a remarkably well-cooked dish. Fritz was highly
complimented on his success, even by his mother.

The scented leaves were, I thought, those of a tree which I knew to be
found in Madagascar, called by the natives ravensara, or "good leaf." It
is said to combine the scent of the nutmeg, clove, and cinnamon. The
fruit is a species of nut, possessing the scent of the leaves in a more
delicate degree, and from it an oil or essence is distilled, which is
highly valued in native cookery.

During the process of curing our large supply of hams and bacon, which
occupied several days, we roamed about the neighborhood in all
directions, finding no trace of the serpent, but making many valuable
acquisitions, among which were some gigantic bamboos, from fifty to
sixty feet in length and of proportionate thickness. These, when cut
across near the joints, formed capital casks, tubs and pots; while the
long sharp thorns, which begirt the stem at intervals, were as strong
and useful as iron nails.

One day we made an excursion to the farm at Prospect Hill, and were
grievously provoked to find that the vagabond apes had been there, and
wrought terrible mischief, as before at Woodlands.

The animals and poultry were scattered, and everything in the cottage so
torn and dirtied, that it was vain to think of setting things right that
day. We therefore very unwillingly left the disorder as we found it,
purposing to devote time to the work afterward.

When all was in readiness for the prosecution of our journey, we closed
and barricaded the hut, in which, for the present, we left the store of
bacon; and arranging our march in the usual patriarchal style, we took
our way to the Gap, the thorough defense of which defile was the main
object we had in view.

Our last halting-place being much enclosed by shrubs, bamboos, and
brushwood, we had during our stay opened a path through the cane thicket
in the direction we were about to travel; this we now found of the
greatest assistance, and the loaded cart passed on without impediment.

The ground was open and tolerably level beyond, so that in a few hours
we arrived at the extreme limit of our coast territory.

We halted on the outskirts of a little wood, behind which, to the right,
rose the precipitous and frowning cliffs of the mountain gorge, while to
the left flowed the torrent, leaving between it and the rocks the narrow
pass we called the Gap, and passing outward to mingle its water with the
sea.

The wood afforded us pleasant shelter, and standing high and within
gunshot of the mouth of the rocky pass, I resolved to make it our
camping place. We therefore unpacked the cart, and made our usual
arrangements for safety and comfort, not forgetting to examine the wood
itself, so as to ascertain whether it harbored any dangerous animals.

Nothing worse than wild cats was discovered. We disturbed several of
these creatures in their pursuit of birds and small game, but they fled
at our approach.

By the time dinner was ready we felt much fatigued, and some hours of
unusually sultry and oppressive heat compelled us to rest until toward
evening, when returning coolness revived our strength. We pitched the
tent, and then occupied ourselves with preparations for the next day,
when it was my intention to penetrate the country beyond the defile, and
make a longer excursion across the Savannah than had yet been
undertaken.

All was ready for a start at an early hour; my brave wife consented to
remain in camp with Franz as her companion, while the three elder boys,
and all the dogs, except Juno, went with me.

We expected to find it somewhat difficult to make our way through the
narrowest part of the pass, which had been so strongly barricaded and
planted with thorny shrubs, but found on the contrary that the fences
and walls were broken down and disarranged. It was thus very evident
that the great snake, as well as the herd of peccaries, had made an
entrance here.

This barricade was the first check that had been placed by hand of man
upon the wild free will of nature in this lonely place.

With one consent storms, floods, torrents, and the wild beasts of the
forest, had set themselves to destroy it.

We resolved to make the defenses doubly strong, being convinced that the
position was capable of being barricaded and fortified so as to resist
the invaders we dreaded.

The prospect which opened before us on emerging from the rocky pass was
wide and varied. Swelling hills and verdant wooded vales were seen on
one hand, while a great plain stretched before us, extending from the
banks of the river toward a chain of lofty mountains, whose summits were
rendered indistinct in the haze of the distance.

We crossed the stream, which we named East River, filling our flasks
with water, and it was well we did so, for in continuing our journey, we
found the soil become more arid and parched than we had expected; in
fact we soon appeared surrounded by a desert.

The boys were astonished at the altered appearance of the country, part
of which had been explored when we met with the buffaloes. I reminded
them of the difference of the season; that the expedition had been made
directly after the rains, when vegetation had clothed with transient
beauty this region, which, possessing no source of moisture itself, had
become scathed and bare during the blazing heat of summer.

Our march proceeded slowly, and many were the uncomplimentary remarks
made on the "new country."

It was "Arabia Petrea," groaned one. "Desert of Sahara," sighed another.
"Fit abode for demons," muttered a third. "Subterranean volcanic fires
are raging beneath our feet."

"Patience, my dear fellows!" cried I; "you are too easily discouraged.
Look beyond the toilsome way to those grand mountains, whose spurs are
already stretching forward to meet us. Who knows what pleasant surprises
await us amid their steep declivities? I, for my part, expect to find
water, fresh grass, trees, and a lovely resting-place."

We were all glad to repose beneath the shade of the first over-hanging
rock we came to, although, by pressing further upward, we might have
attained to a pleasanter spot.

Looking back toward the Gap, we marked the strange contrast of the
smiling country bordering the river, and the dreary, monotonous plain we
had traversed.

After gazing on the distant scene, we produced our store of provisions,
and were busily engaged, when Knips (our constant companion) suddenly
began to snuff and smell about in a very ridiculous way; finally, with a
shriek which we knew was expressive of pleasure, he set off at a full
speed, followed by all the dogs, up a sort of glen behind us.

We left them to their own devices, being far too pleasantly engaged with
our refreshments to care much what fancy the little rogue had got in his
head.

When hunger was somewhat appeased, Fritz once more cast his eyes over
the expanse of plain before us, and after looking fixedly for a moment,
exclaimed:

"Is it possible that I see a party of horsemen riding at full gallop
toward us! Can they be wild Arabs of the desert?"

"Arabs my boy! certainly not; but take the spyglass and make them out
exactly. We shall have to be on our guard, whatever they are!"

"I cannot see distinctly enough to be sure," said he presently, "and
imagination supplies the deficiency of sight in most strange fashion. I
could fancy them wild cattle, loaded carts, wandering haycocks, in fact
most anything I like."

The spyglass passed from hand to hand; Jack and Ernest agreed in
thinking the moving objects were men on horseback; but when it came to
my turn to look, I at once pronounced them to be very large ostriches.

"This is fortunate, indeed!" I exclaimed; "we must try to secure one of
these magnificent birds; the feathers alone are worth having."

"A live ostrich, father! that would be splendid. Why, we might ride upon
him!"

As the ostriches approached, we began to consider in what way we should
attempt a capture. I sent Fritz and Jack to recall the dogs, and placed
myself with Ernest behind some shrubs which would conceal us from the
birds as they came onward.

The boys did not rejoin us for some little time; they found Knips and
the dogs at a pool of water formed by a small mountain stream, which the
monkey's instinct had detected; his sudden departure was thus accounted
for, and they availed themselves right gladly of his discovery, filling
their flasks, and hastily bathing before their return.

The ostriches continued to come in our direction, varying their pace as
though in sport, springing, trotting, galloping, and chasing each other
round and round, so that their approach was by no means rapid.

I could now perceive that of the five birds one only was a male, the
white plumes of the wings and tail contrasting finely with the deep
glossy black of the neck and body.

The color of the females being ashen brown, the effect of their white
plumes was not so handsome.

"I do not believe we shall have a chance with these birds," said I,
"except by sending Fritz's eagle in pursuit; and for that we must bide
our time, and let them come as near as possible."

"In what way, then, are ostriches caught by the natives of the African
deserts?" inquired Fritz.

"Sometimes by chase on horseback; but their speed is so very great, that
even that must be conducted by stratagem.

"When these birds are pursued, they will run for hours in a wide circle;
the hunter gallops after them, but describes a much smaller circle, and
can therefore maintain the pace for a longer time, waiting to make the
attack until the bird is fatigued.

"Among the Bushmen, the hunter sometimes envelopes himself in the skin
of an ostrich, his legs doing duty for those of the bird, and his arm
managing the head and neck so as to imitate the movements of the bird
when feeding. The enterprising hunter is thus enabled to get among a
flock of ostriches, and to shoot them with arrows one after another.

"When aware of an enemy they defend themselves desperately, using their
powerful legs as weapons, always kicking forward, and inflicting
dreadful injuries on dogs, and even on men, if attacked without due
precaution. But let us take up our positions, and keep perfectly still,
for the ostriches are at hand!"

We held the dogs concealed as much as possible; the stately birds
suddenly perceiving us, paused, hesitated, and appeared uneasy. Yet as
no movement was made, they drew a few steps nearer, with outstretched
necks, examining curiously the unwonted spectacle before them.

The dogs became impatient, struggled from our grasp, and furiously
rushed toward our astonished visitors. In an instant they turned and
fled with the speed of the wind; their feet seemed not to touch the
ground, their wings aiding the marvelously rapid progress.

In a few moments they would have been beyond our reach, but as they
turned to fly the eagle was unhooded. Singling out the male bird the
falcon made his fatal swoop, and piercing the skull, the magnificent
creature was laid low. Before we could reach the spot the dogs had
joined the bird of prey, and were fiercely tearing the flesh and
bedabbling the splendid plumes with gore.

The sight grieved us.

"What a pity we could not capture this glorious bird alive!" exclaimed
Fritz, as we took its beautiful feathers; "it must, I am sure, have
stood more than six feet high, and two of us might have mounted him at
once!"

"In the vast sandy deserts where nothing grows, what can flocks of these
birds find to live upon?" inquired Ernest.

"That would indeed be hard to say, if the deserts were utterly barren
and unfruitful," returned I; "but over these sandy wastes a beneficent
Providence scatters plants of wild melons, which absorb and retain every
drop of moisture, and which quench the thirst as well as satisfy the
hunger of the ostriches and other inhabitants of the wilds. These
melons, however, do not constitute his entire diet; he feeds freely on
grasses, dates, and hard grain, when he can obtain them."

"Does the ostrich utter any cry?"

"The voice of the ostrich is a deep, hollow, rumbling sound, so much
resembling the roar of a lion as to be occasionally mistaken for it. But
what does Jack mean by waving his cap and beckoning in that excited
fashion? What has the boy found, I wonder!"

He ran a little toward us, shouting:

"Eggs, father! Ostriches' eggs! a huge nest full--do come quick!"

We all hastened to the spot, and in a slight hollow of the ground beheld
more than twenty eggs, as large as an infant's head.

The idea of carrying more than two away with us was preposterous,
although the boys, forgetting what the weight would be, seriously
contemplated clearing the nest.

They were satisfied when a kind of landmark had been set up, so that if
we returned we might easily find the nest.

As each egg weighed about three pounds, the boys soon found the burden
considerable, even when tied into a handkerchief and carried like a
basket. To relieve them, I cut a strong elastic heath stick, and
suspending an egg in its sling at each end, laid the bent stick over
Jack's shoulder, and like a Dutch dairy-maid with her milk pails, he
stepped merrily along without inconvenience.

We presently reached a marshy place, surrounding a little pool evidently
fed by the stream which Knips had discovered. The soft ground was
trodden and marked by the footsteps of many different sorts of animals;
we saw tracks of buffaloes, antelopes, onagas or quaggas, but no trace
whatever of any kind of serpent; hitherto our journey in search of
monster reptiles had been signalized by very satisfactory failure.

By this brook we sat down to rest and take some food; Fangs presently
disappeared, and Jack calling to his pet discovered him gnawing at
something which he had dug from the marsh. Taking it for a root of some
sort, Jack brought it for my inspection. I dipped it in water to clear
off the mud, and to my surprise found a queer little living creature, no
bigger than half an apple, in my hand. It was a small tortoise.

"A tortoise, I declare!" cried Fritz. "What a long way from the sea. How
came it here, I wonder?"

"Perhaps there has been a tortoise-shower," remarked Ernest. "One reads
of frog-showers in the time of the ancient Romans."

"Hullo, Professor! you're out for once," said I. "This is nothing but a
mud-tortoise, which lives in wet, marshy ground and fresh water. They
are useful in gardens; for although they like a few lettuce leaves now
and then, they will destroy numbers of snails, grubs, and worms."

Resuming our journey, we arrived at a charming valley, verdant,
fruitful, and shaded by clumps of graceful trees. It afforded us the
greatest delight and refreshment to pass along this cool and lovely
vale, which we agreed to call Glen Verdant.

In the distance we could see herds of antelopes or buffaloes feeding;
but as our dogs continually ranged a long way ahead of us, they were
quickly startled, and vanished up one or other of the narrow gorges
which opened out of the valley.

Following the imperceptible windings of the vale, we were surprised, on
quitting it for the more open ground, to find ourselves in a country we
were already acquainted with, and not far from the Jackal Cave, as we
called the place where Fangs had been captured in cubhood.

On recognizing the spot, Ernest, who was in advance with one of the
dogs, hastened toward it. We lost sight of him for a few minutes, and
then arose a cry of terror, violent barking, and deep, surly growls.

As we rushed forward, Ernest met us, looking white as ashes, and calling
out:

"A bear, a bear, father! He is coming after me!"

The boy clung to me in mortal fear. I felt his whole frame quivering.

"Courage, my son!" cried I, disengaging myself from his grasp; "we must
prepare for instant defense!"

The dogs dashed forward to join the fray, whatever it was; and not long
were we in doubt. To my no small consternation, an enormous bear made
his appearance, quickly followed by another.

With leveled guns, my brave Fritz and I advanced slowly to meet them.
Jack was also ready to fire, but the shock had so unnerved Ernest that
he fairly took to his heels. We fired together, one at each bear; but
though hit, the monsters were unfortunately only wounded. We found it
most difficult to take aim, as the dogs beset them on all sides.
However, they were much disabled, one having the lower jaw broken, and
the other, with a bullet in his shoulder, was effectually lamed. The
dogs, perceiving their advantage, pressed more closely round their foes,
who yet defended themselves furiously, with frightful yells of pain and
rage. Such was the confusion and perpetual movement of the struggle,
that I dared not fire again, seeing that even slightly wounding one of
our gallant hounds would instantly place him in the power of the raging
bears.

Watching our opportunity, we suddenly advanced with loaded pistols to
within a very few paces of the animals, and firing, both fell dead, one
shot through the head, the other, in the act of rearing to spring on
Fritz, received his charge in its heart.

"Thank Heaven!" cried I, as with dull groans the brutes sank to the
ground. "We have escaped the greatest peril we have yet encountered!"

The dogs continued to tear and worry the fallen foe, as though unwilling
to trust the appearance of death. With feelings somewhat akin, I drew my
hunting-knife, and made assurance doubly sure.

Seeing all safe, Jack raised a shout of victory, that poor Ernest might
gain courage to approach the scene of conflict, which at last he did,
and joined us in examining the dangerous animals, as they lay motionless
before us.

Every point was full of interest, their wounds, their sharp teeth, their
mighty claws, the extraordinary strength of neck and shoulder, all were
remarked and commented on, and observing that the shaded brown hair was
tipped with glossy white, I thought that these might be the silver bears
mentioned in Captain Clarke's journey to the northwest coasts of
America.

"Well, my lads," said I, "if we have failed to catch sight of serpents,
we have at least made good riddance of some other bad rubbish! These
fellows would one day have worked us woe, or I am much mistaken. What's
to be done next?"

"Why, skin them, to be sure," said Fritz. "We shall have a couple of
splendid bearskin rugs."

As this process would take time and evening drew on, we dragged the huge
carcasses into their den, to await our return, concealing them with
boughs of trees and fencing the entrance as well as we could. The
ostrich eggs we also left behind us, hidden in a sandy hole.

By sunset we reached the tent, and joyfully rejoined the mother and
Franz, right glad to find a hearty meal prepared for us, as well as a
large heap of brushwood for the watch-fire.

When a full account of our adventures had been given, with a minute and
special description of the bear fight, the mother related what she had
done during our absence. She and Franz had made their way through the
wood up to the rocks behind it, and discovered a bed of pure white clay,
which it seemed to her might be used for making porcelain. Then she had
contrived a drinking trough for the cattle out of a split bamboo.

She had arranged a hearth in a sheltered place by building up large
stones, cemented with the white clay; and, finally, she had cut a
quantity of canes and brought them, on the cart, to be in readiness for
the building we had in hand.

I praised the thoughtful diligence which had effected so much that was
of real and definite use. In order to try the clay, I put some balls of
it in the fire now kindled, to burn during the night, and we then betook
ourselves to rest under shelter of our tent.

I awoke at dawn and aroused my little party. My first idea was to
examine the clay balls, which I found baked hard and finely glazed, but
too much melted down by the heat--a fault which, seeing the excellent
quality of the clay, I knew it would be well worth while to remedy.

After breakfast, and our accustomed devotions, we harnessed the cart,
and took the way to the bears' den. Fritz headed the party, and, coming
in sight of the entrance to the cave, called out softly:

"Make haste and you will see a whole crowd of wild turkeys, who seem to
have come to attend the funeral obsequies of their respected friend and
neighbor, Bruin, here. But there appears to be a jealous watcher who is
unwilling to admit the visitors to the bed of state!"

The Watcher, as Fritz called him, was an immensely large bird, with a
sort of comb on his head, and a loose, fleshy skin hanging from beneath
the beak. Part of the neck was bare, wrinkled, and purplish-red, while
around it, resting on the shoulders, was a downy collar of soft, white
feathers. The plumage was grayish-brown, marked here and there with
white patches; the feet appeared to be armed with strong claws. This
great bird guarded the entrance to the cave, occasionally retiring into
it himself for a few minutes; but as soon as the other birds came
pressing in after him, he hurried out again, and they were forced to
retire.

We stopped to observe this curious scene, and were startled suddenly by
a mighty rush of wings in the air above us. We looked up; at the same
moment Fritz fired, and an enormous bird fell heavily head foremost on
the rocks, by which its neck was broken, while blood flowed from a wound
in the breast.

We had been holding back the dogs, but they, with Fritz, now rushed
toward the cave, the birds rising around them and departing with heavy,
ungainly flight, leaving only Fritz's prize, and one of the other birds
killed by the large one in its fall.

With the utmost caution I entered the cave, and rejoiced to find that
the tongue and eyes only of the bears had been devoured; a little later
and we should have had the handsome skins pecked and torn to rags, and
all chance of steaks and bears' paws gone.

On measuring the wings of the large bird from tip to tip, I found the
length exceeded eleven feet, and concluded it to be a condor; it was
evidently the mate of the "Watcher," as Fritz called the first we saw.

To work we now went on the bears, and no slight affair we found it to
skin and cut them up, but by dint of perseverance, we at last succeeded
in our object.

Determining to smoke the meat on the spot, we cut magnificent hams, and
took off the rest of the meat in slices after the manner of the
buccaneers in the West Indies, preserving the paws entire to be cooked
as a delicacy, and obtaining from the two bears together a prodigious
supply of lard, which my wife gladly undertook to melt and prepare for
keeping.

The bones and offal we drew to some distance with the help of our
cattle, and made the birds of the air most welcome to feast upon it.
This, with the assistance of all sorts of insects, they did so
effectually that before we left the place the skulls were picked
perfectly clean, the sun had dried them, and they were ready for us to
carry off to our museum.

The skins had to be very carefully scraped, washed, salted, cleansed
with ashes, and dried; which occupied fully two days.

I was lamenting our distance from the rascusara tree, the leaves of
which had flavored our roast peccary so nicely, when I observed among
the brushwood which the boys had brought from the thickets around us, a
climbing plant, whose leaves had a very strong smell; the stem resembled
a vine, and the fruit grew in clusters like currants. Some were red, and
some of a green color, which I supposed to denote various degrees of
ripeness. They were hard, and the outer skin was quite thin.

I recognized in this the pepper plant, a discovery particularly
agreeable at this moment.

The boys soon gathered a large supply; the red berries were soaked in
salt and water for several days, then washed and rubbed, and finally,
becoming perfectly white, were dried in the sun. The treatment of the
green berries was simple; they were merely exposed to the sun's heat for
a day or two, and then stored: in this way we obtained enough, both of
black and white pepper, to last us a very long time.

I took also a number of young plants, that we might have pepper growing
at Rockburg and our various settlements. Some roots of another plant
were also taken, which, from the pods, appeared to be a kind of bean.

We were glad of this occupation during the tedious business of smoking
the bears' meat, and availed ourselves of the leisure time by also
preparing for stuffing the condor and the turkey buzzard, urubu or black
vulture--for I could not determine to which species the smaller bird
belonged.

The four boys at length became so weary of inaction, that I determined
to let them make an excursion alone on the Savannah. Three of them
received this permission with eager delight, but Ernest said he would
prefer to remain with us; to which, as the expedition was to be entirely
one of pleasure, I could make no objection.

Little Franz, on the other hand, whom I would willingly have kept with
us, was wild to go with his brothers, and I was obliged to consent, as I
had made the proposal open to all, and could not draw back.

In the highest spirits they ran to bring their steeds (as we were fain
to call the cattle they rode) from their pasturage at a short distance.
Speedily were they saddled, bridled, and mounted--the three lads were
ready to be off.

It was my wish that our sons should cultivate a habit of bold
independence, for well I knew that it might be the will of God to
deprive them easily of their parents; when, without an enterprising
spirit of self-reliance, their position would be truly miserable.

My gallant Fritz possessed this desirable quality in no small degree,
and to him I committed the care of his young brothers, charging them to
look up to and obey him as their leader.

They were well armed, well mounted, had a couple of good dogs; and, with
a hearty "God speed and bless you, my boys!" I let them depart.

We, who remained behind, passed the day in a variety of useful
occupations.

The bears' meat, which was being cured in a smoking shed such as that we
set up for the peccary hams, required a good deal of attention from my
wife. Ernest had a fancy for making ornamental cups from the ostrich
eggs, while I investigated the interior of the cave.

I found the inner wall to consist of a kind of talc, mingled with
threads of asbestos, and also indications of mica. Examining further, I
detached a large block, and found to my joy that I could split it into
clear transparent sheets, which would serve admirably for window panes.

My wife saw this substitute for glass with unfeigned satisfaction,
declaring, that although she would not complain, yet the want of glass
for windows had been a downright trouble to her.




CHAPTER XIII.

 The boys return and give an account of their adventures--How they
     captured the antelopes--How Fritz caught the rabbits and Jack rode
     down the gazelles--How they followed the honey bird and Jack tried
     to rob the bees' byke--We sup on the bears' paws--Across the
     desert again--Sight three ostriches--The male bird captured--We
     secure him between Storm and Grumble--The mother's astonishment at
     our new pet--Return to Woodlands--Home again--We establish
     colonies on Shark and Whale Islands--Turn our attention to
     agriculture--The difficulties of ostrich training--My patent
     saddle and bridle--I exercise my ingenuity in various trades.


As evening approached, the bears' paws, which were stewing for supper,
sent forth savory odors; and we sat talking round the fire, while
listening anxiously for sounds heralding the return of our young
explorers.

At last the tramp and beat of hoofs struck our ears; the little troop
appeared, crossing the open ground before us at a sharp trot, and a
shrill ringing cheer greeted us as we rose and went to meet them.

They sprang from their saddles, the animals were set at liberty to
refresh themselves, and the riders eagerly came to exhibit their
acquisitions and give an account of themselves.

Funny figures they cut! Franz and Jack had each a young kid slung on his
back, so that the four legs, tied together, stuck out under their chins.

Fritz's game bag looked remarkably queer--round lumps, sharp points, and
an occasional movement seemed to indicate a living creature or creatures
within.

"Hurrah! for the chase, father!" cried Jack. "Nothing like real hunting
after all. And just to see how Storm and Grumble go along over a grassy
plain! It is perfectly splendid! We soon tired out the little antelopes,
and were able to catch them."

"Yes, father," said Franz; "and Fritz has two Angora rabbits in his bag,
and we wanted to bring you some honey. Only think! such a clever bird--a
cuckoo, showed us where it was!"

"My brothers forget the chief thing," said Fritz. "We have driven a
little herd of antelopes right through the Gap into our territory; and
there they are, all ready for us to hunt when we like--or to catch and
tame!"

"Well done!" cried I; "here is indeed a list of achievements. But to
your mother and me, the chief thing of all, is God's goodness in
bringing you safe back to us. Now, let us hear the whole story, that we
may have a definite idea of your performances."

"We had a splendid ride," said Fritz, "down Glen Verdant, and away to
the defile through our Rocky Barrier, and the morning was so cool and
fresh that our steeds galloped along, nearly the whole way, at the top
of their speed. When we had passed through the Gap we moderated our
furious pace and kept our eyes open on the lookout for game; we then
trotted slowly to the top of a grassy hill, from whose summit we saw two
herds of animals, whether antelopes, goats, or gazelles, we did not
know, grazing by the side of the stream below us. We were about to
gallop down and try to get a shot at them, when it struck me that it
would be wiser to try and drive the whole herd through the Gap into our
own domain, where they would be shut up, as it were, in a park, free and
yet within reach. Down the hill we rode as hard as we could go, formed
in a semi-circle behind the larger herd--magnificent antelopes--and,
aided by the dogs, with shouts and cries drove them along the stream
toward the Gap; as we came near the opening they appeared inclined to
halt and turn, like sheep about to be driven into the butcher's yard;
and it was all we could do to prevent them from bolting past us; but, at
length, one made a rush at the opening and, the rest following, they
were soon all on the other side of the frontier, and inhabitants of New
Switzerland."

"Capital," I said, "capital, my boy! But I don't see what is to make
them remain inhabitants of our domain, or to prevent them from returning
through the Gap whenever they feel inclined."

"Stop, father," he replied, "you interrupt me too soon; we thought of
that possibility too, and provided against it. We stretched a long line
right across the defile and strung on it feathers and rags and all sorts
of other things, which danced and fluttered in the wind, and looked so
strange that I am perfectly certain that the herd will never attempt to
pass it; in fact, Levaillant, from whom I learned the trick, says, in
his 'Voyage au Cap de Bonne Espérance,' that the Hottentots make use of
the method for penning in the antelopes they have caught in the chase."

"Well done," said I, "I am glad to see that you remember what you have
read. The antelopes are welcome to New Switzerland, but, my boy," I
added, "I cannot say the same for the rabbits you have there; they
increase so rapidly that if you establish a colony of the little
wretches your next difficulty will be to get rid of them."

"True," he replied, "but my idea was to place them upon Whale Island,
where they would find abundant food, and at the same time in no way
trouble us. May I not establish a warren there? It would be so useful.
Do you know, my eagle caught these pretty little fellows for me? I saw a
number of them running about and so unhooded him, and in a few minutes
he brought me three--one dead, with whose body I rewarded him, and these
two here, unhurt."

"Now, father," said Jack, interrupting him, "do listen to me and hear my
story, or else Fritz will begin upon my adventures and tire you out with
his rigmarole descriptions."

"Certainly, Jack," I said, "I am quite ready to listen to you. First
and foremostly, how did you bring down those beautiful little animals
you have there?"

"Oh, we galloped them down. The dogs sniffed about in the grass while
Fritz was away after the rabbits, out popped those little fawns, and
away they went bounding and skipping at the rate of thirty miles an
hour, with Storm, Grumble, and the dogs at their heels. In about a
quarter of an hour we had left the dogs behind and were close upon our
prey. Down went the little creatures in the grass, and, overcome with
terror and fatigue, were at our mercy. So we shouted to Fritz, and----"

"My dear boy," said I, "according to your statement, Fritz must have
been seven miles and a half off."

"Oh, well, father, perhaps we did not ride for quite a quarter of an
hour, and, of course, I can't say exactly how fast we were going; and
then, you see, the fawns did not run in a straight line; at any rate
Fritz heard us, and he and Franz and I leashed the legs of the pretty
creatures, and then we mounted again, and presently saw a wretch of a
cuckoo, who led us ever so far out of our course by cuckooing and making
faces at us, and then hopping away. Franz declared it must be an
enchanted princess, and so I thought I would rid it of its spell; but
Fritz stopped me shooting it, and said it was a 'Honey Indicator,' and
that it was leading us probably to a bees' byke, so we spared its life,
and presently, sure enough, it stopped close by a bees' nest in a hollow
tree. This was capital, we thought, and, as we were in a great hurry to
taste the honey, I threw in a lot of lighted lucifer matches, but
somehow it did not kill the bees at all, but only made them awfully
angry, and they flew out in a body and stung me all over. I rushed to
Storm and sprang on his back, but, though I galloped away for bare life,
it was an age before I got rid of the little wretches, and now my face
is in a perfect fever. I think I will get mother to bathe it for me;"
and off rushed the noisy boy, leaving Fritz and me to see to the fawns
and examine the rabbits. With these latter I determined to do as Fritz
proposed, namely, to colonize Whale Island with them. I was all the
more willing to do this because I had been considering the advisability
of establishing on that island a fortress to which we might retreat in
any extreme danger, and where we should be very thankful, in case of
such a retreat, to possess means of obtaining a constant supply of
animal food.

Having ministered to the wants of the antelopes, I tried to interest the
boys in my discovery of the block of talc, but just then their mother
summoned us to dinner.

The principal dish in this meal consisted of the bears' paws--most
savory smelling delicacies, so tempting that their close resemblance to
human hands, and even the roguish "Fee-fo-fum" from Jack, did not
prevent a single member of the family from enjoying them most heartily.

Supper over, we lit our watch-fire, retired to our tent, and slept
soundly.

We had been working very diligently; the bears' meat was smoked, the fat
melted down and stored, and a large supply of bamboos collected. But I
wished to make yet another excursion, and at early dawn I aroused the
boys.

Fritz mounted the mule, I rode Lightfoot, Jack and Franz took their
usual steeds, and, with the two dogs, we galloped off--first to visit
the euphorbia to collect the gum, and then to discover whether the
ostrich had deserted her eggs in the sand.

Ernest watched us depart without the slightest look or sigh of regret,
and returned to the tent to assist his mother and study his books.

Our steeds carried us down the Green Valley at a rapid rate, and we
followed the direction we had pursued on our former expedition. We soon
reached Turtle Marsh, and then, filling our water-flasks, we arrived at
the rising ground where Fritz discovered the mounted Arabs.

As Jack and Franz wanted a gallop, I allowed them to press forward,
while Fritz and I visited the euphorbia trees. A quantity of the red gum
had exuded from the incisions I had made, and as this had coagulated in
the sun, I rolled it into little balls and stored it in a bamboo jar I
had brought with me for the purpose.

As we rode after the boys, who were some way ahead, Fritz remarked:

"Did you not tell me that the juice of that tree was poisonous, father;
why have you collected such a quantity?"

"I did indeed say so," I replied; "it is a most deadly poison. The
inhabitants of the Cape of Good Hope use it to poison the springs where
wild animals assemble to quench their thirst; and they thus slaughter an
immense number of the creatures for the sake of their hides. I intend,
however, to use it to destroy the apes should they again commit
depredations, and also in preparing the skins of animals to protect them
from the attacks of insects."

The two boys were still at some distance from us, when suddenly four
magnificent ostriches rose from the sand where they had been sitting.

Jack and Franz perceived them, and, with a great shout, drove them
toward us. In front ran a splendid male bird, his feathers of shining
black, and his great tail plume waving behind. Three females of an ashen
gray color followed him. They approached us with incredible swiftness,
and were within gunshot before they perceived us. Fritz had had the
forethought to bind up the beak of his eagle so that, should he bring
down an ostrich, he might be unable to injure it.

He now threw up the falcon which, towering upward, swooped down upon the
head of the foremost bird, and so confused and alarmed him, that he
could not defend himself nor continue his flight. So greatly was his
speed checked that Jack overtook him, and hurling his lasso, enfolded
his wings and legs in its deadly coils and brought him to the ground.
The other ostriches were almost out of sight, so leaving them to their
own devices, we leaped from our steeds and attempted to approach the
captured bird. He struggled fearfully, and kicked with such violence,
right and left, that I almost despaired of getting him home alive.

It occurred to me, however, that if we could cover his eyes, his fury
might be subdued. I instantly acted upon this idea, and flung over his
head my coat and hunting-bag, which effectually shut out the light.

No sooner had I done this than his struggles ceased, and we were able to
approach. We first secured round his body a broad strip of sealskin, on
each side of which I fastened a stout piece of cord, that I might be
able to lead him easily. Then, fastening another cord in a loop round
his legs that he might be prevented from breaking into a gallop, we
released him from the coils of the lasso.

"Do you know," said I to the boys, "how the natives of India secure a
newly captured elephant?"

"Oh, yes!" said Fritz; "they fasten him between two tame elephants.
We'll do that to this fine fellow, and tame him double quick."

"The only difficulty will be," remarked Jack, "that we have no tame
ostriches. However, I daresay Storm and Grumble will have no objection
to perform their part, and it will puzzle even this great monster to run
away with them."

So we at once began operations. Storm and Grumble were led up on either
side of the recumbent ostrich, and the cords secured to their girths.
Jack and Franz, each armed with a stout whip, mounted their respective
steeds, the wrappers were removed from the bird's eyes, and we stood by
to watch what would next occur.

For some moments after the return of his sight he lay perfectly still,
then he arose with a bound and, not aware of the cords which hampered
him, attempted to dash forward. The thongs were stout, and he was
brought to his knees. A fruitless struggle ensued, and then at length,
seeming to accommodate himself to circumstances, he set off at a sharp
trot, his guards making the air re-echo with their merry shouts. These
cries stimulated the ostrich to yet further exertions, but he was at
length brought to a stand by the determined refusal of his four-footed
companions to continue such a race across loose sand.

The boys having enjoyed the long run, I told them to walk with the
prisoner slowly home, while Fritz and I returned to examine the
ostrich's nest. The eggs were quite warm, and I was certain that the
mother had quite recently left the nest; leaving about half, I packed
the rest of the eggs in a large bag I had brought for the purpose, and
slung it carefully on the saddle before. We soon caught up our advance
guard, and without other notable incident reached our tent.

Astonishment and dismay were depicted on the face of the mother as we
approached.

"My dear husband," she exclaimed, "do you think our provisions so
abundant that you must scour the deserts to find some great beast to
assist us to devour them. You must discover an iron mine next, for iron
is what ostriches chiefly live on, is it not? Oh! I do wish you would be
content with the menagerie you have already collected, instead of
bringing in a specimen of every beast you come across. And this is such
a useless monster!"

"Useless! mother," exclaimed Jack; "you would not say so had you seen
him run; why, he will be the fleetest courser in our stables. I am going
to make a saddle and bridle for him, and in future he shall be my only
steed. Then as for his appetite, father declares it is most delicate, he
only wants a little fruit and grass, and a few stones and tenpenny nails
to help his digestion."

The way in which Jack assumed the proprietorship of our new prize seemed
to strike his brothers as rather cool, and there was instantly a cry
raised on the subject.

"Very well," said Jack, "let us each take possession of the part of the
ostrich we captured. Your bird, Fritz, seized the head, keep that;
father shall have the body, I'll have the legs, and Franz a couple of
feathers from the tail."

"Come, come," said I, "I think that Jack has a very good right to the
ostrich, seeing that he brought it to the ground, and if he succeeds in
taming it and converting it into a saddle horse it shall be his. From
this time, therefore, he is responsible for its training."

The day was now too far advanced to allow us to think of setting out for
Rockburg, so we fastened up the ostrich between two trees, and devoted
the remainder of the evening to making preparations for our departure.

At early dawn our picturesque caravan was moving homeward. The ostrich
continued so refractory that we were obliged to make him again march
between Storm and Grumble, and as these gallant steeds were thus
employed, the cow was harnessed to the cart, laden with our treasures.
Room was left in the cart for the mother. Jack and Franz mounted Storm
and Grumble, I rode Lightfoot, and Fritz brought up the rear on Swift.

At the mouth of the Gap we called a halt, and replaced the cord the boys
had strung with ostrich feathers by a stout palisade of bamboos. I also
took the opportunity of collecting a store of pipeclay, as I intended
during the winter months, which were close at hand, to try my hand at
china making.

When we reached the sugar-cane grove, we again stopped to collect the
peccary hams we had left to be smoked; and my wife begged me to gather
some seeds of an aromatic plant which grew in the neighborhood, and
which had the scent of vanilla. I obtained a good supply, and we moved
forward toward Woodlands, where we intended to rest for the night, after
our long and fatiguing march.

Our tent was pitched, and on our beds of cotton we slept soundly.

Next morning early we examined our farmyard, which appeared in a most
prosperous and flourishing condition. The sight of all these domestic
animals made us long even more than ever for our home at Rockburg, and
we determined to hasten thither with all possible speed.

The number of our pigs, goats, and poultry had greatly increased since
we had last visited our colony; and some of these, two fine breeds of
chickens especially, my wife wished to take back with her.

We found that the herd of antelopes, which Fritz and Jack had driven
through the Gap, had taken up their abode in the neighborhood, and
several times we saw the beautiful animals browsing among the trees.

While at the farm, we repaired both the animals' stalls and our dwelling
room, that the former might be more secure against the attacks of wild
beasts, and the latter fitted for our accommodation when we should visit
the spot.

Everything at length being satisfactorily arranged, we again retired to
rest, and early next morning completed our journey to Rockburg.

By midday we were once more settled at home. Windows and doors were
thrown open to admit fresh air; the animals established in their stalls;
and the cart's miscellaneous cargo discharged and arranged.

As much time as I could spare, I devoted to the ostrich, whom we
fastened, for the present, between two bamboo posts in front of our
dwelling.

I then turned my attention to the eggs we had brought, and which I
determined to hatch, if possible, by artificial heat. For this purpose I
arranged a stove, which I maintained at a uniform temperature, and on it
I placed the eggs, carefully wrapped in cotton wool.

Next morning Fritz and I went off in the boat, first to Whale Island,
there to establish our colonists, the Angora rabbits, and then to Shark
Island, where we placed the dainty little antelopes. Having made them
happy with their liberty and abundance of food, we returned as quickly
as possible to cure the bearskins, and add the provisions we had brought
to the stores lying in our cellar.

As we returned, we caught up Jack, making his way in great glee toward
Rockburg. He was carrying, in a basket, an immense eel, which he and
Ernest had secured.

Ernest had set, on the previous night, a couple of lines; one had been
dragged away, but on the other they found this splendid fellow.

It proved delicious. Half was prepared for dinner, and the other half
salted and stowed away.

We now, for a short time, again turned our attention to our duties about
the house.

Thinking that the veranda would be greatly improved by some creepers, I
sowed, round the foot of each bamboo pillar, vanilla and pepper-seeds,
as well as that of other creeping plants, which would not only give the
house a pleasanter aspect, but also afford us shade during the summer
months.

I constructed a couple of hencoops too, for the hens and their little
chicks which we had brought from Woodlands, for I knew that if I left
them unprotected, the inquisitive dispositions of Knips and Fangs might
induce them to make anatomical experiments which would be detrimental to
the welfare of the youngsters.

Ernest's rat skins were voted a nuisance within doors, and were tied
together and hung up outside; so powerful was the odor they emitted,
that even then Jack would pretend to faint every time he passed near
them.

The museum received its addition: the condor and vulture were placed
there, to be stuffed when we should find time during the rainy season.
The mica and asbestos, too, were brought in for the present, not to lie
there idle, but to wait until I could use them as I intended, for china
and lampwicks.

Having occupied two days in this way, we turned our attention to other
duties: the cultivation of a wheat, barley, and maize field, the
management of the ostrich's eggs, and the taming of the captives.

As agriculture was, though the least to our taste, the most important of
these several duties, we set about it first. The animals drew the plow,
but the digging and hoeing taxed our powers of endurance to the utmost.

We worked two hours in the morning and two in the evening. Fully did we
realize the words of Scripture: "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat
bread."

In the interval we devoted our attention to the ostrich. But our efforts
on behalf of his education seemed all in vain. He appeared as untameable
as ever. I determined, therefore, to adopt the plan which had subdued
the refractory eagle.

The effect of the tobacco fumes almost alarmed me. The ostrich sank to
the ground and lay motionless. Slowly, at length, he arose, and paced up
and down between the bamboo posts.

He was subdued, but to my dismay resolutely refused all food. I feared
he would die; for three days he pined, growing weaker and weaker each
day.

"Food he must have!" said I to my wife; "food he must have!" The mother
determined to attempt an experiment. She prepared balls of maize flour,
mixed with butter. One of these she placed within the bird's beak. He
swallowed it, and stretched out his long neck, looking inquiringly for a
second mouthful. A second, third, and fourth ball followed the first.
His appetite returned, and his strength came again.

All the wild nature of the bird had gone, and I saw with delight that we
might begin his education as soon as we chose. Rice, guavas, maize, and
corn he ate readily--_washing it down_, as Jack expressed it, with small
pebbles, to the great surprise of Franz, to whom I explained that the
ostrich was merely following the instinct common to all birds; that he
required these pebbles to digest his food, just as smaller birds require
gravel.

After a month of careful training, our captive would trot, gallop, obey
the sound of our voice, feed from our hand; and, in fact, showed himself
perfectly docile. Now our ingenuity was taxed to the utmost. How were we
to saddle and bridle a bird? First, for a bit for his beak. Vague ideas
passed through my mind, but every one I was obliged to reject. A plan at
length occurred to me. I recollected the effect of light and its absence
upon the ostrich, how his movements were checked by sudden darkness,
and how, with the light, power returned to his limbs.

I immediately constructed a leathern hood, to reach from the neck to the
beak, cutting holes in it for the eyes and ears.

Over the eyeholes I contrived square flaps or blinkers, which were so
arranged with whalebone springs that they closed tightly of themselves.
The reins were connected with these blinkers, so that the flaps might be
raised or allowed to close at the rider's pleasure.

When both blinkers were open, the ostrich would gallop straight ahead;
close his right eye and he turned to the left, close his left and he
turned to the right, shut both and he stood stock still.

I was justly proud of my contrivance, but, before I could really test
its utility, I was obliged to make a saddle. After several failures, I
succeeded in manufacturing one to my liking, and in properly securing
it; it was something like an old-fashioned trooper's saddle, peaked
before and behind--for my great fear was lest the boys should fall. This
curious-looking contrivance I placed upon the shoulders as near the neck
as possible, and secured it with strong girths round the wings and
across the breast, to avoid all possibility of the saddle slipping down
the bird's sloping back.

I soon saw that my plan would succeed, though skill and considerable
practice was necessary in the use of my patent bridle. It was difficult
to remember that to check the courser's speed it was necessary to
slacken rein, and that the tighter the reins were drawn, the faster he
would fly. We at length, however, all learned to manage Master
Hurricane, and the distance between Rockburg and Falconhurst was
traversed in an almost incredibly short space of time. The marvelous
speed of the bird again revived the dispute as to the ownership, and I
was obliged to interfere.

"Jack shall retain the ostrich," said I, "for it is most suited to him;
he is a lighter weight than either of you his elder brothers, and Franz
is not yet strong enough to manage such a fleet courser. But he is so
far to be considered common property, that all may practice on him
occasionally; and, in a case of necessity, any one may mount him."

Our field work was by this time over. The land had been plowed and sown
with wheat, barley, and maize. On the other side of Jackal River we had
planted potatoes and cassava roots, and all sorts of other seeds had
been carefully sown.

We had not neglected the ostrich's eggs, and one day Fritz introduced me
with great glee to three little ostriches. But alas, the little
creatures were not destined to enjoy life long. One died almost as soon
as it was hatched, and the others, after tottering about on their
stilt-like legs for a few days, followed its example.

I now found time to turn my attention to the bears' skins, which
required preparation before they would be fit for use as leather. They
had been salted and dried, and now required tanning. I had no tan,
however. This was unfortunate; but not to be deterred from my purpose, I
determined to use a mixture of honey and water in its place.

The experiment proved successful. When the skins were dried they
remained flexible and free from smell, while the fur was soft and
glossy.

This was not the only result of the experiment, for the honey-water
which I boiled appeared so clear and tempting, that it struck me that I
might prepare from it an excellent drink. I put by some of the liquid
before making use of it as tan, and reboiled it with nutmeg and
cinnamon. The preparation, which much resembled English mead, was
pronounced delicious, and the mother begged me to brew a large supply.
As our cellar was now well stocked with provisions for the winter, and
our other preparations were completed, I was able to turn my attention
to details of lesser importance. The boys had been clamoring for hats,
and as my success in so many trades had surprised me, I agreed to turn
hatter for the nonse. With the rat skins and a solution of india rubber,
I produced a kind of felt, which I dyed a brilliant red with cochineal,
and stretching this on a wooden block I had prepared, I passed over it a
hot iron, to smooth the nap, and by next morning had the satisfaction of
presenting to my wife a neat little red Swiss cap, to be lined and
finished by her for one of the boys. The mother admired the production
immensely, and lining it with silk, added yet more to its gay appearance
by adorning it with ribbons and ostrich feathers, and finally placed it
upon the head of little Franz.

So delighted was every one with the hat, that all were eager to be
similarly provided, and begged me to manufacture more. I readily agreed
to do so, as soon as they should furnish me with the necessary
materials, and advised them to make half a dozen rat traps, that they
might secure the water rats with which the stream abounded, and whose
rich glossy fur would serve admirably for felt.

Every fifth animal that they brought me I told them should be mine, that
I might obtain material for a hat for myself and their mother.

The boys at once agreed to this arrangement, and began the manufacture
of the traps, which were all so made that they should kill the rats at
once, for I could not bear the idea of animals being tortured or
imprisoned.

While they were thus engaged I applied myself to the manufacture of
porcelain. I first cleaned the pipeclay and talc from all foreign
substances, and made them ready to be beaten down with water into a soft
mass, and then prepared my molds of gypsum plaster. These preparations
were at length made, and the molds received a thin layer of the
porcelain material. When this was partly baked, I sprinkled over it a
powder of colored glass beads which I had crushed, and which looked very
pretty in patterns upon the transparent porcelain.

Some of my china vessels cracked with the heat of the stove, some were
very ill-shaped; but, after many failures, I succeeded in producing a
set of white cups and saucers, a cream-jug, a sugar-basin, and half a
dozen small plates.

I must allow that my china was far from perfect; the shape of some of
the vessels was faulty, and none were really transparent; nevertheless,
the general appearance gave great satisfaction, and when the plates were
filled with rosy and golden fruit resting on green leaves, and fragrant
tea filled the cups, it greatly added to the appearance of the table.




CHAPTER XIV.

 The rainy season again--The building of the cajack--The mother invents
     a swimming dress--A visit to our colonies--Mysterious seaweed--The
     mother's surprise--A visit to Whale Island--Mischievous pigs--The
     three boys return from a day's hunting--They display their
     treasures--A new skinning apparatus--We make a crushing
     machine--An early harvest--We prepare a threshing floor--Reaping
     in Italian fashion--Threshing also in Italian fashion--Return of
     the herring shoals.


Scarcely had I completed my pottery, when great black clouds and
terrific storms heralded the approach of another winter. The rainy
season having set in, we were compelled to give up our daily excursions.

Even in the spacious house which we now occupied, and with our varied
and interesting employments, we yet found the time dragging heavily. The
spirits of all were depressed, and even occasional rapid rides, during a
partial cessation of the rain, failed permanently to arouse them. Fritz,
as well as I, had perceived this, and he said to me:

"Why, father, should we not make a canoe, something swifter and more
manageable than those vessels we as yet possess? I often long for a
light skiff, in which I might skim over the surface of the water."

The idea delighted all hands, but the mother, who was never happy when
we were on the sea, declared that our chances of drowning were, with the
pinnace and canoe, already sufficiently great, and that there was not
the slightest necessity for our adding to these chances by constructing
another craft which would tempt us out upon the perfidious element. My
wife's fears were, however, speedily allayed, for I assured her that the
boat I intended to construct should be no flimsy cockle-shell, but as
safe and stout a craft as ever floated upon the sea. The Greenlander's
cajack I intended to be my model, and I resolved not only to occupy the
children, but also to produce a strong and serviceable canoe--a
masterpiece of art.

The boys were interested, and the boat-building was soon in operation.
We constructed the skeleton of whalebone, using split bamboo canes to
strengthen the sides and also to form the deck, which extended the whole
length of the boat, leaving merely a square hole in which the occupant
of the canoe might sit.

The work engrossed our attention most entirely, and by the time it was
complete the rain had passed away and the glorious sun again shone
brightly forth.

Our front door was just wide enough to admit of the egress of our boat,
and we completed her construction in the open air. We quickly cased the
sides and deck with sealskin, making all the seams thoroughly watertight
with caoutchouc.

The cajack was indeed a curious looking craft, yet so light that she
might be lifted easily with one hand, and when at length we launched her
she bounded upon the water like an India rubber ball. Fritz was
unanimously voted her rightful owner, but before his mother would hear
of his entering the frail-looking skiff she declared that she must
contrive a swimming dress, that "should his boat receive a puncture from
a sharp rock or the dorsal of a fish and collapse, he might yet have a
chance of saving his life."

Though I did not consider the cajack quite the soap bubble the mother
imagined it, I yet willingly agreed to assist her in the construction of
the dress.

The garment we produced was most curious in appearance, and I must own
that I doubted its efficiency. It was like a double waistcoat, made of
linen prepared with a solution of india rubber, the seams being likewise
coated with caoutchouc, and the whole rendered perfectly air-tight. We
so arranged it that one little hole was left, by means of which air
could be forced into the space between the outer covering and the
lining, and the dress inflated.

Meanwhile I perceived with pleasure the rapid vegetation the climate was
producing. The seeds we had scattered had germinated, and were now
promising magnificent crops. The veranda, too, was looking pleasant with
its gay and sweet-scented creepers, which were already aspiring to the
summit of the pillars. The air was full of birds, the earth seemed
teeming with life.

The dress was at length completed, and Fritz one fine afternoon offered
publicly to prove it. We all assembled on the beach, the boy gravely
donned and inflated the garment, and, amid roars of laughter from his
brothers, entered the water. Quickly and easily he paddled himself
across the bay toward Shark Island, whither we followed in one of our
boats.

The experiment was most successful, and Ernest, Jack, and Franz, in
spite of their laughter at their brother's garment, begged their mother
to make for each of them a similar dress.

While on the island we paid a visit to the colonists whom we had
established there the previous autumn. All was well; we could perceive
by the footprints that the antelopes had discovered and made use of the
shelter we had erected for them, and feeling that we could do nothing
more we scattered handfuls of maize and salt, and strolled across to the
other side of the island. The shore was covered with lovely shells, many
of which, with beautiful pieces of delicate coral, the boys collected
for their museum; strewn by the edge of the water too lay a great
quantity of seaweed of various colors, and as the mother declared that
much of it was of use, the boys assisted her to collect it and store it
in the boat. As we pulled back to the land I was surprised to see that
my wife chose from among the seaweed a number of curious leaves with
edges notched like a saw. When we reached home she carefully washed
these and dried them in the oven. There was evidently something
mysterious about this preparation, and my curiosity at length prompted
me to make an attempt to discover the secret.

"Are these leaves to form a substitute for tobacco?" said I; "do you so
long for its refreshing smell?"

My wife smiled, for her dislike to tobacco was well known, and she
answered in the same jocular tone:

"Do you not think that a mattress stuffed with these leaves would be
very cool in summer?"

The twinkle in her eyes showed me that my curiosity must still remain
unsatisfied, but it nevertheless became greater than ever.

The boys and I had one day made a long and fatiguing expedition, and,
tired out, we flung ourselves down in the veranda. As we lay there
resting, we heard the mother's voice.

"Could any of you enjoy a little jelly?"

She presently appeared, bearing a porcelain dish laden with most lovely
transparent jelly. Cut with a spoon and laid before us it quivered and
glittered in the light.

"Ambrosia!" exclaimed Fritz, tasting it. It was indeed delicious, and,
still marveling from whence the mother could have obtained a dish so
rare, we disposed of all that she had set before us.

"Aha," laughed the mother, "is not this an excellent substitute for
tobacco, far more refreshing than the nasty weed itself. Behold the
product of my mysterious seaweed."

"My dear wife," exclaimed I, "this dish is indeed a masterpiece of
culinary art, but where had you met with it? What put it into your
head?"

"While staying with my Dutch friends at the Cape," replied she, "I often
saw it, and at once recognized the leaves on Shark Island. Once knowing
the secret, the preparation of the dish is extremely simple; the leaves
are soaked in water, fresh every day, for a week, and then boiled for a
few hours with orange juice, citron, and sugar."

We were all delighted with the delicacy, and thanked the mother for it
most heartily, the boys declaring that they must at once go off again to
the island to collect as many of the leaves as they could find. I agreed
to accompany them, for I wished to examine the plantations we had made
there.

All were flourishing, the palms and mangroves had shot up in a most
marvelous manner, and many of the seeds which I had cast at random among
the cliffs in the rocks had germinated, and promised to clothe the
nakedness of the frowning boulders.

Away up among the rocks, too, we discovered a bright sparkling spring of
delicious water, at which, from the footprints around, we saw that the
antelopes must have refreshed themselves.

Finding everything so satisfactory, we were naturally anxious to
discover how our colony and plantations on Whale Island had fared. It
was evident at a glance that the rabbits had increased; the young and
tender shoots of the trees bore the marks of many greedy, mischievous
little teeth. The cocoanut palms alone had they spared.

Such depredations as these could not be allowed, and with the help of
the boys I erected round each stem a hedge of prickly thorn, and then
prepared again to embark; before we did so, however, I noticed that some
of the seaweed had also been gnawed by the rabbits, and wondering what
it could have been to tempt them, I collected some of it to examine more
fully at home.

The skeleton of the whale, too, attracted our attention, for, picked
clean by the birds and bleached by the sun and rain, the bones had been
purified to a most perfect whiteness. Thinking that the joints of the
vertebræ might be made of use, I separated some ten or twelve, and
rolled them down to the boat, and then returned to the shore, towing
them after us.

A scheme now occupied my mind for the construction of a crushing
machine, which would prove of the greatest service to us. I knew that to
make such a machine of stone was far beyond my power, but it had struck
me that the vertebræ of the whale might serve my purpose.

I determined next morning to look out a tree from which I might cut the
blocks of wood that I should require to raise my crushers.

My expedition was destined to be a solitary one, for when I went to the
stables for a horse, I discovered that the boys had gone off by
themselves with their guns and traps, and had left to me a choice
between the bull and buffalo.

With Storm, therefore, I was fain to be content. I crossed the bridge,
but as I reached the cassava field I noticed to my great annoyance that
it had been overrun and laid waste by some mischievous animals. I
examined the footprints, and seeing that they greatly resembled those of
pigs, determined to follow the trail, and see who these invaders of our
territory would prove to be. The track led me on for some way until I
almost lost sight of it near our old potato field. For some time I
hunted backward and forward without seeing a sign of the animals; at
length a loud barking from Floss and Bruno, who were with me, announced
that they had been discovered.

The whole family of our old sow, and she herself, were standing at bay,
showing their teeth and grunting so savagely, that the dogs feared to
approach them.

I raised my gun and fired twice among the herd; two of the pigs fell,
and the rest fled, followed by the dogs. I picked up the pigs, and
calling back the pursuers, continued my way through the forest.

A tree suited to my purpose was soon found; I marked it and returned
home.

Ernest, who had remained at home, assisted me to flay the young porkers,
and I handed them over to the mother to prepare for supper; by which
time I hoped the other lads would have returned.

Late in the evening we heard the sounds of trampling hoofs, and
presently Jack appeared, thundering along upon his two-legged steed,
followed in the distance by Fritz and Franz. These latter carried upon
their cruppers game bags, the contents of which were speedily displayed;
four birds, a kangaroo, twenty muskrats, a monkey, two hares, and half a
dozen beaver rats, were laid before me. Besides these, Fritz threw down,
without a word of explanation, a bundle of thistles.

The boys seemed almost wild with excitement at the success of their
expedition, and presently Jack exclaimed:

"Oh, father, you can't think what grand fun hunting on an ostrich is; we
flew along like the wind; sometimes I could scarcely breathe, we were
going at such a rate, and was obliged to shut my eyes because of the
terrific rush of air; really, father, you must make me a mask with glass
eyes to ride with, or I shall be blinded one of these fine days."

"Indeed!" replied I, "I must do no such thing."

"Why not?" asked he, with a look of amazement upon his face.

"For two reasons; firstly, because I do not consider that I _must_ do
anything that you demand; and, secondly, because I think that you are
very capable of doing it yourself. However, I must congratulate you upon
your abundant supply of game; you must have indeed worked hard. Yet I
wish that you would let me know when you intend starting on such a long
expedition as this; you forget that though you yourselves know that you
are quite safe, and that all is going on well, yet that we at home are
kept in a constant state of anxiety. Now, off with you, and look to your
animals, and then you may find supper ready."

Presently the boys returned, and we prepared for a most appetizing meal
which the mother set before us.

While we were discussing the roast pig, and washing it down with
fragrant mead, Fritz described the day's expedition.

They had set their traps near Woodlands, and had there captured the
muskrats, attracting them with small carrots, while with other traps,
baited with fish and earth-worms, they had caught several beaver rats,
and a duck-billed platypus. Hunting and fishing had occupied the rest of
the day, and it was with immense pride that Jack displayed the kangaroo
which he had run down with his swift courser. Contributions to the
garden had not been forgotten, and Fritz handed over to his mother
several cuttings from cinnamon and sweet-apple trees. Finally, when all
the other treasures had been displayed, Fritz begged me to examine his
thistles which he had gathered, thinking, he said, that it was a plant
used in the manufacture of wool. He was perfectly right, for I
recognized it at once as the "fuller's teazle," a plant whose sharp
little thorns, which cover the stem and leaves, are used to raise the
nap of cloth.

We resolved to be up betimes the following morning, that we might attend
to the preparation of the booty, and as I now noticed that the boys were
all becoming extremely drowsy, I closed the day with evening devotions.

The number of the creatures we killed rendered the removal of their
skins a matter of no little time and trouble. It was not an agreeable
task at any time, and when I saw the array of animals the boys had
brought me to flay, I determined to construct a machine which would
considerably lessen the labor. Among the ship's stores, in the surgeon's
chest, I discovered a large syringe. This, with a few alterations, would
serve my purpose admirably. Within the tube I first fitted a couple of
valves, and then, perforating the stopper, I had in my possession a
powerful air pump.

The boys stared at me in blank amazement when, armed with this
instrument, I took up the kangaroo, and declared myself ready to
commence operations.

"Skin a kangaroo with a squirt?" said they, and a roar of laughter
followed the remark.

I made no reply to the jests which followed, but silently hung the
kangaroo by its hind legs to the branch of a tree. I then made a small
incision in the skin, and inserting the mouth of the syringe forced air
with all my might between the skin and the body of the animal. By
degrees the hide of the kangaroo distended, altering the shape of the
creature entirely.

Still I worked on, forcing in yet more air until it had become a mere
shapeless mass, and I soon found that the skin was almost entirely
separated from the carcass. A bold cut down the belly, and a few touches
here and there where the ligatures still bound the hide to the body, and
the animal was flayed.

"What a splendid plan!" cried the boys; "but why should it do it?"

"For a most simple and natural reason," I replied; "do you not know that
the skin of an animal is attached to its flesh merely by slender and
delicate fibers, and that between these exist thousands of little
bladders or air chambers; by forcing air into these bladders the fibers
are stretched, and at length, elastic as they are, cracked. The skin has
now nothing to unite it to the body, and, consequently, may be drawn off
with perfect ease. This scientific fact has been known for many years;
the Greenlanders make constant use of it; when they have killed a seal
or walrus, they distend the skin that they may tow the animal more
easily ashore, and then remove its hide at a moment's notice."

The remaining animals were subjected to the same treatment, and, to my
great joy, in a couple of days the skins were all off, and being
prepared for use.

I now summoned the boys to assist me in procuring blocks of wood for my
crushing machine, and the following day we set forth with saws, ropes,
axes, and other tools. We soon reached the tree I had selected for my
purpose, and I began by sending Fritz and Jack up into the tree with
axes to cut off the larger of the high branches that, when the tree
fell, it might not injure its neighbors. They then descended, and Fritz
and I attacked the stem. As the easiest and most speedy method we used
a saw, such a one as is employed by sawyers in a saw-pit, and Fritz
taking one end and I the other, the tree was soon cut half through. We
then adjusted ropes that we might guide its fall, and again began to
cut. It was laborious work, but when I considered that the cut was
sufficiently deep we took the ropes and pulled with our united strength.
The trunk cracked, swayed, tottered, and fell with a crash.

The boughs were speedily lopped off, and the trunk sawed into blocks
four feet long.

To cut down and divide this tree had taken us a couple of days, and on
the third we carted home four large and two small blocks, and with the
vertebræ joints of the whale I, in a very short time, completed my
machine.

While engaged on this undertaking I had paid little attention to our
fields of grain, and, accordingly, great was my surprise when one
evening the fowls returned, showing most evident indifference to their
evening meal, and with their crops perfectly full. It suddenly struck me
that these birds had come from the direction of our cornfield. I hurried
off to see what damage they had done, and then found to my great joy
that the grain was perfectly ripe.

The amount of work before us startled my wife. This unexpected harvest,
which added reaping and threshing to the fishing, salting, and pickling
already on hand, quite troubled her.

"Only think," said she, "of my beloved potatoes and manioc roots! What
is to become of them, I should like to know? It is time to take them up,
and how to manage it, with all this press of work, I can't see."

"Don't be down-hearted, wife," said I; "there is no immediate hurry
about the manioc, and digging potatoes in this fine, light soil is easy
work compared to what it is in Switzerland, while as to planting more,
that will not be necessary if we leave the younger plants in the ground.
The harvest we must conduct after the Italian fashion, which, although
anything but economical, will save time and trouble, and as we are to
have two crops in the year, we need not be too particular."

Without further delay, I commenced leveling a large space of firm,
clayey ground to act as a threshing floor; it was well sprinkled with
water, rolled, beaten, and stamped; as the sun dried the moisture it was
watered anew, and the treatment continued until it became as flat, hard,
and smooth as threshing floor need be.

Our largest wicker basket was then slung between Storm and Grumble; we
armed ourselves with reaping hooks, and went forth to gather in the corn
in the simplest and most expeditious manner imaginable.

I told my reapers not to concern themselves about the length of the
straw, but to grasp the corn where it was convenient to them, without
stooping; each was to wind a stalk around his own handful, and throw it
into the basket; in this way great labor was saved. The plan pleased the
boys immensely, and in a short time the basket had been filled many
times, and the field displayed a quantity of tall, headless stubble,
which perfectly horrified the mother, so extravagant and untidy did she
consider our work.

"This is dreadful!" cried she; "you have left numbers of ears growing on
short stalks, and look at that splendid straw completely wasted! I don't
approve of your Italian fashion at all."

"It is not a bad plan, I can assure you, wife, and the Italians do not
waste the straw by not cutting it with the grain; having more arable
than pasture land, they use this high stubble for their cattle, letting
them feed in it, and eat what grain is left; afterward, allowing the
grass to grow up among it, they mow all together for winter fodder. And
now for threshing, also in Italian fashion. We shall find it spare our
arms and backs as much in that as in reaping."

The little sheaves were laid in a large circle on the floor, the boys
mounted Storm, Grumble, Lightfoot, and Hurry, starting off at a brisk
trot, with many a merry jest, and round they went, trampling and
stamping out the grain, while dust and chaff flew in clouds about them.

My wife and I were incessantly occupied with hay-forks, by means of
which we shook up and moved the sheaves over which the threshers rode,
so as to throw them in the track.

From time to time the animals took mouthfuls of the tempting food they
were beating out; we thought they well deserved it, and called to mind
the command given to the Jews, "Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that
treadeth out the corn."

After threshing, we proceeded to winnowing; by simply throwing the
threshed corn with shovels high in the air when the land or sea-breeze
blew strong, the chaff and refuse was carried away by the wind and the
grain fell to the ground.

During these operations our poultry paid the threshing-floor many
visits, testifying a lively interest in the success of our labors, and
gobbling up the grain at such a rate that my wife was obliged to keep
them at a reasonable distance; but I would not have them altogether
stinted in the midst of our plenty. I said, "Let them enjoy themselves;
what we lose in grain, we gain in flesh. I anticipate delicious
chicken-pie, roast goose, and boiled turkey!"

When our harvest stores were housed, we found that we had reaped sixty,
eighty, even a hundred fold what had been sown. Our garner was truly
filled with all manner of store.

Expecting a second harvest, we were constrained to prepare the field for
sowing again, and immediately therefore commenced mowing down the
stubble. While engaged in this, flocks of quails and partridges came to
glean among the scattered ears. We did not secure any great number, but
resolved to be prepared for them next season, and by spreading nets, to
catch them in large quantities.

My wife was satisfied when she saw the straw carried home and stacked;
our crop of maize, which of course had not been threshed like the other
corn, afforded soft leaves which were used for stuffing mattresses,
while the stalks, when burnt, left ashes so rich in alkali as to be
especially useful.

I changed the crops sown on the ground to rye, barley, and oats, and
hoped they would ripen before the rainy season.

The shoals of herring made their appearance just as we finished our
agricultural operations. This year we pickled only two barrels of them;
but we were not so merciful toward the seals, which arrived on the coast
directly afterward. We hunted them vigorously, requiring their skins for
many purposes, more especially for the completion of the cajack. On the
little deck of that tiny vessel I had made a kind of magazine, in which
to store pistols, ammunition, water, and provisions, and this I meant to
cover with sealskin, so as to be quite watertight. A couple of harpoons
furnished with seal bladders were to be suspended alongside.




CHAPTER XV.

 Trial of the cajack--Fritz kills a walrus--We carry home its head--The
     storm--Where is Fritz?--Safe at last--The fishing season--An
     expedition proposed--Three of the boys start for Woodlands--Pigeon
     post--Encounter with a hyena--Wood Lake explored--A
     tapir--Prospect Hill pillaged--A tragedy--The boys in danger--We
     join them--We build a summer house--Discover the cacao
     plant--Fritz ascends the stream--He sees elephants and
     hippopotami--Jack's "moist secret"--We return to Rockburg--Grace
     and beauty--Shark Island is fortified.


At last came the day when Fritz was to make his trial trip with the
cajack. Completely equipped in swimming costume--trousers, jacket, and
cap--it was most ludicrous to see him cower down in the canoe and puff
and blow till he began to swell like the frog in the fable.

All trace of his original figure was speedily lost, and shouts of
laughter greeted his comical appearance. Even his mother could not
resist a smile, although the dress was her invention.

I got the other boat out, that my wife might see we were ready to go to
his assistance the moment it became necessary.

The cajack was launched from a convenient shelving point, and floated
lightly on the sea-green ocean mirror. Fritz with his paddles then began
to practice all manner of evolutions: darting along with arrowy
swiftness, wheeling to the right, then to the left; and at last,
flinging himself quite on his side, while his mother uttered a shriek of
terror, he showed that the tiny craft would neither capsize nor sink.
Then, recovering his balance, he sped securely on his further way.

Encouraged by our shouts of approbation, he now boldly ventured into
the strong current of Jackal River, and was rapidly carried out to sea.

This being more than I had bargained for, I lost no time in giving chase
in the boat, with Ernest and Jack; my wife urging us to greater speed,
and declaring that some accident could not fail to happen to "that
horrid soap-bubble."

We soon arrived outside the bay, at the rocks where formerly lay the
wreck, and gazed in all directions for signs of the runaway.

After a time we saw, at a considerable distance, a faint puff of smoke,
followed by the crack of a pistol. Upon this we fired a signal shot,
which was presently answered by another, and, steering in the direction
of the sound, we soon heard the boy's cheery halloo; the cajack darted
from behind a point of land, and we quickly joined company.

"Come to this rocky beach," cried Fritz, "I have something to show you."

With blank amazement we beheld a fine, well-grown young walrus,
harpooned and quite dead.

"Did you kill this creature, my dear Fritz?" I exclaimed, looking round
in some anxiety, and half expecting to see a naked savage come to claim
the prize.

"To be sure, father! don't you see my harpoon? Why do you doubt it?"

"Well, I scarcely know," replied I, laughing; "but success so speedy, so
unexpected, and so appropriate, to an amateur Greenlander, took me by
surprise. I congratulate you, my boy! But I must tell you that you have
alarmed us by making this long trip. You should not have gone out of the
bay. I left your mother in grievous trouble."

"Indeed, father, I had no idea of passing out of sight, but once in the
current, I was carried along, and could not help myself. Then I came on
a herd of walruses, and I did so long to make a prize of one that I
forgot everything else, and made chase after them when beyond the
influence of the current, until I got near enough to harpoon this fine
fellow. He swam more slowly, and I struck him a second time; then he
sought refuge among these rocks, and expired. I landed, and scrambled to
where he lay, but I took care to give him the contents of my pistol
before going close up, having a salutary recollection of the big
serpent's parting fling at you, Jack."

"You ran a very great risk," said I. "The walrus is an inoffensive
creature; but when attacked and wounded, it often becomes furious, and,
turning upon its pursuer, can destroy, with its long tusks, a strongly
built whale boat. However, thank God for your safety! I value that above
a thousand such creatures. Now, what's to be done with him? He must be
quite fourteen feet long, although not full grown."

"I am very glad you followed me, father," said Fritz; "but our united
strength will not remove this prodigious weight from among these rocks;
only do let me carry away the head, with these grand, snow-white tusks!
I should so like to fasten it on the prow of the cajack, and name it the
_Sea-horse_."

"We must certainly carry away the beautiful ivory tusks," said I; "but
make haste; the air feels so excessively close and sultry, I think a
storm is brewing."

"But the head! the head! we must have the whole head," cried Jack; "just
think how splendid it will look on the cajack!"

"And how splendid it will smell too, when it begins to putrify," added
Ernest; "what a treat for the steersman?"

"Oh, we will prepare for that," said Fritz; "it shall be soaked and
cleaned, and dried until it is as hard as a wooden model; it shall not
offend your delicate nose in the least, Ernest!"

"I supposed the walrus to be an animal peculiar to the Arctic regions,"
remarked Ernest.

"And so it is," I replied; "though they may occasionally be seen
elsewhere; these may have wandered from the Antarctic seas. I know that
on the eastern coast of Africa is found a smaller species of walrus
called the dugong; it has long incisor teeth, but not tusks; and
certainly resembles a seal, rather than a walrus."

While thus speaking, we were actively engaged in the decapitation of the
walrus, and in cutting off long strips of its skin. This took some time,
as we had not the proper implements, and Fritz remarked that in future
the cajack must be provided with a hunting-knife and a hatchet; adding
that he should like to have a small compass in a box, with a glass top,
fixed in front of the hole where the steersman sits. I saw the necessity
of this, and I promised it should be done.

Our work being accomplished, we were ready to go, and I proposed to take
Fritz and the canoe on board our boat, so that we might all arrive
together; but I yielded to his earnest wish to return alone as he came;
he longed to act as our avant-courier, and announce our approach to his
mother; so he was soon skimming away over the surface of the water,
while we followed at a slower rate.

Black clouds meanwhile gathered thick and fast around us, and a
tremendous storm came on. Fritz was out of sight, and beyond our reach.

We buckled on the swimming belts and firmly lashed ourselves to the
boat, so that we might not be washed overboard by the towering seas
which broke over it.

The horizon was shrouded in darkness, fearful gusts of wind lashed the
ocean into foam, rain descended in torrents, while livid lightning
glared athwart the gloom. Both my boys faced the danger nobly; and my
feelings of alarm were mingled with hope on finding how well the boat
behaved.

The tempest swept on its way, and the sky began to clear as suddenly as
it had been overcast; yet the stormy waves continued for a long time to
threaten our frail bark with destruction, in spite of its buoyancy and
steadiness.

Yet I never lost hope for ourselves--all my fears were for Fritz; in
fact I gave him up for lost, and my whole agonized heart arose in
prayer for strength to say, "Thy will be done!"

At last we rounded the point, and once more entering Safety Bay, quickly
drew near the little harbor.

What was our surprise--our overwhelming delight--when there we saw the
mother with Fritz, as well as her little boy, on their knees in prayer
so earnest for our deliverance, that our approach was unperceived, until
with cries of joy we attracted their notice. Then indeed ensued a happy
meeting, and we gave thanks together for the mercy which had spared our
lives.

Returning joyfully to Rockburg, we changed our drenched garments for
warm, dry clothes; and, seated at a comfortable meal, considered and
described at our ease the perils of the storm.

Afterward, the head of the walrus was conveyed to our workshop; where it
underwent such a skillful and thorough process of cleaning, embalming,
and drying, that ere long it was actually fixed on the prow of the
cajack, and a most imposing appearance it presented!

The strips of hide, when well tanned and prepared, made valuable
leather.

Much damage had been done by the late storm. The heavy rain had flooded
all the streams, and injured crops which should have been housed before
the regular rainy season.

The bridge over Jackal River was partly broken down, and the water tanks
and pipes all needed repair. So our time was much occupied in restoring
things to order.

On going to work one day, near the cascade, we found a great number of
dark red berries scattered on the ground; they were about the size of
ordinary hazel nuts, with small leafy coronets at the tip.

The boys thought them so inviting, that they tasted them at once, but
angry exclamations and much spitting and spluttering followed the
experiment; even Knips rejected them, and they would have been cast
aside with contempt, had not the smell induced me to examine them. I
decided that this was the fruit of the clove.

Some plants were immediately set in the nursery garden, and my wife was
pleased to have this excellent spice wherewith to flavor her boiled rice
and other dishes, in lieu of pepper--a very welcome variety to everyone.

Having a good supply of clay, brought from the bed near Falconhurst, I
proposed to use it for making aqueducts; and, observing how much the
recent rain had promoted the growth of our young corn, I determined to
irrigate the fields with the drainage from our crushing mill.

The fishing season was again successful. Large takes of salmon,
sturgeon, and herring rewarded our annual exertions, and our storeroom
again assumed a well-stocked appearance. Much as I wished that we could
obtain a constant supply of these fish fresh, I was obliged to reject
the naïve proposal from Jack, that we should tether a shoal of salmon by
the gills to the bottom of the bay as we had secured the turtles.

Many quiet uneventful days passed by, and I perceived that the boys,
wearied by the routine of farm work at Rockburg, were longing for a
cruise in the yacht or an expedition into the woods, which would refresh
both mind and body.

"Father," said Fritz at length, "we want a quantity of hurdles, and have
scarcely any more bamboos of which to make them. Had we not better get a
supply from Woodlands? And you said, too, the other day, that you wished
you had some more of the fine clay: we might visit the Gap at the same
time."

I had really no objection to propose; and it was shortly afterward
settled that Fritz, Jack, and Franz should start together; and that
Ernest, who had no great desire to accompany his brothers, should remain
with his mother and me, and assist in the construction of a sugar mill,
the erection of which I had long contemplated.

Before they started, Fritz begged some bear's meat from the mother, to
make pemmican.

"And what may pemmican be?" she asked.

"It is food carried by the fur-traders of North America on their long
journeys through the wild country they traverse; and consists of bear or
deer's flesh, first cooked and then pounded or ground to powder. It is
very portable, and nourishing."

His mother consented "to humor him," as she said, although without much
faith in the value of the preparation; and in the course of two days a
stock of pemmican, sufficient for a Polar expedition, was fabricated by
our enthusiastic son.

They were ready to start, when I observed Jack quietly slip a basket,
containing several pigeons, under the packages in the cart.

"Oh, oh!" thought I, "the little fellow has his doubts about that
pemmican, and thinks a tough old pigeon would be preferable."

The weather was exquisite; and, with exhortations to prudence and
caution from both me and their mother, the three lads started in the
very highest spirits. Storm and Grumble, as usual, drew the cart, and
were ridden by Fritz and Franz; while Hurry carried Jack swiftly across
the bridge in advance of them; followed by Floss and Bruno, barking at
his heels.

The sugar mill occupied us for several days, and was made so much like
our other mills that I need not now describe it.

On the evening of the first day, as we sat resting in the porch at
Rockburg, we naturally talked of the absentees, wondering and guessing
what they might be about.

Ernest looked rather mysterious, and hinted that he might have news of
them next morning.

Just then a bird alighted on the dovecot, and entered. I could not see,
in the failing light, whether it was one of our own pigeons or an
intruder. Ernest started up, and said he would see that all was right.

In a few minutes he returned with a scrap of paper in his hand.

"News, father! The very latest news by pigeon post, mother!"

"Well done, boys! what a capital idea!" said I, and taking the note I
read:

     "DEAREST PARENTS AND ERNEST:

     "A brute of a hyena has killed a ram and two lambs. The dogs seized
     it. Franz shot it. It is dead and skinned. The pemmican isn't worth
     much, but we are all right. Love to all.

                                                        "FRITZ.
    "WOODLANDS, 15th instant."

"A true hunter's letter!" laughed I; "but what exciting news. When does
the next post come in, Ernest?"

"To-night, I hope," said he, while his mother sighed, and doubted the
value of such glimpses into the scenes of danger through which her sons
were passing, declaring she would much rather wait and hear all about it
when she had them safe home again.

Thus the winged letter-carriers kept us informed from day to day of the
outline of adventures which were afterward more fully described.

On approaching the farm at Woodlands, the boys were startled by hearing,
as they thought, human laughter, repeated again and again; while, to
their astonishment, the oxen testified the great uneasiness, the dogs
growled and drew close to their masters, and the ostrich fairly bolted
with Jack into the rice swamp.

The laughter continued, and the beasts became unmanageable.

"Something is very far wrong!" cried Fritz. "I cannot leave the animals;
but while I unharness them, do you, Franz, take the dogs, and advance
cautiously to see what is the matter."

Without a moment's hesitation, Franz made his way among the bushes with
his gun, closely followed by the dogs; until, through an opening in the
thicket, he could see, at a distance of about forty paces, an enormous
hyena, in the most wonderful state of excitement; dancing round a lamb
just killed, and uttering, from time to time, the ghastly hysterical
laughter which had pealed through the forest.

The beast kept running backward and forward, rising on its hind legs,
and then rapidly whirling round and round, nodding its head, and going
through most frantic and ludicrous antics.

Franz kept his presence of mind very well; for he watched till, calming
down, the hyena began with horrid growls to tear its prey; and then,
firing steadily both barrels, he broke its foreleg, and wounded it in
the breast.

Meanwhile Fritz, having unyoked the oxen and secured them to trees,
hurried to his brother's assistance. The dogs and the dying hyena were
by this time engaged in mortal strife; but the latter, although it
severely wounded both Floss and Bruno, speedily succumbed, and was dead
when the boys reached the spot. They raised a shout of triumph, which
guided Jack to the scene of action; and their first care was for the
dogs, whose wounds they dressed before minutely examining the hyena. It
was as large as a wild boar; long stiff bristles formed a mane on its
neck, its color was gray marked with black, the teeth and jaws were of
extraordinary strength, the thighs muscular and sinewy, the claws
remarkably strong and sharp altogether. But for his wounds he would
certainly have been more than a match for the dogs.

After unloading the cart at the farm, the boys returned for the carcass
of the tiger-wolf, as it is sometimes called, and occupied themselves in
skinning it during the remainder of the day, when, after dispatching the
carrier-pigeon to Rockburg, they retired to rest on their bearskin rugs,
to dream of adventures past and future.

The following day they devised no less a scheme than to survey the
shores of Wood Lake, and place marks wherever the surrounding marsh was
practicable, and might be crossed either to reach the water or leave
it.

Fritz in the cajack, and the boys on shore, carefully examined the
ground together; and when they found firm footing to the water's edge,
the spot was indicated by planting a tall bamboo, bearing on high a
bundle of reeds and branches.

They succeeded in capturing three young black swans, after considerable
resistance from the old ones. They were afterward brought to Rockburg,
and detained as ornaments to Safety Bay.

Presently a beautiful heron thrust his long neck from among the reeds,
to ascertain what all the noise on the lake was about. Before he could
satisfy his curiosity, Fritz unhooded his eagle, and though vainly he
flapped and struggled, his legs and wings were gently but firmly bound,
and he had to own himself vanquished, and submit to the inspection of
his delighted captors.

It was their turn to be alarmed next, for a large powerful animal came
puffing, with a curious whistling sound, through the dense thicket of
reeds, passing close by and sorely discomposing them by its sudden
appearance. It was out of sight immediately, before they could summon
the dogs, and from their description it must have been a tapir, the
color dark brown, and in form resembling a young rhinoceros, but with no
horn on the nose, and the upper lip prolonged into a trunk something
like that of an elephant on a smaller scale. It is a gentle creature,
but when attacked becomes a fierce opponent, and can wound dogs
dangerously with its powerful teeth.

The tapir can swim and dive with perfect ease, and abounds in the
densely wooded swamps and rivers of tropical America.

Fritz in his cajack followed for a time the direction in which the tapir
proceeded, but saw no more of it.

Meanwhile the other two boys returned to the farm by the rice fields,
and there fell in with a flock of cranes, five or six of which they
caught alive, among them two demoiselles or Numidian cranes. These birds
they shot at with arrows arranged in a skillful and original way, with
loops of cord dipped in birdlime attached to them, so that it often
happened that the bird aimed at was entangled and brought down
uninjured.

The young hunters seemed to have lived very comfortably on peccary ham,
cassava bread and fruit, and plenty of baked potatoes and milk.

One trial of the pemmican was sufficient, and it was handed over to the
dogs. Fritz, however, determined again to attempt the manufacture,
knowing its value when properly prepared.

After collecting a supply of rice and cotton, they took their way to
Prospect Hill; "and," said Fritz, as he afterward vividly described the
dreadful scene there enacted, "when we entered the pine wood, we found
it in possession of troops of monkeys, who resolved to make our passage
through it as disagreeable as possible, for they howled and chattered at
us like demons, pelting us as hard as they could with pine cones.

"They became so unbearable, that at last we fired a few shot right and
left among them; several bit the dust, the rest fled, and we continued
our way in peace to Prospect Hill, but only to discover the havoc the
wretches had made there.

"Would you believe it, father? The pleasant cottage had been overrun
and ruined by apes just as Woodland last summer! The most dreadful dirt
and disorder met our eyes wherever we turned, and we had hard work to
make the place fit for human habitation; and even then we preferred the
tent. I felt quite at loss how to guard the farm for the future; but
seeing a bottle of the poisonous gum of the euphorbia in the tool chest,
I devised a plan for the destruction of the apes which succeeded beyond
my expectations.

"I mixed poison with milk, bruised millet, and anything I thought the
monkeys would eat, and put it in cocoanut shells, which I hung about in
the trees, high enough to be out of reach of our own animals. The
evening was calm and lovely; the sea murmured in the distance, and the
rising moon shed a beauty over the landscape which we seemed never
before to have so admired and enjoyed. The summer night closed around us
in all its solemn stillness, and our deepest feelings were touched; when
suddenly the spell was broken by an outburst of the most hideous and
discordant noises. As by one consent, every beast of the forest seemed
to arise from its den, and utter its wild nocturnal cry. Snorting,
snarling, and shrieking filled the wood beneath us.

"From the hills echoed the mournful howl of the jackals, answered by
Fangs in the yard, who was backed up by the barking and yelping of his
friends Floss and Bruno. Far away beyond the rocky fastnesses of the
Gap, sounded unearthly, hollow snortings and neighings, reminding one of
the strange cry of the hippopotamus; above these, occasional deep
majestic roaring made our hearts quail with the conviction that we heard
the voices of lions and elephants.

"Overawed and silent, we retired to rest, hoping to forget in sleep the
terrors of the midnight forest, but ere long the most fearful cries in
the adjoining woods gave notice that the apes were beginning to suffer
from the poisoned repast prepared for them.

"As our dogs could not remain silent amid the uproar and din, we had not
a wink of sleep until the morning. It was late, therefore, when we rose,
and looked on the awful spectacle presented by the multitude of dead
monkeys and baboons thickly strewn under the trees round the farm. I
shall not tell you how many there were. I can only say, I wished I had
not found the poison, and we made all haste to clear away the dead
bodies, and the dangerous food, burying some deep in the earth, and,
carrying the rest to the shore, we pitched them over the rocks into the
sea. That day we traveled on to the Gap."

The same evening that the boys reached the rocky pass, a messenger
pigeon arrived at Rockburg, bearing a note which concluded in the
following words:

"The barricade at the Gap broken down. Everything laid waste as far as
the sugar-brake, where the hut is knocked to pieces, and the fields
trampled over by huge footmarks. Come to us, father--we are safe, but
feel we are no match for this unknown danger."

I lost not an instant, but saddled Swift, late as it was, in order to
ride to the assistance of our boys, desiring Ernest to prepare the small
cart, and follow me with his mother at daybreak, bringing everything we
should require for camping out for some days.

The bright moonlight favored my journey, and my arrival at the Gap
surprised and delighted the boys, who did not expect me till the next
day. Early on the following morning I inspected the footprints and
ravages of the great unknown. The cane brake had, without doubt, been
visited by an elephant. That great animal alone could have left such
traces and committed such fearful ravages. Thick posts in the barricade
were snapped across like reeds; the trees in the vicinity, where we
planned to build a cool summer-house, were stripped of leaves and
branches to a great height, but the worst mischief was done among the
young sugar-cane plants, which were all either devoured or trampled down
and destroyed.

It seemed to me that not one elephant, but a troop must have invaded our
grounds. The tracks were very numerous, and the footprints of various
sizes; but, to my satisfaction, I saw that they could be traced not only
from the Gap, but back to it in evidently equal numbers.

We did not, therefore, suppose that the mighty animals remained hidden
in the woods of our territory; but concluded that, after this
freebooting incursion, they had withdrawn to their native wilds, where,
by greatly increasing the strength of our ramparts, we hoped henceforth
to oblige them to remain.

In what manner to effect this we laid many plans, during the night of
my arrival, when, sitting by an enormous watch-fire, I chatted with my
boys, and heard details of their numerous adventures, so interesting for
them to relate, and for me to hear, that every one was more disposed to
act sentinel than retire to sleep.

The mother and Ernest arrived next day, and she rejoiced to find all
well, making light of trodden fields and trampled sugar-canes, since her
sons were sound in life and limb.

A systematic scheme of defense was now elaborated, and the erection of
the barricade occupied us for at least a month, as it was to be a firm
and durable building, proof against all invasion. As our little tent was
unsuited to a long residence of this sort, I adopted Fritz's idea of a
Kamschatchan dwelling, and, to his great delight, forthwith carried it
out.

Instead of planting four posts, on which to place a platform, we chose
four trees of equal size, which, in a very suitable place, grew exactly
in a square, twelve or fourteen feet apart. Between these, at about
twenty feet from the ground, we laid a flooring of beams and bamboo,
smoothly and strongly planked. From this rose, on all four sides, walls
of cane; the frame of the roof was covered so effectually by large
pieces of bark that no rain could penetrate.

The staircase to this tree-cottage was simply a board plank with bars
nailed across it for steps. The flooring projected like a balcony in
front of the entrance door, and underneath, on the ground, we fitted up
sheds for cattle and fowls.

Various ornaments in Chinese or Japanese style were added to the roof
and eaves, and a most convenient, cool, and picturesque cottage,
overhung and adorned by the graceful foliage of the trees, was the
result of our ingenuity.

I was pleased to find that the various birds taken by the boys during
this excursion seemed likely to thrive; they were the first inmates of
the new sheds, and even the black swans and cranes soon became tame and
sociable.

Constantly roaming through the woods, the children often made new
discoveries.

Fritz brought one day, after an excursion to the opposite side of the
stream beyond the Gap, a cluster of bananas, and also of cacao beans,
from which chocolate is made.

The banana, although valuable and nourishing food for the natives of the
tropical countries where it grows, is not generally liked by Europeans,
and probably this variety was even inferior to many others, for we found
the fruit much like rotten pears, and almost uneatable.

The cacao seeds tasted exceedingly bitter, and it seemed wonderful that
by preparation they should produce anything so delicious as chocolate.

My wife, who now fancied no manufacture beyond my skill, begged for
plants, seeds, or cuttings to propagate in her nursery garden, already
fancying herself in the enjoyment of chocolate for breakfast, and I
promised to make a cacao plantation near home.

"Let me have bananas also," said she, "for we may acquire a taste for
that celebrated fruit, and, at all events, I am sure I can make it into
an excellent preserve."

The day before our return to Rockburg, Fritz went again to the inland
region beyond the river to obtain a large supply of young banana plants,
and the cacao fruit. He took the cajack, and a bundle of reeds to float
behind him as a raft to carry the fruit, plants, and anything else he
might wish to bring back.

On the evening he made his appearance, coming swiftly down stream. His
brothers rushed to meet him, each eager to see and help to land his
cargo.

Ernest and Fritz were quickly running up the bank, with arms full of
plants, branches, and fruits, when Fritz handed to Jack a dripping wet
bag which he had brought along partly under water. A curious pattering
noise proceeded from this bag, but they kept the contents a secret for
the present, Jack running with it behind a bush before peeping in, and I
could just hear him exclaim:

"Hullo! I say, what monsters they are. It's enough to make a fellow's
flesh creep to look at them!"

With that he hastily shut up the bag, and put it away safely out of
sight in water.

Securing the cajack, Fritz sprang toward us, his handsome face radiant
with pleasure, as he exhibited a beautiful waterfowl.

Its plumage was rich purple, changing on the back to dark green; the
legs, feet, and a mark above the bill, bright red. This lovely bird I
concluded to be the sultan cock described by Buffon, and as it was
gentle, we gladly received it among our domestic pets.

Fritz gave a stirring account of his exploring trip, having made his way
far up the river, between fertile plains and majestic forests of lofty
trees, where the cries of vast numbers of birds, parrots, peacocks,
guinea fowls, and hundreds unknown to him, quite bewildered, and made
him feel giddy.

"It was in the Buffalo Swamp," continued he, "that I saw the splendid
birds you call sultan cocks, and I set my heart on catching one alive,
which, as they seemed to have little fear of my approach, I managed by
means of a wire snare. Farther on I saw a grove of mimosa trees, among
which huge dark masses were moving in a deliberate way. Guess what they
were!"

"Savages?" asked Franz timidly.

"Black bears, I bet!" cried Jack.

"Your words suggest to my mind the manner and appearance of elephants,"
said Ernest.

"Right you are, Professor!" exclaimed Fritz gaily, the words producing
quite a sensation on the whole attentive family. "From fifteen to twenty
elephants were feeding peacefully on the leafy boughs, tearing down
branches with their trunks and shoving them into their mouths with one
jerk, or bathing in the deep waters of the marsh for refreshment in the
great heat. You cannot imagine the wild grandeur of the scene! The
river being very broad, I felt safe from wild animals, and more than
once saw splendid jaguars crouched on the banks, their glossy skin
glancing in the sunlight.

"While considering if it would be simply foolhardy to try a shot at one
of these creatures, I was suddenly convinced that discretion is the
better part of valor, and urging my canoe into the center current, made
a rapid retreat down the river. For just before me, in the calm deep
water of a sheltered bay where I was quietly floating, there arose a
violent boiling, bubbling commotion, and for an instant I thought a hot
spring was going to burst forth--instead of that, uprose the hideous
head and gaping jaws of a hippopotamus, who, with a hoarse, terrific
snort, seemed about to attack me. I can tell you I did not wait to see
the rest of him! a glimpse of his enormous mouth and its array of white
gleaming tusks was quite enough. 'Right about face!' said I to myself,
and shot down the stream like an arrow, never pausing till a bend in the
river brought me within sight of the Gap, where I once more felt safe,
and joyfully made my way back to you all."

This narrative was of thrilling interest to us, proving the existence of
tribes of the most formidable animals beyond the rocky barrier which
defended, in so providential a manner, the small and fertile territory
on which our lot was cast.

During the absence of the adventurer we had been busily engaged in
making preparations for our departure--and everything was packed up and
ready by the morning after his return.

After some hesitation I yielded to his great wish, which was to return
by sea in his cajack round Cape Disappointment, and so meet us at
Rockburg.

He was much interested in examining the outlines of the coast and the
rugged precipices of the Cape. These were tenanted by vast flocks of sea
fowl and birds of prey; while many varieties of shrubs and plants,
hitherto unknown to us, grew in the clefts and crevices of the rocks,
some of them diffusing a strong aromatic odor. Among the specimens he
brought I recognized the caper plant, and, with still greater pleasure,
a shrub which was, I felt sure, the tea-plant of China--it bore very
pretty white flowers, and the leaves resembled myrtle.

Our land journey was effected without accident or adventure of any kind.

Jack, mounted as usual on Hurry, the ostrich, carried the mysterious wet
bag very carefully slung at his side, and when near home started off at
a prodigious rate in advance of us.

He let fall the drawbridge, and we saw no more of him until, on reaching
Rockburg, he appeared leisurely returning from the swamp, where
apparently he had gone to deposit his "moist secret," as Franz called
it.

We were all glad to take up our quarters once more in our large and
convenient dwelling, and my first business was to provide for the great
number of birds we now had on our hands, by establishing them in
suitable localities, it being impossible to maintain them all in the
poultry yard. Some were, therefore, taken to the islands; and the black
swans, the heron, the graceful demoiselle cranes, and our latest
acquisition, the splendid sultan cock, soon became perfectly at home in
the swamp, greatly adding to the interest of the neighborhood of Safety
Bay.

The old bustards were the tamest of all our feathered pets, and never
more so than at meal times. They were unfailing in their attendance when
we dined or supped in the open air.

Toward evening, as we sat in the veranda listening to Fritz's account of
his trip round the Cape, an extraordinary hollow, roaring noise sounded
from the swamp not unlike the angry bellowing of a bull.

The dogs barked, and the family rose in excitement; but I remarked a
look of quiet humor in Fritz's eye, as he stood leaning against one of
the veranda pillars, watching Jack, who, in some confusion, started off
toward the marsh.

"Come back, you silly boy!" cried his mother; "the child has not so much
as a pistol, and is rushing off alone to face he knows not what!"

"Perhaps," said I, looking at Fritz, "this is not a case requiring the
use of firearms. It may be only the booming of a bittern which we hear."

"You need not be uneasy, mother," said Fritz; "Jack knows what he is
about; only this charming serenade took him by surprise, and I fancy he
will have to exhibit his treasures before they reach perfection. Yes,
here he comes!"

Lugging his "moist secret" along with him, Jack, flushed and breathless,
came up to us, exclaiming:

"They were to grow as big as rabbits before you saw them! Such a shame!
I never thought they would kick up a row like that. Now for it!"--and he
turned out the bag. "This is 'Grace,' and this is 'Beauty.'"

Two immense frogs rolled clumsily on the ground, and recovering their
feet, sat squat before us, swelling and puffing with a ludicrous air of
insulted dignity, while peals of laughter greeted them on all sides.

"Ladies and Gentleman, these are two very handsome young specimens of
the famous African bullfrog," said Jack, pretending to be offended at
the mingled disgust and amusement occasioned by their appearance; "they
are but half-grown, and I hoped to maintain them in seclusion until they
reached full size, when I would have introduced them with proper
_éclat_. But since their talent for music has brought them precociously
into public notice, I must beg for your kind and indulgent patronage,
and--leave to take them back to the swamp!"

Great clapping of hands followed Jack's speech.

"Grace" and "Beauty" were examined, and commented on with much interest,
and voted decidedly handsome "in their way."

Their general color was greenish brown, mottled and spotted with
reddish brown and yellow; the sides green and black; the under part
yellow, mottled with orange. The eyes were positively beautiful, of a
rich chestnut hue, covered with golden white dots, which shone with a
metallic luster. The skin of the body was puckered into longitudinal
folds.

By general consent they were remanded to the swamp.

Shortly after our return to Rockburg, my wife drew my attention to the
somewhat neglected state of our dear old summer residence at
Falconhurst, begging me to devote some time to its restoration and
embellishment.

This I most willingly undertook, and we removed thither, as soon as the
boys had completed the arrangement of the artificial salt-lick to their
satisfaction.

At Falconhurst things were quickly in good order, and we made a great
improvement by completing the broad terrace supported on the arching
roots of the trees--it was better floored--and rustic pillars and
trellis-work sustained a bark roof which afforded a pleasant shade.

After this was done, I was compelled to consent to a plan long cherished
by Fritz, who wished to construct a watch-tower and mount a gun on Shark
Island. After great exertion, both mental and bodily, this piece of
military engineering was completed; and a flagstaff erected, on which
the guard at this outpost could run up a white flag to signal the
approach of anything harmless from the sea, while a red flag would be
shown on the least appearance of danger.

To celebrate the completion of this great work, which occupied us during
two months, we hoisted the white flag, and fired a salute of six guns.




CHAPTER XVI.

 Ten years afterward--Our farms and farmyards--Fritz makes a voyage of
     discovery--Cape Minster and the swallows' nests--Pearl oysters--A
     magnificent bay--The strange message--An excursion to Pearl
     Bay--Fritz proposes to search for the stranger, and prepares his
     canoe for her reception--The pearl fishery--An encounter with a
     wild boar--Jack's accident--Truffles--A midnight alarm--The lion
     and his mate--Our enemies overcome--Juno's death--We set sail for
     Rockburg--Fritz leaves us.


"We spend our years as a tale that is told," said King David.

These words recurred to me again and again as I reviewed ten years, of
which the story lay chronicled in the pages of my journal.

Year followed year; chapter succeeded chapter; steadily, imperceptibly,
time was passing away.

The shade of sadness cast on my mind by retrospect of this kind was
dispelled by thoughts full of gratitude to God, for the welfare and
happiness of my beloved family during so long a period. I had cause
especially to rejoice in seeing our sons advance to manhood,
strengthened by early training for lives of usefulness and activity
wherever their lot might fall.

And my great wish is, that young people who read this record of our
lives and adventures should learn from it how admirably suited is the
peaceful, industrious, and pious life of a cheerful, united family, to
the formation of strong, pure, and manly character.

None take a better place in the great national family, none are happier
or more beloved than those who go forth from such homes to fulfill new
duties, and to gather fresh interests around them.

Having given a detailed account of several years' residence in New
Switzerland, as we liked to call our dominion, it is needless for me to
continue what would exhaust the patience of the most long-suffering, by
repeating monotonous narratives of exploring parties and hunting
expeditions, wearisome descriptions of awkward inventions and clumsy
machines, with an endless record of discoveries, more fit for the pages
of an encyclopedia than a book of family history.

Yet before winding up with the concluding events, I may mention some
interesting facts illustrative of our exact position at the time these
took place.

Rockburg and Falconhurst continued to be our winter and summer
headquarters, and improvements were added which made them more and more
convenient, as well as attractive in appearance.

The fountains, trellised verandas, and plantations round Rockburg,
completely changed the character of the residence which, on account of
the heat and want of vegetation, had in former days been so distasteful
to my wife. Flowering creepers overhung the balconies and pillars; while
shrubs and trees, both native and European, grew luxuriantly in groves
of our planting.

In the distance, Shark Island, now clothed with graceful palms, guarded
the entrance to Safety Bay, the battery and flagstaff prominently
visible on its crested rock.

The swamp, cleared and drained, was now a considerable lake, with just
marsh and reeds enough beyond it to form good cover for the waterfowl
whose favorite retreat it was.

On its blue waters sailed stately black swans, snow-white geese, and
richly colored ducks; while out and in among the water plants and rushes
would appear at intervals glimpses of the brilliant sultan, marsh-fowl,
crimson flamingos, soft, blue-gray, demoiselle cranes, and crested
heron, all associating in harmony, and with no fear of us, their
masters.

The giant frogs, Grace and Beauty, delighted Jack by actually attaining
in time to the size of small rabbits; and, perfectly knowing their very
appropriate names, would waddle out of the marsh at his call, to eat a
grasshopper or dainty fly.

Beneath the spreading trees, and through the aromatic shrubberies, old
Hurry, the ostrich, was usually to be seen marching about, with grave
and dignified pace, as though monarch of all he surveyed. Every variety
of beautiful pigeon nested in the rocks and dovecots, their soft cooing
and glossy plumage making them favorite household pets.

By the bridge alone could Rockburg be approached; for higher up the
river, where, near the cascade, it was fordable a dense and impenetrable
thicket of orange and lemon trees, Indian figs, prickly pears, and all
manner of thorn-bearing shrubs, planted by us, now formed a complete
barrier.

The rabbit warren on Shark Island kept us well supplied with food, as
well as soft and useful fur; and, as the antelopes did not thrive on
Whale Isle, they also were placed among the shady groves with the
rabbits, and their own island devoted to such work as candle-making,
tanning, wool-cleaning, and any other needful but offensive operations.

The farm at Woodlands flourished, and our flocks and herds supplied us
with mutton, beef, and veal, while my wife's dairy was almost more than
she could manage.

My boys retained their old love for giving names to the animals. They
had a beautiful creamy-white cow called Blanche, and a bull with such a
tremendous voice, that he received the name of Stentor. Two fleet young
onagers were named Arrow and Dart; and Jack had a descendant of his old
favorite Fangs, the jackal, which he chose to call Coco, asserting that
no word could be distinguished at a distance without the letter "o" in
it, giving illustrations of his theory, till our ears were almost
deafened.

Excellent health had been enjoyed by us all during these ten years,
though my wife occasionally suffered from slight attacks of fever, and
the boys sometimes met with little accidents.

They were all fine, handsome fellows; Fritz, now twenty-four, was of
moderate height, uncommonly strong, active, muscular, and high-spirited.

Ernest, two years younger, was tall and slight; in disposition, mild,
calm, and studious; his early faults of indolence and selfishness were
almost entirely overcome. He possessed refined tastes and great
intellectual power.

Jack, at twenty, strongly resembled Fritz, being about his height,
though more lightly built, and remarkable rather for active grace and
agility than for muscular strength.

Franz, a lively youth of seventeen, had some of the qualities of each of
his brothers; he possessed wit and shrewdness, but not the arch drollery
of Jack.

All were honorable, God-fearing young men, dutiful and affectionate to
their mother and myself, and warmly attached to each other.

Although so many years had elapsed in total seclusion, it continued to
be my strong impression that we should one day be restored to the
society of our fellow-men.

But time, which was bringing our sons to manhood, was also carrying
their parents onward to old age; and anxious, gloomy thoughts relating
to their future, should they be left indeed alone, sometimes oppressed
my heart.

On such occasions, I would not communicate the sense of depression to my
family, but, turning in prayer to the Almighty Father, laid my trouble
before Him, with never-failing renewal of strength and hope.

My elder sons often made expeditions of which we knew nothing until
their return after many hours; when any uneasiness I might have felt was
dissipated by their joyous appearance, and reproof always died away on
my lips.

Fritz had been absent one whole day from Rockburg, and not until
evening did we remark that his cajack was gone, and that he must be out
at sea.

Anxious to see him return before nightfall, I went off to Shark Island
with Ernest and Jack, in order to look out for him from the watch tower
there, at the same time hoisting our signal flag, and loading the gun.

Long we gazed across the expanse of ocean glittering in the level beams
of the setting sun, and finally discerned a small black speck in the
distance which, by the telescope, was proved to be the returning
wanderer.

I remarked that his skiff sailed at a slower rate than usual toward the
shore. The cannon was fired to let him know that his approach was
observed, and then we joyfully hurried back to receive him at the
harbor.

It was easy to see, as he drew near, what had delayed his progress. The
cajack towed a large sack, besides being heavily laden.

"Welcome, Fritz!" I cried. "Welcome back, wherever you come from, and
whatever you bring. You seem to have quite a cargo there!"

"Yes, and my trip has led to discoveries as well as booty," answered he;
"interesting discoveries which will tempt us again in the same
direction. Come, boys, let's carry up the things, and while I rest I
will relate my adventures."

As soon as possible all assembled round him.

"I think my absence without leave deserves reproach instead of this warm
reception, father, and I must apologize for it," he began. "But ever
since I possessed the cajack it has been my ambition to make a voyage of
discovery along the coast, which we have never explored beyond the point
at which I killed the walrus.

"In order to be ready to start without delay when a convenient
opportunity offered, I made preparations beforehand, such as
provisioning my skiff, fixing the compass in front of my seat, arranging
conveniently rifle, harpoon, ax, boat-hook, and fishing net. I also
resolved to take with me Pounce, my eagle, and this I always will do in
future.

"This morning dawned magnificently; the calm sea, the gentle breeze, all
drew me irresistibly to the fulfillment of my purpose.

"I left the harbor unperceived, the current quickly bore me out to sea,
and I rounded the point to the left, passing just over the spot where,
beneath the waves, lie the guns, cannon balls, ironwork, and all that
was indestructible about our good old wreck. And would you believe it?
Through the glassy clear water, undisturbed by a ripple, I actually saw
many such things strewn on the flat rocky bottom.

"Pursuing my way, I passed among rugged cliffs and rocks which jutted
out from the shore, or rose in rugged masses from the water. Myriads of
sea fowl inhabited the most inaccessible of these, while on the lower
ridges, seals, sea bears, and walruses were to be seen, some basking
lazily in the sun, some plunging into the water, or emerging awkwardly
from it, hoisting their unwieldy bodies up the rocks by means of their
tusks.

"I must confess to feeling anything but comfortable while going through
the places held in possession by these monsters of the deep, and used
every effort to pass quickly and unnoticed. Yet it was more than an hour
and a half before I got clear of the rocks, cliffs, and shoals to which
they resorted, and neared a high and precipitous cape, running far out
to sea. Right opposite me, in the side of this rocky wall, was a
magnificent archway, forming, as it first appeared to me, a lofty
entrance to an immense vaulted cavern. I passed beneath this noble
portal and examined the interior. It was tenanted by numbers of a small
species of swallow, scarcely larger than a wren, and the walls were
covered by thousands of their nests. They were rudely built, and their
peculiarity was that each rested on a kind of platform, something like a
spoon without the handle. I detached a number, and found that they had a
curious appearance, seemingly made of something fibrous and gelatinous,
and more like a set of sponges, corals, or fungi, than nests of birds. I
have brought them home in my fishing net."

"If we had commercial dealings with the Chinese," said I, "your
discovery would be of value; these are doubtless edible birds' nests.
The bird is called the esculent swallow, and the trade in this strange
article of diet is a very large one. The nests are of different value,
but those which are quite new, and nearly white, are held in such esteem
that they are worth their weight in silver.

"There are tremendous caverns in Java and other places where, at great
risk, these nests are procured; the annual weight obtained being upward
of fifty thousand pounds, and the value more than £200,000.

"When placed in water and well soaked, they soften and swell, and are
made into soup of very strengthening and restorative quality.

"I think you might try your hand on these, mother, just for curiosity's
sake."

"I can't say I fancy the look of the queer things," said she, "but I
don't mind trying if they will turn to jelly; though boiling birds'
nests is cookery quite out of my line."

"Oh, do, mother; let us taste birds' nests as soon as you can, though
the idea makes me fancy a mouth full of feathers!" laughed Jack.

"It is really a most curious formation," said Fritz. "From whence are
the swallows supposed to get this kind of gelatine?"

"It has never been exactly ascertained," I replied, "whether the birds
discover or produce this curious substance. But whatever may be its
basis, it is clear that a very large portion of it is furnished by
certain glands, which pour out a viscid secretion."

"After laying in my store of nests," continued Fritz, "I pursued my way
through this vaulted cave or corridor; which, presently turning, opened
into a very lonely bay, so calm and lake-like, that, although of
considerable size, I concluded at once it must be nearly land locked.
Its shores, beyond the rocky boundary through which I penetrated,
extended in a fertile plain toward what seemed the mouth of a river,
beyond which lay rough, and probably marshy, ground, and a dense forest
of cedars, which closed the view.

"The water beneath me was clear as crystal; and, gazing into its depths
and shallows, I perceived beds of shell-fish, like large oysters,
attached to the rocks and to each other by tufts of hairy filaments.

"'If these are oysters,' thought I, 'they must be better worth eating,
as far as size goes, than our little friends in Safety Bay,' and
thereupon I hooked up several clusters with my boat-hook, and landing
soon after on the beach, I flung them on the sand, resolving to fetch
another load, and then tow them after me in the fishing-net.

"The hot sun disagreed with their constitution, I suppose; for when I
came back the shells were all gaping wide open; so I began to examine
them, thinking that after all they were probably much less delicate than
the small oysters we have learnt to like so much.

"Somehow, when a thing is to be 'examined,' one generally needs a knife.
The blade met with resistance here and there in the creature's body; and
still closer 'examination' produced from it several pearly balls like
peas, of different sizes. Do you think they can be pearls? I have a
number here in a box."

"Oh, show them to us, Fritz!" cried the boys. "What pretty shining
things! and how delicately rounded, and how softly they gleam!"

"You have discovered treasure, indeed!" I exclaimed; "why these are most
beautiful pearls! Valueless, certainly, under present circumstances; but
they may prove a source of wealth, should we ever again come into
contact with the civilized world. We must visit your pearl-oyster beds
at the earliest opportunity."

"After resting for some time, and refreshing myself with food," pursued
Fritz, "I resumed my survey of the coast, my progress somewhat impeded
by the bag of shell-fish, which I drew after me; but I proceeded without
accident past the mouth of the stream to the further side of the bay,
which was there inclosed by a point corresponding to that through which
I had entered; and between these headlands I found a line of reefs and
sandbanks, with but a single channel leading out to the open sea; from
which, therefore, Pearl Bay, as I named it, lies completely sheltered.

"The tide was setting strongly in shore, so that I could not then
attempt a passage through it, but examined the crags of the headland,
thinking I might perchance discover a second vaulted archway. I saw
nothing remarkable, however, but thousands of sea fowl of every sort and
kind, from the gull and sea swallow to the mighty albatross.

"My approach was evidently regarded as an invasion and trespass; for
they regularly beset me, screaming and wheeling over my head, till, out
of all patience, I stood up, and hit furiously about me with the
boat-hook; when, rather to my surprise, one blow struck an albatross
with such force, that he fell stunned into the water.

"I now once more attempted to cross the reef by the narrow channel, and
happily succeeding, found myself in the open sea, and speeding homeward,
joyfully saw our flag flying, and heard the welcome salute you fired."

Here ended the narrative; but next morning Fritz drew me aside, and
confided to me a most remarkable sequel, in these words:

"There was something very extraordinary about that albatross, father. I
allowed you to suppose that I left it as it fell, but in reality I
raised it to the deck of the canoe, and then perceived a piece of rag
wound round one of its legs. This I removed, and, to my utter
astonishment, saw English words written on it, which I plainly made out
to be: 'Save an unfortunate Englishwoman from the smoking rock!'

"This little sentence sent a thrill through every nerve: my brain seemed
to whirl. I doubted the evidence of my senses.

"'Is this reality, or delusion?' thought I. 'Can it be true, that a
fellow-creature breathes with us the air of this lonely region?'

"I felt stupefied for some minutes: the bird began to show signs of
life, which recalled me to myself; and, quickly deciding what must be
done, I tore a strip from my handkerchief, on which I traced the
words--'Do not despair! Help is near!'

"This I carefully bound round one leg, replacing the rag on the other,
and then applied myself to the complete restoration of the bird. It
gradually revived; and after drinking a little, surprised me by suddenly
rising on the wing, faltering a moment in its flight, and then rapidly
disappearing from my view in a westerly direction.

"Now, father, one thought occupies me continually: will my note ever
reach this Englishwoman? Shall I be able to find, and to save her?"

I listened to this account with feelings of the liveliest interest and
astonishment.

"My dear son," said I, "you have done wisely in confiding to me alone
your most exciting discovery. Unless we know more, we must not unsettle
the others by speaking of it; for it appears to me quite possible that
these words were penned long ago on some distant shore, where, by this
time, the unhappy stranger may have perished miserably. By the 'smoking
rock' must be meant a volcano. There are none here."

Fritz was not disposed to look at the case from this gloomy point of
view; did not think the rag so very old; believed smoke might rise from
a rock which was not volcanic; and evidently cherished the hope that he
might be able to respond effectually to this touching appeal.

I was in reality as anxious as himself on the subject, but judged it
prudent to abate rather than excite hopes of success which might be
doomed to bitter disappointment.

After earnest consultation on the subject, we decided that Fritz should
go in search of the writer of the message, but not until he had so
altered the canoe as to fit it for carrying two persons, as well as
provisions sufficient to admit of his absence for a considerable time.
Impatient as he was, he could not but see the wisdom of this delay.

We returned to the house, and saw the boys busily opening the oysters,
which they had had no time to do the previous night, and greatly excited
as ever and anon a pearl was found.

"May we not establish a pearl fishery at once, father?" shouted they.
"We might build a hut on the shore of the bay, and set about it
regularly."

An excursion to Pearl Bay was now the event to which all thoughts
turned, and for which preparations on a grand scale were made. It was to
form, as it were the basis of the more important voyage Fritz had in
view, and to which, unsuspected by the rest, he could devote all his
attention.

I took an opportunity, one day, when all were present, to remark in a
serious tone:

"I have been considering, dear wife, that our eldest son is now of an
age to be dependent on himself. I shall, therefore, henceforth leave him
at liberty to act in all respects according to his own judgment; and,
especially in the matter of voyages or excursions, he must not be
hampered by the fear of alarming us should he choose to remain absent
longer than we expect. I have such entire confidence in his prudence,
and at the same time in his affection for us, that I am certain he will
never needlessly cause us anxiety."

Fritz looked gratefully toward me as I spoke; and his mother ratified my
words, embracing him affectionately, and saying, with emotion, "God
bless and preserve thee, my boy!"

It took some time to make several raking or scraping machines, which I
invented for the purpose of detaching and lifting the oysters from their
native rocks; but that gave Fritz leisure to change the fittings of his
canoe, so as to have a spare seat in it.

His brothers naturally concluded he meant to take one of them as
shipmate on board, and he allowed the mistake to continue. They occupied
themselves in making various articles they expected to be of use, and
bore the delay with tolerable patience.

At last came the day, when, taking leave of the mother and Franz, we
went on board the yacht, accompanied by some of the dogs; while Jack,
proudly occupying the new seat beside Fritz in the canoe, shared with
him the honor of leading the way in the character of pilots.

We passed safely through the rocks and shoals near Walrus Island into an
expanse of calm water, sheltered by jutting cliffs, where the sea
glanced like a mirror, and for the first time we observed the fairy-like
shells of the paper-nautilus sailing lightly over the dazzling surface.

It was impossible to see these lovely seafarers without wishing to
obtain specimens; and the canoe accordingly gave chase, presently
securing half a dozen, which were handed to us in the yacht to be
carefully preserved for the museum, and the place was ever after called
Nautilus Creek.

Further on we rounded a short promontory, flat, with an abrupt rock at
the extremity, to which we gave the name of Cape Pug-Nose; and then, at
some distance, appeared the grand cliffs of a headland running far out
to sea.

This I suppose we should have to weather, but my pilots made no change
in our course, and, following the canoe, we soon came in sight of the
majestic archway which offered us a short passage to Pearl Bay.

The wonderfully architectural appearance of the pillars, arches, and
pinnacles, surrounding and surmounting this noble entrance, struck me
with admiration, resembling parts of a fine gothic cathedral, and
inducing me to propose for it the name, Cape Minster.

A perfect cloud of little swallows darted from the cavernous entrance on
our approach, divided into flocks, soared, wheeled, flew right and left,
and finally returned in a body as swiftly as they came, to the sides of
the long dark tunnel, which were festooned with their nests.

We detached a number of these as we passed, taking care to leave those
containing eggs of young. The best were at a considerable height, but
the broken shelving rocks afforded, in some places, footing for such
daring and active climbers as Fritz and Jack, and they quickly obtained
as many as we could possibly require.

Our progress was much assisted by the tide, which, like a current, bore
us onward along the nave of this natural cathedral; aisles, transepts,
screens, and side-chapels appearing between the columns and arches which
in the "dim religious light" were revealed to our wondering eyes.

On emerging into the dazzling sunshine, we found ourselves floating in
the calm expanse of Pearl Bay; but it was some minutes before we could
look around on the bright and lovely scene.

Fritz had not over-rated its beauty, and the romantic islets which
studded its waters seemed to give the effect of a pleasant smile to
features already perfect.

We cruised about for some time, surveying the coast with its fertile
meadows, shady groves, gently swelling hills, and murmuring brooks,
seeking a convenient landing place in the vicinity of the shallows where
lay the oyster-beds.

This we found, close to a sparkling streamlet; and, as the day was fast
declining, we made speedy arrangements for burning a watch-fire; after
which we partook of a hasty supper, and leaving the dogs, with Coco, the
jackal, to sleep on shore, we returned on board the yacht for the night,
anchoring within gunshot of the land.

The coast being quite strange to us, I knew not what wild beasts might
frequent it; but, though I did not fear that any would approach us by
swimming, yet I was glad to have with us our lively little ape, Mercury
(the successor of our old favorite, Knips, long since gathered to his
fathers), for he occupied at night a cosy berth on deck, and was certain
to give vociferous notice should anything alarming occur.

Fritz moored the cajack alongside, and came on board. The night passed
in peace, although for a time we were disturbed by the yelping of
jackals, with whom Coco persisted in keeping up a noisy conversation.

We awoke it daybreak, and after breakfast _à la fourchette_, we repaired
in haste with nets, scrapers, and all other requisites, to the
oyster-beds, where we worked with such diligence and success that in the
course of two days we had an immense pile of shells built up like a
stack on the beach, and left to decay.

I collected a quantity of seaweed to spread over them, which was
afterward burnt to make alkali, when we returned to secure our harvest
of pearls.

Every evening we went out shooting in the neighborhood, and kept
ourselves supplied with game of one sort or another. The last day of our
fishery we started earlier, intending to make a longer excursion into
the woods.

Ernest set off first with Floss; Jack and Coco strolling after them.
Fritz and I were still employed in taking on board the last load of our
tools, when we suddenly heard a shot, a loud cry of pain or fear, and
then another shot.

At the first alarm, the other two dogs rushed away from us toward the
spot, and Fritz, who had just called Pounce from his perch, to accompany
us in the ramble, let him fly, and seizing his rifle darted off in the
same direction.

Before I could reach the scene of action, more shots were heard, and
then a shout of victory; after which appeared through the stems of the
trees the disconsolate figure of Jack, hobbling along like a cripple,
supported on each side by his brothers.

When they came near me they stopped; and poor Jack moaning and groaning,
began to feel himself all over, as if to search for broken bones, crying
out:

"I'm pounded like a half-crushed pepper-corn!"

On examination I found some severe bruises.

"Who or what has been pommeling the boy?" I exclaimed; "one would think
he had been beaten."

"It was a huge wild boar," said Ernest, "with fierce eyes, monstrous
tusks, and a snout as broad as my hand."

We took Jack down to the yacht, bathed his bruises, gave him a cooling
drink, and he soon fell fast asleep in his berth, where I left him and
returned to the shore.

"Now, Ernest," said I, "enlighten me on the subject of this adventure!
What you and the boar did, is quite a mystery to me."

"Floss and I were going quietly along," replied he, "when suddenly there
was a rustling and snorting close by, and a great boar broke through the
brushes, making for the outskirts of the wood. Floss gave chase
directly, and the boar turned to bay. Then up came Jack with Coco, and
the gallant little jackal attacked the monster in the rear. In another
moment, however, he was sent sprawling upon his back, and this so
provoked his master that he fired a hasty ill-directed shot. The brute's
notice and fury at once turned upon Jack, who prudently took to his
heels, when I attempted to check the career of the boar by a shot,
which, however, only slightly wounded it. Jack stumbled and fell over
the root of a tree, just as the animal came up with him. 'Help! murder,'
shouted he; and if the other dogs had not then arrived, and all together
tackled the boar, I fear it would have been a case of murder indeed! as
it was, the poor fellow got mauled and trampled upon dreadfully.

"As I was waiting for an opportunity to fire without any risk of hitting
Jack, Pounce rushed through the air and darted upon the beast, and
Fritz came up quickly and shot it dead with a pistol.

"While we were helping Jack along, and passing a place where the boar
had been grubbing, I noticed some such curious knotty roots or
tubercles, that I brought away specimens. Are they worth anything, do
you think? they have a strong smell."

"If I may trust my nose," said I, "you have brought something by no
means to be despised. Yes!" I continued, putting them to my lips, "these
are very fine truffles! Taste them, Fritz."

"Indeed, they are excellent," said he; "very different from the tough,
leathery things I remember in Europe; these are tender and well
flavored."

"Because they are fresh," said I. "You have before tasted those only
which have been brought from a distance. They are found in different
parts of Europe, buried at a depth of ten or twelve inches in the soil
of oak or beech woods. A small dog is employed to hunt for them, who
perceives their musky odor in a singularly acute way, and at once
scratches at the spot where they lie."

"Have the truffles no leaves or stalks," inquired Fritz, "by which they
might be found without the help of the dog?"

"They have nothing of the sort," I replied; "they are discovered simply
by scent, and are considered to belong to the tribe of Fungi."

By this time it was late; we took supper, made up the watch-fire, and
withdrew to our yacht, where we slept peacefully.

Early next morning we proceeded to visit the field of battle. The wild
boar, which I had not before seen, proved to be much larger and more
formidable in appearance than I had imagined, and Jack's escape seemed
to be perfectly marvelous.

The boys took it as a matter of course that we were to cut out hams and
flitches; and we therefore did so, though I warned them that they need
not expect much pleasure in eating bacon from a tough old African boar
like this. We conveyed the mighty hams to the beach, each on a sledge of
plaited boughs and twigs, and drawn by one of the dogs. The monstrous
head traveled in the same way, and we collected a large number of
truffles before quitting the forest.

As soon as the dogs were released, they rushed back to the scene of
operations in the wood, comprehending that they were now free to feast
on what remained there.

There was so much to be done in consequence of this affair that Fritz,
who had hoped to set out on his solitary expedition that day, deferred
it until the next; and was, therefore, fortunately with us, when late in
the evening we desisted from our labors, and, having supped, were
preparing to retire to rest.

All at once a deep, fearful sound echoed through the neighboring woods.
It made our blood curdle in our veins. We listened with straining ears,
hoping it would not be repeated. With a shudder we heard the dread voice
roar again, yet nearer to us, and an answer peal from the distance.

"We must find out who are the performers in this concert!" exclaimed
Fritz, springing to his feet and snatching up his rifle. "Make the fire
blaze; get on board the yacht, and have all the guns in readiness. I am
off to reconnoiter in the canoe."

We mechanically obeyed his rapid orders, while the bold youth
disappeared in the darkness; and, after heaping fuel on the fire, we
went on board and armed ourselves with cutlasses, besides loading all
the guns, waiting in readiness either to land again or to quit the
coast.

We presently saw the whole pack of our dogs, as well as Coco, the
jackal, and the little ape, Mercury (who had been tempted by the
truffles to stay with them in the woods), come galloping at full speed
up to the fire.

Mercury was evidently excessively discomposed at finding us gone; he
gnashed his teeth, and chattered, as though in fear, looking hopelessly
at the water, through which he could not venture.

The dogs planted themselves by the fire, gazing fixedly landward, with
ears erect, and occasionally uttering a barking challenge, or a
suppressed howl.

Meantime, the horrid roarings approached nearer, and I concluded that a
couple of leopards or panthers had been attracted by the scent of the
boar's carcass.

But not long after I had expressed this opinion, we beheld a large,
powerful animal spring from the underwood, and, with a bound, and
muttered roar, approach the fire. In a moment I recognized the
unmistakable outlines of the form of a lion, though in size he far
surpassed any I had ever seen exhibited in Europe.

The dogs slunk behind the fire, and the lion seated himself almost like
a cat on his hind legs, glaring alternately at them, and at the great
boar hams which hung near, with doubtless a mixed feeling of irritation
and appetite, which was testified by the restless movement of his tail.

He then arose, and commenced walking up and down with a slow and
measured pace, occasionally uttering short, angry roars, quite unlike
the prolonged, full tones we had heard at first.

At times he went to drink at the brook, always returning with such
haste, that I fully expected to see him spring.

Gradually his manner became more and more threatening; he turned toward
us, crouched, and with his body at full stretch, waved his tail, and
glared so furiously, that I was in doubt whether to fire, or retreat,
when through the darkness rang the sharp crack of a rifle.

"That is Fritz!" exclaimed every one; while, with a fearful roar, the
lion sprang to his feet, stood stock still, tottered, sank on his knees,
rolled over, and lay motionless on the sand.

"We are saved!" I cried; "that was a masterly shot. The lion is struck
to the heart; he will never stir again. Stay on board, boys. I must
join my brave Fritz."

In a few moments I landed; the dogs met me with evident tokens of
pleasure, but kept whining uneasily, and looking toward the deep
darkness of the woods whence the lion had come.

This behavior made me cautious; and, seeing nothing of Fritz, I lingered
by the boat, when suddenly a lioness bounded from the shadow of the
trees, into the light diffused by the fire.

At sight of the blazing faggots she paused, as though startled; passed
with uncertain step round the outskirts of the illuminated circle; and
uttered roarings, which were evidently calls to her mate, whose dead
body she presently discovered.

Finding him motionless, her manner betokened the greatest concern; she
touched him with her fore-paws, smelt round him, and licked his bleeding
wounds. Then, raising her head, she gnashed her teeth, and gave forth
the most lamentable and dreadful sound I ever heard; a mingled roar and
howl, which was like the expression of grief, rage, and a vow to be
revenged, all in one.

Crack! Another shot: the creature's right forepaw was lamed; and the
dogs, seeing me raise my gun, suddenly gathered courage, and ran forward
just as I fired. My shot also wounded the lioness, but not mortally, and
the most terrific combat ensued.

It was impossible to fire again, for fear of wounding the dogs. The
scene was fearful beyond description. Black night surrounded us; the
fitful blaze of the fire shed a strange, unnatural light on the
prostrate body of the huge dead lion, and on the wounded lioness, who
fought desperately against the attack of the four gallant dogs; while
the cries, roars, and groans of anguish and fury uttered by all the
animals were enough to try the stoutest nerves.

Old Juno, staunch to the last, was foremost in the fray. After a time, I
saw her change her plan of attack, and spring at the throat of the
lioness; who, in an instant, raised her left paw, and at one blow the
cruel claws had laid open the body of the dog, and destroyed the life of
the true and faithful companion of so many years.

Just then Fritz appeared. The lioness was much weakened, and we ventured
to go near enough to fire with safety to ourselves; and finally I
dispatched her by plunging a hunting-knife deep in her breast.

Ernest and Jack were summoned from the yacht to witness the completed
victory; and I regretted having left them on board, when I saw how
greatly the noise and tumult had alarmed them, unable, as they were, to
ascertain what was going on.

They hastened toward us in great agitation, and their joy on seeing us
safe was only equaled by the grief they felt on learning the death of
Juno.

The night was now far advanced; the fire burnt low; but we piled on more
wood, and, by the renewed light, drew poor Juno from between the paws of
the lioness; and by the brookside, washed and bound up the torn body,
wrapped it carefully in canvas, and carrying it with us on board the
yacht, that it might be buried at Rockburg, whither on the following day
it was our purpose to return.

Wearied and sorrowful, but full of thankfulness for our personal safety,
we at length lay down to sleep, having brought all the dogs on board.

Next morning, before quitting Pearl Bay, we once more landed, that we
might possess ourselves of the magnificent skins of the lion and
lioness, whose visit, fatal to themselves, had caused such a commotion
during the night.

In about a couple of hours we returned to the yacht, leaving the flayed
carcasses to the tender mercies of the birds of prey sure to be
attracted to them.

"Homeward bound," sang out the boys, as they cheerily weighed anchor,
and prepared to stand out to sea. I could see, though he did not
complain, that poor Jack had not recovered from the boar's rough
treatment, and moved very stiffly.

"You must pilot us through the channel in the reef this time, Fritz,"
said I; adding, in a lower tone, "and then is it to be 'farewell,' my
son!"

"Yes, dear father--_Au revoir_!" returned he, brightly, with a glance
full of meaning, while he threw into his canoe a cushion and a fur
cloak.

"Thanks, Fritz! but I'm going to honor them with the care of my battered
bones in the yacht here. You are awfully considerate though, old
fellow," remarked Jack, not for a moment doubting that his brother
expected him to return, as he came, beside him in the cajack.

Fritz laughed, and commended his decision. Then springing into his
skiff, he led the way toward the open sea.

We followed, carefully, and soon passed the reef; after which the boys
were very busy with the sails, putting the vessel on the homeward
course, when, waving his hand to me, Fritz turned in the opposite
direction, and quickly vanished behind the point, which I afterward
named Cape Farewell.

When missed by his brothers, I said he had a fancy to explore more of
the coast, and if he found it interesting he might, instead of only a
few hours, remain absent for two or three days.

Toward evening, we sailed into Safety Bay.




CHAPTER XVII.

 Juno's epitaph--Fritz does not appear--We start in search of him--A
     cachalot whale--The unexpected appearance of a savage--Fritz in a
     dusky disguise--He leads us to Fair Isle, and shows us the wonders
     therein--The stranger--Fritz narrates his adventures--How he saw
     Toucans--Encountered a tiger--Lost Pounce--Found the Smoking Rock,
     and Jenny Montrose--The history of the stranger--Wolves dispute
     our right to the whale--Coco joins his brethren--Jack and Jenny
     search for the truant--We leave Pearl Bay--A hearty reception--A
     visit to Falconhurst--Jack displays our stud--The rainy season
     again.


The mother and Franz, though somewhat startled by the unexpected absence
of Fritz, were delighted to see us return safely, and listened with
eager interest to our adventures. My wife shuddered, and scarcely
suppressed an involuntary scream as she heard of our desperate encounter
with the lion and his mate. Jack's danger and providential escape, too,
made her tremble; and so pale did he still look, that she could scarcely
believe he was uninjured.

Tears came into Franz's eyes when he heard of the sad death of poor old
Juno; and he inquired most tenderly whether her remains had been brought
back, that they might be interred near the house which had been her home
for so many years.

Next day he saw her buried carefully; and Ernest, at his request,
produced an epitaph, which was inscribed upon a slab of stone above her
grave.

                    JUNO,
            A servant true lies here;
                A faithful friend,
                    A Dog,
                To all most dear;
                Who met her end
    Fighting right bravely in her master's cause.

The flesh of the wild boar and the truffles were handed over to the
mother, who received them with delight, promising us therefrom many a
savory dish. She would fain have had the boar's head too; but my word
was pledged to Ernest that it should adorn his museum, and, though my
lips watered to taste it baked in Hottentot fashion, I would not break
my promise.

This splendid head, therefore, together with the lions' skins, we
carried to the tannery on Whale Island, where they were cleaned and
dressed.

Five days passed, but Fritz still remained absent. I could not conceal
my anxiety, and at length determined to follow him. All were delighted
at the proposal, and even the mother, when she heard that we were to
sail in the pinnace, agreed to accompany us.

The boat was stored, and on a bright morning, with a favorable breeze,
we five, with the dogs, stepped aboard, and ran for Cape Minster.

Our beautiful little yacht bounded over the water gaily, and the bright
sunshine and delicious sea breeze put us all in the highest spirits. The
entrance of the archway was in sight, and thither I was directing the
boat's course. Suddenly, right ahead, I saw a dark and shadowy mass just
below the surface of the water. "A sunken rock!" I thought to myself,
"and yet it is strange that I never before noticed it." I put down the
helm in a moment, but a catastrophe seemed inevitable.

We surged ahead! A slight shock, and all was over! The danger was
passed!

I glanced astern, to look again at the dangerous spot; but the rock was
gone, and, where but a moment before I had distinctly seen its great
green shadow, I could now see nothing. Before we had recovered from our
amazement, a shout from Jack surprised me.

"There is another," he exclaimed, "to starboard, father!"

Sure enough, there lay, apparently, another sunken rock.

"The rock is moving!" shouted Franz; and a great black body emerged from
the sea, while from the upper extremity rushed a column of water, which,
with a mighty noise, rose upward, and then fell like rain all around.
The mystery was explained; for, as the great beast emerged yet further
from the water, I recognized, from its enormous size and great length of
head, the cachalot whale.

The monster was apparently enraged at the way we had scratched his back;
for, retreating to a short distance, he evidently meditated a rush upon
us.

Fearful stories occurred to me of the savage temper of this whale, how
he has been known to destroy boat after boat, and even ships, and with a
feeling of desperation I sprang to one of the guns. Jack leaped to the
other, and almost simultaneously we fired. Both shots apparently took
effect; for the whale, after lashing the water violently for a few
seconds, plunged beneath its surface, and disappeared. We kept a sharp
lookout for him, for I was unwilling to lose such a valuable prize, and,
reloading, stood toward the shore, in which direction he was apparently
making. Presently we again sighted him in shallow water, lashing
fearfully with his tail, and dyeing the waves around him with blood.
Approaching the infuriate animal as nearly as I dared, we again fired.

The struggles of the whale seemed for a few moments to become even yet
more frantic, and then, with a quiver from head to tail, he lay
motionless--dead!

The boys were about to raise the cry of victory, but checked the shout
upon their very lips; for darting behind a rock they espied a canoe
paddled by a tall and muscular savage, who now stood up in his skiff and
appeared to be examining us attentively. Seeing that we were standing
toward him, the swarthy native seized his paddle and again darted behind
a rock. An awful thought now took possession of me. There must be a
tribe of blacks lurking on these shores, and Fritz must have fallen into
their hands. We, however, I determined should not be easily taken; and
our guns were loaded and run out.

Presently a dusky face appeared, peeping at us from a lofty rock; it
vanished, and we saw another peeping at us from lower down. Then, again,
the skiff put out as though to make a further reconnoiter. All, even
Jack, looked anxious, and glanced at me for orders.

"Hoist a white flag," said I, "and hand me the speaking-trumpet."

I seized the instrument and uttered such peaceable words in the Malay
language as I could recall; neither the flag nor my words seemed to
produce any effect, and the savage was about to return to the shore.

Jack hereupon lost patience, and in his turn took up the trumpet.

"Come here, you black son of a gun," he exclaimed. "Come on board and
make friends, or we'll blow you and your----"

"Stop! stop! you foolish boy," I said; "you will but alarm the man, with
your wild words and gestures."

"No! but, see," he cried, "he is paddling toward us!"

And sure enough the canoe was rapidly approaching.

Presently a cry from Franz alarmed me. "Look! look!" he shrieked, "the
villain is in Fritz's cajack. I can see the walrus' head."

Ernest alone remained unmoved. He took the speaking-trumpet:

"Fritz, ahoy!" he shouted; "welcome, old fellow!"

The words were scarcely out of his mouth when I, too, recognized the
well-known face beneath its dusky disguise.

In another minute the brave boy was on board, and in spite of his
blackened face was kissed and welcomed heartily. He was now assailed
with a storm of questions from all sides: "Where had he been?" "What had
kept him so long, and why had he turned blackamoor?"

"The last question," replied he, with a smile, "is the only one I will
now answer; the others shall be explained when I give a full account of
my adventures. Hearing guns fired, my mind was instantly filled with
ideas of Malay pirates, for I never dreamed that you could be here in
the yacht, so I disguised myself as you now see me, and came forth to
reconnoiter. When you addressed me in Malay you only added to my terror,
for it left not a doubt in my mind that you were pirates."

Having in our turn described to him our adventure with the cachalot
whale, I asked him if he knew of a suitable spot for the anchorage of
the yacht.

"Certainly," he replied, casting toward me a glance full of meaning; "I
can lead you to an island where there is a splendid anchorage, and which
is itself well worth seeing, for it contains all sorts of strange
things." And after removing the stains from his skin, and turning
himself once more into a civilized being, he again sprang into his canoe
and piloted us to a picturesque little island in the bay.

Now that there could be no doubt as to the success of Fritz's
expedition, I no longer hesitated to give to my wife an account of his
project, and to prepare her mind for the surprise which awaited her. She
was greatly startled, as I expected, and seemed almost overcome with
emotion at the idea of seeing a human being, and that being one of her
own sex.

"But why," she asked, "did you not tell me of this at first? Why wait
until the last moment with such joyful news?"

"I was unwilling," I replied, "to raise hopes which might never be
realized: but now, thank Heaven, he has succeeded, and there is no need
for concealment."

The boys could not at all understand the evident air of mystery and
suppressed excitement which neither their mother, Fritz, nor I could
entirely conceal. They cast glances of the greatest curiosity toward the
island, and as soon as the sails were furled and the anchor dropped,
they sprang eagerly ashore. In a body we followed Fritz, maintaining
perfect silence. Presently we emerged from the thicket through which we
were passing, and saw before us a hut of sheltering boughs, at the
entrance of which burned a cheerful fire.

Into this leafy bower Fritz dived, leaving his brothers without, mute
with astonishment. In another moment he emerged, leading by the hand a
slight, handsome youth, by his dress apparently a young English naval
officer. The pair advanced to meet us; and Fritz, with a countenance
radiant with joy, briefly introduced his companion as Edward Montrose.

"And," he continued, looking at his mother and me, "will you not welcome
him as a friend and a brother to our family circle?"

"That will we, indeed!" I exclaimed, advancing and holding out my hands
to the fair young stranger. "Our wild life may have roughened our looks
and manners, but it has not hardened our hearts, I trust."

The mother, too, embraced the seeming youth most heartily. The lads, and
even the dogs, were not behind hand in testifying their gratification at
the appearance of their new friend--the former delighted at the idea of
a fresh companion, and the latter won by her sweet voice and appearance.

From the expression made use of by Fritz I perceived that the girl
wished her sex to remain unrevealed to the rest of the party until the
mother could obtain for her a costume more suited to her real character.

The young men then ran down to the yacht to bring up what was necessary
for supper, as well as to make preparations for a camp in which we might
spend the night. This done the mother hastened to set before us a
substantial meal, while the boys, anxious to make their new acquaintance
feel at home among them, were doing their best to amuse her. She
herself, after the first feeling of strangeness had worn off, entered
fully into all their fun; and by the time they sat down to supper was
laughing and chattering as gaily as any one of the rest. She admired the
various dishes, tasted our mead, and, without alluding once to her
previous life, kept up a lively conversation.

The mere fact of meeting with any human being after so many years of
isolation was in itself sufficient to raise the boys to the greatest
state of excitement; but that this being should be one so handsome, so
gay, so perfectly charming, seemed completely to have turned their
heads; and when I gave the sign for breaking up of the feast, and their
new friend was about to be led to the night quarters which had been
prepared for her on board the yacht, the health of Edward Montrose was
proposed, and drank in fragrant mead, amid the cheers and acclamations
of all hands.

When she was gone, and silence had been restored, Jack exclaimed:

"Now, then, Fritz, if you please, just tell me where you came across
this jolly fellow. Did you take your mysterious voyage in search of him,
or did you meet him by chance? Out with your adventures, while we sit
comfortably round the fire."

So saying, Jack cast more wood upon the blazing pile, and throwing
himself down in his usual, careless fashion, prepared to listen
attentively.

Fritz, after a few moments' hesitation, began:

"Perhaps you remember," said he, "how, when I returned from my
expedition in the cajack the other day, I struck down an albatross. None
but my father at the time knew, however, what became of the wounded
bird, or even thought more about it. Yet it was that albatross who
brought me notice of the shipwrecked stranger and he, too, I determined
should carry back a message, to cheer and encourage the sender.

"I first, as you know, prepared my cajack to carry two persons; and
then, with a heart full of hope and trust, left you and the yacht, and,
with Pounce seated before me, made for the open sea. For several hours I
paddled steadily on, till, the wind freshening, I thought it advisable
to keep in nearer shore; that, should a regular storm arise, I might
find some sheltered bay in which to weather it.

"It was well I did so; for, scarcely had I reached a quiet cove which
promised to afford me the protection I desired than the sea appeared one
mass of foam: great surging waves arose; and even in the comparative
calm of the bay I felt that I was in some danger.

"I passed the night in my cajack; and next morning, after a frugal meal
of pemmican, and a draught of water from my flask, once more ventured
forth. The wind had subsided, and the sea was tolerably smooth; and,
keeping my eyes busily employed in seeking in every direction to detect,
if possible, the slightest trace of smoke, or other sign of human life,
I paddled on till noon.

"The aspect of the coast now began to change: the shores were sandy,
while further inland lay dense forests, from whose gloomy depths I could
ever and anon hear the fierce roar of beasts of prey, the yell of apes,
the fiendish laugh of the hyena, or the despairing death cry of a
hapless deer. Seldom have I experienced a greater feeling of solitude
than while listening to these strange sounds, and knowing that I, in
this frail canoe, was the only human being near. Giving myself up to
contemplation, I rested my paddle, and allowed my cajack to drift slowly
on.

"As I neared the shore, I noticed a large number of stranger looking
birds, who would sometimes flutter round me, and then dart back again to
the border of the forest, where they were feeding on what appeared to be
the pepper plant; they seized the berries in their great, ponderous
beaks, threw them up into the air, and then dexterously caught them in
their fall. Their beaks were really something extraordinary: they looked
as though they must give their owners a perpetual headache, from their
immense weight. The only thing that relieved the extreme ugliness of
these great appendages was their gorgeous color, which was only rivaled
by the gay hue of the plumage. I wished now that I had brought home a
specimen; but at the time I was so much amused by watching the grotesque
antics of the birds that I did not think of obtaining one. When I left
the spot, I settled in my own mind that they were toucans: was I right,
Ernest?"

The Professor, unwilling to interrupt the narrative, merely gave an
oracular nod, and Fritz continued:

"For some hours after this I paddled quickly on, sometimes passing the
mouth of a stream, sometimes that of a broad river. Had I been merely on
an exploring expedition, I should have been tempted, doubtless, to
cruise a little way up one of these pathways into the forest; but now
such an idea did not enter my head. On, on, on, I felt I must go, until
I should reach the goal of my voyage.

"The shades of night at length drew on, and, finding a sheltered cove, I
moored my cajack, and stepped on shore. You may imagine how pleasant it
was to stretch my legs, after sitting for so long in the cramped
position which my cajack enforces. It would not do, however, to sleep on
shore; so after preparing and enjoying my supper, I returned on board,
and there spent the night.

"Next morning Pounce and I again landed for breakfast. I lit my fire,
and hung before it a plump young parrot to roast. As I was so doing, I
heard a slight rustle among the long grass behind me. I glanced round,
and there, with glaring eyes and his great tail swaying to and fro, I
saw an immense tiger.

"In another moment his spring would have been made. I should have been
no more, and our young guest would have been doomed to, God only knows
how many, years of frightful solitude!

"My gun was lying by my side. Before I could have stooped to pick it up,
the monster would have seized me.

"Pounce saw and comprehended my danger: the heroic bird darted upon my
enemy, and so blinded him with his flapping wings, and the fierce blows
of his beak, that his spring was checked, and I had time to recover my
self-possession. I seized my gun, and fired; and the brute, pierced to
the heart, gave one spring, and then rolled over at my feet.

"My enemy was dead; but beside him, alas! lay poor Pounce, crushed and
lifeless. One blow of the great beast's paw had struck him down, never
to rise again!"

Fritz's voice shook as he came to this point; and, after remaining
silent for a moment or two, he continued hurriedly:

"With a sad and desolate feeling at my heart, I buried the faithful bird
where he had met his death; and then, unable longer to continue near the
spot, I returned to my cajack, and leaving the great tiger lying where
he fell, paddled hastily away.

"My thoughts were gloomy. I felt as though, now that my companion was
gone, I could no longer continue the voyage. The albatross, I thought,
may have flown for hundreds of miles before it reached me. This stranger
may be on different shores from these entirely; every stroke of my
paddle may be carrying me further from the blazing signal: who knows?

"This feeling of discouragement was not, however, to be of long
duration; for in a moment more a sight presented itself, which banished
all my doubts and fears, and raised me to the highest pitch of
excitement.

"A high point of land lay before me. I rounded it, and beyond found a
calm and pleasant bay, from whose curved and thickly wooded shores ran
out a reef of rocks. From the point of this reef rose a column of smoke,
steadily and clearly curling upward in the calm air. I could scarcely
believe my senses, but stopped gazing at it, as though I were in a
dream; then, with throbbing pulse and giddy brain, I seized my paddle,
and strained every nerve to reach it.

"A few strokes seemed to carry me across the bay, and, securing my
canoe, I leaped upon the rock, on which the beacon was blazing, but not
a sign of a human being could I see. I was about to shout, for as the
fire had evidently been recently piled up, I knew the stranger could not
be far off; but, before I could do so, I saw a slight figure passing
along the chain of rocks toward the spot on which I stood. You may all
imagine my sensations.

"I advanced a few paces; and then mastering my emotion as best I could,
I said in English:

"'Welcome, fair stranger! God, in his mercy, has heard your call, and
has sent me to your aid!'

"Miss Montrose came quickly forward----"

"Who? What?" shouted the boys, interrupting the narrative; "who came
forward?" and amid a general hubbub, Ernest, rising and advancing to his
brother, said in his quiet way:

"I did not like to make any remark till you actually let out the secret,
Fritz, but we need no longer pretend not to see through the disguise of
Edward Montrose."

Fritz, though much disconcerted by the discovery of the secret,
recovered his self-possession; and, after bearing with perfect
equanimity the jokes with which his brothers assailed him, joined in
three cheers for their new sister, and when the confusion and laughter
which ensued had subsided, continued his story:

"Miss Montrose grasped my hands warmly, and guessing from my
pronunciation, I am afraid, that I was not in the habit of speaking
English every day of my life, said in French:

"'Long, long, have I waited since the bird returned with your message.
Thank God, you have come at last!'

"Then, with tears of joy and gratitude, she led me to the shore, where
she had built a hut and a safe sleeping-place, like Falconhurst on a
small scale, among the branches of a tree. I was delighted with all she
showed me, for indeed her hut and its fittings evinced no ordinary skill
and ingenuity. Round the walls hung bows, arrows, lances, and
bird-snares; while on her work-table, in boxes and cases, carved
skillfully with a knife, were fish-hooks of mother-of-pearl, needles
made from fish-bones, and bodkins from the beaks of birds, fishing-lines
of all sorts, and knives and other tools. These latter she told me
were, with a chest of wearing apparel, almost the only things washed
ashore after the wreck, when three years ago she was cast alone upon
this desolate coast. I marveled more and more at the wonderful way in
which this girl had surmounted obstacles, the quarter of which would
completely have appalled the generality of her sex. The hut itself was a
marvel of skill; stout posts had been driven into the ground, with cross
pieces of bamboo, to form a framework; the walls had been woven with
reeds, the roof thatched with palm-leaves, and the whole plastered
smoothly with clay, an open space being left in the center of the roof
for a chimney to carry off the smoke of the fire.

"As we entered, a cormorant, with a cry of anger, flew from under the
table toward me, and was about to attack me fiercely. Miss Montrose
called it off, and she then told me she had captured and tamed the bird
soon after first landing, and since that time had contrived to train it
to assist her in every conceivable way; it now not only was a pleasant
companion, but brought her food of every description, fish, flesh and
fowl, for whether it dived into the waters, according to its natural
habit, struck down birds upon the wing, or seized rabbits and other
small animals upon the land, it laid all its booty at her feet.

"Before darkness closed in, all the curiosities and ingenious
contrivances of the place had been displayed--the kitchen stove, cooking
utensils, skin bottles, shell plates and spoons, the fishing raft and
numberless other things--and then, sitting down with my fair hostess to
a most appetizing meal, she gave me a short account of her life:

"Jenny Montrose was the daughter of a British officer, who had served
for many years in India, where she herself was born. At the early age of
three years she lost her mother.

"After the death of his wife, all the colonel's love and care was
centered upon his only child; under his eye she was instructed in all
the accomplishments suited to her sex; and from him she imbibed an
ardent love of field sports. By the time she was seventeen, she was as
much at home upon her horse in the field as in her father's drawing
room. Colonel Montrose now received orders to return home with his
regiment, and as for certain reasons he did not wish her to accompany
him in the ship with the troops, he obtained a passage for her on board
a vessel which was about to sail at the same time.

"The separation was extremely painful to both the old soldier and his
daughter, but there was no alternative. They parted, and Miss Montrose
sailed in the _Dorcas_ for England. A week after she had left Calcutta,
a storm arose and drove the vessel far out of her course; more bad
weather ensued; and at length, leaks having been sprung in all
directions, the crew were obliged to take to the boats. Jenny obtained a
place in one of the largest of these. After enduring the perils of the
sea for many days, land was sighted; and, the other boats having
disappeared, an attempt was made to land. The boat was capsized, and
Miss Montrose alone reached the shore. For a long time she lay upon the
sand almost inanimate; but, reviving sufficiently to move, she at length
obtained some shell-fish, and by degrees recovered her strength. From
that time forth until I appeared she never set eyes upon a human being.
To attract any passing vessel, and obtain assistance, however, she kept
a beacon continually blazing at the end of the reef; and, with the same
purpose in view, attached missives to the feet of any birds she could
take alive in her snares. The albatross, she told me, she had kept for
some time, and partially tamed; but, as it was in the habit of making
long excursions on its own account, she conceived the idea of sending it
also with a message, that should it by chance be seen and taken alive,
it might return with an answer.

"Our supper was over, and, at length, both wearied out with the
anxieties and excitement of the day, we retired to rest, she to her
leafy bower, and I to sleep in the hut below.

"Next morning, having packed her belongings in the cajack, we both went
on board; and bidding adieu to her well-known bay she took her seat
before me, and I made for home.

"We should have reached Rockburg this evening had not an accident
occurred to our skiff and compelled us to put in at this island. The
boat was scarcely repaired when I heard your first shots. I instantly
disguised myself; and, never doubting that Malay pirates were near, came
forth to reconnoiter. Glad, indeed, I was to find my fears ungrounded."

All had listened attentively to Fritz's story, but now a dreadful yawn
from Franz, followed by others from Jack, Ernest, and Fritz, and a great
desire on my own part to follow their example, warned me that it was
time to dismiss the party for the night. Fritz retired to his cajack,
the boys and I to the deck of the yacht, and the remainder of the night
passed quietly away.

Next morning, as we assembled for breakfast, I took the opportunity of
begging Miss Montrose no longer to attempt to continue her disguise, but
to allow us to address her in her real character.

Jenny smiled; for she had noticed, as the young men met her when she
came from the cabin, a great alteration in their manner, and had at once
seen that her secret was guessed.

"After all," she said, "I need not be ashamed of this attire; it has
been my only costume for the last three years, and in any other I should
have been unable to manage all the work which during that time has been
necessary."

Our pleasant meal over, I prepared to start for home, but Fritz reminded
me of the cachalot, and although he confessed he should not care to
repeat the operation of cutting up a whale, he thought it would be a
pity to lose such a chance of obtaining a supply of spermaceti.

I fully agreed with him; and embarking, we quickly reached the sandbank
on which the monster lay. No sooner did we come near, than the dogs
leaped ashore, and before we could follow, rushed round to the other
side of the great beast; snarling, growling, and howling ensued, and
when we reached the spot we found a terrific combat going on. A troop of
wolves were disputing fiercely with the dogs their right to the prey.
Our appearance, however, quickly settled the matter; two of the brutes
already lay dead, and those that now escaped our guns galloped off.
Among the pack were a few jackals, and no sooner did Coco catch sight of
these, his relations, than, suddenly attracted by his instinct, he left
his master's side, and in spite of our shouts and cries, joined them,
and disappeared into the forest.

As it would have been useless and dangerous to attempt to follow the
deserter into the woods, we left him alone, trusting that he would
return before we again embarked. Fritz then climbed up the mountain of
flesh, and with his hatchet quickly laid open the huge skull; Jack and
Franz joined him,--Ernest having remained on the island, where we had
left the mother and Jenny,--and with buckets assisted him to bail out
the spermaceti. The few vessels we possessed were soon full, and having
stored them in the yacht, we once more embarked and arrived at the
little island shortly before the dinner hour.

A capital meal had been prepared for us, and, when we had made ourselves
presentable, we sat down to it, and related our adventures. The account
of Coco's desertion was received with exclamations of surprise and
sorrow. "Yet," said Jenny, after a time, "I do not think you should
despair of his recovery, for animals in their native state seldom care
to allow those that have been once domesticated to consort with them. My
poor albatross even, though he was never thoroughly tamed, and certainly
did finally desert me, yet used to return at intervals; and I am pretty
sure that were you, Jack, to search the wood early to-morrow morning,
you would find your pet only too willing to come back to civilized
life; or, if you like, I will go myself and find him, for I should
immensely like to have a paddle in the cajack all by myself."

Jack was delighted at the former suggestion, and though he would not
listen for a moment to Jenny's request to be allowed to go alone, he
agreed, if she cared for the fun of an early cruise, to accompany her in
the canoe next morning, and to return to the yacht in time to start for
Rockburg.

At sunrise they were off, armed with "bait" in the shape of meat and
biscuit, and a muzzle and chain which Jack had manufactured in the
evening to punish the runagate for his offenses, should they catch him.
Arrived at the sandbank, they landed; and, after entering the forest and
shouting "Coco, Coco!" till the woods rang again, they presently espied
the truant, slouching disconsolately toward them, looking very miserable
and heartily ashamed of himself.

With torn ears, and coat ruffled and dirty, he sneaked up. There was no
need to use the bait to entice him; and when the poor beast thus came,
unhappy and begging forgiveness, Jack had not the heart to degrade him
further with the muzzle and chain. He had evidently attempted to join
his wild brethren, and by them had been scouted, worried, and hustled,
as no true jackal; and, as Jenny had foretold, was now only too glad to
return to bondage and to comfort.

Poor Coco had recovered his spirits slightly by the time the yacht was
reached; and, after a hearty meal, again took his place among the dogs,
whom I had little doubt he would never again desert.

All was now bustle and activity; and breakfast over, we went aboard the
yacht. Fritz and Jack stepped into the canoe; and we soon left Fair Isle
and Pearl Bay far behind.

The morning was delightful. The sea, excepting for the slight ripple
raised by the gentle breeze wafting us homeward, was perfectly calm.
Slowly and contentedly we glided on through the wonders of the splendid
archway, threaded our passage among the rocks and shoals, and passed out
to the open sea. So slowly did we make our way, that the occupants of
the cajack announced that they could not wait for us when they had once
piloted us out from among the shoals and reefs, and plied their paddles
to such good purpose that they were soon out of sight. Nautilus Bay and
Cape Pug-Nose were in due time passed, however, and Shark Island hove in
sight. With great astonishment Jenny gazed at our watch tower, with its
guard-house, the fierce-looking guns, and the waving flag upon the
heights. We landed, that she might visit the fortification; when we
displayed all our arrangements with great pride. When they and the herd
of lovely gazelles had been sufficiently admired, we again embarked, and
steered toward Deliverance Bay. On reaching the entrance, a grand salute
of twelve shots welcomed us and our fair guest to Rockburg. Not pleased
with the even number, however, Ernest insisted upon replying with
thirteen guns, an odd number being, he declared, absolutely necessary
for form's sake.

As we neared the quay, Fritz and Jack stood ready to receive us, and
with true politeness handed their mother and Jenny ashore. They turned
and led the way to the house through the gardens, orchards, and
shrubberies which lay on the rising ground that sloped gently upward to
our dwelling.

Jenny's surprise was changed to wonder as she neared the villa
itself--its broad, shady balcony, its fountains sparkling in the sun,
the dovecots, the pigeons wheeling above, and the bright, fresh creepers
twined round the columns, delighted her. She could scarcely believe that
she was still far from any civilized nation, and that she was among a
family wrecked like herself upon a lonely coast.

My amazement, however, fully equaled that of my little daughter when,
beneath the shade of the veranda, I saw a table laid out with a
delicious luncheon. All our china, silver, and glass had been called
into requisition, and was arranged upon the spotless damask cloth.

Wine sparkled in the decanters, splendid pine-apples, oranges, guavas,
apples, and pears resting on cool green leaves, lay heaped in pyramids
upon the porcelain dishes. A haunch of venison, cold fowl, hams, and
tongues occupied the ends and sides of the table, while in the center
rose a vase of gay flowers, surrounded by bowls of milk and great jugs
of mead. It was, indeed, a perfect feast, and the heartiness of the
welcome brought tears of joy into the lovely eyes of the fair girl in
whose honor it had been devised.

All were soon ready to sit down; and Jenny, looking prettier than ever
in the dress for which she had exchanged her sailor's suit, took the
place of honor between the mother and me. Ernest and Franz also seated
themselves; but nothing would induce Fritz and Jack to follow their
example. They considered themselves our entertainers, and waited upon us
most attentively, carving the joints, filling our glasses, and changing
the plates; for, as Jack declared to Miss Montrose, the servants had all
run away in our absence, and, for the next day or two, perhaps we should
be obliged to wait upon ourselves.

When the banquet was over, and the waiters had satisfied their
appetites, they joined their brothers, and with them displayed all the
wonders of Rockburg to their new sister. To the house, cave, stables,
gardens, fields and boathouses, to one after the other did they lead
her.

Not a corner would they have left unnoticed, had not the mother, fearing
they would tire the poor girl out, come to the rescue, and led her back
to the house.

On the following day, after an early breakfast, we started, while it was
yet cool, for Falconhurst; and as I knew that repairs and arrangements
for the coming winter would be necessary, and would detain us for
several days, we took with us a supply of tools, as well as baskets of
provisions, and other things essential to our comfort.

The whole of our stud, excepting the ostrich, were in their paddocks
near the tree; but Jack, saying that his mother and Jenny really must
not walk the whole way, to the great amusement of the latter, leaped on
Hurry, and fled away in front of us. Before we had accomplished one
quarter of the distance, we heard the thundering tread of many feet
galloping down the avenue, and presently espied our motley troop of
steeds being driven furiously toward us. Storm, Lightfoot, Swift,
Grumble, Stentor, Arrow and Dart were there, with Jack, on his fleet
two-legged courser, at their heels. At his saddlebow hung a cluster of
saddles and bridles, the bits all jangling and clanking, adding to the
din and confusion, and urging on the excited animals, who thoroughly
entered into the fun, and with tails in the air, ears back, and heels
ever and anon thrown playfully out, seemed about to overwhelm us.

We stepped aside to shelter ourselves behind the trees from the furious
onset; but a shout from Fritz brought the whole herd to a sudden halt,
and Jack spurred toward us.

"Which of the cattle shall we saddle for you, Jenny?" he shouted;
"they're all as gentle as lambs, and as active as cats. Every one has
been ridden by mother; and knows what a side-saddle means, so you can't
go wrong."

To his great delight, Jenny quickly showed her appreciation of the
merits of the steeds by picking out Dart, the fleetest and most spirited
in the whole stud.

The ostrich was then relieved of his unusual burden, the animals were
speedily equipped, and Lightfoot bearing the baskets and hampers, the
whole party mounted and trotted forward. Jenny was delighted with her
palfrey, and henceforward he was reserved for her special use.

The work at Falconhurst, as I had expected, occupied us for some time,
and it was a week before we could again return to Rockburg. Yet the time
passed pleasantly; for though the young men were busy from morning to
night, the presence of their new companion, her lively spirits and gay
conversation, kept them in constant good humor.

When the repairs were all finished, we remained yet a day or two longer,
that we might make excursions in various directions to bring in poultry
from Woodlands, stores of acorns for the pigs, and grass, willows, and
canes, to be manufactured during the winter into mats, baskets, hurdles,
and hencoops.

Many a shower wetted us through during these days, and we had scarcely
time to hurry back to Rockburg and house our cattle and possessions
before the annual deluge began.

Never before had this dreary season seemed so short and pleasant; with
Jenny among us, the usual feeling of weariness and discontent never
appeared; the English language was quickly acquired by all hands, Fritz,
in particular, speaking it so well that Jenny declared she could
scarcely believe he was not an Englishman. She herself already spoke
French, and therefore easily learned our native language and spoke it
fluently before we were released from our captivity.




CHAPTER XVIII.

 Spring and its accompanying work--The mysterious guns--Who fired
     them--A storm--Fritz and I reconnoiter--The English brig--We visit
     her in the yacht--Captain Littlestone--We are cordially
     welcomed--Mr. Wolston and his family--An earnest consultation--Our
     visitors at Rockburg--The supper--Who is for Europe and who for
     New Switzerland?--The decision--Farewell.


Many wondrous tales were told or read in turn by the boys and Jenny
during the long evenings as we sat drawing, weaving, and plaiting in our
cozy study. In fact this winter was a truly happy time, and when at
length the rain ceased and the bright sun again smiled upon the face of
nature, we could scarcely believe, as we stepped forth and once more
felt the balmy breath of spring, that, for so many weeks, we had been
prisoners within our rocky walls.

All was once more activity and life; the duties in field, garden, and
orchard called forth the energy of the lads, while their mother and
sister found abundant occupation in the poultry yard and house.

Our various settlements and stations required attention. Falconhurst,
Woodlands, Prospect Hill, Shark and Whale Islands were in turn visited
and set in order. The duty of attending to the island battery fell to
Jack and Franz.

They had been busy all day repairing the flagstaff, rehoisting the flag,
and cleaning and putting into working order the two guns.

Evening was drawing on and our day's work over; the rest of us were
strolling up and down upon the beach, enjoying the cool sea breeze. They
loaded and ran out their guns, and paddling off with an empty tub in
the cajack, placed it out at sea as a mark for practice. They returned
and fired, and the barrel flew in pieces, and then, with a shout of
triumph, they cleaned the guns and ran them in.

Scarcely had they done so when, as though in answer to their shots, came
the sound of three guns booming across the water from the westward.

We stopped, speechless. Was it fancy? Had we really heard guns from a
strange ship? Or had the boys again fired? No! there were the lads
leaping into their canoe and paddling in hot haste toward us. They, too,
had heard the sound.

A tumult of feelings rushed over us--anxiety, joy, hope, doubt, each in
turn took possession of our minds. Was it a European vessel close upon
our shores, and were we about to be linked once more to civilized life?
Or did those sounds proceed from a Malay pirate, who would rob and
murder us! What was to be the result of meeting with our fellow beings;
were they to be friends who would help us, enemies who would attack us,
or would they prove unfortunate creatures in need of our assistance? Who
could tell?

Before we could express these thoughts in words the cajack had touched
the shore, and Jack and Franz were among us.

"Did you hear them? Did you hear them?" they gasped. "What shall we do?
Where shall we go?"

"O Fritz," continued my youngest son, "it must be a European ship. We
shall find her. We shall see our Fatherland once more," and in an
emotion of joy he grasped his brother's hands.

Till then I knew not what a craving for civilized life had been aroused
in the two young men by the appearance of their European sister.

All eyes were turned toward me. What would I advise?

"At present," I said, "we can do nothing, for night is drawing on. We
must make what preparations we can, and pray for guidance."

In the greatest excitement we returned to the house, all talking
eagerly, and till late no one could be persuaded to retire to rest.

Few slept that night. The boys and I took it in turn to keep watch from
the veranda, lest more signals might be fired, or a hostile visit might
be paid us. But about midnight the wind began to rise, and before we
reassembled to discuss our plans a fearful storm was raging; so terrific
was the sea that I knew no boat could live, and had a broadside been
fired at the entrance of the bay we should not have heard it through the
howling of the blast. For two days and two nights the hurricane
continued, but on the third day the sun again appeared, and, the wind
lulling, the sea went rapidly down. Full of anxiety, I readily complied
with the boys' desire to put off to Shark Island and discharge the guns;
for who could tell what had been the result of the gale; perhaps the
vessel had been driven upon the rocky shore, or, fearing such a fate,
she had left the coast and weathered the storm out at sea; if so, she
might never return.

With these thoughts I accompanied Jack and Franz to the fort.
One--two--we fired the guns and waited.

For some minutes there was no reply, and then an answering report rolled
in the distance. There was no longer room for doubt; the strangers were
still in the vicinity, and were aware of our presence. We waved the flag
as a signal to those on shore that all was well, and quickly returned.
We found the whole family in a state of the greatest excitement, and I
felt it necessary to calm them down as much as possible, for neither
could I answer the questions with which I was besieged, nor could I
conceal the fact that the visit of the vessel might not prove so
advantageous as they expected.

Fritz and I at once prepared to make a reconnoitre; we armed ourselves
with our guns, pistols, and cutlasses, took a spyglass, seated ourselves
in the cajack, and with a parting entreaty from the mother to be
cautious, paddled out of the bay and round the high cliffs on our left.
For nearly an hour we advanced in the direction from which the reports
of the guns seemed to proceed. Nothing could we see, however, but the
frowning rocks and cliffs, and the waves beating restlessly at their
base. Cape Pug-Nose was reached, and we began to round the bluff old
point. In a moment all our doubts were dispelled, and joy and gratitude
to the Great Giver of all good filled our hearts. There, in the little
sheltered cove beyond the cape, her sails furled, and anchor dropped,
lay a brig of war with the English colors at her masthead.

With the glass I could discern figures upon the deck, and upon the shore
beyond several tents pitched under the shelter of the trees, and the
smoke of fires rising among them. As I handed the glass to Fritz, I felt
a sudden misgiving. "What," said I to myself, "can this English vessel
be doing thus far from the usual track of ships?" and I called to mind
tales of mutinous crews who had risen against their officers, have
chosen some such sheltered retreat as this; have disguised the vessel,
and then sailed forth to rob and plunder upon the high seas.

Fritz then exclaimed: "I can see the captain, father; he is speaking to
one of the officers, and I can see his face quite well; he is English, I
am certain he is English, and the flag speaks the truth!" and he put the
glass again in my hand that I might see for myself.

Still keeping under the shelter of the cliff, I carefully surveyed the
vessel. There was no doubt that Fritz was right, and my fears were once
more dispelled; all was neatness and regularity on board; the spotless
decks, the burnished steel and brass, and the air of perfect order which
pervaded both ship and camp, betokened that authority and discipline
there reigned. For some minutes longer we continued our examination of
the scene, and then, satisfied by the appearance of the camp on shore
that there was no chance of the brig quitting the coast for several
days, we resolved to return without betraying our presence, for I was
unwilling to appear before these strangers until we could do so in
better form, and in a manner more in accordance with our actual
resources.

We again landed at Rockburg, where our family awaited our arrival in
eager expectation, and as fully as possible we told them of all we had
seen. They thoroughly approved of our caution, and even Jenny, whose
hopes had been excited to the highest pitch by our description of the
English vessel, and who longed to meet her countrymen once more, agreed
to postpone the visit until the following day, when, having put our
yacht into good order, we might pay our respects to the captain, not as
poor shipwrecked creatures begging assistance, but as lords and masters
of the land, seeking to know for what purpose strangers were visiting
the coast.

The rest of the day was occupied in making our preparations. Our dainty
little craft was made to look her very best; her decks were scrubbed,
her brass guns burnished, all lumber removed and put ashore, and the
flag of England hoisted to her peak. The mother overhauled our
wardrobes, and the neatest uniforms were put ready for the boys and me,
for though neither my wife nor Jenny had ever dreamed of appearing
otherwise than they would have done had they been at home among
civilized people in Europe, yet we, accustomed daily to rough and often
even dirty work, had adopted just that custom which best suited our
comfort and inclination. We should indeed have surprised the smart
man-o'-war's men, had we appeared in our great, shapeless, wide-brimmed
hats, our linen coats and trousers, our broad leathern belts and hairy
buskins; so we next day readily donned the more becoming costumes.

At the break of that eventful morn, when we were destined once more to
set our eyes upon our fellow-men, and to hear news of the outer world,
from which for so many years we had been exiled, we assembled in our
little breakfast room. The meal was eaten hurriedly and almost in
silence, for our hearts were too full, and our minds too busily
occupied, to allow of any outward display of excitement. Fritz and Jack
then slipped quietly out, and presently returned from the garden with
baskets of the choicest fruits in fresh and fragrant profusion, and with
these, as presents for the strangers, we went on board our yacht.

The anchor was weighed, the sails set, and with the canoe in tow the
little vessel, as though partaking of our hopes and joyous expectation,
bounded merrily over the waters of Safety Bay, gave a wide berth to the
Reef, against whose frowning rocks the sea still lashed itself to foam,
and kept away from the cove, where the English ship unconsciously
awaited us. The Pug-Nosed Cape was reached, and, to the surprise and
utter amazement of the strangers, we rounded the point and brought up
within hail. Every eye on board and on shore was turned toward us, every
glass was produced and fixed upon our motions; for of all the strange
sights which the gallant crew may have looked for, such an anomaly as a
pleasure yacht, manned by such a party as ours, and cruising upon this
strange and inhospitable shore, was the furthest from their thoughts.

Fritz and I stepped into our boat and pulled for the brig. In another
minute we were upon her deck. The captain, with the simple frankness of
a British seaman, welcomed us cordially, and having led us into his
cabin, begged us to explain to what good fortune he owed a visit from
residents upon a coast generally deemed uninhabited, or the abode of the
fiercest savages.

I gave him an outline of the history of the wreck, and of our sojourn
upon these shores, and spoke to him, too, of Miss Montrose, and of the
providential way in which we had been the means of rescuing her from her
lonely position.

"Then," said the gallant officer, rising and grasping Fritz by the hand,
"let me heartily thank you in my own name, and in that of Colonel
Montrose; for it was the hope of finding some trace of that brave girl
that led me to these shores. The disappearance of the _Dorcas_ has been
a terrible blow to the colonel, and yet, though for three years no word
of her or any of those who sailed in her has reached England, he has
never entirely abandoned all hope of again hearing of his daughter. I
knew this, and a few weeks ago, when I was about to leave Sydney for the
Cape, I found three men who declared themselves survivors of the
_Dorcas_ and said that their boat, of four which left the wreck, was the
only one which, to their knowledge, reached land in safety. From them I
learned all particulars, and applying for permission to cruise in these
latitudes, I sailed in hopes of finding further traces of the
unfortunate crew. My efforts have been rewarded by unlooked-for
success."

Fritz replied most modestly to the praises which he received, and then
the captain begged to be introduced to my wife and Miss Montrose.

"And," he continued, "if it be not contrary to your rules of discipline
for the whole ship's company to be absent at once, I will now send a
boat for the remainder of your party."

One of the officers was accordingly dispatched to the yacht with a
polite message, and the mother, Jenny, and the boys were presently on
board.

Our kind host greeted them most warmly, and he and his officers vied
with one another in doing us honor. They proved, indeed, most pleasant
entertainers, and the time passed rapidly away. At luncheon the captain
told us that there had sailed with him from Sydney an invalid gentleman,
Mr. Wolston, his wife, and two daughters; but that, though the sea
voyage had been recommended on account of his health, yet it had not
done Mr. Wolston so much good as had been anticipated, and he had
suffered so greatly from the effects of the storm, which had driven the
_Unicorn_ into the bay for repairs, that he had been eager to rest for a
short time on land.

We were anxious to meet the family, and in the afternoon it was decided
that we should pay them a visit. Tents had been pitched for their
accommodation under the shady trees, and when we landed we found Mr.
Wolston seated by one of them, enjoying the cool sea breeze. He and his
family were delighted to see us, and so much did we enjoy their society,
that evening found us still upon the shore. It was too late then to
return to Rockburg, and the captain kindly offered tents for the
accommodation of those who could not find room in the yacht. The boys
spent the night on land.

That night I had a long and serious consultation with my wife, as to
whether or not we really had any well grounded reason for wishing to
return to Europe. It would be childish to undertake a voyage thither
simply because an opportunity offered for doing so.

Neither knew to what decision the feelings of the other inclined; each
was afraid of expressing what might run counter to those feelings; but
gradually it began to appear that neither entertained any strong wish to
leave the peaceful island; and finally we discovered that the real wish
which lay at the bottom of both our hearts was to adopt New Switzerland
as thenceforward our home.

What can be more delightful than to find harmony of opinion in those we
love, when a great and momentous decision has to be taken?

My dear wife assured me that she desired nothing more earnestly than to
spend the rest of her days in a place to which she had become so much
attached, provided I, and at least two of her sons, also wished to
remain.

From the other two she would willingly part, if they chose to return to
Europe, with the understanding that they must endeavor to send out
emigrants of a good class to join us, and form a prosperous colony,
adding that she thought the island ought to continue to bear the name of
our native country, even if inhabited in future time by colonists from
England, as well as from Switzerland.

I heartily approved of this excellent idea, and we agreed to mention it,
while consulting with Captain Littlestone on the subject of placing the
island under the protection of Great Britain.

Then came the question as to which of our sons were best suited to
remain with us, and which to go away.

This point we left undecided, thinking that in the course of a few days
they would probably make a choice of their own accord, which they did,
even sooner than we anticipated.

After breakfast, it was proposed that Captain Littlestone should bring
his ship round to Safety Bay, that we might receive a visit from him and
his party, at Rockburg--where we invited the invalid, Mr. Wolston, and
his family, in hopes that his health might benefit by a comfortable
residence on shore.

No sooner was this plan adopted, than Fritz and Jack hurried off in the
canoe to prepare for their reception, being followed in more leisurely
style by the brig and our yacht.

But what words can express the amazement of our guests, when, rounding
the Rocky Cape at the entrance, Safety Bay, the beautiful domain of
Rockburg lay before them.

Still greater was their astonishment, as a salute of eleven guns boomed
from the battery on Shark Island, where the royal standard of England
was displayed and floated majestically on the morning breeze.

A glow of surprise and pleasure beamed on every countenance, and poor
Wolston's spirits appeared to revive with the very idea of peace and
happiness to be enjoyed in such a home.

He was carried on shore with the utmost care and tenderness, and
comfortably established in my room, a camp-bed for Mrs. Wolston being
added to the furniture there, that she might be able conveniently to
attend on her husband.

Meantime the scene at the harbor and all round Rockburg was of the
liveliest description; merriment and excitement prevailed in all
directions, as the beauties and wonders of our residence were explored,
so that a summons to dinner scarcely attracted notice.

However, as a visit to Falconhurst was projected, the company was at
length induced to be seated, and to partake of our good cheer, but the
spirit of restlessness soon returned, and the young people kept roaming
about through our hitherto quiet lawns, avenues, and shrubberies, until
I was ready to believe their number three times what it actually was.

Toward evening the universal excitement began to abate, and the party
assembled for supper with tolerable composure.

Mr. Wolston was able to join us, as the rest he had enjoyed, and the
pleasure inspired by the hope of a residence among us, seemed to have
given him new life. This wish he now distinctly expressed in his own
name, and in that of his wife; inquiring what our intentions were, and
proposing, if agreeable to us, that they, with their eldest daughter,
whose health, like his own, was delicate, should make a long stay on the
island, while the younger daughter went for the present to her brother
at the Cape of Good Hope.

In the event of his ultimately deciding to settle altogether among us,
Mr. Wolston would propose that his son should leave the Cape, and join
our colony.

With sincere satisfaction I welcomed this proposal, saying that it was
my wish and that of my wife to remain for the rest of our days in New
Switzerland.

"Hurrah for New Switzerland!"

"New Switzerland forever!" shouted the whole company enthusiastically,
as they raised their glasses, and made them touch with a musical ring,
which so expressively denotes a joyful unanimity of sentiment.

"Prosperity to New Switzerland: long may she flourish;" echoed on all
sides.

"Long life and happiness to those who make New Switzerland their home!"
added Ernest, to my great surprise, leaning forward as he spoke, to
ring his glass with mine, his mother's, and Mr. Wolston's.

"Won't somebody wish long life and prosperity to those who go away?"
inquired Jenny, with a pretty, arch look. "Much as I long to return to
England and my father, my inclination will waver if all the cheers are
for New Switzerland!"

"Three cheers for England and Colonel Montrose," cried Fritz; "success
and happiness to us who return to Europe!" and while the vaulted roofs
rang with the cheering elicited by this toast, a glance from Jenny
showed him how much she thanked him for appreciating her wish, to return
to her father, notwithstanding her attachment to our family.

"Well," said I, when silence was restored, "since Fritz resolves to go
to England, he must undertake for me the duty of bringing happiness to a
mourning father by restoring to him this dear daughter, whom I have been
ready to regard as my own, by right of her cast on the shores of my
island.

"Ernest chooses to remain with me. His mother and I rejoice heartily in
this decision, and promise him all the highest scientific appointments
in our power to bestow.

"And now what is Jack's choice? The only talent I can say he possesses
is that of a comic actor, and to shine on the stage he must needs go to
Europe."

"Jack is not going to Europe, however," was his reply. "He means to stay
here, and when Fritz is gone he will be the best rider and the best shot
in New Switzerland, which is the summit of his ambition.

"The fact is," he continued, laughing, "I rather stand in awe of their
European schools, and should expect to find myself caught and clapped
into one if I ventured too near them."

"A good school is exactly what I want," said Franz. "Among a number of
students there is some emulation and enthusiasm, and I shall have a
chance of rising in the world."

"Fritz will probably return here some day; but it might be well for one
member of the family to go home with the intention of remaining there
altogether, and as I am the youngest I could more easily than the rest
adapt myself to a different life. My father, however, will decide for
me."

"You may go, my dear son," I replied; "and God bless all our plans and
resolutions. The whole earth is the Lord's, and where, as in his sight,
you lead good and useful lives, there is your home.

"And now that I know your wishes, the only question is whether Captain
Littlestone will kindly enable you to carry them out?"

All eyes were fixed eagerly upon him, and after a moment's pause the
gallant officer spoke as follows:

"I think my way in this matter is perfectly clear, and I consider that I
have been providentially guided to be the means of once more placing
this family in communication with their friends and with the civilized
world.

"My orders were to search for a shipwrecked crew.

"Survivors from two wrecks have been discovered.

"Three passengers express a wish to leave my ship here, instead of at
the Cape, while, at the same time, I am requested to give to three
persons a passage to England.

"Could anything suit better? I am most willing to undertake the charge
of those who may be committed to my care.

"Every circumstance has been wonderfully ordered and linked together by
Divine Providence, and if England gains a prosperous and happy colony,
it will prove a fitting clasp to this fortunate chain of events. Three
cheers for New Switzerland!"

Deep emotion stirred every heart as the party separated for the night.
Many felt that they were suddenly standing on the threshold of a new
life, while, for myself, a weight was rolled from my heart, and I
thanked God that a difficulty was solved which, for years, had
oppressed me with anxiety.

After this nothing was thought of but making preparations for the
departure of the dear ones bound for England. Captain Littlestone
allowed as much time as he could spare; but it was necessarily short, so
that incessant movement and industry pervaded the settlement for several
days.

Everything was provided and packed up that could in any way add to our
children's comfort on the voyage, or benefit them after their arrival in
England, and a large share of my possessions in pearls, corals, furs,
spices, and other valuables would enable them to take a good position in
the world of commerce.

I committed to their care private papers, money, and jewels which I knew
to have been the personal property of the captain of our ill-fated ship,
desiring them to hand them over, if possible, to his heirs. A short
account of the wreck, with the names of the crew, a list of which I had
found, was given to Captain Littlestone.

Fritz, having previously made known to me, what indeed was very evident,
the attachment between himself and Jenny, I advised him to mention it to
Colonel Montrose as soon as possible after being introduced to him, and
ask for his sanction to their engagement. I, on my part, gladly
bestowing mine, as did his mother, who loved the sweet girl dearly, and
heartily grieved to part with her.

On the evening before our separation, I gave to Fritz the journal in
which, ever since the shipwreck, I had chronicled the events of our
life, desiring that the story might be printed and published.

"It was written, as you well know," said I, "for the instruction and
amusement of my children, but it is very possible that it may be useful
to other young people, more especially to boys.

"Children are, on the whole, very much alike everywhere, and you four
lads fairly represent multitudes, who are growing up in all directions.
It will make me happy to think that my simple narrative may lead some of
these to observe how blessed are the results of patient continuance in
well-doing, what benefits arise from the thoughtful application of
knowledge and science, and how good and pleasant a thing it is when
brethren dwell together in unity, under the eye of parental love."

       *       *       *       *       *

Night has closed around me.

For the last time my united family slumbers beneath my care.

To-morrow this closing chapter of my journey will pass into the hands of
my eldest son.

From afar I greet thee, Europe!

I greet thee, dear old Switzerland!

Like thee, may New Switzerland flourish and prosper--good, happy, and
free!


THE END.




HAL KEEN MYSTERY STORIES

By HUGH LLOYD


Boys! Meet Hal Keen, that lanky, nonchalant, redheaded youth whose
guiding star is the star that points to adventure, excitement and
mystery. Follow him in his hunts for clues and criminals. There are
plenty of thrills and shivers in these stories to keep you on your toes.

THE SMUGGLER'S SECRET

Hal Keen sets out to get to the bottom of a mystery that threatens the
safety of a whole community.

THE MYSTERIOUS ARAB

Mystery, excitement, murder in a scientist's camp in the jungles of
Africa, where hate, revenge, and suspicion lead to tragedy.

THE HERMIT OF GORDON'S CREEK

The disappearance of two airmail pilots leads to a mystery that centers
about an abandoned mine and a strange old man.

KIDNAPPED IN THE JUNGLE

A hint of buried treasure in the ruins of an old French mission leads
Hal deep into the Central American jungle.

THE COPPERHEAD TRAIL MYSTERY

Baffling and blood-curdling events center about the ranch where Hal Keen
and his friends had gone in search of gold.

THE LONESOME SWAMP MYSTERY

The lonely and mysterious swamp gave up its secret only after a series
of terrifying events taxed Hal's courage and ability.

THE CLUE AT SKELETON ROCKS

In this new thriller Hal Keen finds mystery and adventure in and about a
lonely lighthouse on Skeleton Rocks, off the Maine coast.

THE DOOM OF STARK HOUSE

Mystery and terror in an old house in the wilderness above Quebec where
Hal Keen is the guest of a strange family.


GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK


ADVENTURES _in the_ UNKNOWN

By CARL H. CLAUDY

Weird! Mysterious! Incredible! Astounding!

Leap back a million years into the dark prehistoric ages. Speed through
the dangers of outer space beyond the stratosphere at a thousand miles a
minute. Meet the grotesque machine men of Mars. Break into the bounds of
the Fourth Dimension. You will meet in these thrilling, fascinating
stories many incredible beings and astounding sights that will stagger
your imagination.

THE MYSTERY MEN OF MARS

Seventy million miles from home! Three men--a daring scientist and two
adventurous boys--take off from the earth in a steel and aluminum sphere
that sails through space at 20 miles a second. On the planet Mars they
face destruction at the hands of beings who resemble mechanical bugs
more than men!

A THOUSAND YEARS A MINUTE

In the world of a million years ago--whence they have been propelled by
an old professor's invention--Alan and Ted find themselves pitted
against the dinosaurs, mammoths and savage ape men of a lost world.

THE LAND OF NO SHADOW

Through a violet coil frame in Professor Arronson's laboratory Ted and
Alan leap into the gray and terrifying land of the Fourth Dimension.
There they are shadowed by the ghostly forms of menacing, bodiless
shapes!


GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK


ZANE GREY BOOKS FOR BOYS

Packed with all the thrill and color and action that have made this
author famous!


THE "KEN WARD" STORIES

The Young Forester

Kenneth Ward, a young eastern lad just out of preparatory school, goes
west on his summer vacation to join a friend, Dick Leslie, a government
forest ranger in Arizona. Ken, honest, loyal but hot-headed runs into
plenty of excitement and trouble when he finds that a big lumber steal
is going on.

The Young Lion Hunter

Ken Ward and his kid brother, Hal, spend a summer on a forest preserve
in Utah with Ken's pal Dick Leslie. The government rangers are out after
the mountain lions and the boys from the east are glad to share in the
thrilling work.

The Young Pitcher

When Ken Ward entered Wayne College to pursue his study of forestry he
discovered that as a freshman he was on the bottom rung and had to fight
to win his way to recognition. His first claim to fame comes when he
pummels a prominent sophomore in self-defense.

Ken Ward in the Jungle

Ken Ward and his younger brother Hal take a trip into the wilds of
Mexico--Ken to try his hand at field work in the jungle and Hal, who is
ambitious to become a naturalist, to collect specimens. The boys set out
to solve the mysteries of the Santa Rosa River, an unknown course of
about a hundred and seventy-five miles through uncharted jungle.


STORIES OF BASEBALL

_Zane Grey's baseball is as real, as dramatic and as thrilling as the
western stories that made him famous._

The Redheaded Outfield

The Redheaded Outfield--three fiery-pated players who introduce a little
boxing and plenty of comedy into the game will delight you. The
Rube--who is all that a rube should be--appears in a whole series of
these stories and is a character you won't forget.

The Short-Stop

Chase Alloway developed a mean curve that had the small town players
buffaloed. They called him "Chaseaway", the "Hoodoo" and "crooked eye"
and one small town team was all for having him tarred and feathered! A
story crowded with hard and fast baseball--and a dash of romance!


STORIES OF THE GREAT WEST

The Last of the Plainsmen

"He'd rope the devil and tie him down--if the lasso didn't burn," it was
said of "Buffalo Jones," one of the last of the famous plainsmen who
trod the trails of the old West. Killing was repulsive to him and the
passion of his life was to capture wild beasts alive.

A real hunting trip--with constant danger threatening from wild beasts,
Indians and the hazards of wild country untouched by civilization.

Roping Lions in the Grand Canyon

A true story of Zane Grey's experiences capturing lions alive, which
makes ordinary hunting with guns seem, in contrast about as exciting as
a Sunday-school picnic. The account of how they captured six of the
tawny, fiery-eyed demons which infest the bottom of the Grand Canyon,
and got them into camp alive and growling, will enthrall the great host
of Zane Grey's boy readers.

The Last of the Great Scouts

_The life story of "Buffalo Bill" by_ HELEN CODY WETMORE _With Foreword
and Conclusion by Zane Grey._

"Buffalo Bill"--scout, pathfinder, hunter and Indian fighter is the most
famous of all that great company of frontiersmen who opened up the West
for civilization. Indeed no character in history makes a stronger appeal
to the imagination than this daring hero of the old west.


GROSSET & DUNLAP, Publishers, NEW YORK


_The_ AIR COMBAT STORIES _for_ BOYS By THOMSON BURTIS

_Author of_ THE REX LEE STORIES

Zooming into the war scene comes this new hero of the air, Lieutenant
Rudford Riley, who leads The Phantom Five, a group of airmen detailed
for special duty in the Royal Flying Corps during the early days of the
war when every take-off was an impudent challenge to death. The record
of their mad exploits over the front makes breathless reading, and their
adventures have the ring of truth in them for the author-flyer takes
them from his own rich experience as a war-time aviator.

DAREDEVILS OF THE AIR

Recounts Lieutenant Riley's adventures as leader of The Phantom Five
against the enemy in the air.

FOUR ACES

As commanding officer of Special Flight A, Rud Riley and Jerry Lacey,
the Manhattan Madman, are thrown into the thickest and hottest of the
air fighting.

WING FOR WING

Continues the record of the daredevil young airman's adventures as one
of the leading aces in the war.

FLYING BLACK BIRDS

Stormy Lake leads a squadron of picked daredevils called the Black Birds
against the famous German Red Devils led by Von Baer.


GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK




Transcriber's Note.


A few typographical and spelling errors have been corrected.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Swiss Family Robinson, by Johann David Wyss

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SWISS FAMILY ROBINSON ***

***** This file should be named 41659-8.txt or 41659-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/6/5/41659/

Produced by Tor Martin Kristiansen, Kara Shallenberg, Asad
Razzaki and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
