The Project Gutenberg EBook of Geoffery Gambado, by William Henry Bunbury

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Geoffery Gambado
       A Simple Remedy for Hypochondriacism and Melancholy Splenetic Humours

Author: William Henry Bunbury

Release Date: March 12, 2012 [EBook #39115]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GEOFFERY GAMBADO ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Sue Fleming and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)








Geoffery Gambado;

OR,

A SIMPLE REMEDY FOR
HYPOCHONDRIACISM

AND

MELANCHOLY SPLENETIC HUMOURS.

BY A HUMORIST PHYSICIAN.

_Honi soit qui mal y pense._

PRINTED, FOR THE AUTHOR, BY DEAN & SON, LUDGATE HILL, LONDON.

[Illustration: GEOFFERY GAMBADO]




TABLE OF CONTENTS


PREFACE.            3
THE FRONTISPIECE.   8
CHAPTER I.         11
CHAPTER II.        21
CHAPTER III.       30
CHAPTER IV.        34
CHAPTER V.         40
CHAPTER VI.        51
CHAPTER VII.       56
CHAPTER VIII.      60
CHAPTER IX.        62
CHAPTER X.         66
CHAPTER XI.        70
CHAPTER XII.       72
CHAPTER XIII.      79
CHAPTER XIV.       88
CHAPTER XV.       108




Preface.


Some years ago, sixteen original sketches by Henry Bunbury, Esq. were
given to the Author of this Book. This celebrated sketcher and
caricaturist was a gentleman well known in the county of Suffolk for his
public and private virtues, as well as for his superior talents. He was
a lineal descendant of the Rev. Sir William Bunbury, whose baronetcy was
created in 1681. Of a cheerful and lively temper, he sought to infuse
the same spirit through all ranks of society. If we mistake not, his son
became Sir Henry Bunbury, and represented the county of Suffolk, as his
uncle, Sir Thomas Charles Bunbury, had done before him.

His descendants still occupy the mansion and estates in Suffolk, where
they have been, and are still, the great benefactors to the poor, and
the parish of Great Barton near Bury St. Edmund's.

But we have to speak more particularly of Henry Bunbury, Esq. and his
talents. To this day, his accurate delineations of the political and
social customs of the age he lived in, and of the characters who came
under his observation, are remarkable for their truthful force. It is
very seldom that men of high life and good education, possess the
artistic power of graphic delineation: at least, we have but few amateur
delineators who can stand the test of the invidious sneers and jeers of
those empty possessors of wealth and station, who consider themselves
degraded even by the acquaintance of an artist, a poet, or a literary
character. Now, if a man is not a degraded man, but lives himself after
the law of God, he need never mind the scoffs or ridicule of any man;
but may say, as Henry Bunbury did to those who ridiculed him,--"Evil be
to him who evil thinks."

In the Sketches contained in this work, the difficulty was to make out
what kind of story they told; for though some persons might see in them
nothing more than ridicule upon the _Annals of Complete Horsemanship_,
yet those who knew the man, and knew the disposition he always
entertained, namely, a desire to do evil to no man, but good to all,
thought that his intention was to cure some over-sensitive minds of
morbid and melancholy feelings, which ought not, unreasonably and
unseasonably, to overwhelm them, and destroy their energies.

It was not that he ridiculed real affliction, or ever, in any one of his
drawings, sought to give a pang to the real mourner; but he really loved
a cheerful disposition; and could not bear that man should be afflicting
himself with imaginary diseases, when a little self-exertion, or
diversion, would restore his right tone of bodily health, and be the
means of doing him good.

We have adopted these views of our celebrated talented Suffolk
gentleman, and have endeavoured to turn his pictures to this profitable
account. They represent horses, and costume of fashion or fiction, long
since exploded; but they represented real persons, whom he knew, and
many were reckoned inimitable likenesses. Caricature is itself a species
of broad, or excessive resemblance of fact; let it be represented by
Shakspeare's Falstaff,--Hogarth's Marriage a la Mode,--Dickens' Pickwick
Papers,--Macaulay's Stories of Historical Persons, (introduced into his
popular History of England),--or of Punch,--or of that greatest of all
powerful pencil delineators of character, George Cruikshank. We leave
out the popular novelists, or poets, who have written funny as well as
serious things;--all, more or less, have taken advantage of caricature
skill, to prove their acquaintance with the ridiculous.

Cowper is generally looked upon as a serious poet, yet he wrote "Johnny
Gilpin." But we will make no more excuses for our present work. We will
only add that it was originally conceived for a charitable purpose, and
is now made use of as such.

The Author of the Illustrations has long since departed this mortal
life; and the Author of the Narrative, not seeking the reputation of
his own name, does not give it to the world; but, apologizing for his
interpretation of the sketches, desires only to do good. If any should
be entertained, and will kindly send any mark of their favour to the
Publisher, for the Author, the word of a Gentleman is given, that,
whatever it may be, it shall be strictly devoted to public good.




THE FRONTISPIECE.


"Reader! did you ever see an angel on horseback?" "No!" No more did I,
that I know of! We read of one in (II. Maccabeus, c. 3); but then he was
clad in armour of gold, and rode a most powerful animal, who smote with
his forelegs the avaricious Heliodorus. But here we see a very different
representation, both as to horse and rider, and engaged in trumpeting
forth the praises of the celebrated

DOCTOR GAMBADO.

"Gambado! Sempre viva! Encora! Encora!" In fact, it is termed "The
Apotheosis of Geoffery Gambado, Esq. M.D. F.R.S."

Now this angel might be a daughter of Doctor Gambado's, or she might be
his scullery-maid. She is represented on a horse, which, instead of
being a winged Pegasus, stands well upon his pegs, and seems to have
lent his wings to the damsel herself, to bear both himself and her
"in nubibus." She holds a medallion of the Doctor, a striking portrait,
in her right hand; and in her left, the celebrated brazen trumpet of
Fame; and, no doubt, whether his angelic daughter or his faithful
domestic, she was one who knew so well the admirable worth of the good
physician, that she simply means to say,--"May the cheerful spirit of
such good men as Doctor Gambado live for ever, and drive out of all
splenetic patients, the tormenting stings of the Blue Devils."

[Illustration: THE APOTHEOSIS OF GEOFFERY GAMBADO, MD]

If he can do this, his canonization will indeed be immortal, though it
be trumpeted forth by so humble an instrument as the angel we here see
represented on a wooden horse.

Reader, the humblest instrument in the world may, in the hand of wisdom,
be used as an angel for your own good. The poor fellow who lifts you up
from the ground, should you happen to fall, may be the helping hand
provided you. The messenger who finds you in suffering, and sends the
doctor to your relief, may be the unknown angel for your deliverance.

A poor boy, or a poor girl, who snatches you, in your infant days, from
the peril of a pond, may be used as an angel for your welfare.

Do not always expect to see angels in golden armour for your
deliverance; though the generous and charitably-good Samaritan, the
friend in need, may be the friend indeed at the hour you most require
him,--only be humble, only be thankful, and even this poor picture may
be a message of comfort to your spirit; for

    "Reproof is better than a great man's gold;
    And he is good who loves a thing well told:
    Then 'evil be to him who thinks the same,'
    And would destroy Gambado's honest fame."

[Illustration]




CHAPTER I.

_Gambado himself seeing the world in a six miles' tour._


It is time we should speak something of this celebrated person, and
account for his present position and appearance. He is very unlike any
modern physician. A hundred years ago, however, we have no doubt that
such was a fac-simile of this noble specimen of an equestrian medical
proficient. It is a hundred years ago since the original sketch of him
was made, which we have endeavoured to copy. We have to account for
finding him in such a position. First, Who was he? What was he? Where
did he live? What did he do? And how came he into notice at all?

Most men are born somewhere! and except they become noted for something
they have done, it is very seldom that any inquiry is made about them at
all. Neither the place of their birth, nor the locale of their fame, or
name, or habitation, of their death, or marriage, is made of any moment
whatsoever.

Alas! those who are most ambitious of fame, seldom get it whilst they
live; and very few, ever, as literary men, are exalted to a title, like
Lord Macaulay; whilst those often feel they are praised for what they
own they do not deserve, are more humbled by their reputation, than they
are exalted.

It was said to Gambado, in the day of his greatest reputation, "We will
certainly have you in Westminster Abbey?"

"Thank you, my dear fellow," was his reply; "I would rather eat a mutton
chop with you at the Mermaid Tavern, in the street I was born in, than
lie along with John Milton, (who was born in the next street to mine),
or with any of those worthies, Shakspeare, Raleigh, or Ben Jonson; who
can no longer eat a mutton chop with us at their old Tavern:

   "'I seek no fame, I want no name,
       My bread in Bread-street is:
    Gambado has sufficient fame;
       This is sufficient bliss!'"

He was born in Bread-street, in Cheapside: and in the first year of the
reign of George the Third, A.D. 1760, he was in full practice and
celebrity, and could not be less than forty years of age. As to whom he
married, and what became of his wife and one lovely daughter, we know
not. They appear conspicuously only in the last pages of this narrative,
and were evidently in the enjoyment of all their great master's
reputation, as well as in the keeping up with him in partaking of his
own favourite panacea for all complaints, viz.--the riding on horseback.

But how came he to take up this exercise? to stick to it? and to
recommend it as he did upon every occasion? Simply, as he told every
one, because he found in it a sure and certain remedy for that dreadful
nervous disease, commonly known by the name of the "Blue Devils."

Few things gave greater offence in that day to the Faculty, than Dr.
Gambado's system of practice. He prescribed very little, if any,
medicine: he certainly gave none to those whom he considered did not
require it. He knew the power of a strong mind over a weak body, and
what too great fatigue of either would produce. He knew well, moreover,
the danger of entertaining too much imagination upon any complaint. He
was acknowledged by all to be well versed in the physical construction
of the human frame; and especially of that most complicated portion, the
nervous system, to which he had paid such scientific attention that his
_Vocabulary of Nervous Constitutions_ was his great work, that won
for him much scientific fame, and got him the honour of being elected
F.R.S. before he attained such practical success as made his fortune. He
did make a great fortune; and he was honest enough to confess that he
owed the enjoyment of it, if not the possession of it, entirely to a
Horse-dealer.

He was, himself, at one period of his life, so completely prostrated in
his own nervous system, that, from the crown of his head to the sole of
his feet, he was completely unstrung. He was constantly in the habit of
going to church with his wife and daughter, at St. Stephen's, Walbrook,
one of Sir Christopher Wren's most beautiful specimens of architecture;
but in his depression he shunned the company of those he loved best on
earth, and almost forsook his God and his duty, imagining himself
totally forsaken of Him and every friend. He had no pleasure in any
thing. His very profession was a burthen to him, and night and day he
did nothing but mope. What would have become of him, his wife and
daughter, his practice, his home, and his society, had he not, as he
used to say, met with an angel, in the shape of a horse-dealer?

He was strolling, one evening, in a very melancholy mood, down
Friday-street, not far from his own home, as he passed by the livery
stables of John _Tattsall_, as the name was then spelt. John knew the
doctor, and capped him with "A beautiful evening, sir."

The Doctor stopped, and looking very woefully in his face, said, "Yes,
John, very beautiful to those who are well."

"Yes sir, and to those who are sick, too; and I wish they could enjoy
it."

"John, I am very ill myself, and have been so for some time. I shall not
write many more prescriptions!"

"I hope you won't, sir; I hope you won't."

"Why so, John? why so?"

"Because you gentlemen prescribe so much advice, and so seldom follow
any good advice yourselves, that you are sure to die sooner than any
other men. You all know too much about other people, and very little
about yourselves."

"You are a blunt fellow, John; but I do not like you the less for that.
You once consulted me, did you not?"

"Yes, sir, and you told me the truth; and I liked you all the better for
it. You told me plainly there was nothing the matter with me. 'Go home,'
you said, 'drink a glass of cold water just before you get into bed; and
if that do not do you more good than any medicine I can give you, then
come to me again, bring me another guinea, and I will give you the same
advice.' I did as you advised, and it was the best cold water cure that
ever was effected: I have never been ill since. But, Doctor, I have
heard that you are out of sorts. One good turn deserves another, and if
you will follow my advice, only for one week, you shall be a different
man to what you now are. You shall soon earn your hundreds; and only
give me one guinea in the hundred, and you will make my fortune and your
own too."

"What is your advice? I will agree to the terms."

"Well, Doctor, let me tell you the truth. You have done too
much,--studied too much,--wrote too much,--thought too much,--and have
overdone everything, and now find you can do nothing. You are fast
sinking into that lapsed condition in which you will soon become an
inmate of Bedlam, if you go on as you have done of late. You grow
enormously fat, and are getting like the pig in my stye, and will soon
be snoring, snoring, snoring, all day long, a plague to yourself and
everyone else. If you do not follow my advice, you will be a dead man
before you ever eat another Christmas turkey."

"What is it, John?"

"Ride out six miles on horseback, every morning at six o'clock,--and six
miles back again,--and that for six days; and if, at the end of that
time, your lethargic state is not improved, then say, John Tattsall is a
good-for-nothing humbug, and deserves to be well horsewhipped."

"But, John, I never rode on horseback in my life: never was in the habit
of it. I do not think I ever could."

"_Master, you must try, if you would not die._"

Now the Doctor did not like the thought of dying, though he had seen so
much of it when it touched others. A strange kind of nervous sensation
ran through him,--not through his veins, for he was one who wrote
against "vasicular nerves,"--but it ran through his system, as he
thought of John's words, "_Master, you must try, if you would not die._"

"Well John,--I will try,--but you must teach me!" "Come, master, that's
right; nothing like trying to amend our ways before it's too late, as
good Doctor Cassock said. So a good beginning, well followed up, and,
barring accident, I see no reason, Doctor, why you should not live for
forty years longer. You know well, that a man overworked, like any other
animal, is soon worn out; and a man who does no work, very soon dies.
Just come and look at a nice little Norway cob I have in my stable;
quiet and gentle as a lamb. A very few turns down my ride, will give you
a seat in the saddle, and you shall be again a happy man."

The Doctor got into the saddle that very evening; and nobody saw him,
but John; and if the stable boys peeped out and smiled, they got a
little back-handed tip with their master's whip, and were glad to hide
their diminished heads in the straw. He went home a little more
cheerful; played a game of backgammon with his wife, and kissed the
cheek of his only child Kate, and seemed a little better. To the
surprise of his family, he ordered hot water into his dressing-room, at
half-past five in the morning; and, of course, it was thought he was
going to take a journey. He did so; but when he went out, he said, "I
shall breakfast at half-past eight o'clock."

So the Doctor took a six miles' tour every morning, for six days. He
improved daily; and though he rode very awkwardly at first, holding on
by the reins, and keeping his brow bent and his eye intent upon the
Norway Cob's ears, his daily exercise did him a world of good; and
before the week was out, he began to find himself a different creature.
At the end of the week, he gave John Tattsall fifty guineas for the Cob;
and a friendship, founded upon mutual accommodation, subsisted between
them, to the day of their deaths.

So was a horse-dealer made an angel or messenger of health to the
mournful spirit or unstrung nerves of Doctor Geoffery Gambado. He had
the honesty to own it. The Doctor perfectly recovered his right mind and
bodily health; and, like a wise man, who well knows that the same thing
which does him good may do others the same, he took more patients to
John Tattsall's livery stables than he ever sent to the sea side, to
Madeira, to Buxton, or to Margate, Ramsgate, or any other gate
whatsoever. John kept horses to suit all comers and all customers, and
found Doctor Gambado the most grateful of all, because he always owned
that, beneath a good Providence, he did him great good.

The Doctor's fame rapidly increased with the increase of his health. He
soon became the very first Physician in nervous complaints. He knew the
cause of nervous degeneracy,--no man better. He recommended Tattsall to
all such patients as he found likely to be benefitted by him; and they
were not a few. His letters, if they could be collected, would be found
as direct to the point as the Wellington despatches.

    "John,--I want just such a horse as cured me, to cure an old fool
    like myself.

                                      Yours, &c.--GAMBADO."

John, like a well-tutored chemist, understood the peculiar character of
the Doctor's prescriptions, which, unlike a quack's, were generally
written in a plain, legible hand, without any _ad captandum_ humbug.
John had horses from twenty-five to five-hundred guineas each.

But as the Doctor's fame increased, so, it might be truly said, the
follies of "hypochondriacism" began to be exposed. People, and
especially those of the Great Faculty, were jealous of the Doctor's
reputation. It is always a sign of a little mind to be envious, or
jealous of another man's celebrity. Take it for granted, when you hear a
man speak slightingly of another, set that man down, whoever he is, for
a conceited ass himself, or an ambitious, if not an envious and wretched
man. Better speak nothing, than speak evil of another; better correct an
evil thought, than have to repent of an evil act. Some called the Doctor
a mere visionary practitioner, or a mere veterinary surgeon, or a quack,
or anything else. But he kept on his course. We have selected a few of
the strange cases that came before him a hundred years ago.

    What changes in a hundred years!
      What fashions, and what dress!
    What troubles, woes, and bloody tears,
      The world must now confess!

    Avoid them all,--seek peace and love,--
      Be humble and be wise;
    May this poor book some comfort prove
      To friends, and enemies.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER II.

_A Brother Patient.--How to make the least use of a Horse._


It was not long before the Doctor received a visit from an old friend;
one, who had, in younger days, been a student in the same school, and
entered into practice about the same time. The servant introduced Doctor
Bull,--yes, Doctor John Bull, or, more properly styled, John Bull, Esq.
M.D.--but not F.R.S. No, Doctor Bull had been more ambitious of
practising, than of obtaining an empty name. He was a steady, well-to-do
little man, and never lost a patient from any want of good manners or
attention. He had certainly given much thought to the subject of
_Hydrophobia_, and was considered no mean authority in the treatment of
cases pronounced very malignant; but he by no means confined his
abilities to that one branch of human misfortune.

He advised well with the Surgeons, and, generally, approved their
treatment; but suggested frequently that judicious change which the
nature of the case required. This he did in so gentlemanly and
considerate a manner, that he was sure to be consulted by the very next
patient of the same Surgeon.

In this way, he made many friends, lost very few, and found himself in
the most affluent circumstances from very extensive practice. But,
somehow, he overworked himself, and got into a very irritable, and at
the same time desponding, tone. Prosperity tries men very often more
severely than adversity.

The Doctor, as long as he had his way to make in the world, was more
attentive to others, and thought less about his own ails than he did
about others. Now that he had accumulated money, he began to think of
investments, and how he should place to the best account his
accumulations.

He also thought a little more of style, equipage, choice society, and
innumerable things, to which his life had been hitherto a stranger. He
began to think and to care more about himself, than he did about any
body else. He became of some consequence in his neighbourhood, and
expected every one to bow to him, and to treat him as a _monied man_. In
short, from a pure philanthropist, he became almost a misanthrope.

He began to torment himself about every thing and every body. Nothing
pleased him,--his wife and children disturbed him,--he was downright
cross to them. And the same man, who once never came into his house
without a cheerful smile for every one in it, now took no notice of
anyone, except it were to find fault, and to let out words which in his
sober senses he would be shocked to hear any other person make use of.

"My dear, I am sure you are not well," said Mrs. Bull, to him one day,
"I am sure you are not well."

"I could have told you that," was the reply.

"Do take a little change."

"Pish! change! what change? I am changing, and shall soon make some
great change, if things go on as they do in this house."

"Is anything wrong, my dear?"

"Yes, everything is wrong,--nothing is right,--all things are out of
order,--and everything wants a change."

"Well, my dear, I think, if we took a house for three months at
Brighton, it would do us all good."

"What good, madam? And who is to pay for it? What will become of my
patients? and how am I to support my family? Brighton indeed! No, no! If
I cannot be better without going to Brighton, I had better decline at
home! Who is to look after my patients?"

"Why, there is Doctor Goodfellow, who I am sure you admire. He will
attend any of your patients for you. Do, my dear, have a little
compassion upon yourself."

"And, I suppose, upon you too; upon Kitty as well; upon Mary, Patty, and
little Johnny; servants and all,--Heigh!"

"If you please, my dear, even so, for you have not had much compassion
upon any of us lately; and a change towards us all would be very
agreeable."

A good wife has nothing to fear, and especially when she knows that she
so loves her husband as to desire his health above all things else,
whether of body, mind, or spirit. If a wife may not expostulate with her
husband, who may? And notwithstanding all his perverseness, she had her
own way with him, because she felt it was right.

To Brighton they all went; but the fancy had taken too strong hold upon
Doctor Bull, to let him rest. He worried himself because he was away
from London,--he worried himself about the state of his patients,--the
price of stocks,--the state of his own pulse, tongue, eyes, and
lungs,--till he could endure himself no longer.

"I must go and see my old friend Gambado; I know he is a clever man, and
has paid great attention to the nervous system, I must go and see him.
He ordered his chariot, and drove to Bread-street; sent in his card,
and was very soon shaking hands with his quondam friend Doctor Gambado.

"Bull, I am glad to see you! You are not come to consult me
professionally about yourself, I hope?"

"I am, though, and about nobody else."

"Then what's the matter with you?"

"Dispeptic."

"Is that all?" "No! Choleric?" "Is that all?" "No." "What is the matter?
out with it."

"To tell you the truth, Geoffery, I hardly know how to describe myself
to you. You never were afflicted in the same way."

"How do you know that?"

"I am sure of it. You never were tormented morning, noon, and night. You
never hated your profession, as I do mine. You never felt that you
killed a great many more than you cured! You never loathed the sight of
your wife and children, your house, servants, food, bed, board and
lodging. In short, I am a regular monster to myself, and shall soon be
good for nothing! Did you ever feel so, my friend?"

"Yes, and ten thousand times worse than all you have described."

"My dear friend, it is impossible."

"You may think it so,--and I certainly thought, once, exactly as you do
now,--I can therefore make allowances for you. I tell you, no one ever
appears so bad to any man, as the afflicted man does to himself. He
would soon be better if he could once see others worse than himself, or
as bad as himself, and wish, heartily wish, to see them cured. I tell
you, such was my case--even worse than yours,--and I can cure you."

"Will you, my dear friend? will you?"

"Yes, will I; and as we never take fees of the faculty, therefore, I
will cure you for nothing. I do not say, with nothing.--No. Will you
follow my advice?"

"Yes, assuredly. What is it?"

"Ride on horseback."

"I never did so since I was a boy."

"Nor did I, till I tried."

"But did that cure you?"

"Yes, it did; and will cure you also."

"How long did you ride before you felt better?"

"Not an hour."

"How long before you were well again?"

"Six days; six miles out, every day; six miles home; and in six days all
those morbid secretions went away from my brain, and I became as I am, a
cheerful and happy man."

"But how shall I manage? I must begin _de novo_. I must learn, and I
must get a horse that will just move as I want him, slow and sure;
either a walk, or a gentle canter; one that does not mind the whip; and
I dare not ride one with a spur."

"My dear fellow, I have a friend who served me with a horse just as I
wanted it; and I have no doubt he can serve you just as well. I will
write him a note, and you shall take it to him yourself."

Accordingly, the Doctor wrote him one of his laconic Epistles.

    "DEAR TATT.--Mount my brother Doctor; give him a stiff-one, and one
    that will require a little exercise of the _deltoides_ of the right
    arm. He can pay. Suit him well.
                             Yours, faithfully,--GEOFFERY GAMBADO."
    "Mr. John Tattsall."

Now the celebrated Doctor Bull had as good a pair of carriage horses as
any Squire Bull in England. Tatt. certainly mounted him on one "that he
could not" _make the least of_. He was quiet enough, stiff enough, slow
enough, steady enough; he did not mind the whip, for the Doctor might
cut him over the head, neck, ears, and under the flank, and anywhere,
and everywhere else; but the beast had no animation. The more he
punished him, he only went the surest way to show to the world, _How to
make the least of a horse_.

A few days after his _horse exercise_, he called on his friend Doctor
Gambado, and said, "Doctor, I am certainly better; but I believe I
should have been quite as well, if I had mounted a saddler's wooden
horse, and tried to make him go, as I am in trying to make your friend
Tattsall's horse go. I could not have believed it possible that any
beast could bear without motion such a dose of whip-cord as I have
administered to him."

"You asked for one that would bear the whip: did you not?"

"Yes, and one that was steady, did not shy, and would go very gently
even a slow pace; but this horse has no pace at all."

"Well, my good old friend, I am glad you are better; that's a great
point. I have no doubt, none in the world, that if you could mount
Master Johnny's rocking-horse, and would do so, and have a good game of
romps with your boy, it would do you as much good as showing to the
world _how to make the least of a horse_, by kicking, flogging, checking
his rein, and trying to persuade him to go on.

"But if you will only walk down with me to John Tattsall's stables, I
have no doubt you will quickly learn a lesson of equestrian management
that shall soon set you right with the public, and most especially with
yourself. You have learnt nothing but how to make the least of a horse.
Let my servant take your horse back; and if John Tattsall do not soon
show you _how to make the most of a horse_, then do not pay him either
for his horse or for his pains; but set all down to my account. Be
seated, my dear fellow, whilst I send your horse back with a note. The
Doctor wrote--

    "DEAR JOHN,--My brother Bull wants to learn how to make the most of
    a horse. We will be with you in the course of an hour.

                                  Ever yours,--GEOFFERY GAMBADO."
      "Mr. John Tattsall."

The brothers M.D. sat down to an hour's chat upon politics, stocks,
dividends, and philosophy; and at the end of one hour were seen wending
their way arm-in-arm to the celebrated _Livery Stables_ of John
Tattsall, whither we will follow them, just to see if we can behold a
contrast.

          Far we need not go, to see
          What makes a contrariety.




CHAPTER III.

_How to make the most of a horse._


Arrived at the stables, it was not long before Doctor Gambado introduced
his brother and friend Doctor Bull to the noted personage of his day,
John Tattsall. Is the name of Tattsall, as it used to be called,
corrupted, from a hundred years ago, now to that of Tattersall? We do
not know the gentleman's dealer, auctioner, or horse agent of the latter
name; but if he be the descendant of the great John Tattsall, we only
hope he is as good a man as his ancestor. A better in his line could
never be. It requires a knowledge of a man's craft, to say whether he is
a good or bad workmen at it. We have very little knowledge of
horse-dealers' craft, but their profits must be very great,--when the
licence is set so high as five and twenty pounds, before they can
practise the economy of horse-dealing. A hundred years ago, and the tax
was not so high.

[Illustration]

"This, John, is my friend, Doctor Bull, whom I recommended to your
notice to find him a horse in every respect quiet, without vice, and
gentle,--one who would bear the whip and not kick."

"Can the gentleman say I have not suited him?"

"I do not say I am not suited, but I had almost as soon be nonsuited in
a case of law, as be suited with so inactive a beast to ride."

"Ah! sir, you speak like a tyro concerning the law. If you were once
_nonsuited_, and had all the costs to pay in an action-at-law, believe
me, sir, the being _non suited_ in a horse which had no action, would be
greatly preferable to all the success of a case-at-law, though you were
told at the time that you got off cheap, after paying £150. Look, sir,
at that cheque:

    "Please to pay to Messrs. Runner and Co. the sum of three hundred
    pounds, on account of transfer of property, to the account of

                              Yours, faithfully,
                                  CURRY AND POWDER."

How would you like that?"

"I should not like it at all; but there are many things in law and
horse-dealing, which the least said about them the soonest ended."

"And also in other things as well. But bring out the gentleman's
chestnut horse, Sam."

This was spoken to the groom, who knew his master's voice, and presently
brought forth the very self-same horse, sent back to the stables one
hour previously, as inactive: now behold him as lively as a lark.

What had been done to him, those acquainted with the art of renovation
could alone tell; but here was a contrariety without going far to find
it. The legs had been trimmed, the tail set up; and when the said John
Tattsall mounted him, the man and horse seemed to become each other.
John was a true specimen of an upright horse-dealer, a hundred years
ago. Coat was buttoned up, hat almost as conspicuous as the Field
Marshal's on the day of a grand review. Stick under his arm, easy seat
in his saddle, long spurs, short breeches, brown periwig, and such a
contour of character, that when he touched him with the spur, the
fiery-eyed charger set off at a Hyde Park canter, to the delight of his
learned spectators.

No one could be more pleased than Doctor Bull. "Aye! that is the way to
make the most of a horse. Could I but make as much of him as that, he
would be, of all creatures, the very one to set me up again? That will
do, Mr. Tattsall, that will do. You have given me a good lesson how to
make the most of a horse."

"Then, sir, you must let me make the most of him alone. One hundred
guineas, is his price; and this is my advice to you, never take this
horse out of his stable without giving him a good brush-up first. And
never get on to his back, without a pair of spurs on your feet; and you
will find him as pleasant a little park horse as any gentleman could
ever wish to ride."

The money was paid, and _John Tattsall made the most of him_. But Doctor
Bull made all that he expected out of him; namely, a restoration from a
fit of Hypochondriacism into which he never after relapsed; but owed his
cure to the honest advice of Geoffery Gambado, Esq. M.D. F.R.S.

              "The simplest remedy, is mostly sure;
              'Twill never kill; but almost always cure."




CHAPTER IV.

_Love and Wind._


The Doctor sat in his easy chair reading, as was his custom, the Morning
Star. That paper was then, what the Times is now. The Star had the
ascendant, but the Times outshone the Star. There is a season for every
thing under the sun; and two more variable things under the sun can
scarcely be mentioned, than the two at the head of this chapter. No two,
however, will, with all their variations of calm and storm, be more
lasting than these will be found to be, to the end of time. The Times,
and all connected therewith, will have an end. Love knows no end. The
Times may change as often as the winds, but it will be an ill wind
indeed that blows nobody any good.

But the Doctor was interrupted in his perusal of his paper by the
entrance of his factotum of a servant man, Samuel Footman. Sam was
steward and porter, and waiting man and butler, and a very worthy fellow
too, for in every thing he was trustworthy, the best quality any man
on earth, or woman either, can possess. Sam presented a card, saying the
gentleman's carriage was at the door, and he wanted to know if you were
at home. The Doctor looked at it. "Show Sir Nicholas Skinner up, Sam."

[Illustration]

There entered into the Doctor's presence the most melancholy
half-starved spectacle of humanity that he had ever seen; almost a
walking skeleton,--tall, thin, gaunt, and cadaverous,--melancholy in the
extreme, eyes sunken, lips drawn down so as almost to form a
semi-circular mouth; long, lank, thin light hair; a rough frill of the
most delicate white round his neck. His coat was buttoned round a waist
as thin as any woman's could be, and his eyes were sharp, black,
piercing, and poetical. "Pray, Sir Nicholas, be seated," said the good
Doctor, "you seem fatigued."

"I am so indeed! I have travelled all night, with post horses, all the
way from Salisbury, on purpose to consult you, Doctor; for I have heard
that you are famous in the cure of all nervous debility, and I verily
believe every nerve in my frame is shattered. How I have sustained the
journey and its fatigue I can scarcely tell; but I suppose it was the
hope of living for another, that gave me support."

Here the gentleman gave so long and so deep a drawn sigh, that it
convinced the Doctor at once, that this was one of those cases of
hopeless malady, _disappointed love_; which nothing but one thing could
either kill or cure, namely _matrimony_. The Doctor very seldom ventured
to recommend this universal specific for one thing or the other. It was
not exactly in his line.

"Let me feel your pulse." This he did; he also sounded his lungs, looked
into his eyes, and listened to the pulsation of his heart.

"Ah!" he said, "there is a little irregularity there. All is not exactly
right in the region of the heart. It appears to me to be slightly
disorganized."

"Not slightly, I assure you, Doctor; not slightly; I am afraid,
severely!" And this was spoken so very solemnly, that the Doctor, though
he felt disposed to smile, could not find it in his heart to treat the
case slightingly.

"Have you had any advice at Salisbury? Have you been under any medical
treatment?"

"O yes; yes, sir; Doctor Crosse has attended me for the last twelve
months. He treats my case as one of decline, or consumption. I was once
as robust as you are, Doctor; but I have wasted away to a shadow within
the space of one year."

"Pray, sir, are you a married man?"

"No-o-o! No-o-o! Not exactly that, but I am an engaged man. They do tell
me, I must be in better health before I marry; and that makes me very,
very anxious to get better. They will scarcely allow the slightest
breath of wind to blow upon me; no air, no exercise, no window down, no
curtain undrawn, one even temperature,--and nothing must disturb me. Oh!
Doctor, I fear I never shall marry. My intended is very careful over me.
She has come up, all the way to town with me, as my nurse; and is now in
my carriage at your door."

"Dear me, sir! why did you not tell me this before? It is actually
necessary that I should see your good nurse, and have a few minutes'
conversation with her. I am so glad you have brought her; it gives me
the greatest hope that I may be able to effect a cure."

The Doctor rang the bell. "Samuel, request the lady in the carriage to
step into the house. Show her into the drawing-room. With your
permission, Sir Nicholas, I will speak to her myself concerning your
treatment?"

The Doctor was expecting to see an elegant, lady-like woman, something
slender, and answering to the attenuated gentility of the being in whom
"hope deferred, evidently made the heart sick."

What was his astonishment when he beheld a blooming, buxom, short, fat,
merry-looking lass! with a face that sorrow seemed never to have
smitten. She wore a large hat and feathers; such a profusion of rich
brown hair, sweeping down her back, as would have made the Lord
Chancellor the finest wig in the land.

It is needless to relate the conversation. The Doctor soon found that
she was desirous of becoming Lady Nicholas Skinner, and very soon
settled the matter with great adroitness.

"_He must ride on horseback!_ You must make him do so. There is nothing
the matter with him, but over anxiety to be better; and it is all in
your hands. You, and you only, have the power of making him better."

"But about the wind?--state of the weather? what is your advice? east,
west, north, or south,--which is best?"

"No matter; the more wind the better gallop! Show him the way over
Salisbury Plains; and make him follow you. Take no notice whatever of
his feelings; but tell him, if he feels for you, he must keep pace with
you. He will soon be better!"

"But, about horses? There are no good riding horses in Salisbury."

"We will arrange that for you. Sir Nicholas may leave that to me. Only
assure him that he must persevere;--and let me know how he is, this day
month."

At the end of the month, the Doctor received the following epistles in
one cover; evidently meant to be a mutual acknowledgment.

                                   Salisbury, August 1st, 1774.

    "DEAR DOCTOR GAMBADO,--Love and wind have triumphed. The horses
    suited admirably; though I fear the one Sir Nicholas rides is rather
    short-winded, as he comes to a stand still before we have had half a
    gallop. Still, I thank you, he is greatly improved. It was hard
    work, and seemed very cruel at first, but he himself will tell you
    the news.

                  "I remain, Dear Doctor Gambado,
                                   Your's, gratefully,
                                       CLARISSA DOUBLEDAY."

                                    Salisbury, August 1st, 1774.

    "DEAR DOCTOR,--I enclose a cheque for £300 upon my banker in town;
    £200 for the horses, which are delightful creatures, and I thank you
    for obtaining them for us; and £100 for the last fee to Doctors!--by
    far the best; for I hope to be married in September. It is an ill
    wind that blows nobody good.

                "But in love, and wind, I remain, Dear Doctor,
                             Your's obliged,--NICHOLAS SKINNER."

     "Doctor Gambado,
            Bread street, Cheapside, London."


          Love blows a blast, to conquer every man,
              Let him resist it,--long he never can;
          'Twill conquer all, and in the end bring peace,
              Hurrah for love! true love can never cease!




CHAPTER V.

_How to ride a Horse on three Legs._


Fame never permits her votaries to rest, and once a man has gained a
certain reputation for any thing, he is wise who can be the humblest
under it, because he is conscious only of demerit. Should Fame desert
him, he will never sink under it. He will say, "I had a great deal more
than I deserved; let me be content." Wise man indeed! Doctor Gambado,
however, found that Fame did not desert him nor his practice. He was the
more sought after, the more personally-retired he would become.
Bread-street is not now celebrated for the worthies it was an hundred
years ago; but there are worthy men in it, and perhaps worthier than
those an hundred years ago, though not so celebrated for
_eccentricities_. Man's nature alters very materially under the
impression of time. Men inveigh against fashion; but the most convenient
fashion is that which is the simplest after all. Clerical habits
alter; externally they go for a class, a profession, or degree. We hope
that external feature will never be mistaken for internal; or the clergy
would be black indeed. Quakerism used to be a badge of simplicity in
dress and manners, till the self-possession of prosperity destroyed the
equanimity of judgment; and men set them down for exactly their worth.
But gently, my steed, gently; too long soliloquies generally make a man
yawn.

[Illustration]

Doctor Gambado had to go from London to York, and to visit no less a
person than one of the greatest ecclesiastical dignitaries of the land,
as the following letter will show.

                         "Precincts, York, October 10th, 1774.

    "SIR,--Doctor Greathead is desirous of consulting you, as speedily
    as possible; and if you have an eminent veterinary surgeon, who can
    accompany you, the Doctor will pay all expenses, as he has a
    favourite horse very ill. Travel post, if you please.

                         I am sir, your humble servant,
                             GEORGE GOTOBED, Hon. Sec. &c. &c."

Characteristic of simplicity was the Doctor's letter, that very instant,
to John Tattsall, written on a scrap and sent by his own servant.

    "JOHN,--Will you be ready to start for York in an hour?

                               "Your's,--GAMBADO."

John's reply was more laconic.

    "Yes.

                                  "Your's,--J. T."

In one hour see this loving couple off for York. Each confiding in the
other's integrity, they each took plenty of money with them. At that
time, travelling by post or by coach was no joke. In a general way, from
London to York was a four days' journey; but now, four hours will do
great things.

We are not going to bother our readers with a description of all the
adventures of these worthies on their way. How many times they were
upset. How many times the post boy's horse fell down. How many spokes,
fellies, or hobs, were splintered. Let it suffice that, with two such
resolute men inside, who were never at a loss for contrivances under the
very worst circumstances, they were sure to get safely through the
journey.

Had the reader seen the blunderbuss,--yes, the bell-mouthed brass
blunderbuss,--with a strange springing bayonet at the muzzle, the moment
it was discharged, and this placed in the fore front of the carriage,
directly opposite the sword case behind, he would indeed have said the
Doctor was well provided against any robbers of the Yorkshire Ridings.

John, too, had a brace of pistols under his belt. They had no occasion,
however to use them. They were conspicuous enough to every post-boy,
waiter, and stable-keeper. Whether that kept them from an attack, we
know not; but they were not attacked, and arrived safely at the then
celebrated Precincts, close to the Cathedral.

They found the great Doctor Greathead, seated in an invalid chair, about
four o'clock in the afternoon. His first words of salutation were those
of hospitality.

"Gentlemen, have you had any refreshment after your journey?"

Doctor Gambado declared they had only just stept out of the carriage.

"Before I converse with the gentlemen, show them into the refectory. I
will be prepared, half an hour hence, for our consultation."

Glad was Doctor Gambado, to refresh his stomach after travel, and not
less glad John Tattsall to partake of the great divine's hospitality.

They did ample justice to the good things set before them; and as
neither of them had any favour to ask of this great man, but both had
something to confer, they were in no fear of taking too much or too
little.

The butler was very attentive, and asked if they had had any adventures
upon the road. Of course he received a courteous reply. The Doctor
inquired if there was any thing new in York. New York was then unknown;
but _York New Theatre_ was then the go all over the north. It was just
finished in most exquisite style, and was in fact the lion of the north.

"You will have plenty to see, sir," said the butler, "if you never were
at York before. Our Minster is the wonder of the world."

"But your master, he must be a wonder?"

Very few masters are wonders in their butler's eyes, though many a
butler becomes a wonder in the service of his master.

"There is nothing very wonderful about my master, except his present
indisposition; and I most sincerely hope that your visit may do him
good."

The butler had great respect for Doctors, and for Doctors that had
before them the title of Right Reverend, or His Grace, or My Lord, or
The Venerable; and these or some of these, he was accustomed to see
every day; but an M.D. F.R.S. was not often in his view. He had noted
these letters upon Doctor Gambado's card. The other gentleman had no
card, and, therefore, he concluded that he was the greater man.

The footman came in to announce that his master was ready to receive
Doctor Gambado and his friend.

There was something formidable in entering the presence of so great a
divine as Doctor Greathead; but they were not going in for an
examination of themselves, but to examine.

"Now, my friends, I can talk to you. I did not like talking to starving
men, lest they should be ready to eat me up; and you will say, they
would have enough to do to do that. But there are no cannibals at York,
or I might have been eaten up long ago. Still, I regret to say that I
have a disease preying upon my vitals; and except you can prescribe a
cure, Doctor, I am afraid it is all up with me."

"We can prescribe no cure, without understanding the nature of the
complaint."

"But it is that which puzzles the faculty in York. They say I have no
bodily complaint; that it is all upon the _nerves_; and therefore it is,
that in applying to my friend, Doctor Turnbull, to know if he knew any
physician in London celebrated for his knowledge of the treatment of
nervous cases, he mentioned you as the author of a book upon the nervous
system; and I desired my secretary to write to you. You have well done
to come to us, and we hope to receive benefit from your advice."

"I am obliged to Doctor Turnbull, for the mention of my name; but I must
make some inquiries about your bodily health?"

"How is your appetite?" "Good."

"How is your sleep?" "Good."

"How is your sight?" "Good."

"How is your pulse?" "Try it."

"What do you say yourself?" "It is good."

"Have you any fever?" "None."

"Have you any particular pain?" "No."

"Do you walk much?" "No."

"Do you ride much?"

"I can ride no longer; and I fear this is one of the painful causes of
my strange distemper."

"Are you accustomed to horseback exercise?"

"Constant: I used to ride on the Carlisle road every day, till about a
month since, and now I never ride."

"Why not?"

"I have lost the fancy or taste for it, and somehow I care no longer
about it."

"Ah! that's bad! That's bad of itself. You met with no accident, to give
your nervous system a shock, did you?"

"None whatever, except that my favourite old horse could go no longer,
and I no longer felt inclined to go."

"But there are other horses that might be had equally as good."

"None, sir, None! I do not believe there is another horse in England
that could carry me, like my old gray."

"If Yorkshire cannot suit you, I know no other county in the kingdom
likely to do so. Surely, Doctor Greathead, you must be deceived in this
respect?"

"Deceived or not, Doctor Gambado, I am not deceived in saying this, that
I will ride no other horse; and, in fact, I would rather ride that horse
on three legs, if he could be made to go upon them, then any other horse
upon four."

Great men as well as little men have singular crotchets in their heads
sometimes; and if these crotchets cannot be altered, they will go on in
such a monotonous tone that they never get out of it. The Doctor was a
learned scholar, and a very good divine; but his favourite horse was as
dear to him as a lady's favourite cat or cap could be to her.

He had rode the same horse ten years, and had got so attached to him,
that when that horse was seized with a lameness in the off hind leg, and
could no longer stand or go upon it, the Doctor's sympathies increased
with his favourite, though he was no longer any use to him. Like his
master, the animal fed well, and could sleep well, but he could not go.

"Have you seen my horse?"

"I came to see yourself first, Doctor, and I can have no objection to go
and see your horse, in company with my friend Mr. John Tattsall, who I
should say knows more of a horse than any man living; and can make a
horse go, I verily believe, on three legs."

The very idea gave animation to Doctor Greathead's features.

"I will walk with you to the stables."

He rang the bell, ordered his hat, gloves, and even his riding whip, so
precocious was the idea that the Doctor had conceived of being able to
mount once more his favourite gray.

The horse was led out, and came out upon three legs; the other evidently
of no use to him. In fact he could not put it to the ground.

John examined the sturdy old fellow, who had a small head and stout
legs; he pronounced him to be afflicted with an incurable disease in the
coffin-bone, and said he never could go upon that leg. He looked at all
the other limbs, and pronounced them _all right_.

"A fine old horse, your Reverence; a fine old horse, fit to carry your
worship's weight; but he never will go again upon all fours."

"Can he ever be made to go upon three?"

"I see no reason to doubt it. The disabled limb is only such from the
fetlock to the hoof; if the joint could be supported from the hock to
the fetlock, and pressure be produced so as to keep that leg up to his
body, without any weight falling upon the tendons of the foot, I see no
reason why the horse should not canter upon three legs,--I do not say
with the same ease as he would upon four sound ones; but certainly
easier far than he could upon the four as they now are."

"You are a sensible man, sir, and what you say seems feasible. What
would you suggest?"

"Let one of your grooms go and get a Yorkshire weaver's strap that will
go once round the animal's body, and at the same time catch up the
animal's leg,--and fasten it with a stout Birmingham buckle, so that the
power shall be exerted in the leg bone without the fetlock or the foot;
and I think your Reverence will be able to show to all the world _how to
ride a horse on three legs_."

"Good! good! Let it be done immediately: I verily believe it can be
done."

It literally was done, and in one hour Doctor Greathead showed that he
himself was alive again. He mounted his favourite gray; and though the
animal laid its ears, and lifted up its hind quarters, rather higher
than usual, it went; and did perform what the Doctor never expected it
to do again--namely, carried him a mile on the Carlisle road, and that
without a fall.

It did the Doctor good whenever he did ride it. How often that was, we
have no record to tell us.

He paid the Doctor of Medicine and his friend John Tattsall more than
would have purchased three fine Yorkshire horses. In fact he paid for
his whim.

He was cured of his whim.

And Doctor Gambado and his friend John returned to town satisfied.

          If men have fancies, bugbears of the mind,
            And money, too, to pay for what they want;
          Why should they not, like Doctor Greathead, find
            Their fancies made to profit more than cant?
          We all have fancies! what more should we say,
          Than if we would indulge them, we must pay?

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI.

_Tricks upon Travellers._


The descent from the sublime to the ridiculous is a very easy transition
in this mortal life. Even in the moments of utmost seriousness, we have
seen something flit across the vision of the brain, or eye, or the
spirit, that for a moment diverts the current of thought from the
simplicity of the most devout and earnest Christian. Every moment we
learn a new lesson of life and thought, from nature or from grace.

Thoughts are continually arising as to the probability of doing anyone
any good, in these narratives. They form a diversion of thought, and
much must depend upon the disposition of the mind of the reader. A good
man will make some good out of every thing, and a bad man will find
nothing good in anything.

To look simply at the picture, and to laugh at it, is easy; but to say,
that they who played tricks upon others deserved to be whipped out of
them, might be easier said than done.

Among the Doctor's patients was a singular mean old gentleman, Sir
Abraham Crusty, who was recommended by the Doctor to ride out hunting,
or to give the hounds a look, by way of diversion to his usual
nothingness in his country-box. Sir Abraham had retired from city
friends, city business, city thoughts,--to enjoy, as he hoped, the
breezes and the green fields, and rural occupation at his country seat
in Surrey; but being very hypochondriacal and very mean as well, he was
desirous of being as economical as possible, and not desirous of being
considered a regular fox-hunter.

He could look on, enjoy the variety, and not be expected to pay anything
towards the support of the hounds. Hence he would drop in upon them,
look at them, ride a little way with them, and then return quietly to
his own mansion. He would not keep a hunting stud, nor any man-servant
to ride out with him. He was old enough to take care of himself, wise to
do his own will, and mean enough to think about nobody else but himself.

When he consulted the Doctor, and was told what to do, he asked him if
he could tell him the best way to do it. "Go to John Tattsall's, buy a
steady hunter with good strong limbs, and one that will make no
mistake."

He did so: but John mistook him for an old farmer, and, consequently,
gave him a good old hunter for a very little money. Any body might take
Sir Abraham Crusty for what they pleased, so long as they did not take
too much of his money; and that he took care not to throw away upon even
saddle, bridle, or riding whip, for he rode on an old saddle covered
with a thick cloth, and had a drover's cart whip for his hunting whip;
and few would imagine Sir Abraham was going out to follow the hounds. He
used to go himself overnight to the King Charles in the Oak, sleep
there, and, as if he were merely a travelling man of business, who came
for lodging for man and beast, he paid packman's fare for supper at
night, and breakfasted upon eggs and bacon in the morning; and started
off quietly for the covert's side, without any intention of being
considered a hunter.

He went, however, one day with a very bitter complaint to Doctor
Gambado, saying, he thought his horse would be the death of him, for
that he never started from the Royal Oak without such a violent fit of
kicking, that he was afraid of a fall; and that made him so nervous, he
thought the Doctor ought to return him his fee, and Mr. Tattsall take
the horse back and allow him something handsome for his keep of it.

"And so I will," replied the Doctor, "if John Tattsall do not cure him,
or at least account for his kicking."

"Where do you say he exhibits these tricks?" said John.

"At the Royal Oak, Norwood."

John was there the next Easter hunt day. So was Sir Abraham.

John saw him start, and saw that two urchins, viz. the post boy and the
boots, stuck a stick under his tail, which seldom fell off until the old
gentleman had had quite enough of the kicking. But once the stick
dropped, the old horse went quiet enough.

When Sir Abraham was gone, John came from his dormitory, and soon put
this question to the lads:

"Why do you treat that old gentleman in this shabby way?"

"Vy, sar, because he is a shabby, crusty old fellow, and treats all the
sarvents of the hestablishment in the shabbiest vay. He pays for his
bed, and for his 'orse's bed,--for his board, and his 'orse's
board,--but he never gives Sal anything, vat beds him up at night, nor
Bill anything, vat beds his 'orse up,--nor me anything, vat cleans his
old boots for him; so ve just shows him vun of our tricks upon
travellers: that's all, and sarves him right."

This was told to the Doctor, who, the next time he saw Sir Abraham, said
to him:

"Sir Abraham, you will forgive my honesty; but, if you wish to cure your
horse of kicking at the Royal Oak, you must know how to be penny wise,
and pay the chambermaid, the hostler, and the boots. I am sure you will
never be pound foolish."

Sir Abraham took the hint, and the horse never kicked again at the King
Charles in the Oak.

          To all their dues, let no man flinch to pay,
          If he would prosper in an honest way;
          Customs are good, if carried not too far,
          And a good custom, oft prevents a jar;
          Sir Abraham's horse no more gave out his kicks,
          Nor John nor Bill on travellers played tricks.




CHAPTER VII.

_How to prevent a Horse slipping his Girth._


"My dear Gambado," said Lord Rosier to the Doctor, "I know not how I
shall ever repay you for your good advice. I am your debtor, for two
things; first for inducing me to take up horseback exercise again, and
then for recommending me to your friend John Tattsall, who has furnished
me with a most excellent trotter, and one that does one good to ride
it."

"I am glad to hear it, my Lord: but to what purpose is your visit to me
this morning? You look the picture of health; I hope nothing is the
matter."

"Oh! dear no! Nothing is the matter with me; but, I thought I might,
without any intentional offence, just call and speak to you about the
horse. I hope I do not offend."

"By no means, my Lord; pray go on. Your Lordship will not impute to me
any thing wrong in the character of the horse?"

[Illustration]

"By no means, Doctor; by no means. I only sought your advice, because I
thought you so skillful that you could get me into the right method of
treating a horse."

"Humph!"

This was the first direct slap at the Doctor's _veterinary powers_. He
had a request from York to bring with him a _veterinary surgeon_; but he
was now consulted by a British nobleman about the treatment of a horse.
Well, thought the Doctor, let us hear the complaint; for after all it
may be the fault of the rider more than of the beast.

"What is the matter, my Lord?"

"It is simply this,--the creature, though in every other respect a
suitable one, has a strange propensity or habit of slipping his girths;
so that when I have rode out a mile or two, I find myself upon his rump;
and once, indeed, I happened to let go the reins, and the saddle came
over his tail, and I slipped off behind. He then quietly walked out of
his saddle and went away, leaving me to carry my own saddle to the
nearest hostelry, and to have a walk home, instead of a ride."

"My Lord, you acknowledge that it was your own fault for letting go the
reins. Never, under any circumstances, let the reins go out of your own
hands; if you do, you are sure to have a fall. The same, my Lord, with
all who hold the reins of government; a tight rein can always be
sufficiently slackened, when an improvement is required in the pace; but
once let them entirely go, and you have no longer any power to guide.
Your horse must run away, and you must have a fall."

"But what is a man to do, when he finds that the animal he rides gets
the bit into his mouth, and bores so strongly upon his arms that it
gives him the cramp in his muscles to hold the reins in his hands?"

"There you puzzle me. I confess, I should very soon give up riding such
a horse altogether. But," said the Doctor, looking at his watch, "if you
do not mind walking with me as far as Tattsall's, I think John could
give you better advice upon this head than I can. Come, it is worth the
trouble."

"With all my heart: I esteem it a favour. My groom shall lead the horse
to his stables, and we will walk on after him."

The Doctor and his noble patient were soon in John Tattsall's yard.

"John, I have brought Lord Rosier to you, to learn a lesson. He is in a
fix about a horse he bought of you, which he approves in every other
respect but that of slipping his girth; can you tell the gentleman how
to prevent it?"

"To be sure I can, Doctor, if the gentleman will only condescend to
give me a little attention. I will mount the horse myself, and show him
how I prevent the horse from slipping his girths." He did so; and when
he gave up the horse, he said, "There, sir, observe what I have done.

"Stick your feet, my Lord, home in the stirrups, press all your weight
thereupon, and so push the saddle forward. If the horse bores upon your
arms, bore him well with your legs the moment he lifts his head; the
saddle, if it has slipped, will immediately regain its position. And
when he bores his head down again, you have nothing to do but to repeat
the boring him in his sides; and as the horse suits your Lordship so
well, this will only form a little agreeable variety of exercise for the
benefit of your Lordship's health; which I am heartily glad to find so
greatly improved."

"Thank you, John; thank you, it will do, it will do!"

               'Tis a bore, a horse to ride,
               Slipping girths from side to side;
               'Tis a bore with many pains,
               For a man to lose the reins.

               Keep your seat, and keep command,
               And hold your bridle well in hand:
               Fast and firm the steed will go.
               And slips and slides you'll never know.




CHAPTER VIII.

_How to ride without a Bridle._


"Doctor, what am I to do?" said Mr. Broadcloth, the wealthy tailor of
Bond-street. "Here am I, just fifty years of age, now in the prime of
life, and cannot enjoy a moment's content. I have forty-nine hands at
work for me, in my shop every day, beside piece-work out-doors. I have
six runners of errands; four porters, to carry out my goods, and to
bring me home work. Beside all this, I have such incessant customers to
be measured, and coats to make, that from morning to night I hear
nothing but snip go, snip go, snip go! and although I work like a
journeyman, I half wish I was one of my own porters, and could go from
house to house for fresh air and exercise."

"Oh, my dear sir!" said the Doctor, "you must ride on horseback,--you
must indeed! you must be a journey-man yourself,--carry out your
clothes to Clapham, and find yourself all the better in health and
spirits."

[Illustration]

"Doctor, I have heard that all who can do as you bid them, are sure to
recover."

         "The first of all blessings is health,--for without it
         Men may think there's enjoyment in life,--but I doubt it."

"Then recover yourself, and you will own my advice to be good."

"What shall I do for a horse?"

"Do as everybody else does,--go to John Tattsall's, and get the horse
that will suit you. I shall be glad to see you on one."

The tailor was soon mounted;--but it is one thing to be
mounted,--another to be seated.

He soon complained to Mr. Tattsall, that the horse he had bought of him
would not mind the bridle.

"Then," says John, "ride him without one. In fact, your horse did belong
to a lame letter-carrier, and he never rode him with a bridle. You may
have one round his neck by way of a check rein; but this horse, you will
find, will never deceive you.

"You have nothing to do but to mount, and say, 'Go on:' he will be off
in a gentle canter along the gutter, keeping close to the pavement,
avoiding the lamp posts, oyster stalls, orange tables, trucks, and
barrows; and whenever you say 'Wo-ho,' he will make a dead stop. You may
get off, and wait an hour, if you like, he will never stir, but will
know how to take care of himself; only give him a bit of carrot or an
apple, just to let him know you are his master, as the poor old lame
duck did,--and you may mount and say 'Go on,' and 'Wo-ho,' twenty times
in a day,--and he will obey you. You will not need a bridle or a rein."

Mr. Broadcloth did so,--and never complained of his horse after,--and
quite recovered of his complaint.

          Go on!--wo-ho! Good words will all command,
          And gentle treatment bring the steed to hand.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER IX.

_How to make a Mare go._


"Money makes the mare to go," is a very old proverb. Very few men have
read the original poem upon this subject, except they have met with a
very old volume of Crashaw's Poems.

          "Will thou lend me thy mare to go a mile?
          No, she is lame, leaping over a stile.
          But if thou wilt her to me spare,
          I'll give thee money for thy mare.
          Ho! ho! say ye so?
          Money makes the mare to go."

But one of the Doctor's patients was an old active fishmonger, of the
name of Sturgeon; one well to do indeed in his line, a hundred years
ago. There are a great many who now supply the London market, without
any of that hard road work from Greenwich to Billingsgate. Now trains
run to and fro, and fish are alive in London from the smacks. But it was
smack and go, then, with carts every morning, one after the other in
succession, loaded almost top heavy. Then there was unpacking, packing
and off for the coaches, Times, Phenomena, Telegraph, Exeter Mail,
Yorkshire Old Blue, and a host of others, to supply provincial
fishmongers, &c. and great houses in the country.

But Mr. Sturgeon had, by command of his surgeon, to drive no longer. But
Doctor Gambado insisted upon it, that he must ride on horseback. Now Mr.
Sturgeon had a very favourite mare, which could trot well in harness;
but could not be persuaded into any but a slow pace, if any one rode on
her back.

"What would I not give," he said to the Doctor, "if she could be made to
go."

"Well," said the Doctor, "money makes the mare to go; and I have no
doubt old John Tattsall, who was never yet at a loss what to do with
horseflesh, would soon put you into the way of making your mare to go."

"What! with me on her back?"

"Oh, yes! and another besides, if wanted."

John was duly consulted.

"Well, Mr. Sturgeon, I see no difficulty in the matter. It requires only
a little courage on your part, and I am sure you will find it answer
you purpose well. You have nothing to do, but exercise a little
ingenuity in your own line. When you are next at Greenwich, just take a
good strong lobster, with a pair of tremendous claws; fasten him by the
tail to the inside of your fishmonger's coat, and let his head and
clinchers hang out against the mare's flank. Sit you firm in the saddle,
with your feet well out of the black pincher's way. One gripe, and the
mare will go like a shot; nor will she stop to let you pick up your hat
and wig; but wherever her stable is in town, you will see she will never
stop till she reaches it."

The trial was made, and

          Away went Sturgeon, like a shot,--
          Away, away! The mare could trot;
          And so she did,--nor did she pause.--
          John Tattsall gained the world's applause;
          For one sharp bite upon the side,
          And such a gripe of hair and hide,
          The monster held within his claw,
          That Sturgeon scarce could hold her jaw.
          With head uplift, and leg up high,
          The mare, like swallow, seemed to fly,
          And soon, from Sturgeon's round bald pate,
          The wig and hat flew o'er the gate;
          But on rode Sturgeon, made to know
          How well to make a mare to go.




CHAPTER X.

_The Tumbler, or its Affinities._


We cannot narrate all the varieties of patients the Doctor had to deal
with. We leave the ladies' cases out of the question, though he strongly
recommended to them his great receipt--a ride on horseback.

Of all the difficult cases the Doctor had to deal with, was that of a
little stingy, dyspeptic, middle aged pin-man, retired from business,
and resident in Pimlico.

He was never satisfied. No one could convince him that he was not a good
rider, though he had caused more broken-kneed horses in one month, than
any other rider had made in twelve months. He literally went by the name
of Tumble-down-Pincushion. It was no use furnishing him with a good
horse; down it would come before long, and the little man would roll
over like a pincushion; pick himself up, and declare it was the fault
of the horse.

[Illustration]

He would exasperate his Doctor, and his Doctor's friend, by pretending
to show them how a man ought to sit on horseback; and truly, if ever
there was a contrast visible, it was in the upright figure of John
Tattsall on horseback, and Mr. Jeremiah Hinchman, the retired pin-man of
Pimlico. John always knew how to make the most of a horse. Mr. Hinchman
never did make any thing but the least of himself and of his horse also.
There was a strange affinity between his horse and himself,--at least,
between him and one, a favourite rat-tailed sorrel gray. If it tumbled
down, it was never disturbed: it was so accustomed to the affinity with
the ground, that its knees became hardened with a species of horney
excrescence, that seldom showed any thing but dirt, if it did tumble.
Nor did the little man either, for having a remarkably light weight in
the saddle, and a prominent disposition to bend over his horse's neck,
he generally cast a very light summersault in his exit from the seat to
the ground.

"I wish," he said one day to Mr. Tattsall, in no very amiable mood, "I
wish you would put me in some way of not falling off the
tumble-down-horses which you sent me."

"Sir," said Tattsall, "I would not let you ride a horse of mine, till
you had paid for it as your own, or paid me the price of it, by way of
insurance against the surety of his being a tumbler in your hands. You
say you are suited with a very quiet tumbler, and one that takes it easy
when he is down. You want yourself to be made to take it as easy as your
horse; and, now, sir, to prove my readiness to serve you as a customer,
and to serve you well too, I will put you into a way of having such
affinity with your horse, that you shall tumble off no more."

"If you do," said Mr. Hinchman, "I will forgive you for having sent me
twenty horses, not one of which could keep its legs, or keep me on his
back."

John was not easily puzzled.

"Sir," said he, "you must manage the thing your own self. Only just hear
my proposed plan. Let an incision be made in two places upon each flap
of the saddle; let a thong pass under the saddle-flap, and tie it
yourself over your knee. You will then never fall off; but be enabled to
keep your seat until your horse shall rise again with ease, and you thus
prove the truth of the motto

          The Tumbler, or its Affinities.

Affinity is defined by Johnson, to be relation by marriage, as opposed
to consanguinity,--by others, as relation or agreeableness between
things. No one could think of Mr. Hinchman being of the same
consanguinity as his horse Tumbler, but as a relation of agreeableness
between two things, in this latter, the tumbler had his affinity with
his master.

          Thus they kept the road together,
          Whether fine or foul the weather;
          And when they tumbled, both went down;
          And when they rose, they both went on.
          So on they went, and all men's eyes
          Saw Tumblers with Affinities.




CHAPTER XI.

_How to do Things by Halves._


There is an old saying, and generally considered a good one: "Never do
things by halves." But there are exceptions to every rule, and the
sending a banknote by halves, is one of them; and a very good exception
too. We wish anyone who reads this, would only be induced to send to the
Publisher half a bank of England note, and get it acknowledged by the
Author, for the good work he has in hand, even in this publication; and
he will be sure to be rejoiced to receive the other half as well, and
acknowledge that things done by halves, may answer a better purpose than
the being done all at once.

Meet an old friend half way, and I'll warrant you they will go together
the other half ten thousand times more pleasantly than if they had both
met only at the journey's end. Still, in a general way, things done by
halves do not always fit, so as to make the whole agreeable. They may
become so conjoint as to be agreeable to each other; but who does not
like to see a good house built all at once, rather than patched from
time to time? Who likes to see a church half restored, and half a ruin?
So, who likes to have half the heart of his sweetheart, and never to
have the whole. Let him learn to have a whole heart himself, first, and
he will be sure to possess the whole heart of another, and fulfil the
whole law.

[Illustration]

Alderman Goodbeheard, who had been one of Doctor Gambado's patients,
delighted, when in the country, to see the hounds; but being a very
portly person, and not one of the highflyers in the field, he told John
Tattsall, that he wanted a horse that would get over gates and styles,
without taking a flying leap. He must have one that could creep over
them, by putting first his forelegs on, and then his hind, so as to give
him time to lean forward and to lean backward, without those sudden
jerks, which he had seen some gentlemen get in the saddle. He did not
mind his horse breaking a bar or so, provided he did no mischief to
himself or to his rider; for, as the Alderman generally rode along
convenient roads and footpaths, he wished to do so with comfort to
himself and convenience to his creature.

"I see, sir," said John; "you want a creeper, that will do things by
halves."

"Exactly so, sir! exactly so, sir!"

"I can suit your worship well, only you must keep a whip, constantly to
ride behind you, just to teach the animal to do as he was taught, to do
things by halves."

"If you can find me a lad to do this, I should be glad to have him in my
service."

"I have a groom in my service, who would just suit your purpose. He has,
in fact, been the trainer of the animal to do just that kind of thing."

"Capital! capital! I will furnish him with scarlet coat and cap, boots
and spurs, whip and saddle, and pay him £2 2s. per week, until the end
of the hunting season, when you may have him again to train other horses
how to do things by halves."

          So paid the Alderman his groom,
          And found in hunting he had lost his gloom;
          For though, by halves, the hunter's work was done,
          The master and his man both shared the fun.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XII.

_Doctor Cassock, F.R.S. I.P.Q._


Doctor Cassock was, in his day, a most extraordinary man: he was a
double-first at Oxford, a scholar, and a gentleman. He was a most
benevolent little man, and Doctor Gambado's friend and pastor, both well
read and well bred. But he was ever cultivating his inventive faculty to
do good. In his visits to the poor, he invented new bed-rests, new
cradles, new spring beds, new comforts of every kind. He was a great
inventor of puzzle locks,--puzzle keys,--puzzle cupboards, doors, window
frames, and fire-guards. In short there was, as he used to say, no
device in the grave; therefore, he was ever starting something new.

Many a mechanic was indebted to him, and many a printer,--for in his
church of St. Mildred's, in the Poultry, he was the first to put aside
the old English black-letter character of the Bible and Prayer-book, and
to assume the type, which holds fast in all good printing-offices to
the present day. His sermons were always new, and were the only things
in which he might be said to puzzle nobody; for they were plain, simple
sermons of solid truth and practical utility.

He loved every soul, and being an acknowledged well-read scholar, he was
more popular among his people than anyone who tried to gain popularity.
His inventive faculty, had it been in the present age, instead of one
hundred years ago, might have procured him the celebrity of a Brunel,
and a fortune; but his scheming being always for others, he at last
puzzled or puddled his own affairs so as to involve himself and his
means in difficulties; and becoming very low spirited, the friend of
others had to go and consult Doctor Gambado, and to tell him at once
that he came to be a charity patient, for he had not a guinea in the
world to give him.

"My dear, Cassock," said the Doctor, "in carrying out your various
projects, you have forgotten that learning and wisdom should be joint
companions; that they are of little worth when separate, but of
inestimable value when united."

"You speak truth, my dear Gambado; and I find, by experience, that a
word of wisdom will often go further than a purse full of guineas. Quite
right. But you have known me long enough to observe, that I have ever
thought the practical part of my profession superior to all the learned
part."

"That may be true. But, Doctor, you have not confined either your
teaching or your practice to the duties of your profession. I deny not
that you have done good to many. You have done me a great deal of good;
for, to a certainty, I never knew you preach one thing and practice
another. Yet, sometimes, I have known you interest yourself so deeply in
imaginary inventions, as to persuade yourself that you were doing good,
when you were entirely mistaken."

The Doctor sighed, and simply said, "Gambado, we can never all think
alike, any more than we can all be alike. You have done right and made
your fortune; while my coat is threadbare, and I begin to want."

"All, believe me, Doctor, is as it should be. You want my advice gratis.
I always have had yours gratis, and profitted by it, and loved it. Now,
if you will take my advice, I will take yours, and so we shall find
mutual accommodation."

"What is your advice?"

"Ride on horseback."

"How can I do so? One hundred pounds in debt, and only one hundred
pounds per annum. I cannot starve a year, and ride on horseback too.
You give advice I cannot follow."

"I should be sorry to do so. I will write you a prescription, but you
must take it yourself to be made up in Lombard-street; and I will write
you a note, which you must take to Mr. John Tattsall.

"Just read that paper, while I write the prescription, Doctor Cassock."

        "Messrs Gold, Silver, and Company, Bankers, Lombard-street. Pay the
        bearer £100 on account of,
                              "Your's, faithfully,
        £100.                      GEOFFERY GAMBADO"

    "DEAR JOHN,--Give my old friend, Doctor Cassock, just such a nag as
    the first I had of you for £50, and I will pay you for it,--for its
    keep, and for its stable room,--groom and all,--so that the Doctor
    may always find it saddled and bridled, and have nothing to pay; but
    set all down to the account of,
                                 "Your's at command,
                                          GEOFFERY GAMBADO."
        "Mr. John Tattsall."

A tear rose to the eye of Doctor Cassock, as his friend handed to him
both the notes; and he felt that species of choaking sensation, which a
good man feels at the unexpected generosity of a real friend.

"Oh, Gambado! what advice can I ever have given to you, worthy such
generosity as this?"

"My dear old friend, I will tell you at once that I only follow out the
text upon which you preached yesterday:

"'Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do unto them:
for this is the law, and the prophets.' I have only done as I would be
done by."

The Doctor could only say, "God bless you."

He was soon after enabled to repay the Doctor; for a distant relation
left him an independence, a few weeks after; and he became the merriest,
if not the wisest, old gentleman of his day.

He could not, even then, leave off the faculty of invention; for he
became the noted inventor of a noble puzzle, for Tumble-down horses. He
was actually induced to take out a patent for it. He never found any
body but himself to use it. He did use it, though in his case it never
was wanted, for his horse never tumbled down with him; and he put
everyone who saw him riding with it, in such a merry mood, that it was
difficult to say which laughed the heartiest, the Doctor himself, or
those who beheld him.

          A friend in need is a friend indeed;
            If you find him, own his worth;
          He has never a word, but 'tis always God speed,
            From the east to west, from south to north;
          Do good to all, and do evil to none,
          And do to others,--what should be done.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIII.

_A Daisy Cutter, with his Varieties._


In the month of July, 1780, Doctor Geoffery Gambado was visited, from
Birmingham, by the celebrated cutler, Mr. John Green, a gentleman who
had become uncommonly dyspeptic from a great excrescence, wart, or wen,
that grew out of his right temple, almost covering his ear. It gave him
no particular pain, except when he chanced to recline upon that part of
his head; yet, as every body looked at it, who came into his shop, and
when he appeared at church, or in any public place, he grew uncommonly
irritable and nervous. The faculty pronounced it too large to be cut
out; and, if the truth be told, Mr. Green himself had such a horror of
cutting, that, though a dealer in cutlery and in the very first steel
articles, he had an unconquerable distaste to the knife being used upon
his own person.

Like many other good kind of men, he dealt in articles that others
might use; but he himself had no wish to use them. Those who use the
sinews of men, that is, of other men, for their own speculative
purposes, and actually abhor the use of the very things they sell,
should be careful of the exciting, inciting, or foolish words they
utter, lest their language should superinduce others to use those
articles in which their traffic is, to their own destruction. Mr.
Burton, the great Quaker, was a dealer in Burton ale to a great extent,
though he was himself a rigidly abstemious man; yet, as his trade was a
good one, and paid well both in the north and south, he could afford to
give considerable sums to temperance, or even total abstinence
societies, without feeling any loss in his trade. The fact is, until the
bright men of traffic shall find out that the ruling principle of their
souls is coveteousness, they will never reform the world by a spurious
profusion of words and calculations, which have only that one principle
to appeal to as their own support.

Mr. Green dealt in swords, and knives and forks, in guns and pistols, in
lancets and razors; but he would not suffer the lancet or the knife to
touch his own flesh. He was a dealer in weapons, not in blows. A man of
peace, yet, like many a man styling himself a friend to humanity, and
assuming apostolic liberty, he could find fault with every thing and
every body; yet, for trade's sake, he had no objection to the demand
for swords, guns, or pistols. He could supply the government with any
quantity from his stores in Birmingham.

It must be confessed, that his nervous affection, and melancholy
disposition arose more from the wart upon his brow, and all its external
irritations, than from any qualms of conscience, arising from any kind
of self examination, self accusation, or self condemnation. Few men's
consciences so trouble them in the day of their prosperity.

He was recommended to consult the great nervous Doctor of the age,
Doctor Gambado. So he went to town, had an interview with the Doctor,
described all his agitating ails, and received this advice:

"Ride on horseback."

"But do you think that will do me any good?"

"I am quite sure it will do you some good,--to what extent it is
impossible to say,--that must depend upon your patience and
perseverance. One thing you can always do, namely, wear a hat that will
cover the appearance of the excrescence, and I should not be surprised
at its being the means of reducing its size considerably."

Little did the Doctor himself imagine how a cure, by his advice, was
completely effected.

"Oh, Doctor!" exclaimed Mr. Green, "what would I not give could it be
entirely eradicated by such gentle means as horseback exercise. I am no
great rider, but I would ride any distance, and almost any horse, to get
rid of this awkward protuberance."

"Well, my dear sir, we will try. Nothing like trying."

"I have heard, Doctor, that you have large stables, and keep horses of
all kinds."

The Doctor could not help smiling when he thought of his own fame, as a
horse keeper, horse doctor, and horse furnisher.

"I have large stables at the back of my house, and I have three horses
of my own; but I never kept one for sale, or sold one myself. I let off
my stables to a livery-keeper, who has ten or a dozen horses here,
namely to Mr. John Tattsall, who has the credit of being able to suit
everyone, only each must pay well to be suited."

"I should not mind what I had to pay, if I could be suited to my mind."

"Let us go and give him a look. If you can at all describe to him the
sort of horse you want, I think he will soon be able to accommodate you.
You may be sure, if the horse can be had, he will get it for you, if it
is not at this time in his stable."

The Doctor's fee was cheerfully paid, £10 10s. neatly wrapt up in tissue
paper. He had been told nothing less could be expected from a master
cutler.

Mr. Green put on his large slouchy broad-brimmed hat that covered half
his face; and the Doctor and his patient were soon in the presence of
the great Mr. Tattsall.

"John, this gentleman wants a horse."

"Glad of it, sir. Pray what sort of horse do you want, sir?"

"A good one."

"Every body wants that, and I have a great many good 'uns;' but I like
to know the sort of good 'un that a gentleman requires. One man likes a
bay, another a gray, another a roan, another a chestnut; but the colour
is not always the description. One likes a high action, another a gentle
goer, another a thunderer, another a prime bang up; one likes a
thorough-bred, another a hunter; some require cobs, others carriage
horses, others ladies' horses, others park horses; but if you can
describe the sort of animal you want, I can soon tell you if I can suit
you."

"I did once see a horse," said Mr. Green, evidently calling up to his
recollection days long gone by; "I did once see a horse that made me say
to myself, 'There! if ever I ride on horseback, I should like to get
just such a horse as that.' It was gentleness and elegance personified.
It was a beautiful creature. It turned out its toes, just lifted one
foot above the other, with a kind of quick cross action, and then set
it down with such elegance and ease, that it seemed to trip along over
the ground, exactly like a dancing master. Proud was its bearing, head
up, and tail high," and Mr. Green most poetically described it in these
words:

               "It brushed the morning dew,
               And o'er the carpet flew,
                 With all becoming grace.
               So gentle, and so nobly bred,
               Give it alone its upshot head,
                 'Twould go at any pace."

"Sir, I perceive you are a poet."

"Not a bit of it. I only cut them out of the Poet's Corner, in the Star,
and I think the author's name was 'Anon;' but it mattered not as to who
was the author, it described the very horse; and I thought then, and I
think so still, that by a very short transposition it would suit my
wife, and perhaps many others. What think you, sir?"

               "She brushed the evening dew,
               And o'er the carpet flew,
                 With all becoming grace.
               So gentle, and so nobly bred,
               Give her alone her upshot head,
                 She'd go at any pace."

The Doctor and the dealer could not help laughing.

"I perceive, sir, you are a wag; if you are not a poet. I congratulate
you upon having so charming a creature for your wife; and I only wish I
may be able to suit you with as good a horse."

"Have you a horse of this description?"

"I have a mare exactly of that kind, and we call her the Daisy Cutter."

"Pray, let me see her."

"Shall I ride her, to show you her qualities?"

"If you please."

"Bring out the Daisy Cutter."

She was brought forth, and John soon set her off to advantage.

"Just the very thing! Just the very thing! Will you send her down to
Birmingham? I am not exactly in riding trim, or I would ride her down
myself."

The animal was paid for, sent home, and proved to be the very creature
suited to Mr. Green's case.

He rode his celebrated Rosenante every evening, and greatly improved in
bodily health. He actually became cheerful, and his wife blessed the
good Doctor Gambado for having restored her husband to himself again.

Alas! for human infirmities, or for human vagaries! One of the most
wonderful complaints of nervous hypochondriacism, was actually cured,
together with its cause, by a momentary spree.

One beautiful evening, the little man was riding in the gaiety of his
heart toward Aston Hall, visions of future greatness passing before his
eyes, when, just upon the greensward in front of the park gates, there
lay in his way a great black hog, on the very edge of the road. He
thought within himself, that he should like to take a leap smack over
the animal's back; and just looking round to see that no eye should
behold his spree, he gave his "Rosenante" an unwonted kick with his
heels.

She was certainly surprised at her master's unwonted action, and in the
spurt of the moment, cocked her tail, lifted her head, and quickened her
pace;--but whether she did not see the hog, or could not leap over it if
she did, she ran directly over the animal, and fell over it, awaking it
in a horrible fright to scamper grunting away;--but, alas! she pitched
her own head, and her master's head also, without his hat, upon the hard
road. They both went the whole hog. Mr. Green lay senseless on the road,
in a pool of blood, arising from the severity of the blow, which tore
away the whole scalp of the forehead, together with the entire wart or
excrescence which grew thereupon. His Rosenante affrighted, returned to
Birmingham,--was soon recognized,--and Mr. Green was soon carried
insensible to the hospital. He remained there some days, recovering
himself and his senses.

Thus the Daisy Cutter and his vagaries became a proverb in Birmingham.
And that which skill could not, or rather through nervous apprehension
was not, permitted to try, a black hog, one of the most unlikely things
in the world, was instrumental in effecting.

          When spirits mount in cheerful glee,
          Beware of leaping for a spree;
            For sprees create a fall:
          And when you leap alone in-cog,
          Beware of going the whole hog;
            Better not go at all.
          Yet sometimes good from ill may spring,--
            One spree may prove satiety:
          If Daisy Cutters wisdom bring,
            Rejoice in the variety.




CHAPTER XIV.

_A Horse with a Nose._


DID any one ever see a horse without a nose? It cannot, therefore, be
meant, at the heading of this chapter, to draw any distinction between a
horse with a nose, and a horse without one. We say of a dog, he has got
a good nose; that is, if, as hound, pointer, or retriever, he can scent
or find his game _well_. A man we have seen without a nose, and a very
painful sight it is to see any feature of the human face in any way
distorted; but that such a man can "smell a rat," denotes not that he
has a peculiar quality of scent, but that he is a cunning fellow, and
can look a little deeper into the artifices of men and their motives
than others are aware of. Some men have indeed the smoothest faces, and
the simplest manners, and yet retain the utmost cunning, or, if men like
it better, wisdom in the world. They can smell a rat,--they can discover
a flaw in the indictment,--they can see how an adversary may be
overthrown, and can quietly stir up strife and pick the pocket of friend
or foe, without of course doing any thing wrong; defrauding any one, or
in any way letting the sufferer himself suppose that he is the victim or
tool, or goose to be plucked by the cunning craft and subtlety of the
deceiver.

[Illustration]

If men will ruin themselves, whose fault is it? but, if they do so,
there are plenty to rise upon their ruin, and to laugh at their folly.
Conscience, they say, makes cowards of all men; but that conscience must
be founded, not upon any man's judgement, but their own. There never was
any man who did no wrong that could be afflicted by his own conscience;
but there never was a man, who by his own unaided judgment, ever did
right so perfectly, that his conscience could entirely acquit him of
every base and sordid motive. Many may be very highly honourable and
upright men, and yet have a great many rogues to deal with, and scarcely
know how to deal with them. The best way is to say nothing, but avoid
them.

Doctor Gambado had a patient come to him of this kind, and he was a
lawyer who stood _very, very_ high in his station one hundred years ago.

He was provokingly ill,--ill in his body,--ill in his mind,--ill at ease
with himself,--and dreadfully afflicted with such disturbed thoughts at
night, that his sleep went from him, and his conscience had no rest.

It is very provoking to have a troublesome conscience; but it is more
provoking still, not to be able to quiet that conscience by any common
or uncommon means. Simon Deuce, Esq. who actually attained the eminence
of high authority, not in the court of Conscience, or in the court of
Equity, but in Chancery, had retired from business and left his
son-in-law, Sir Charles Dubious, his house in Billiter-square. He
himself took a mansion on Blackheath, and there he sought in vain for
that enjoyment of rest and contentment, which good men only inherit in
their latter end.

Physic was in vain,--advice, such as most men give, produced no
cessation of anxiety. He became moody, sullen, morose, irritable,
dogmatic, and all but absolutely irrational. His faculties were
piercingly sound, his memory most acute, his legal knowledge clear, and
his discovery of transgressions of law were every day displayed before
his eyes, from those who rode in a coronetted barouche, to those who
rode in a donkey cart. He loved, actually loved to make complaints, and
to see the law carried out; and in petty acts of tyranny he was so
absolute a persecutor, that he was a terror to all who lived around him.

Generosity was never in his nature, neither did he ever pretend to teach
it, or observe its laws. In fact, every one was considered by him as a
weak fool, who did either a kind or generous act, beyond the positive
obligation of the law.

What happiness could such a man have in his retirement? His great
happiness was the accumulation of money in the funds, and these
occasioned him a momentary excitement. His friend, Samuel Ryecross, of
Ryecross-house, Blackheath, advised him to consult Doctor Gambado.

"Do you mean Gambado, the horse dealer?"

"He is not a horse dealer."

"I say he is a horse dealer, and ought to take out a licence for horse
dealing. He does not do so, and I have half a mind to have him up, and
bring him into court for cheating, defrauding, and robbing the
government."

"I think you must have been misinformed. I believe he is really a very
clever, honest man, and gives good sound practical advice to all his
patients."

"Yes, so I have heard; and all of it is 'Ride on horseback.' If I went
to consult him, I should only get that advice. I know it before hand,
and have no inclination to throw away a guinea for it."

"But is it bad advice in your case? would it not do you good to try it?
Why, if you know his remedy, do you not pursue it?"

"Because I do not think it would do me any good."

"Well, you have tried a great many doctors. Let me drive you in my
phaeton to Bread-street, and let us hear what the Doctor says."

"Will you pay the Doctor?"

"Yes, if you will follow his advice."

"Done, we will go."

They did go.

The Doctor knew the man he had to deal with, and yet he had confidence
in the horseback exercise as the best cure for him, and he told him so.

"Have you got a horse that would suit me?"

"There is a fine strong horse in my stables, that I think would suit
you."

"May we go and look at him?"

"I will go with you."

Samuel Ryecross was rather surprised; but Simon Deuce gave him a look,
as much as to say, '_I told you he was a horse dealer_.'

When they went to the stables, John Tattsall was there himself, and not
being known to either of the gentlemen, they both supposed him to be the
groom in the employ of Doctor Gambado.

"John, I have brought a customer to look at the great brown horse. Is he
at home?"

"He is, sir; I will lead him out."

He led him out,--rode him,--and Mr. Deuce asked the Doctor what his
price was. The Doctor said, "John, what did you say the horse was
worth?"

"Ninety guineas, sir, and not a farthing less. I would not let the
gentleman have him for one guinea less."

"Will you order him to be sent to my house on Blackheath?"

"Shall I ride him there now, and bring back your cheque?" said John
Tattsall.

"You may, if you please, my man."

John bowed, and after ascertaining the name of the abode, Billiter
house, Blackheath, he rode off.

"In what name, Doctor, shall I write the cheque?" for, presuming that
the Doctor was not professionally a horse dealer, though he considered
that he had bought the horse of him, he had a mind to see if he shrunk
at all from the responsibility.

The Doctor replied, "In the name of the very man who delivers him, John
Tattsall; and I hope the horse will suit you, sir, and do you good."

"There," said Mr. Deuce to his friend Ryecross, "what say you now to the
Doctor dealer? hey! Is not my deal with him this day sufficient to
convict him before any bench of Magistrates in all the counties of
England. If I do not take the shine out of this Doctor Gambado, then say
that Simon Deuce knows nothing of the law."

When they got home, the horse had arrived.

The cheque was written:

            "Pay John Tattsall," &c. &c.

John touched his hat, walked off with his money, took a cab to
Lombard-street, got the cheque cashed; and called and thanked the Doctor
for his recommendation.

The very next day, the Doctor received a summons to answer the charge of
being a horse dealer without a licence for that purpose. The suit was
preferred in the name of Deuce _v._ Gambado.

Of course, all these things are put into regular process of law, with
which we shall not entertain the public. In due time, the case came on
in the proper court, and Mr. Deuce swore that he bought such a horse of
Doctor Gambado, and that the Doctor's servant, John Tattsall, delivered
the horse at Billiter-house, Blackheath. Samuel Ryecross was witness to
the transaction. The cheque was produced in court, and Mr. Deuce was
lauded very highly for his sense of justice in not allowing the
government to be defrauded, and more in not allowing that highly
respectable profession of M.D. F.R.S. to be a covering to the tricks and
degradation of a horse dealer without a licence.

Never, however, was Deuce more confounded in all his life, than by the
cross examination of Serjeant Sharp.

"Pray, sir, may I ask--Did you go to consult Doctor Gambado for any
complaint?"

"I went purposely, by the advice of my friend, Samuel Ryecross."

"For what purpose, Mr. Deuce?"

"To consult him."

"Were you ill at that time?"

"Decidedly not well."

"May I ask the nature of the complaint for which you consulted so
eminent a physician as Doctor Gambado?"

Mr. Deuce hesitated.

"I have no desire to know more of the complaint than you may think right
to tell us; but all who have heard of Doctor Gambado's patients, know
well that they are mostly afflicted with nervous depression. May I ask
if such was your case?"

"Yes, it was."

"You were deranged, sir; were you not?"

Mr. Deuce, with great vehemence, "No more deranged, sir, than you are."

"Do not be angry, sir, when I used the term _deranged_. I meant that
your system was a little deranged, disorganized, or so out of sorts, as
to produce a kind of physical disarrangement of the organs leading to
the brain, so as to create unpleasant sensations, dyspeptic habits,
sleepless nights, and a little of that irritability which we have just
seen, so as to render you a little impulsive, and not unlikely to be
mistaken."

Deuce did not like this at all, but he could not help saying

"It might be so."

"Oh! It might be so! Now, Mr. Deuce, I must put rather a strong question
to you:

"Did you ever accuse Doctor Gambado of being a horse dealer?"

"Not that I am aware of."

"Not that you are aware of! Now, sir, I must get you to tax your memory,
and I ask you plainly, did you not go on purpose to trap Doctor Gambado
into the selling you a horse, that you might bring him into a court of
justice?"

Mr. Deuce paused. He did not reply. He seemed nervous.

"Pray, sir, take your time. You are a member of the law, you know the
law, and the usages of a court of justice; and I am sure you will give
us a plain, straightforward answer."

"I did not go exactly with that intention. My friend, Mr. Ryecross,
persuaded me to consult him about myself."

"Now, sir, I shall cross-examine your friend, Mr. Ryecross. Did you or
did you not, at the very time that you went to consult this eminent
physician, say to your friend, that he, meaning Doctor Gambado, was a
horse dealer, and not a physician?"

"I might have so said."

"Pray, sir, do you understand the law of libel? I shall strongly
recommend my client, let the result of this action be what it may, to
bring an action against you, sir, for one of the grossest acts of
libellous intention this court has ever heard of; and, if I mistake not
the judgement this day will decide, whether a gentleman like yourself is
to utter a libel of a ruinous tendency to so high a professional man,
with impunity.

"Then you did say he was a horse dealer?"

"Yes, I did."

"Pray, sir, had you any previous acquaintance with Doctor Gambado?"

"None whatever."

"Then, I presume you acted in this manner entirely upon hearsay
evidence?"

"I certainly did."

"You had no quarrel with Doctor Gambado?"

"None whatever."

"Was it a sense of justice to your country, that entirely induced you to
try and _smell a rat_ in this gentleman's character?"

"It was."

"And on that account you laid this information against him?"

"I did."

"It was not from any morbid indulgence of any splenetic humour with
which you were at that time afflicted, that induced you to bring this
action?"

"Oh, dear, no!"

"I may say then, sir, you considered it entirely pro bono publico?"

"Quite so."

"You have told the court, sir, that you purchased the horse of Doctor
Gambado?"

"I did so certainly."

"You are sure he sold it to you?"

"I am quite sure."

"Pray, sir, did you ask him, if the horse was his that you bought?"

"I asked him if he had any horse that would suit me."

"What was his reply?"

"To the best of my knowledge, it was that he had one in his stables that
would suit me."

"Now, sir, did he say, that _he had a horse_ in his stables that would
suit you?"

"I understood him so."

"Pray, Mr. Deuce, be sure; because I should be sorry to convict you of a
wilful and direct falsehood. I pray you to be sure. Did he say _he had a
horse that would suit you_? or did he say, _there was a horse in his
stables that would suit you_?"

"It never struck me before,--he might certainly say, _there was a
horse_; but I took him to mean, that _he had one_ that he could sell
me."

"Come, sir, I am very glad to find that you have a disposition to
correct the evidence you have given for the prosecution. You have
sufficient legal acumen to distinguish between a man saying, _there is
such a horse_, and _I have such a horse_; the latter sentence would go
to identify the ownership of the horse, or a declaration to that
effect."

"He might then say, _there was a horse in his stable_?"

"Well, I think he did say so."

"And you did not ask whether the horse was his or not?"

"I did not."

Let Mr. Samuel Ryecross be called.

"You are the friend of the last witness,--are you not?"

"I am."

"You have known him for some years?"

"I have."

"Did you persuade him to consult Doctor Gambado?"

"I did."

"Upon what grounds?"

"Because of his dyspeptic habits."

"Did they not almost amount to monomania?"

"I considered that at times they did."

"Was he not very splenetic?"

"Very."

"I ask you, if he has not, in the neighbourhood of Blackheath, the
character of being very litigious?"

"He is very unpopular."

"He quarrels with everybody?"

"He makes himself conspicuous for finding fault with all transgressors
of the law."

"Is he not very angry?"

"He is very easily provoked."

"Now, sir, I think, when you proposed to consult Doctor Gambado, that he
objected?"

"He did so."

"Upon what grounds?"

"Upon grounds that would, if true, disqualify any medical man, for
professional consistency."

"What were these grounds?"

"He said he was a mere horse dealer,--that he would give him advice to
ride on horseback, and would sell him a horse to do so."

"Did you believe his assertion?"

"No. I not only doubted it; but stoutly contradicted it."

"You had a better opinion of Doctor Gambado?"

"I had."

"Now, sir, did not your friend actually say to you, that he would have
the fellow up, meaning Doctor Gambado, for being a horse dealer without
a licence?"

"He did."

"Did he not go to the Doctor with that intent?"

"I verily believe he did; but I certainly did not accompany him with any
such intent."

"You recommended him purely for his health?"

"I did; and, moreover, I paid the Doctor's fee, upon the promise that he
would follow the Doctor's advice."

"Are Mr. Deuce's habits penurious?"

"Extremely so."

"Then how comes he to be so litigious?"

"He finds that costs him very little, if any thing in the end."

"He considers, then, in this case, that my client will be mulcted in
costs?"

"I have no doubt he does."

"Were you present when he consulted Doctor Gambado?"

"I was."

"What was his advice?"

"Ride on horseback."

"Did you consider that good advice?"

"I did."

"What question did your friend put to the Doctor about the horse?"

"He asked him, '_Have you got a horse that will suit me?_'"

"What was his reply?"

"There is a fine strong horse in my stables, that I think would suit
you."

"Are you sure that was his reply?"

"Quite sure."

"Did you consider that reply as affixing the ownership of the horse to
himself?"

"I confess that I did so."

"Did you see any triumphant glance, or recognition of Mr. Deuce's
sagacity, at having fulfilled the declaration of the accuser, that he
was a horse dealer?"

"Yes, I did."

"Did you think the horse was the Doctor's own?"

"I own, I did."

"Did you ask him if the horse was his?"

"No, I did not. I concluded it was so."

"Did you see the horse sold?"

"I did."

"Who do you consider sold the horse?

"I considered, to my great surprise, that Doctor Gambado sold the
horse."

"Then you altered your opinion of the Doctor."

"I did so, considerably."

"Was your friend very warm upon the subject of the Doctor's horse
dealing?"

"Very."

"Did you know of his resolution to bring this action?"

"I fully considered he would do so."

Mr. John Tattsall was then called.

"You are a horse dealer?"

"I am."

"You know both the plantiff and defendant?"

"I know the former, from having sold him a horse, have known the latter
many years."

"Pray, sir, do you hire Doctor Gambado's stables?"

"I hire stables of Doctor Gambado."

"How far from your own stables?"

"The back premises of each join."

"How long have you hired the Doctor's stables?"

"Fifteen years."

"How many horses do you generally keep there?"

"Ten, twelve, fourteen, and sometimes sixteen horses."

"Pray, are you in partnership with Doctor Gambado?"

"No, I am not."

"Has he any share in your business?"

"None whatsoever."

"Has he any horses?"

"Three of his own."

"In a separate stable?"

"In a stable adjoining to those I hire of him."

"To your knowledge, did the Doctor ever sell a horse?"

"Never."

"Has he any horses to sell?"

"None."

"You positively affirm upon oath that the Doctor is not a horse dealer?"

"I swear it."

"Did he ever sell a horse for you?"

"Never."

"Did you ever authorize him to sell a horse for you?"

"Never."

"Pray was the horse that the plantiff, Mr. Deuce, bought, your property
or the Doctor's?"

"Mine."

"Did the Doctor give the price of the horse to the gentleman, or did
you?"

"I did,--the Doctor asked me what I had said was the price of the horse,
and I told him,--and I told the gentleman I would not take one guinea
less for him than ninety guineas."

"Then, really and truly, you took the money for your own horse, kept it,
and did not give the Doctor a farthing?"

"I gave him nothing but 'Thank you, Doctor, for introducing to me a
customer.'"

"Had the Doctor seen the horse before?"

"Frequently, and admired him for the strength of his limbs, and for his
proportions."

"Do you remember what he said, when he brought the gentleman into your
or his yard?"

"Yes. 'John, I've brought a customer.'"

"You knew what that meant?"

"Of course I did, and I led out the brown horse myself, and paced him,
sold him, took the money; the cheque is, I suppose, in court: it was
written for me, and I had no idea the horse was sold by anybody but me,
to whom it belonged."

At this stage of the proceedings the solicitor for the prosecution
intimated that his client wished to withdraw his case.

Serjeant Sharpe said, "He hoped his Honour would direct a verdict for
the defendant, his client; and that the world would see what a shameful
action it had been. He told the solicitor for the prosecution that he
was glad that his client felt ashamed of himself. He could never make
him amends for what he had done; that it was disgraceful in the extreme
to seek the advice of so good a man, and to treat him in the way he had
done. He was quite sure that he would shortly have an increase of his
malady, and that even his friend, Mr. Ryecross, would no longer pity
him."

The judge dismissed the case, with a high compliment to Doctor Gambado,
and with full costs to be paid into court by Mr. Deuce.

This action had some good effect upon this unhappy man, though it did
not cure him of hypochondriacism. He rode out on horseback--on his new
horse;--but whenever that horse came to the sign of the Red Cross, on
Blackheath, directly opposite the four cross ways, he would lift up his
nose, stand stockstill, and as if he would have his rider see the
cross, and think upon it, he would not be persuaded to move. In vain did
the lawyer tug at him, chuck his bridle, kick his sides, and use the
most violent gesticulations to get him on. Whether he had a _nose_ for
the stables, or had been accustomed to Blackheath Red Cross on former
days, he certainly had a nose, and until some one gently led him from
the spot he would never be compelled to leave it. So he went by the name
of _Old Deuce's Horse_, or, _The Horse with a Nose_.

          Hast thou a nose to smell a rat?
          Beware thou get not tit for tat.
          'Tis better far to keep thy nose,
          Than have it split by angry foes.
          Avoiding strife, go, follow good,
          No harm will reach thee in such mood.




CHAPTER XV.

_Me, my Wife, and Daughter._


WHO can look upon the comfortable enjoyment of good and happy people, in
their latter days, and not delight to see them? Such a picture as this,
drawn originally by Henry Bunbury, Esq. and meant to convey a picture of
domestic felicity in his day, would probably produce excessive ridicule
if seen in these fast days. If, now, such a sight were seen in
Rotten-row, however pleasing to the philanthropist, it would be called
an affectation of absurdity. Yet Doctor Gambado, to the last year of his
life, rode in such felicity that he was the only man in his profession
that exactly practised the advice he gave. A contrast to everything in
the present day,--we say to everything like modern enjoyment.

One hundred years ago, there were no puffing steam engines, drawing
thousands, with the rapidity of lightning, to Brighton, Ramsgate,
Margate, and Folkestone. Men all tell us, that domestic felicity is
the same. We do not doubt it; but we find very few, very few, indeed, so
blest with content, and so happy in their mutual society, as our
respected friend, when, with his wife and daughter by his side, he rode
a jog trot at the seaside, or the hillside, or along the fashionable
road of life.

[Illustration]

The Doctor had toiled through good report and evil report, and, like a
prudent wise man, provided the best he could for his own. He kept up his
house in Bread-street, though he declined practice altogether, that is,
for _pecuniary profit_.

I question whether the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
would not have considered this an overloaded beast; but there was no
such society in existence then. The weary camel, toiling over the waste,
might be overloaded; but he would let his driver know how much he would
carry. John Tattsall furnished his good friend, the Doctor, with
elephantine horses, stout, stiff, strong, bony and sinewy; he was,
without the aid of Doctor Cassock, the inventor of a wicker pannier of
such ample dimensions, as to afford the most easy and convenient chair
for each of the ladies, without exposing feet or ancles, or incommoding
boots or dress. Now, indeed, ladies who travel in first-class carriages
by rail, find the seats too narrow and almost destructive to their
crinoline.

Hurrah for good people! Hurrah for happy people, wherever we can find
them! Hurrah for the man who never allows his domestic felicity to be
disturbed by any outward circumstances,--let his condition of life be
among the highest or the lowest in the land! Hurrah for him who has the
least ambition to gratify, except that of doing good to his neighbour!
Hurrah for a grateful heart wherever it can be found! But whilst we thus
laud the domestic comfort of real good people, let us not forget that
they must have passed through many troubles and trials to gain that
peace and serenity of mind, which our happy trio, Geoffery Gambado, his
wife, and daughter, enjoyed. They had no affected display of superior
accomplishments to delight society, and had no flattering encomiums
passed upon them for their gentility. They were gentle, well informed,
quiet, loveable people. They spoke that which they considered right, and
always did the right thing as it ought to be done. The law which their
good and excellent pastor taught them, they never departed from, viz.
"That of doing to others, as they would others should do to them."

They kept the holiest law of true goodness, _Love one another_, in its
perfect sense.

Doctor Gambado well knew who gave him a wife; and when he married, he
resolved to perform the solemn vow he then made, and he kept his
vow,--so did his wife hers,--and they were as happy a couple as could
well be seen or known upon the face of the earth.

In his time, God's blessing was sought to enable him to keep his vow.
There was no law then permitting men to go and be married without any
asking of God's blessing upon such a step. Marriage was not then
degraded into the unholy thing it is now, and conscience merely made to
answer to a legal contract, which difference of opinion, or quarrels, or
contrariety of disposition, may get dissolved in a divorce court. "For
better for worse, for richer for poorer, till death us do part," is no
longer the sole and solemn bond of matrimony. But the Doctor was a
Christian in the noblest sense, and in domestic life his religion was
his conscience, his wisdom, and his happiness. As little parade as man
could make of outward profession was his study, but his heart was in the
right place.

Where that is the case, ignorance and presumption, imposition and folly,
are unknown. Men may ridicule simplicity of life and manners; but there
is an honesty of heart superior to all affectation, which need never be
afraid.

The troubles of life are always borne well by those who observe the law
of God; and those who do not, never get any real release from them. They
may get riches; they may hide the blush of coveteousness; but they have
very little real comfort within themselves, because of the very changes
which they themselves and all things around them undergo.

Doctor Gambado enjoyed every change of life, and lost no good condition
either. He could look upon the calm sea with delight, and with the
serenity of one who had not lived in vain. He always entertained the
kindliest feelings of a brother for his sincere friend, Doctor Cassock,
who used to drop in with any new number of the Spectator, and enjoy it.
The domestic evenings spent in classical friendship are among the purest
scholastic as well as domestic enjoyments.

Envy he had none, and therefore was most to be envied of those who, like
Mr. Deuce, or anyone else, never enjoyed the happiness of another.
Promote the welfare of another, and you will find your own comfort
increased. Detract from another, and nothing but envy will be your
increase.

The object with which this book was begun, and is finished, is to let
you see, reader, how to make something out of that which might to many
appear worse than nothing.

Suppose that sixteen drawings of this character were given you, with
nothing but the heading of each chapter written under them,--would you
have made out a more comprehensive description of the probability of
their truth? There is some profit in the labour, if your heart is in
any way cheered by beholding the ingenuity of man.

Works of art, or works of great expense, or great works of any kind, the
Author makes no kind of pretence to perform; yet, if you are pleased
with his ingenuity, grudge not a helping hand at any time to reward
industry.

          Ah! little thought Gambado, in his day,
          As on he passed through life's uneven way,
          How many toils and troubles he would scan,
          Before he reached the common age of man!
          Yet on he went; and as his years declined,
          And quietude and peace becalmed his mind,
          He felt and owned, no greater bliss could be
          Than resignation for Eternity.
          "Ah!" he would say, "behold, dear wife, yon sea,
          Each wave seems striving for celebrity!
          It rolls along until it reach the shore,
          Then bursts in froth,--and then is seen no more!
          Still, on and on succeeding waves advance,
          And thus perpetual motion would enhance.
          'Tis so with mortals striving on and on,
          They reach the shore,--and all their toil is gone.
          How oft yon waves, by angry tempests tost,
          Like human passions, are in fury lost;
          Dash'd on the rocks, their crested pride, in foam
          Sprays into atoms ere it finds a home."

          So mighty strugglers after this world's fame,
          Find all their fury perish with their name.
          'Tis seldom known that speculators thrive,
          Or long their great inventions may outlive.
          Others come on,--no end of new things known,
          One age will praise,--the next, the praise disown.
          Feathers you wear,--but feathers blown away,
          Will be succeeded by some new display.
          We ride on horseback, and survey the tide,--
          The age will come, that horses none will ride;
          The age will be that coaches will no more
          Be seen with horses, two, or three, or four;
          But on will pass, and leave no other trace,
          Than iron's friction from a rapid pace.

          What would Gambado think, if he could see
          His own predictions made a verity?
          Who can predict one single year's advance?
          Truth is so strange it seems a day's romance.
          Things that last year were mighty,--are all gone;
          Works of great hope,--are perished and undone.
          Iron is moulded by the human hand;
          And wooden walls no more the seas command.
          All would be great, be rich, and all invent,
          But few there are, who are at all content.
          With lightning speed intelligence conveyed
          From land to land, the iron rails are laid,--
          And 'neath the ocean's deep united cords,
          Convey the merchant's or the prince's words.
          But mostly all, by sea, or land, or train,
          Is that the traffickers may get their gain.

          The greatest gain, that ever man could get,
          Is sweet contentment after every fret.
          When projects are completed, all is vain,
          For other projects follow in their train;
          Old age comes on,--all projects quickly cease,--
          Happy are they who live and die in peace.
          Gambado did so: Reader, may thy fame
          Rest with content on One Blest, Holy Name!


THE END.

[Illustration]

Transcriber's Notes: The original publication did not contain a table of
contents. This has been provided for the reader's convenience. There
were a few printer's errors which have been corrected. For example,
Chapter XIII was entitled "A Daisey Cutter, with his Varieties" whereas
the name was spelt Daisy in the text.





End of Project Gutenberg's Geoffery Gambado, by William Henry Bunbury

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GEOFFERY GAMBADO ***

***** This file should be named 39115-8.txt or 39115-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/1/1/39115/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Sue Fleming and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
