The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Wonders of the Invisible World, by 
Cotton Mather and Increase Mather

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Wonders of the Invisible World
       Being an Account of the Tryals of Several Witches Lately
       Executed in New-England, to which is added A Farther Account
       of the Tryals of the New-England Witches

Author: Cotton Mather
        Increase Mather

Release Date: April 6, 2009 [EBook #28513]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WONDERS OF THE INVISIBLE WORLD ***




Produced by Julie Barkley, S.D., and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcriber's Note: Italicized text is indicated with _underscores_.
Upright text used within italicized passages for emphasis is indicated
with +plus signs+. Blackletter text in the original is shown here within
\back slashes\. Greek has been transliterated and is shown as #word#.

Inconsistent or archaic spelling, punctuation, and capitalization have
been retained as printed. The spacing of chapters and sections matches
that of the physical book, and no attempt has been made to match the
Table of Contents. A few obvious misprints, such as missing letters or
spaces, have been corrected. They are listed at the end of this
document, along with more detailed notes about this transcription.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                 Library of Old Authors.




              [Illustration: Cotton Mather.]




                   THE WONDERS OF THE
                    INVISIBLE WORLD.

        BEING AN ACCOUNT OF THE TRYALS OF SEVERAL
                WITCHES LATELY EXECUTED IN
                      NEW-ENGLAND.

                  BY COTTON MATHER, D.D.


                   TO WHICH IS ADDED

         A FARTHER ACCOUNT OF THE TRYALS OF THE
                  NEW-ENGLAND WITCHES.

                BY INCREASE MATHER, D.D.
              PRESIDENT OF HARVARD COLLEGE.


                        LONDON:
                   JOHN RUSSELL SMITH,
                      SOHO SQUARE.
                         1862.




INTRODUCTION.


The two very rare works reprinted in the present volume, written by two
of the most celebrated of the early American divines, relate to one of
the most extraordinary cases of popular delusion that modern times have
witnessed. It was a delusion, moreover, to which men of learning and
piety lent themselves, and thus became the means of increasing it. The
scene of this affair was the puritanical colony of New England, since
better known as Massachusetts, the colonists of which appear to have
carried with them, in an exaggerated form, the superstitious feelings
with regard to witchcraft which then prevailed in the mother country. In
the spring of 1692 an alarm of witchcraft was raised in the family of
the minister of Salem, and some black servants were charged with the
supposed crime. Once started, the alarm spread rapidly, and in a very
short time a great number of people fell under suspicion, and many were
thrown into prison on very frivolous grounds, supported, as such charges
usually were, by very unworthy witnesses. The new governor of the
colony, Sir William Phipps, arrived from England in the middle of May,
and he seems to have been carried away by the excitement, and authorized
judicial prosecutions. The trials began at the commencement of June; and
the first victim, a woman named Bridget Bishop, was hanged. Governor
Phipps, embarrassed by this extraordinary state of things, called in the
assistance of the clergy of Boston.

There was at this time in Boston a distinguished family of puritanical
ministers of the name of Mather. Richard Mather, an English
non-conformist divine, had emigrated to America in 1636, and settled at
Dorchester, where, in 1639, he had a son born, who was named, in
accordance with the peculiar nomenclature of the puritans, Increase
Mather. This son distinguished himself much by his acquirements as a
scholar and a theologian, became established as a minister in Boston,
and in 1685 was elected president of Harvard College. His son, born at
Boston in 1663, and called from the name of his mother's family, Cotton
Mather, became more remarkable than his father for his scholarship,
gained also a distinguished position in Harvard College, and was also,
at the time of which we are speaking, a minister of the gospel in
Boston. Cotton Mather had adopted all the most extreme notions of the
puritanical party with regard to witchcraft, and he had recently had an
opportunity of displaying them. In the summer of the year 1688, the
children of a mason of Boston named John Goodwin were suddenly seized
with fits and strange afflictions, which were at once ascribed to
witchcraft, and an Irish washerwoman named Glover, employed by the
family, was suspected of being the witch. Cotton Mather was called in
to witness the sufferings of Goodwin's children; and he took home with
him one of them, a little girl, who had first displayed these symptoms,
in order to examine her with more care. The result was, that the Irish
woman was brought to a trial, found guilty, and hanged; and Cotton
Mather published next year an account of the case, under the title of
"Late Memorable Providences, relating to Witchcraft and Possession,"
which displays a very extraordinary amount of credulity, and an equally
great want of anything like sound judgment. This work, no doubt, spread
the alarm of witchcraft through the whole colony, and had some influence
on the events which followed. It may be supposed that the panic which
had now arisen in Salem was not likely to be appeased by the
interference of Cotton Mather and his father.

The execution of the washerwoman, Bridget Bishop, had greatly increased
the excitement; and people in a more respectable position began to be
accused. On the 19th of July five more persons were executed, and five
more experienced the same fate on the 19th of August. Among the latter
was Mr. George Borroughs, a minister of the gospel, whose principal
crime appears to have been a disbelief in witchcraft itself. His fate
excited considerable sympathy, which, however, was checked by Cotton
Mather, who was present at the place of execution on horseback, and
addressed the crowd, assuring them that Borroughs was an impostor. Many
people, however, had now become alarmed at the proceedings of the
prosecutors, and among those executed with Borroughs was a man named
John Willard, who had been employed to arrest the persons charged by
the accusers, and who had been accused himself, because, from
conscientious motives, he refused to arrest any more. He attempted to
save himself by flight; but he was pursued and overtaken. Eight more of
the unfortunate victims of this delusion were hanged on the 22nd of
September, making in all nineteen who had thus suffered, besides one
who, in accordance with the old criminal law practice, had been pressed
to death for refusing to plead. The excitement had indeed risen to such
a pitch that two dogs accused of witchcraft were put to death.

A certain degree of reaction, however, appeared to be taking place, and
the magistrates who had conducted the proceedings began to be alarmed,
and to have some doubts of the wisdom of their proceedings. Cotton
Mather was called upon by the governor to employ his pen in justifying
what had been done; and the result was, the book which stands first in
the present volume, "The Wonders of the Invisible World;" in which the
author gives an account of seven of the trials at Salem, compares the
doings of the witches in New England with those in other parts of the
world, and adds an elaborate dissertation on witchcraft in general. This
book was published at Boston, Massachusetts, in the month of October,
1692. Other circumstances, however, contributed to throw discredit on
the proceedings of the court, though the witch mania was at the same
time spreading throughout the whole colony. In this same month of
October, the wife of Mr. Hale, minister of Beverley, was accused,
although no person of sense and respectability had the slightest doubt
of her innocence; and her husband had been a zealous promoter of the
prosecutions. This accusation brought a new light on the mind of Mr.
Hale, who became convinced of the injustice in which he had been made an
accomplice; but the other ministers who took the lead in the proceedings
were less willing to believe in their own error; and equally convinced
of the innocence of Mrs. Hale, they raised a question of conscience,
whether the devil could not assume the shape of an innocent and pious
person, as well as of a wicked person, for the purpose of afflicting his
victims. The assistance of Increase Mather, the president or principal
of Harvard College, was now called in, and he published the book which
is also reprinted in the present volume: "A Further Account of the
Tryals of the New England Witches.... To which is added Cases of
Conscience concerning Witchcrafts and Evil Spirits personating Men." It
will be seen that the greater part of the "Cases of Conscience" is given
to the discussion of the question just alluded to, which Increase Mather
unhesitatingly decides in the affirmative. The scene of agitation was
now removed from Salem to Andover, where a great number of persons were
accused of witchcraft and thrown into prison, until a justice of the
peace named Bradstreet, to whom the accusers applied for warrants,
refused to grant any more. Hereupon they cried out upon Bradstreet, and
declared that he had killed nine persons by means of witchcraft; and he
was so much alarmed that he fled from the place. The accusers aimed at
people in higher positions in society, until at last they had the
audacity to cry out upon the lady of governor Phipps himself, and thus
lost whatever countenance he had given to their proceedings out of
respect to the two Mathers. Other people of character, when they were
attacked by the accusers, took energetic measures in self-defence. A
gentleman of Boston, when "cried out upon," obtained a writ of arrest
against his accusers on a charge of defamation, and laid the damages at
a thousand pounds. The accusers themselves now took fright, and many who
had made confessions retracted them, while the accusations themselves
fell into discredit. When governor Phipps was recalled in April, 1693,
and left for England, the witchcraft agitation had nearly subsided, and
people in general had become convinced of their error and lamented it.

But Cotton Mather and his father persisted obstinately in the opinions
they had published, and looked upon the reactionary feeling as a triumph
of Satan and his kingdom. In the course of the year they had an
opportunity of reasserting their belief in the doings of the witches of
Salem. A girl of Boston, named Margaret Rule, was seized with
convulsions, in the course of which she pretended to see the "shapes" or
spectres of people exactly as they were alleged to have been seen by the
witch-accusers at Salem and Andover. This occurred on the 10th of
September, 1693; and she was immediately visited by Cotton Mather, who
examined her, and declared his conviction of the truth of her
statements. Had it depended only upon him, a new and no doubt equally
bitter persecution of witches would have been raised in Boston; but an
influential merchant of that town, named Robert Calef, took the matter
up in a different spirit, and also examined Margaret Rule, and satisfied
himself that the whole was a delusion or imposture. Calef wrote a
rational account of the events of these two years, 1692 and 1693,
exposing the delusion, and controverting the opinions of the two Mathers
on the subject of witchcraft, which was published under the title of
"More Wonders of the Invisible World; or the Wonders of the Invisible
world displayed in five parts. An Account of the Sufferings of Margaret
Rule collected by Robert Calef, merchant of Boston in New England." The
partisans of the Mathers displayed their hostility to this book by
publicly burning it; and the Mathers themselves kept up the feeling so
strongly that years afterwards, when Samuel Mather, the son of Cotton,
wrote his father's life, he says sneeringly of Calef: "There was a
certain disbeliever in Witchcraft who wrote against this book" (his
father's 'Wonders of the Invisible World'), "but as the man is dead, his
book died long before him." Calef died in 1720.

The witchcraft delusion had, however, been sufficiently dispelled to
prevent the recurrence of any other such persecutions; and those who
still insisted on their truth were restrained to the comparatively
harmless publication and defence of their opinions. The people of Salem
were humbled and repentant. They deserted their minister, Mr. Paris,
with whom the persecution had begun, and were not satisfied until they
had driven him away from the place. Their remorse continued through
several years, and most of the people concerned in the judicial
proceedings proclaimed their regret. The jurors signed a paper
expressing their repentance, and pleading that they had laboured under a
delusion. What ought to have been considered still more conclusive,
many of those who had confessed themselves witches, and had been
instrumental in accusing others, retracted all they had said, and
confessed that they had acted under the influence of terror. Yet the
vanity of superior intelligence and knowledge was so great in the two
Mathers that they resisted all conviction. In his _Magnalia_, an
ecclesiastical history of New England, published in 1700, Cotton Mather
repeats his original view of the doings of Satan in Salem, showing no
regret for the part he had taken in this affair, and making no
retraction of any of his opinions. Still later, in 1723, he repeats them
again in the same strain in the chapter of the "Remarkables" of his
father entitled "Troubles from the Invisible World." His father,
Increase Mather, had died in that same year at an advanced age, being in
his eighty-fifth year. Cotton Mather died on the 13th of February, 1728.

Whatever we may think of the credulity of these two ecclesiastics, there
can be no ground for charging them with acting otherwise than
conscientiously, and they had claims on the gratitude of their
countrymen sufficient to overbalance their error of judgment on this
occasion. Their books relating to the terrible witchcraft delusion at
Salem have now become very rare in the original editions, and their
interest, as remarkable monuments of the history of superstition, make
them well worthy of a reprint.




THE CONTENTS.


  THE WONDERS OF THE INVISIBLE WORLD:--                           Page

    The Author's Defence                                             3

    Letter from Mr. _William Stoughton_                              6

    Enchantments encountered                                         9

    An Abstract of Mr. _Perkins's_ Way for the Discovery
        of Witches                                                  30

    The Sum of Mr. _Gaules_ Judgment about the Detection of
        Witches                                                     33

  A DISCOURSE ON THE WONDERS OF THE INVISIBLE WORLD                 38

    An Hortatory and Necessary Address, to a Country now
        Extraordinarily Alarum'd by the Wrath of the Devil          79

    A Narrative of an Apparition which a Gentleman in Boston
        had of his Brother, just then murthered in London          107

    A Modern Instance of Witches discovered and condemned
        in a Tryal, before that celebrated Judge, Sir Matthew
        Hale                                                       111

    The Tryal of _G. B._ at a Court of Oyer and Terminer, held
        in Salem, 1692                                             120

    The Tryal of _Bridget Bishop_, alias _Oliver_, at the Court
        of Oyer and Terminer, held at Salem, June 2, 1692          129

    The Tryal of _Susanna Martin_, at the Court of Oyer and
        Terminer, held by Adjournment at Salem, June 29, 1692      138

    The Tryal of _Elizabeth How_, at the Court of Oyer and
        Terminer, held by Adjournment at Salem, June 30, 1692      149

    The Tryal of _Martha Carrier_, at the Court of Oyer and
        Terminer, held by Adjournment at Salem, August 2, 1692     154

    A Relation of a Few of the Matchless Curiosities which the
        Witchcraft presented                                       159

            The First Curiositie                                   159

            The Second Curiositie                                  161

            The Third Curiositie                                   164

            The Fourth Curiositie                                  165

    Testimony of Mr. _William Stoughton_ and Mr. _Samuel Sewall_   167

    Extracts from Dr. _Horneck_ showing the Similarity in the
        Circumstances attending the Witchcraft in New-England
        and that in Sweedland                                      167

    Matter omitted in the Tryals                                   172

  THE DEVIL DISCOVERED                                             172

    Case proposed, What are those Usual Methods of Temptation
        with which the Powers of Darkness do assault the
        Children of Men?                                           174

    Remarks upon the Three Remarkable Assaults of Temptations
        which the Devil visibly made upon our Lord                 175

            The First Temptation                                   175

            The Second Temptation                                  183

            The Third Temptation                                   192

  A FURTHER ACCOUNT OF THE TRYALS OF THE NEW-ENGLAND
  WITCHES:--

    A True Narrative, collected by _Deodat Lawson_, relating to
        Sundry Persons afflicted by Witchcraft, from the 19th
        of March to the 5th of April, 1692                         201

    Remarks of Things more than Ordinary about the Afflicted
        Persons                                                    211

    Remarks concerning the Accused                                 212

    A Further Account of the Tryals of the New-England
        Witches, sent in a Letter from thence, to a Gentleman
        in London                                                  214

  CASES OF CONSCIENCE CONCERNING EVIL SPIRITS PERSONATING
  MEN, ETC.:--

    An Address to the Christian Reader by Fourteen Influential
        Gentlemen                                                  221

  CASES OF CONSCIENCE CONCERNING WITCHCRAFTS                       225

    The First Case proposed, Whether or not may Satan appear in
        the Shape of an Innocent and Pious, as well as of a
        Nocent and Wicked Person, to afflict such as suffer by
        Diabolical Molestation?                                    225

    The Affirmative proved from Six Arguments:--

      1. From Several Scriptures                                   225

      2. Because it is possible for the Devil, in the Shape of
          Innocent Persons, to do other Mischiefs, proved by
          many Instances                                           234

      3. Because if Satan may not represent an Innocent Person
          as afflicting others, it must be either because he
          wants will or power to do this, or because God will
          never permit him so to do it; either of which may
          be affirmed                                              237

      4. It is certain, both from Scripture and History, that
          Magicians by their Inchantments and Hellish Conjurations
          may cause a False Representation of Persons
          and Things                                               243

      5. From the concurring Judgment of many Learned and
          Judicious Men                                            250

      6. Our own Experience has confirmed the Truth of what
          we affirm                                                253

    The Second Case considered, _viz._ If one bewitched be cast
        down with the look or cast of the Eye of another Person,
        and after that recovered again by a Touch from
        the same Person, is not this an infallible Proof that the
        party accused and complained of is in Covenant with
        the Devil?                                                 255

    _Answer._ This may be Ground of Suspicion and Examination,
        but not of Conviction                                      255

    The Judgment of Mr. _Bernard_ and of Dr. _Cotta_ produced      256

    Several Things offered against the Infallibility of this
        Proof:--

      1. 'Tis possible that the Persons in question may be
          possessed with Evil Spirits. Signs of such               258

      2. Falling down with the Cast of the Eye proceeds not
          from a natural, but an arbitrary Cause                   260

      3. That of the bewitched Persons being recovered with a
          Touch is various and fallible                            262

      4. There are that question the Lawfulness of the Experiment  264

      5. The Testimony of Bewitched or Possessed Persons is
          no Evidence as to what they see concerning others,
          and therefore not as to themselves                       266

      6. Bewitched Persons have sometimes been struck down
          with the Look of Dogs                                    267

      7. If this were an Infallible Proof, there would be
          difficulty in discovering Witches                        268

      8. Nothing can be produced out of the Word of God to
          shew, that this is any Proof of Witchcraft               268

      9. Antipathies in Nature have Strange and Unaccountable
          Effects                                                  268

    The Third Case considered, Whether there are any Discoveries
        of Witchcraft, which Jurors and Judges may
        with a safe Conscience proceed upon to the Conviction
        and Condemnation of the Persons under Suspicion?           269

    Two things premised:--

      1. That the Evidence in the Crime of Witchcraft ought
          to be as clear as in any other Crimes of a Capital
          Nature                                                   269

      2. That there have been ways of Trying Witches long
          used, which God never approved of. More particularly
          that of casting the Suspected Party into the
          Water, to try whether they will Sink or Swim. The
          Vanity and great Sin which is in that way of Purgation
          evinced by Six Reasons                                   270

    That there are Proofs for the Conviction of Witches, which
        Jurors may with a safe Conscience proceed upon, proved
        from Scripture                                             275

    That a Free and Voluntary Confession is a sufficient Ground
        of Conviction                                              276

    That the Testimony of confessing Witches against others, is
        not so clear an Evidence as against themselves             279

    That if two Credible Persons shall affirm upon Oath that they
        have seen the Person accused doing Things, which none
        but such as have familiarity with the Devil, ever did
        or can do, that's a sufficient ground of Conviction:
        and that this has often happened                           282

    Mr. _Perkins_ his Solemn Caution to Jurors                     283

    Postscript                                                     285




  _The Wonders of the Invisible World:_

  Being an Account of the
  TRYALS
  OF
  \Several Witches\,
  Lately Excuted in
  NEW-ENGLAND:

  And of several remarkable Curiosities therein Occurring.

  Together with,

  I. Observations upon the Nature, the Number, and the Operations
     of the Devils.

  II. A short Narrative of a late outrage committed by a knot of
      Witches in _Swede-Land_, very much resembling, and so far
      explaining, that under which _New-England_ has laboured.

  III. Some Councels directing a due Improvement of the Terrible things
       lately done by the unusual and amazing Range of _Evil-Spirits_
       in _New-England_.

  IV. A brief Discourse upon those _Temptations_ which are the more
      ordinary Devices of Satan.


  By _COTTON MATHER_.

  Published by the Special Command of his EXCELLENCY the Govenour of the
  Province of the _Massachusetts-Bay_ in _New-England_.

  Printed first, at _Bostun_ in _New-England_; and Reprinted at _London_,
  for _John Dunton_, at the _Raven_ in the _Poultry_. 1693.




THE AUTHOR'S DEFENCE.


'Tis, as I remember, the Learned _Scribonius_, who reports, That one of
his Acquaintance, devoutly making his Prayers on the behalf of a Person
molested by _Evil Spirits_, received from those _Evil Spirits_ an
horrible Blow over the Face: And I may my self expect not few or small
Buffetings from Evil Spirits, for the Endeavours wherewith I am now
going to encounter them. I am far from insensible, that at this
extraordinary Time of the _Devils coming down in great Wrath upon us_,
there are too many Tongues and Hearts thereby _set on fire of Hell_;
that the various Opinions about the Witchcrafts which of later time have
troubled us, are maintained by some with so much cloudy Fury, as if they
could never be sufficiently stated, unless written in the Liquor
wherewith Witches use to write their Covenants; and that he who becomes
an Author at such a time, had need be _fenced with Iron, and the Staff
of a Spear_. The unaccountable Frowardness, Asperity, Untreatableness,
and Inconsistency of many Persons, every Day gives a visible Exposition
of that passage, _An evil spirit from the Lord came upon Saul;_ and
Illustration of that Story, _There met him two possessed with Devils,
exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way._ To send abroad
a Book, among such Readers, were a very unadvised thing, if a Man had
not such Reasons to give, as I can bring, for such an Undertaking.
Briefly, I hope it cannot be said, _They are all so:_ No, I hope the
Body of this People, are yet in such a Temper, as to be capable of
applying their Thoughts, to make a _Right Use_ of the stupendous and
prodigious Things that are happening among us: And because I was
concern'd, when I saw that no abler Hand emitted any Essays to engage
the Minds of this People, in such holy, pious, fruitful Improvements, as
God would have to be made of his amazing Dispensations now upon us.
THEREFORE it is, that One of the Least among the Children of
_New-England_, has here done, what is done. None, but _the Father, who
sees in secret_, knows the Heart-breaking Exercises, wherewith I have
composed what is now going to be exposed, lest I should in any one thing
miss of doing my designed Service for his Glory, and for his People; but
I am now somewhat comfortably assured of his favourable acceptance; and,
_I will not fear; what can a Satan do unto me!_

Having performed something of what God required, in labouring to suit
his Words unto his Works, at this Day among us, and therewithal handled
a Theme that has been sometimes counted not unworthy the Pen, even of a
King, it will easily be perceived, that some subordinate Ends have been
considered in these Endeavours.

I have indeed set myself to countermine the whole PLOT of the Devil,
against _New-England_, in every Branch of it, as far as one of my
_darkness_, can comprehend such a _Work of Darkness_. I may add, that I
have herein also aimed at the Information and Satisfaction of Good Men
in another Country, a thousand Leagues off, where I have, it may be,
more, or however, more considerable Friends, than in my own: And I do
what I can to have that Country, now, as well as always, in the best
Terms with my own. But while I am doing these things, I have been driven
a little to do something likewise for myself; I mean, by taking off the
false Reports, and hard Censures about my Opinion in these Matters, the
_Parter's Portions_ which my _pursuit of Peace_ has procured me among
the _Keen_. My hitherto _unvaried Thoughts_ are here published; and I
believe, they will be owned by most of the Ministers of God in these
Colonies; nor can amends be well made me, for the wrong done me, by
other sorts of _Representations_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In fine: For the Dogmatical part of my Discourse, I want no Defence; for
the Historical part of it, I have a Very Great One; the
Lieutenant-Governour of _New-England_ having perused it, has done me the
Honour of giving me a Shield, under the Umbrage whereof I now dare to
walk abroad.




REVEREND AND DEAR SIR,

_You very much gratify'd me, as well as put a kind Respect upon me, when
you put into my hands, your elaborate and most seasonable Discourse,
entituled, +The Wonders of the Invisible World+. And having now perused
so fruitful and happy a Composure, upon such a Subject, at this Juncture
of Time; and considering the place that I hold in the Court of +Oyer+
and +Terminer+, still labouring and proceeding in the Trial of the
Persons accused and convicted for Witchcraft, I find that I am more
nearly and highly concerned than as a meer ordinary Reader, to express
my Obligation and Thankfulness to you for so great Pains; and cannot but
hold myself many ways bound, even to the utmost of what is proper for
me, in my present publick Capacity, to declare my +singular Approbation+
thereof. Such is your Design, most plainly expressed throughout the
whole; such your Zeal for God, your Enmity to Satan and his Kingdom,
your Faithfulness and Compassion to this poor People; such the Vigour,
but yet great Temper of your Spirit; such your Instruction and Counsel,
your +Care of Truth+, your Wisdom and Dexterity in allaying and
moderating that among us, which needs it; such your clear discerning of
Divine Providences and Periods, now running on apace towards their
Glorious Issues in the World; and finally, such your good News of +The
Shortness of the Devil's Time+, that all Good Men must needs desire, the
making of this your Discourse publick to the World; and will greatly
rejoyce, that the +Spirit of the Lord+ has thus enabled you to +lift up
a Standard+ against the Infernal Enemy, that hath been +coming in like a
Flood upon us+. I do therefore make it my particular and earnest Request
unto you, that as soon as may be, you will commit the same unto the
+Press+ accordingly. I am,_

                          Your assured Friend,

                                 WILLIAM STOUGHTON.


I live by _Neighbours_ that force me to produce these undeserved Lines.
But now, as when Mr. _Wilson_ beholding a great Muster of Souldiers, had
it by a Gentleman then present, said unto him, _Sir, I'll tell you a
great Thing: Here is a mighty Body of People; and there is not +Seven+
of them all, but what loves Mr. +Wilson+._ That gracious Man presently
and pleasantly reply'd: _Sir, I'll tell you as good a thing as that;
here is a mighty Body of People, and there is not so much as +One+ among
them all, but Mr. +Wilson+ loves him._ Somewhat so: 'Tis possible, that
among this Body of People, there may be few that love the Writer of this
Book; but give me leave to boast so far, there is not one among all this
Body of People, whom this _Mather_ would not study to serve, as well as
to love. With such a _Spirit of Love_, is the Book now before us
written: I appeal to all _this World_; and if _this_ World will deny me
the Right of acknowledging so much, I appeal to the _other_, that it is
_not written with an Evil Spirit_: for which cause I shall not wonder,
if _Evil Spirits_ be exasperated by what is written, as the _Sadduces_
doubtless were with what was discoursed in the Days of our Saviour. I
only demand the _Justice_, that others _read_ it, with the same Spirit
wherewith I _writ_ it.




ENCHANTMENTS ENCOUNTERED.


SECTION I.

It was as long ago as the Year 1637, that a Faithful Minister of the
Church of _England_, whose Name was Mr. _Edward Symons_, did in a Sermon
afterwards Printed, thus express himself; 'At _New-England_ now the Sun
of Comfort begins to appear, and the glorious Day-Star to show it
self;--_Sed Venient Annis Sæculæ Seris_, there will come Times in after
Ages, when the _Clouds will over-shadow and darken the Sky there_. Many
now promise to themselves nothing but successive Happiness there, which
for a time through God's Mercy they may enjoy; and I pray God, they may
a long time; but in this World there is no Happiness perpetual.' An
_Observation_, or I had almost said, an _Inspiration_, very dismally now
verify'd upon us! It has been affirm'd by some who best knew
_New-England_, That the World will do _New-England_ a great piece of
Injustice, if it acknowledge not a measure of Religion, Loyalty,
Honesty, and Industry, in the People there, beyond what is to be found
with any other People for the Number of them. When I did a few years
ago, publish a Book, which mentioned a few memorable Witchcrafts,
committed in this country; the excellent _Baxter_, graced the Second
Edition of that Book, with a kind Preface, wherein he sees cause to say,
_If any are Scandalized, that +New-England+, a place of as serious
Piety, as any I can hear of, under Heaven, should be troubled so much
with Witches; I think, 'tis no wonder: Where will the Devil show most
Malice, but where he is hated, and hateth most:_ And I hope, the Country
will still deserve and answer the Charity so expressed by that Reverend
Man of God. Whosoever travels over this Wilderness, will see it richly
bespangled with Evangelical Churches, whose Pastors are holy, able, and
painful Overseers of their Flocks, lively Preachers, and vertuous
Livers; and such as in their several Neighbourly Associations, have had
their Meetings whereat Ecclesiastical Matters of common Concernment are
considered: _Churches_, whose Communicants have been seriously examined
about their Experiences of Regeneration, as well as about their
Knowledge, and Belief, and blameless Conversation, before their
admission to the Sacred Communion; although others of less but hopeful
Attainments in Christianity are not ordinarily deny'd Baptism for
themselves and theirs; Churches, which are shye of using any thing in
the Worship of God, for which they cannot see a Warrant of God; but with
whom yet the Names of _Congregational_, _Presbyterian_, _Episcopalian_,
or _Antipædobaptist_, are swallowed up in that of _Christian_; Persons
of all those Perswasions being taken into our Fellowship, when visible
Goodliness has recommended them: Churches, which usually do within
themselves manage their own Discipline, under the Conduct of their
Elders; but yet call in the help of _Synods_ upon Emergencies, or
Aggrievances: _Churches_, Lastly, wherein Multitudes are growing ripe
for Heaven every day; and as fast as these are taken off, others are
daily rising up. And by the Presence and Power of the Divine
Institutions thus maintained in the Country, We are still so happy, that
I suppose there is no Land in the Universe more free from the
debauching, and the debasing Vices of Ungodliness. The Body of the
People are hitherto so disposed, that _Swearing_, _Sabbath-breaking_,
_Whoring_, _Drunkenness_, and the like, do not make a Gentleman, but a
Monster, or a Goblin, in the vulgar Estimation. All this
notwithstanding, we must humbly confess to our God, that we are
miserably degenerated from the first Love of our Predecessors; however
we boast our selves a little, when Men would go to trample upon us, and
we venture to say, _Wherein soever any is bold (we speak foolishly) we
are bold also._ The first Planters of these Colonies were a chosen
Generation of Men, who were first so pure, as to disrelish many things
which they thought wanted Reformation elsewhere; and yet withal so
peaceable, that they embraced a voluntary Exile in a squalid, horrid,
_American_ Desart, rather than to live in Contentions with their
Brethren. Those good Men imagined that they should leave their Posterity
in a place, where they should never see the Inroads of Profanity, or
Superstition: And a famous Person returning hence, could in a Sermon
before the Parliament, profess, _I have now been seven Years in a
Country, where I never Saw one Man drunk, or heard one Oath sworn, or
beheld one Beggar in the Streets all the while._ Such great Persons as
_Budæus_, and others, who mistook Sir _Thomas Moor's_ UTOPIA, for a
Country really existent, and stirr'd up some Divines charitably to
undertake a Voyage thither, might now have certainly found a Truth in
their Mistake; _New-England_ was a true _Utopia_. But, alas, the
Children and Servants of those old Planters must needs afford many,
degenerate Plants, and there is now risen up a Number of People,
otherwise inclined than our _Joshua's_, and the Elders that out-liv'd
them. Those two things our holy Progenitors, and our happy Advantages
make Omissions of Duty, and such Spiritual Disorders as the whole World
abroad is overwhelmed with, to be as provoking in us, as the most
flagitious Wickednesses committed in other places; and the Ministers of
God are accordingly severe in their Testimonies: But in short, those
Interests of the Gospel, which were the Errand of our Fathers into these
Ends of the Earth, have been too much neglected and postponed, and the
Attainments of an handsome Education, have been too much undervalued, by
Multitudes that have not fallen into Exorbitances of Wickedness; and
some, especially of our young Ones, when they have got abroad from under
the Restraints here laid upon them, have become extravagantly and
abominably Vicious. Hence 'tis, that the Happiness of _New-England_ has
been but for a time, as it was foretold, and not for a long time, as has
been desir'd for us. A Variety of Calamity has long follow'd this
Plantation; and we have all the Reason imaginable to ascribe it unto the
Rebuke of Heaven upon us for our manifold _Apostasies_; we make no
right use of our Disasters: If we do not, _Remember whence we are
fallen, and repent, and do the first Works._ But yet our Afflictions may
come under a further Consideration with us: There is a further Cause of
our Afflictions, whose due must be given him.


§ II. The _New-Englanders_ are a People of God settled in those, which
were once the _Devil's_ Territories; and it may easily be supposed that
the _Devil_ was exceedingly disturbed, when he perceived such a People
here accomplishing the Promise of old made unto our Blessed Jesus, _That
He should have the Utmost parts of the Earth for his Possession._ There
was not a greater Uproar among the _Ephesians_, when the Gospel was
first brought among them, than there was among, _The Powers of the Air_
(after whom those _Ephesians_ walked) when first the _Silver Trumpets_
of the Gospel here made the _Joyful Sound_. The Devil thus Irritated,
immediately try'd all sorts of Methods to overturn this poor Plantation:
and so much of the Church, as was _Fled into this Wilderness_,
immediately found, _The Serpent cast out of his Mouth a Flood for the
carrying of it away._ I believe, that never were more _Satanical
Devices_ used for the Unsetling of any People under the Sun, than what
have been Employ'd for the Extirpation of the _Vine_ which God has here
_Planted_, _Casting out the Heathen, and preparing a Room before it, and
causing it to take deep Root, and fill the Land, so that it sent its
Boughs unto the +Atlantic+ Sea +Eastward+, and its Branches unto the
+Connecticut+ River +Westward+, and the Hills were covered with the
shadow thereof._ But, All those Attempts of Hell, have hitherto been
Abortive, many an _Ebenezer_ has been Erected unto the Praise of God, by
his Poor People here; and, _Having obtained Help from God, we continue
to this Day._ Wherefore the Devil is now making one Attempt more upon
us; an Attempt more Difficult, more Surprizing, more snarl'd with
unintelligible Circumstances than any that we have hitherto Encountred;
an Attempt so _Critical_, that if we get well through, we shall soon
Enjoy _Halcyon_ Days with all the _Vultures_ of Hell _Trodden under our
Feet_. He has wanted his _Incarnate Legions_ to Persecute us, as the
People of God have in the other Hemisphere been Persecuted: he has
therefore drawn forth his more _Spiritual_ ones to make an Attacque upon
us. We have been advised by some Credible Christians yet alive, that a
Malefactor, accused of _Witchcraft_ as well as _Murder_, and Executed in
this place more than Forty Years ago, did then give Notice of, _An
Horrible PLOT against the Country by WITCHCRAFT, and a Foundation
of WITCHCRAFT then laid, which if it were not seasonally discovered,
would probably Blow up, and pull down all the Churches in the Country._
And we have now with Horror seen the _Discovery_ of such a _Witchcraft_!
An Army of _Devils_ is horribly broke in upon the place which is the
_Center_, and after a sort, the _First-born_ of our _English_
Settlements: and the Houses of the Good People there are fill'd with the
doleful Shrieks of their Children and Servants, Tormented by Invisible
Hands, with Tortures altogether preternatural. After the Mischiefs there
Endeavoured, and since in part Conquered, the terrible Plague, of _Evil
Angels_, hath made its Progress into some other places, where other
Persons have been in like manner Diabolically handled. These our poor
Afflicted Neighbours, quickly after they become _Infected_ and
_Infested_ with these _Dæmons_, arrive to a Capacity of Discerning those
which they conceive the _Shapes_ of their Troublers; and notwithstanding
the Great and Just Suspicion, that the _Dæmons_ might Impose the
_Shapes_ of Innocent Persons in their _Spectral Exhibitions_ upon the
Sufferers, (which may perhaps prove no small part of the _Witch-Plot_ in
the issue) yet many of the Persons thus Represented, being Examined,
several of them have been Convicted of a very Damnable _Witchcraft_:
yea, more than One _Twenty_ have _Confessed_, that they have Signed unto
a _Book_, which the Devil show'd them, and Engaged in his Hellish Design
of _Bewitching_, and _Ruining_ our Land. _We_ know not, at least _I_
know not, how far the _Delusions_ of Satan may be Interwoven into some
Circumstances of the _Confessions_; but one would think, all the Rules
of Understanding Humane Affairs are at an end, if after so many most
Voluntary Harmonious _Confessions_, made by Intelligent Persons of all
Ages, in sundry Towns, at several Times, we must not Believe the _main
strokes_ wherein those _Confessions_ all agree: especially when we have
a thousand preternatural Things every day before our eyes, wherein the
_Confessors_ do acknowledge their Concernment, and give Demonstration of
their being so Concerned. If the Devils now can strike the minds of men
with any _Poisons_ of so fine a Composition and Operation, that Scores
of Innocent People shall Unite, in _Confessions_ of a Crime, which we
see actually committed, it is a thing prodigious, beyond the Wonders of
the former Ages, and it threatens no less than a sort of a Dissolution
upon the World. Now, by these _Confessions_ 'tis Agreed, _That_ the
Devil has made a dreadful Knot of _Witches_ in the Country, and by the
help of _Witches_ has dreadfully increased that Knot: _That_ these
_Witches_ have driven a Trade of Commissioning their _Confederate
Spirits_, to do all sorts of Mischiefs to the Neighbours, whereupon
there have ensued such Mischievous consequences upon the Bodies and
Estates of the Neighbourhood, as could not otherwise be accounted for:
yea, _That_ at prodigious _Witch-Meetings_, the Wretches have proceeded
so far, as to Concert and Consult the Methods of Rooting out the
Christian Religion from this Country, and setting up instead of it,
perhaps a more gross _Diabolesm_, than ever the World saw before. And
yet it will be a thing little short of _Miracle_, if in so _spread_ a
Business as this, the Devil should not get in some of his Juggles, to
confound the Discovery of all the rest.


§ III. Doubtless, the Thoughts of many will receive a great Scandal
against _New-England_, from the Number of Persons that have been
Accused, or Suspected, for _Witchcraft_, in this Country: But it were
easie to offer many things, that may Answer and Abate the Scandal. If
the Holy God should any where permit the Devils to hook two or three
wicked _Scholars_ into _Witchcraft_, and then by their Assistance to
Range with their _Poisonous Insinuations_ among Ignorant, Envious,
Discontented People, till they have cunningly decoy'd them into some
sudden _Act_, whereby the Toyls of Hell shall be perhaps inextricably
cast over them: what Country in the World would not afford _Witches_,
numerous to a Prodigy? Accordingly, The Kingdoms of _Sweden_, _Denmark_,
_Scotland_, yea and _England_ it self, as well as the Province of
_New-England_, have had their Storms of _Witchcrafts_ breaking upon
them, which have made most Lamentable Devastations: which also I wish,
may be _The Last_. And it is not uneasie to be imagined, That God has
not brought out all the _Witchcrafts_ in many other Lands with such a
speedy, dreadful, destroying _Jealousie_, as burns forth upon such _High
Treasons_, committed here in _A Land of Uprightness_: Transgressors may
more quickly here than elsewhere become a Prey to the Vengeance of Him,
_Who has Eyes like a Flame of Fire_, and, _who walks in the midst of the
Golden Candlesticks_. Moreover, There are many parts of the World, who
if they do upon this Occasion insult over this People of God, need only
to be told the Story of what happen'd at _Loim_, in the Dutchy of
_Gulic_, where a Popish Curate having ineffectually try'd many Charms to
Eject the Devil out of a Damsel there possessed, he passionately bid the
Devil come out of her into himself; but the Devil answered him, _Quid
mihi Opus, est eum tentare, quem Novissimo die, Jure Optimo, sum
possessurus?_ That is, _What need I meddle with one whom I am sure to
have, and hold at the Last-day as my own for ever!_

But besides all this, give me leave to add, it is to be hoped, That
among the Persons represented by the _Spectres_ which now afflict our
Neighbours, there will be found _some_ that never explicitly contracted
with any of the _Evil Angels_. The Witches have not only intimated, but
some of them acknowledged, That they have plotted the Representations
of _Innocent Persons_, to cover and shelter themselves in their
Witchcrafts; now, altho' our good God has hitherto generally preserved
us from the Abuse therein design'd by the Devils for us, yet who of us
can exactly state, _How far our God may for our Chastisement permit the
Devil to proceed in such an Abuse?_ It was the Result of a Discourse,
lately held at a Meeting of some very Pious and Learned Ministers among
us, _That the Devils may sometimes have a permission to Represent an
Innocent Person, as Tormenting such as are under Diabolical
Molestations: But that such things are Rare and Extraordinary;
especially when such matters come before Civil Judicature._ The Opinion
expressed with so much Caution and Judgment, seems to be the prevailing
Sense of many others, who are men Eminently Cautious and Judicious; and
have both _Argument_ and _History_ to Countenance them in it. It is
_Rare and Extraordinary_, for an Honest _Naboth_ to have his Life it
self Sworn away by two _Children of Belial_, and yet no Infringement
hereby made on the Rectoral Righteousness of our Eternal Soveraign,
whose _Judgments are a Great Deep_, and who _gives none Account of His
matters_. Thus, although the Appearance of Innocent Persons in _Spectral
Exhibitions_ afflicting the Neighbour-hood, be a thing _Rare and
Extraordinary_; yet who can be sure, that the great _Belial_ of Hell
must needs be always _Yoked_ up from this piece of Mischief? The best
man that ever lived has been called a _Witch_: and why may not this too
usual and unhappy Symptom of A _Witch_, even a Spectral Representation,
befall a person that shall be none of the worst? Is it not possible? The
_Laplanders_ will tell us 'tis possible: for Persons to be unwittingly
attended with officious _Dæmons_, bequeathed unto them, and impos'd upon
them, by Relations that have been _Witches_. _Quæry_, also, Whether at a
Time, when the Devil with his Witches are engag'd in a War upon a
people, some certain steps of ours, in such a War, may not be follow'd
with our appearing so and so for a while among them in the Visions of
our afflicted _Forlorns_! And, Who can certainly say, what other Degrees
or Methods of sinning, besides that of a _Diabolical Compact_, may give
the Devils advantage to act in the Shape of them that have miscarried?
Besides what may happen for a while, to try the _Patience_ of the
Vertuous. May not some that have been ready upon feeble grounds
uncharitably to Censure and Reproach other people, be punished for it by
_Spectres_ for a while exposing them to Censure and Reproach? And
furthermore, I pray, that it may be considered, Whether a World of
Magical Tricks often used in the World, may not insensibly oblige
_Devils_ to wait upon the Superstitious Users of them. A Witty Writer
against _Sadducism_ has this Observation, That persons who never made
any express Contract with _Apostate Spirits_, yet may Act strange Things
by _Diabolick Aids_, which they procure by the use of those wicked
_Forms_ and _Arts_, that the Devil first imparted unto his Confederates.
And he adds, _We know not but the Laws of the Dark Kingdom may Enjoyn a
particular Attendance upon all those that practice their Mysteries,
whether they know them to be theirs or no._ Some of them that have been
cry'd out upon as imploying _Evil Spirits_ to hurt our Land, have been
known to be most bloody _Fortune-Tellers_; and some of them have
confessed, That when they told _Fortunes_, they would pretend the Rules
of _Chiromancy_ and the like Ignorant Sciences, but indeed they had no
Rule (they said) but this, _The things were then Darted into their
minds._ _Darted!_ Ye Wretches; By whom, I pray? Surely by none but the
_Devils_; who, tho' perhaps they did not exactly _Foreknow_ all the thus
Predicted Contingencies; yet having once _Foretold_ them, they stood
bound in Honour now to use their Interest, which alas, in _This World_,
is very great, for the Accomplishment of their own Predictions. There
are others, that have used most wicked _Sorceries_ to gratifie their
unlawful Curiosities, or to prevent Inconveniencies in Man and Beast;
_Sorceries_, which I will not _Name_, lest I should by Naming, _Teach_
them. Now, some _Devil_ is evermore Invited into the Service of the
Person that shall Practise these _Witchcrafts_; and if they have gone on
Impenitently in these Communions with any _Devil_, the _Devil_ may
perhaps become at last a _Familiar_ to them, and so assume their
_Livery_, that they cannot shake him off in any way, but that One, which
I would most heartily prescribe unto them, Namely, That of a deep and
long _Repentance_. Should these _Impieties_ have been committed in such
a place as _New-England_, for my part I should not wonder, if when
_Devils_ are Exposing the _Grosser_ Witches among us, God permit them to
bring in these _Lesser_ ones with the rest for their perpetual
Humiliation. In the Issue therefore, may it not be found, that
_New-England_ is not so stock'd with _Rattle Snakes_, as was imagined.


§ IV. But I do not believe, that the progress of _Witchcraft_ among us,
is all the Plot which the Devil is managing in the _Witchcraft_ now upon
us. It is judged, That the Devil rais'd the Storm, whereof we read in
the Eighth Chapter of _Matthew_, on purpose to over-set the little
Vessel wherein the Disciples of Our Lord were Embarqued with Him. And it
may be fear'd, that in the _Horrible Tempest_ which is now upon
ourselves, the design of the Devil is to sink that Happy Settlement of
Government, wherewith Almighty God has graciously enclined Their
Majesties to favour us. We are blessed with a GOVERNOUR, than whom no
man can be more willing to serve Their Majesties, or this their
Province: He is continually venturing his _All_ to do it: and were not
the Interests of his Prince dearer to him than his own, he could not but
soon be weary of the _Helm_, whereat he sits. We are under the Influence
of a LIEUTENANT GOVERNOUR, who not only by being admirably accomplished
both with Natural and Acquired Endowments, is fitted for the Service of
Their Majesties, but also with an unspotted Fidelity applies himself to
that Service. Our COUNCELLOURS are some of our most Eminent Persons, and
as Loyal Subjects to the Crown, as hearty lovers of their Country. Our
Constitution also is attended with singular Priviledges; All which
Things are by the Devil exceedingly _Envy'd_ unto us; And the Devil will
doubtless take this occasion for the raising of such complaints and
clamours, as may be of pernicious consequence unto some part of our
present Settlement, if he can so far _Impose_. But that which most of
all Threatens us, in our present Circumstances, is the
_Misunderstanding_, and so the _Animosity_, whereinto the _Witchcraft_
now Raging, has Enchanted us. The Embroiling, first, of our _Spirits_,
and then of our _Affairs_, is evidently as considerable a Branch of the
Hellish Intrigue which now vexes us as any one Thing whatsoever. The
Devil has made us like a _Troubled Sea_, and the _Mire_ and _Mud_ begins
now also to heave up apace. Even Good and Wise Men suffer themselves to
fall into their _Paroxysms_; and the Shake which the Devil is now giving
us, fetches up the _Dirt_ which before lay still at the bottom of our
sinful Hearts. If we allow the Mad Dogs of Hell to poyson us by biting
us, we shall imagine that we see nothing but such things about us, and
like such things fly upon all that we see. Were it not for what is IN
US, for my part, I should not fear a thousand Legions of Devils: 'tis by
our Quarrels that we spoil our Prayers; and if our humble, zealous, and
united Prayers are once hindred: Alas, the _Philistines_ of Hell have
cut our Locks for us; they will then blind us, mock us, ruine us: In
truth, I cannot altogether blame it, if People are a little transported,
when they conceive all the secular Interests of themselves and their
Families at the Stake; and yet at the sight of these Heartburnings, I
cannot forbear the Exclamation of the Sweet-spirited _Austin_, in his
Pacificatory Epistle to _Jerom_, on the Contest with _Ruffin_, _O misera
& miseranda Conditio!_ O Condition, truly miserable! But what shall be
done to cure these Distractions? It is wonderfully necessary, that some
healing Attempts be made at this time: And I must needs confess (if I
may speak so much) like a _Nazianzen_, I am so desirous of a share in
them, that if, being thrown overboard, were needful to allay the
_Storm_, I should think Dying, a Trifle to be undergone, for so great a
Blessedness.


§ V. I would most importunately in the first place, entreat every Man to
maintain an holy Jealousie over his Soul at this time, and think; May
not the Devil make me, though ignorantly and unwillingly, to be an
Instrument of doing something that he would have to be done? For my
part, I freely own my Suspicion, lest something of Enchantment, have
reach'd more Persons and Spirits among us, than we are well aware of.
But then, let us more generally agree to maintain a kind Opinion one of
another. That Charity without which, even our giving our Bodies to be
burned would profit nothing, uses to proceed by this Rule; It is kind,
it is not easily provok'd, it thinks no Evil, it believes all things,
hopes all things. But if we disregard this Rule of Charity, we shall
indeed give our Body Politick to be burned. I have heard it affirmed,
That in the late great Flood upon _Connecticut_, those Creatures which
could not but have quarrelled at another time, yet now being driven
together very agreeably stood by one another. I am sure we shall be
worse than _Brutes_ if we fly upon one another at a time when the Floods
of Belial make us afraid. On the one side; [Alas, my Pen, must thou
write the word, _Side_ in the Business?] There are very worthy Men, who
having been call'd by God, when and where this Witchcraft first appeared
upon the Stage to encounter it, are earnestly desirous to have it sifted
unto the bottom of it. And I pray, which of us all that should live
under the continual Impressions of the Tortures, Outcries, and Havocks
which Devils confessedly Commissioned by Witches make among their
distressed Neighbours, would not have a Biass that way beyond other Men?
Persons this way disposed have been Men eminent for Wisdom and Vertue,
and Men acted by a noble Principle of Conscience: Had not Conscience (of
Duty to God) prevailed above other Considerations with them, they would
not for all they are worth in the World have medled in this Thorny
business. Have there been any disputed Methods used in discovering the
Works of Darkness? It may be none but what have had great Presedents in
other parts of the World; which may, though not altogether justifie, yet
much alleviate a Mistake in us if there should happen to be found any
such mistake in so dark a Matter. They have done what they have done, with
multiplied Addresses to God for his Guidance, and have not been
insensible how much they have exposed themselves in what they have done.
Yea, they would gladly contrive and receive an expedient, how the
shedding of Blood, might be spared, by the Recovery of Witches, not gone
beyond the Reach of Pardon. And after all, they invite all good Men, in
Terms to this purpose, 'Being amazed at the Number and Quality of those
accused of late, we do not know but Satan by his Wiles may have
enwrapped some innocent Persons; and therefore should earnestly and
humbly desire the most Critical Enquiry upon the place, to find out the
Falacy; that there may be none of the Servants of the Lord, with the
Worshippers of _Baal_.' I may also add, That whereas, if once a Witch do
ingeniously confess among us, no more _Spectres_ do in their Shapes
after this, trouble the Vicinage; if any guilty Creatures will
accordingly to so good purpose confess their Crime to any Minister of
God, and get out of the Snare of the Devil, as no Minister will discover
such a Conscientious Confession, so I believe none in the Authority
will press him to discover it; but rejoyc'd in a Soul sav'd from Death.
On the other side [if I must again use the word _Side_, which yet I hope
to live to blot out] there are very worthy Men, who are not a little
dissatisfied at the Proceedings in the Prosecution of this Witchcraft.
And why? Not because they would have any such abominable thing, defended
from the Strokes of Impartial Justice. No, those Reverend Persons who
gave in this Advice unto the Honourable Council; 'That Presumptions,
whereupon Persons may be Committed, and much more Convictions, whereupon
Persons may be Condemned, as guilty of Witchcrafts, ought certainly to
be more considerable, than barely the Accused Persons being represented
by a _Spectre_ unto the Afflicted; Nor are Alterations made in the
Sufferers, by a Look or Touch of the Accused, to be esteemed an
infallible Evidence of Guilt; but frequently liable to be abused by the
Devils Legerdemains': I say, those very Men of God most conscientiously
Subjoined this Article to that Advice,--'Nevertheless we cannot but
humbly recommend unto the Government, the speedy and vigorous
Prosecution of such as have rendred themselves Obnoxious; according to
the best Directions given in the Laws of God, and the wholsome Statutes
of the _English_ Nation for the Detection of Witchcraft.' Only 'tis a
most commendable Cautiousness, in those gracious Men, to be very shye
lest the Devil get so far into our Faith, as that for the sake of many
Truths which we find he tells us, we come at length to believe any Lyes,
wherewith he may abuse us: whereupon, what a Desolation of Names would
soon ensue, besides a thousand other pernicious Consequences? and lest
there should be any such Principles taken up, as when put into Practice
must unavoidably cause the _Righteous to perish with the Wicked_; or
procure the Bloodshed of any Persons, like the _Gibeonites_, whom some
learned Men suppose to be under a false Notion of Witches, by _Saul_
exterminated.

They would have all due steps taken for the Extinction of Witches; but
they would fain have them to be sure ones; nor is it from any thing, but
the real and hearty goodness of such Men, that they are loth to surmise
ill of other Men, till there be the fullest Evidence for the surmises.
As for the Honourable Judges that have been hitherto in the Commission,
they are above my Consideration: wherefore I will only say thus much of
them, That such of them as I have the Honour of a Personal Acquaintance
with, are Men of an excellent Spirit; and as at first they went about
the work for which they were Commission'd, with a very great aversion,
so they have still been under Heart-breaking Sollicitudes, how they
might therein best serve both God and Man? In fine, Have there been
faults on any side fallen into? Surely, they have at worst been but the
faults of a well-meaning Ignorance. On every side then, why should not
we endeavour with amicable Correspondencies, to help one another out of
the Snares wherein the Devil would involve us? To wrangle the Devil out
of the Country, will be truly a New Experiment: Alas! we are not aware
of the Devil, if we do not think, that he aims at inflaming us one
against another; and shall we suffer our selves to be Devil-ridden? or
by any unadvisableness contribute unto the Widening of our Breaches?

To say no more, there is a published and credible Relation; which
affirms, That very lately in a part of _England_, where some of the
Neighbourhood were quarrelling, a _Raven_ from the Top of a Tree very
articulately and unaccountably cry'd out, _Read the Third of Colossians
and the Fifteenth!_ Were I my self to chuse what sort of Bird I would be
transformed into, I would say, _O that I had wings like a Dove!_
Nevertheless, I will for once do the Office, which as it seems, Heaven
sent that Raven upon; even to beg, _That the Peace of God may Rule in
our Hearts._


§ VI. 'Tis necessary that we unite in every thing: but there are
especially two Things wherein our Union must carry us along together. We
are to unite in our Endeavours to deliver our distressed Neighbours,
from the horrible Annoyances and Molestations with which a dreadful
Witchcraft is now persecuting of them. To have an hand in any thing,
that may stifle or obstruct a Regular Detection of that Witchcraft, is
what we may well with an holy fear avoid. Their Majesties good Subjects
must not every day be torn to pieces by horrid Witches, and those bloody
Felons, be left wholly unprosecuted. The Witchcraft is a business that
will not be sham'd, without plunging us into sore Plagues, and of long
continuance. But then we are to unite in such Methods for this
deliverance, as may be unquestionably safe, lest _the latter end be
worse than the beginning_. And here, what shall I say? I will venture to
say thus much, That we are safe, when we make just as much use of all
Advice from the invisible World, as God sends it for. It is a safe
Principle, That when God Almighty permits any Spirits from the unseen
Regions, to visit us with surprizing Informations, there is then
something to be enquired after; we are then to enquire of one another,
What Cause there is for such things? The peculiar Government of God,
over the unbodied Intelligences, is a sufficient Foundation for this
Principle. When there has been a Murder committed, an Apparition of the
slain Party accusing of any Man, altho' such Apparitions have oftner
spoke true than false, is not enough to Convict the Man as guilty of
that Murder; but yet it is a sufficient occasion for Magistrates to make
a particular Enquiry, whether such a Man have afforded any ground for
such an Accusation. Even so a Spectre exactly resembling such or such a
Person, when the Neighbourhood are tormented by such Spectres, may
reasonably make Magistrates inquisitive whether the Person so
represented have done or said any thing that may argue their confederacy
with Evil Spirits, altho' it may be defective enough in point of
Conviction; especially at a time, when 'tis possible, some over-powerful
Conjurer may have got the skill of thus exhibiting the Shapes of all
sorts of Persons, on purpose to stop the Prosecution of the Wretches,
whom due Enquiries thus provoked, might have made obnoxious unto
Justice.

_Quære_, Whether if God would have us to proceed any further than bare
_Enquiry_, upon what Reports there may come against any Man, from the
World of _Spirits_, he will not by his Providence at the same time have
brought into our hands, these more evident and sensible things,
whereupon a man is to be esteemed a Criminal. But I will venture to say
this further, that it will be safe to account the Names as well as the
Lives of our Neighbors; two considerable things to be brought under a
Judicial Process, until it be found by Humane Observations that the
Peace of Mankind is thereby disturbed. We are Humane Creatures, and we
are safe while we say, they must be Humane Witnesses, who also have in
the particular Act of Seeing, or Hearing, which enables them to be
Witnesses, had no more than Humane Assistances, that are to turn the
Scale when Laws are to be executed. And upon this Head I will further
add: A wise and a just Magistrate, may so far give way to a common
Stream of Dissatisfaction, as to forbear acting up to the heighth of his
own Perswasion, about what may be judged convictive of a Crime, whose
Nature shall be so abstruse and obscure, as to raise much Disputation.
Tho' he may not do what he should leave undone, yet he may leave undone
something that else he could do, when the Publick Safety makes an
_Exigency_.


§ VII. I was going to make one Venture more; that is, to offer some safe
Rules, for the finding out of the Witches, which are at this day our
accursed Troublers: but this were a Venture too _Presumptuous_ and
_Icarian_ for me to make; I leave that unto those Excellent and
Judicious Persons, with whom I am not worthy to be numbred: All that I
shall do, shall be to lay before my Readers, a brief _Synopsis_ of what
has been written on that Subject, by a Triumvirate of as Eminent Persons
as have ever handled it. I will begin with,




AN ABSTRACT OF MR. PERKINS'S WAY FOR

THE DISCOVERY OF WITCHES.


I. _There are +Presumptions+, which do at least probably and
conjecturally note one to be a +Witch+. These give occasion to Examine,
yet they are no sufficient Causes of Conviction._

II. _If any Man or Woman be notoriously defamed for a +Witch+, this
yields a strong Suspition. Yet the Judge ought carefully to look, that
the Report be made by +Men+ of Honesty and Credit._

III. _If a +Fellow-Witch+, or +Magician+, give Testimony of any Person
to be a +Witch+; this indeed is not sufficient for Condemnation; but it
is a fit Presumption to cause a strait Examination._

IV. _If after Cursing there follow Death, or at least some mischief:
for +Witches+ are wont to practise their mischievous Facts, by Cursing
and Banning: This also is a sufficient matter of Examination, tho' not
of Conviction._

V. _If after Enmity, Quarrelling, or Threatning, a present mischief does
follow; that also is a great Presumption._

VI. _If the Party suspected be the Son or Daughter, the man-servant or
maid-servant, the Familiar Friend, near Neighbor, or old Companion, of a
known and convicted Witch; this may be likewise a Presumption; for
Witchcraft is an Art that may be learned, and conveyed from man to
man._

VII. _Some add this for a Presumption: If the Party suspected be found
to have the Devil's mark; for it is commonly thought, when the Devil
makes his Covenant with them, he alwaies leaves his mark behind them,
whereby he knows them for his own:--a mark whereof no evident Reason in
Nature can be given._

VIII. _Lastly, If the party examined be Unconstant, or contrary to
himself, in his deliberate Answers, it argueth a Guilty Conscience,
which stops the freedom of Utterance. And yet there are causes of
Astonishment, which may befal the Good, as well as the Bad._

IX. _But then there is a +Conviction+, discovering the +Witch+, which
must proceed from just and sufficient proofs, and not from bare
presumptions._

X. _Scratching of the suspected party, and Recovery thereupon, with
several other such weak Proofs; as also, the fleeting of the suspected
Party, thrown upon the Water; these Proofs are so far from being
sufficient, that some of them are, after a sort, practices of
Witchcraft._

XI. _The Testimony of some Wizzard, tho' offering to shew the Witches
Face in a Glass: This, I grant, may be a good Presumption, to cause a
strait Examination; but a sufficient Proof of Conviction it cannot be.
If the Devil tell the Grand Jury, that the person in question is a
Witch, and offers withal to confirm the same by Oath, should the Inquest
receive his Oath or Accusation to condemn the man? Assuredly no. And
yet, that is as much as the Testimony of another Wizzard, who only by
the Devil's help reveals the Witch._

XII. _If a man, being dangerously sick, and like to dye, upon
Suspicion, will take it on his Death, that such a one hath bewitched
him, it is an Allegation of the same nature, which may move the Judge to
examine the Party, but it is of no moment for Conviction._

XIII. _Among the sufficient means of Conviction, the first is, the free
and voluntary Confession of the Crime, made by the party suspected and
accused, after Examination. I say not, that a bare confession is
sufficient, but a Confession after due Examination, taken upon pregnant
presumptions. What needs now more witness or further Enquiry?_

XIV. _There is a second sufficient Conviction, by the Testimony of two
Witnesses, of good and honest Report, avouching before the Magistrate,
upon their own Knowledge, these two things: either that the party
accused hath made a League with the Devil, or hath done some known
practice of witchcraft. And, +all Arguments that do necessarily prove
either of these+, being brought by two sufficient Witnesses, are of
force fully to convince the party suspected._

XV. _If it can be proved, that the party suspected hath called upon the
+Devil+, or desired his Help, this is a pregnant proof of a League
formerly made between them._

XVI. _If it can be proved, that the party hath entertained a Familiar
Spirit, and had Conference with it, in the likeness of some visible
Creatures; here is Evidence of witchcraft._

XVII. _If the witnesses affirm upon Oath, that the suspected person hath
done any action or work which necessarily infers a Covenant made, as,
that he hath used Enchantments, divined things before they come to pass,
and that peremptorily, raised Tempests, caused the Form of a dead man
to appear; it proveth sufficiently, that he or she is a +Witch+._ This is
the Substance of Mr. _Perkins_.




Take next the Sum of Mr. _Gaules_ Judgment about the Detection of
Witches. '1. Some Tokens for the Trial of Witches, are altogether
unwarrantable. Such are the old Paganish Sign, the Witches _Long Eyes_;
the Tradition of Witches not weeping; the casting of the Witch into the
Water, with Thumbs and Toes ty'd a-cross. And many more such Marks,
which if they are to know a Witch by, certainly 'tis no other Witch, but
the User of them. 2. There are some Tokens for the Trial of Witches,
more probable, and yet not so certain as to afford Conviction. Such are
strong and long Suspicion: Suspected Ancestors, some appearance of Fact,
the Corps bleeding upon the Witches touch, the Testimony of the Party
bewitched, the supposed Witches unusual Bodily marks, the Witches usual
Cursing and Banning, the Witches lewd and naughty kind of Life. 3. Some
Signs there are of a Witch, more certain and infallible. As, _firstly_,
Declining of Judicature, or faultering, faulty, unconstant, and contrary
Answers, upon judicial and deliberate examination. _Secondly_, When upon
due Enquiry into a person's Faith and Manners, there are found _all_ or
_most_ of the Causes which produce Witchcraft, namely, _God_ forsaking,
_Satan_ invading, particular _Sins_ disposing; and lastly, a compact
compleating all. _Thirdly_, The Witches free Confession, together with
full Evidence of the Fact. _Confession_ without _Fact_ may be a meer
Delusion, and _Fact_ without _Confession_ may be a meer Accident.
_4thly_, The semblable Gestures and Actions of suspected Witches, with
the comparable Expressions of Affections, which in all Witches have been
observ'd and found very much alike. _Fifthly_, The Testimony of the
Party bewitched, whether pining or dying, together with the joynt Oaths
of sufficient persons, that have seen certain prodigious Pranks or
Feats, wrought by the Party accused. 4. Among the most unhappy
circumstances to convict a Witch, one is, a maligning and oppugning the
Word, Work, and Worship of God, and by any extraordinary sign seeking to
seduce any from it. See _Deut. 13.1, 2._, _Mat. 24.24._, _Act. 13.8, 10._,
_2 Tim. 3.8._ Do but mark well the places, and for this very Property
(of thus opposing and perverting) they are all there concluded arrant
and absolute Witches. 5. It is not requisite, that so _palpable Evidence
of Conviction_ should here come in, as in other more sensible matters;
'tis enough, if there be but so much _circumstantial_ Proof or Evidence,
as the Substance, Matter, and Nature of such an abstruse Mystery of
Iniquity will well admit. [_I suppose he means, that whereas in other
Crimes we look for more direct proofs, in this there is a greater use of
consequential ones._] But I could heartily wish, that the Juries were
empanell'd of the most eminent Physicians, Lawyers, and Divines that a
Country could afford. In the mean time 'tis not to be called a
Toleration, if Witches escape, where Conviction is wanting.' To this
purpose our _Gaule_.

I will transcribe a little from one Author more, 'tis the Judicious
_Bernard_ of _Batcomb_, who in his _Guide to grand Jurymen_, after he
has mention'd several things that are shrewd Presumptions of a Witch,
proceeds to such things as are the _Convictions_ of such an one. And he
says, '_A witch in league with the +Devil+ is convicted by these
Evidences;_ I. By a witches _Mark_; which is upon the Baser sort of
Witches; and this, by the Devils either Sucking or Touching of them.
_Tertullian_ says, _It is the Devils custome to mark his._ And note,
That this mark is _Insensible_, and being prick'd it will not Bleed.
Sometimes, its like a _Teate_; sometimes but a _Blewish Spot_; sometimes
a _Red_ one; and sometimes the _flesh Sunk_: but the Witches do
sometimes cover them. II. By the Witches _Words_. As when they have been
heard calling on, speaking to, or Talking of their _Familiars_; or, when
they have been heard _Telling_ of _Hurt_ they have done to man or beast:
Or when they have been heard _Threatning_ of such Hurt; Or if they have
been heard Relating their _Transportations_. III. By the Witches
_Deeds_. As when they have been _seen_ with their Spirits, or seen
secretly Feeding any of their _Imps_. Or, when there can be found their
Pictures, Poppets, and other Hellish Compositions. IV. By the Witches
_Extasies_: With the Delight whereof, Witches are so taken, that they
will hardly conceal the same: Or, however at some time or other, they
may be found in them. V. By one or more _Fellow-Witches_, Confessing
their own Witchcraft, and bearing Witness against others; if they can
make good the Truth of their Witness, and give sufficient proof of it.
As, that they have seen them with their Spirits or, that they have
Received Spirits from them; or that they can tell, when they used
Witchery-Tricks to Do Harm; or, that they told them what Harm they had
done; or that they can show the mark upon them; or, that they have been
together in their Meetings; and such like. VI. By some _Witness of God_
Himself, happening upon the Execrable Curses of Witches upon themselves,
Praying of God to show some Token, if they be Guilty. VII. By the
Witches own _Confession_, of Giving their Souls to the Devil. It is no
Rare thing, for Witches to Confess.'

They are Considerable Things, which I have thus Recited; and yet it must
be with _Open Eyes_, kept upon _Open Rules_, that we are to follow these
things,

_S._ 8. But _Juries_ are not the only Instruments to be imploy'd in such
a Work; all _Christians_ are to be concerned with daily and fervent
_Prayers_, for the assisting of it. In the Days of _Athanasius_, the
Devils were found unable to stand before, that Prayer, however then used
perhaps with too much of Ceremony, _Let God Arise, Let his Enemies be
Scattered. Let them also that Hate Him, flee before Him._

O that instead of letting our Hearts _Rise_ against one another, our
Prayers might _Rise_ unto an high pitch of Importunity, for such a
_Rising_ of the Lord! Especially, Let them that are _Suffering_ by
_Witchcraft_, be sure to _stay_ and _pray_, and _Beseech the Lord
thrice_, even as much as ever they can, before they complain of any
Neighbour for afflicting them. Let them also that are _accused_ of
_Witchcraft_, set themselves to _Fast_ and _Pray_, and so shake off the
_Dæmons_ that would like _Vipers_ fasten upon them; and get the _Waters
of Jealousie_ made profitable to them.

And Now, _O Thou Hope of +New-England+, and the Saviour thereof in the
Time of Trouble; Do thou look mercifully down upon us, & Rescue us, out
of the Trouble which at this time do's threaten to swallow us up. Let
Satan be shortly bruised under our Feet, and Let the Covenanted Vassals
of Satan, which have Traiterously brought him in upon us, be Gloriously
Conquered, by thy Powerful and Gracious Presence in the midst of us.
Abhor us not, O God, but cleanse us, but heal us, but save us, for the
sake of thy Glory. Enwrapped in our Salvations. By thy Spirit, Lift up a
standard against our infernal adversaries, Let us quickly find thee
making of us glad, according to the Days wherein we have been afflicted.
Accept of all our Endeavours to glorify thee, in the Fires that are upon
us; and among the rest, Let these my poor and weak essays, composed with
what Tears, what Cares, what Prayers, thou +only+ knowest, not want the
Acceptance of the Lord._




A DISCOURSE ON THE WONDERS OF

THE INVISIBLE WORLD.

  UTTERED (IN PART) ON AUG. 4, 1692.

  Ecclesiastical History has Reported it unto us, That a Renowned
    Martyr at the Stake, seeing the Book of the REVELATION thrown
    by his no less Profane than Bloody Persecutors, to be Burn'd in
    the same Fire with himself, he cryed out, _O Beata Apocalypsis;
    quam bene mecum agitur, qui tecum Comburar!_ BLESSED REVELATION!
    said he, _How Blessed am I in this Fire, while I have Thee
    to bear me Company._ As for our selves this Day, 'tis a Fire of sore
    Affliction and Confusion, wherein we are Embroiled; but it is no
    inconsiderable Advantage unto us, that we have the Company of
    this Glorious and Sacred Book the REVELATION to assist us in our
    Exercises. From that Book there is one Text, which I would
    single out at this time to lay before you; 'tis that in

  REVEL. XII. 12.

  _Wo to the Inhabitants of the Earth, and of the Sea; for the Devil is
    come down unto you, having great Wrath; because he knoweth, that
    he hath but a short time._


The Text is Like the Cloudy and Fiery Pillar, vouchsafed unto _Israel_,
in the Wilderness of old; there is a very _dark side_ of it in the
Intimation, that, _The Devil is come down having great Wrath;_ but it
has also a _bright side_, when it assures us, that, _He has but a short
time;_ Unto the Contemplation of _both_, I do this Day Invite you.

We have in our Hands a Letter from our Ascended Lord in Heaven, to
Advise us of his being still alive, and of his Purpose e're long, to
give us a Visit, wherein we shall see our Living _Redeemer_, _stand at
the latter day upon the Earth_. 'Tis the last Advice that we have had
from Heaven, for now sixteen Hundred years; and the scope of it, is, to
represent how the Lord Jesus Christ having begun to set up his Kingdom
in the World, by the preaching of the Gospel, he would from time to time
utterly break to pieces all Powers that should make Head against it,
until, _The Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdomes of our Lord,
and of his Christ, and he shall Reign for ever and ever._ 'Tis a
Commentary on what had been written by _Daniel_, about, _The fourth
Monarchy_; with some Touches upon, _The Fifth_; wherein, _The greatness
of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of
the Saints of the most High:_ And altho' it have, as 'tis expressed by
one of the Ancients, _Tot Sacramenta quot verba_, a Mystery in every
Syllable, yet it is not altogether to be neglected with such a Despair,
as that, _I cannot Read, for the Book is Sealed._ It is a REVELATION,
and a singular, and notable _Blessing_ is pronounc'd upon them that
humbly study it.

The Divine Oracles, have with a most admirable Artifice and Carefulness,
drawn, as the very pious _Beverley_, has laboriously Evinced, an exact
LINE OF TIME, from the first Sabbath at the _Creation_ of the World,
unto the great Sabbatism at the _Restitution_ of all Things. In that
famous _Line of Time_, from the Decree for the Restoring of _Jerusalem_,
after the _Babylonish_ Captivity, there seem to remain a matter of _Two
Thousand and Three Hundred Years_, unto that _New Jerusalem_, whereto
the Church is to be advanced, when the Mystical _Babylon_ shall be
_fallen_. At the Resurrection of our Lord, there were seventeen or
eighteen Hundred of those Years, yet upon the Line, to run unto, _The
rest which remains for the People of God_; and this Remnant in the _Line
of Time_, is here in our _Apocalypse_, variously Embossed, Adorned, and
Signalized with such Distinguishing Events, if we mind them, will help
us escape that Censure, _Can ye not Discern the Signs of the Times?_

The Apostle _John_, for the View of these Things, had laid before him,
as I conceive, a _Book_, with leaves, or folds; which _Volumn_ was
written both on the _Backside_, and on the _Inside_, and Roll'd up in a
Cylindriacal Form, under seven _Labels_, fastned with so many _Seals_.
The first _Seal_ being opened, and the first _Label_ removed, under the
first _Label_ the Apostle saw what he saw, of a first _Rider_
Pourtray'd, and so on, till the last _Seal_ was broken up; each of the
Sculptures being enlarged with agreeable _Visions_ and _Voices_, to
illustrate it. The Book being now Unrolled, there were _Trumpets_, with
wonderful Concomitants, Exhibited successively on the Expanding
_Backside_ of it. Whereupon the Book was _Eaten_, as it were to be
Hidden, from Interpretations; till afterwards, in the _Inside_ of it,
the Kingdom of Anti-christ came to be Exposed. Thus, the Judgments of
God on the _Roman Empire_, first unto the Downfal of _Paganism_, and
then, unto the Downfal of _Popery_, which is but Revived _Paganism_, are
in these Displayes, with Lively Colours and Features made sensible unto
us.

Accordingly, in the Twelfth Chapter of this Book, we have an August
Preface, to the Description of that Horrid _Kingdom_, which our Lord
Christ refused, but Antichrist accepted, from the Devils Hands; a
Kingdom, which for _Twelve Hundred and Sixty_ Years together, was to be
a continual oppression upon the People of God, and opposition unto his
Interests; until the Arrival of that Illustrious Day, wherein, _The
Kingdom shall be the Lords, and he shall be Governour among the
Nations._ The Chapter is (as an Excellent Person calls it) an
_Extravasated Account_ of the Circumstances, which befell the _Primitive
Church_, during the first Four or Five Hundred Years of Christianity: It
shows us the Face of the Church, first in _Rome_ Heathenish, and then in
_Rome_ Converted, before the _Man of Sin_ was yet come to _Mans Estate_.
Our Text contains the Acclamations made upon the most Glorious
Revolution that ever yet happened upon the Roman Empire; namely, That
wherein the Travailing Church brought forth a Christian Emperour. This
was a most Eminent _Victory_ over the Devil, and _Resemblance_ of the
State, wherein the World, ere long shall see, _The Kingdom of our God,
and the Power of his Christ_. It is here noted,

First, As a matter of _Triumph_. 'Tis said, _Rejoyce, ye Heavens, and ye
that dwell in them._ The Saints in both Worlds, took the Comfort of this
Revolution; the Devout Ones that had outlived the late Persecutions,
were filled with Transporting Joys, when they saw the _Christian_
become the _Imperial_ Religion, and when they saw Good Men come to give
Law unto the rest of Mankind; the Deceased Ones also, whose Blood had
been Sacrificed in the Ten Persecutions, doubtless made the Light
Regions to ring with _Hallelujahs_ unto God, when there were brought
unto them, the Tidings of the Advances now given to the _Christian_
Religion, for which they had suffered _Martyrdom_.

Secondly, As a matter of _Horror_. 'Tis said, _Wo to the Inhabiters of
the Earth and of the Sea._ The _Earth_ still means the _False Church_,
the _Sea_ means the _Wide World_, in Prophetical Phrasæology. There was
yet left a vast party of Men that were Enemies to the Christian
Religion, in the power of it; a vast party left for the Devil to work
upon: Unto these is a _Wo_ denounced; and why so? 'Tis added, _For the
Devil is come down unto you, having great Wrath, because he knows, that
he has but a short time._ These were, it seems, to have some desperate
and peculiar Attempts of the Devil made upon them. In the mean time, we
may Entertain this for our Doctrine,

_Great Wo proceeds from the Great WRATH, with which the DEVIL, towards
the end of his TIME, will make a DESCENT upon a miserable World._

I have now Published a most awful and solemn Warning for our selves at
this day; which has four _Propositions_, comprehended in it.

_Proposition I._ That there is a _Devil_, is a thing Doubted by none but
such as are under the Influences of the _Devil_. For any to deny the
Being of a _Devil_ must be from an Ignorance or Profaneness, worse than
_Diabolical_. _A Devil._ What is _that_? We have a Definition of the
Monster, in _Eph. 6.12._ _A Spiritual Wickedness_, that is, _A wicked
Spirit_. A Devil is a _Fallen Angel_, an Angel _Fallen_ from the Fear
and Love of God, and from all Celestial Glories; but _Fallen_ to all
manner of Wretchedness and Cursedness. He was once in that Order of
Heavenly Creatures, which God in the Beginning made _Ministering
Spirits_, for his own peculiar Service and Honour, in the management of
the Universe; but we may now write that Epitaph upon him, _How art thou
fallen from Heaven! thou hast said in thine Heart, I will Exalt my
Throne above the Stars of God; but thou art brought down to Hell!_ A
Devil is a _Spiritual_ and _Rational_ Substance, by his _Apostacy_ from
God, inclined unto all that is Vicious, and for that _Apostacy_ confined
unto the Atmosphere of this Earth, _in Chains under Darkness, unto the
Judgment of the Great Day_. This is a _Devil_; and the _Experience_ of
Mankind as well as the _Testimony_ of Scripture, does abundantly prove
the Existence of such a Devil.

About this _Devil_, there are many things, whereof we may reasonably and
profitably be Inquisitive; such things, I mean, as are in our Bibles
Reveal'd unto us; according to which if we do not speak, on so _dark_ a
Subject, but according to our own uncertain, and perhaps humoursome
Conjectures, _There is no Light in us._ I will carry you with me, but
unto one Paragraph of the Bible, to be informed of three Things,
relating to the _Devil_; 'tis the Story of the _Gadaren Energumen_, in
the fifth Chapter of _Mark_.

First, then, 'Tis to be granted; the _Devils_ are so many, that some
Thousands, can sometimes at once apply themselves to vex one Child of
Man. It is said, in _Mark 5.15._ _He that was Possessed with the Devil,
had the Legion._ Dreadful to be spoken! A _Legion_ consisted of Twelve
Thousand Five Hundred People: And we see that in one Man or two, so many
_Devils_ can be spared for a Garrison. As the Prophet cryed out,
_Multitudes, Multitudes, in the Valley of Decision!_ So I say, _There
are multitudes, multitudes, in the valley of Destruction, where the
Devils are!_ When we speak of, _The Devil_, 'tis, _A name of Multitude_;
it means not _One_ Individual Devil, so Potent and Scient, as perhaps a
_Manichee_ would imagine; but it means a _Kind_, which a _Multitude_
belongs unto. Alas, the _Devils_, they swarm about us, like the _Frogs
of Egypt_, in the most Retired of our Chambers. Are we at our _Boards_?
There will be Devils to Tempt us unto Sensuality: Are we in our _Beds_?
There will be Devils to Tempt us unto Carnality; Are we in our _Shops_?
There will be Devils to Tempt us into Dishonesty. Yea, Tho' we get into
the Church of God, there will be Devils to Haunt us in the very _Temple_
it self, and there tempt us to manifold Misbehaviours. I am verily
perswaded, That there are very few Humane Affairs whereinto some Devils
are not Insinuated; There is not so much as a _Journey_ intended, but
_Satan_ will have an hand in _hindering_ or _furthering_ of it.

Secondly, 'Tis to be supposed, That there is a sort of Arbitrary, even
Military _Government_, among the _Devils_. This is intimated, when in
_Mar. 5.9._ _The unclean Spirit said, My Name is Legion:_ they are such
a Discipline as _Legions_ use to be. Hence we read about, _The Prince
of the power of the Air_: Our _Air_ has a _power_? or an Army of Devils
in the _High Places_ of it; and these Devils have a _Prince_ over them,
who is _King over the Children of Pride_. 'Tis probable, That the Devil,
who was the Ringleader of that mutinous and rebellious Crew, which first
shook off the Authority of God, is now the General of those Hellish
Armies; Our Lord, that Conquered him, has told us the Name of him; 'tis
_Belzebub_; 'tis he that is _the Devil_, and the rest are _his Angels_,
or his Souldiers. Think on vast Regiments of cruel and bloody _French
Dragoons_, with an _Intendant_ over them, overrunning a pillaged
Neighbourhood, and you will think a little, what the Constitution among
the _Devils_ is.

Thirdly, 'tis to be supposed, that some _Devils_ are more peculiarly
_Commission'd_, and perhaps _Qualify'd_, for some Countries, while
others are for others. This is intimated when in _Mar. 5.10._ The Devils
_besought_ our Lord much, _that he would not send them away out of the
Countrey_. Why was that? But in all probability, because _these Devils_
were more able to _do the works of the Devil_, in such a Countrey, than
in another. It is not likely that every Devil does know every
_Language_; or that every Devil can do every _Mischief_. 'Tis possible,
that the _Experience_, or, if I may call it so, the _Education_ of all
Devils is not alike, and that there may be some difference in their
_Abilities_. If one might make an Inference from what the Devils _do_,
to what they _are_, One cannot forbear dreaming, that there are
_degrees_ of Devils. Who can allow, that such Trifling _Dæmons_, as that
of _Mascon_, or those that once infested our _New berry_, are of so much
Grandeur, as those _Dæmons_, whose Games are mighty Kingdoms? Yea, 'tis
certain, that all Devils do not make a like Figure in the _Invisible
World_. Nor does it look agreeably, That the _Dæmons_, which were the
Familiars of such a Man as the old _Apollonius_, differ not from those
baser Goblins that chuse to Nest in the filthy and loathsom Rags of a
beastly Sorceress. Accordingly, why may not some Devils be more
accomplished for what is to be done in such and such places, when others
must be _detach'd_ for other Territories? Each Devil, as he sees his
advantage, cries out, _Let me be in this Countrey, rather than another._

But _Enough_, if not _too much_, of these things.

_Proposition II._ There is a Devilish _Wrath_ against _Mankind_, with
which the _Devil_ is for _God's sake_ Inspired. The Devil is himself
broiling under the intollerable and interminable _Wrath_ of God; and a
fiery _Wrath_ at God, is, that which the Devil is for that cause
Enflamed. Methinks I see the posture of the Devils in _Isa. 8.21._ _They
fret themselves, and Curse their God, and look upward._ The first and
chief _Wrath_ of the Devil, is at the Almighty God himself; he knows,
_The God that made him, will not have mercy on him, and the God that
formed him, will shew him no favour;_ and so he can have no _Kindness_
for that God, who has no _Mercy_, nor _Favour_ for him. Hence 'tis, that
he cannot bear the _Name_ of God should be acknowledged in the World:
Every Acknowledgement paid unto _God_, is a fresh drop of the burning
Brimstone falling upon the Devil; he does make his Insolent, tho
Impotent Batteries, even upon the _Throne_ of God himself: and foolishly
affects to have himself exalted unto that _Glorious High Throne_, by
all people, as he sometimes is, by Execrable _Witches_. This horrible
Dragon does not only with his Tayl strike at the _Stars of God_, but at
the God himself, who made the _Stars_, being desirous to out-shine them
all. God and the Devil are sworn Enemies to each other; the Terms
between them, are those, in _Zech. 11.18._ _My Soul loathed them, and
their Soul also abhorred me._ And from this Furious _wrath_, or
Displeasure and Prejudice at God, proceeds the Devils _wrath_ at us, the
poor Children of Men. Our doing the _Service_ of God, is one thing that
exposes us to the _wrath_ of the Devil. We are the _High Priests_ of the
World; when all Creatures are called upon, _Praise ye the Lord_, they
bring to us those demanded _Praises_ of God, saying, _do you offer them
for us._ Hence 'tis, that the Devil has a Quarrel with us, as he had
with the _High-Priest_ in the Vision of Old. Our bearing the Image of
God is another thing that brings the _wrath_ of the Devil upon us. As a
_Tyger_, thro his Hatred at man will tear the very Picture of him, if it
come in his way; such a _Tyger_ the Devil is; because God said of old,
_Let us make Man in our Image_, the Devil is ever saying, _Let us pull
this man to pieces_. But the envious _Pride_ of the Devil, is one thing
more that gives an Edge unto his Furious _Wrath_ against us. The Apostle
has given us an hint, as if _Pride_ had been the _Condemnation of the
Devil_. 'Tis not unlikely, that the Devil's _Affectation_ to be above
that Condition which he might learn that Mankind was to be preferr'd
unto, might be the occasion of his taking up Arms against the _Immortal
King_. However, the Devil now sees _Man_ lying in the Bosom of God, but
_himself_ damned in the bottom of Hell; and this enrages him
exceedingly; _O_, says he, _I cannot bear it, that man should not be as
miserable as my self._

_Proposition III._ The _Devil_, in the prosecution, and the execution of
his _wrath_ upon them, often gets a _Liberty_ to make a _Descent_ upon
the Children of men. When the Devil _does hurt_ unto us, he _comes down_
unto us; for the Rendezvouze of the _Infernal Troops_, is indeed in the
_supernal parts_ of our Air. But as 'tis said, _A sparrow of the Air
does not fall down without the will of God;_ so I may say, _Not a Devil
in the Air, can come down without the leave of God._ Of this we have a
famous Instance in that Arabian Prince, of whom the Devil was not able
so much as to _Touch_ any thing, till the most high God gave him a
permission, to _go down_. The Devil stands with all the Instruments of
death, aiming at us, and begging of the Lord, as that King ask'd for the
Hood-wink'd _Syrians_ of old, _Shall I smite 'em, shall I smite 'em?_ He
cannot strike a blow, till the Lord say, _Go down and smite_, but
sometimes he _does_ obtain from the _high possessor of Heaven and
Earth_, a License for the doing of it. The Devil sometimes does make
most rueful Havock among us; but still we may say to him, as our Lord
said unto a great Servant of his, _Thou couldest have no power against
me, except it were given thee from above._ The Devil is called in _1
Pet. 5.8._ _Your Adversary_. This is a Law-term; and it notes _An
Adversary at Law_. The Devil cannot come at us, except in some sence
according to _Law_; but sometimes he does procure sad things to be
inflicted, according to the _Law_ of the eternal King upon us. The Devil
first _goes up_ as an _Accuser_ against us. He is therefore styled _The
Accuser_; and it is on this account, that his proper Name does belong
unto him. There is a Court somewhere kept; a Court of Spirits, where the
Devil enters all sorts of Complaints against us all; he charges us with
manifold _sins_ against the Lord our God: _There_ he loads us with heavy
_Imputations_ of Hypocrysie, Iniquity, Disobedience; whereupon he urges,
_Lord, let 'em now have the death, which is their wages, paid unto 'em!_
If our _Advocate_ in the Heavens do not now take off his Libels; the
Devil, then, with a Concession of God, _comes down_, as a _destroyer_
upon us. Having first been an _Attorney_, to bespeak that the Judgments
of Heaven may be ordered for us, he then also pleads, that he may be the
_Executioner_ of those Judgments; and the God of Heaven sometimes after
a sort, signs a Warrant, for this _destroying Angel_, to do what has
been _desired_ to be done for the _destroying of men_. But such a
_permission_ from God, for the Devil to _come down_, and _break in_ upon
mankind, oftentimes must be accompany'd with a _Commission_ from some
wretches of mankind it self. Every man is, as 'tis hinted in _Gen. 4.9._
_His brother's keeper_. We are to _keep_ one another from the Inroads of
the Devil, by mutual and cordial Wishes of prosperity to one another.
When ungodly people give their _Consents_ in _witchcrafts_ diabolically
performed, for the Devil to annoy their Neighbours, he finds a breach
made in the Hedge about us, whereat he Rushes in upon us, with grievous
molestations. Yea, when the impious people, that never saw the Devil, do
but utter their _Curses_ against their Neighbours, those are so many
_watch words_, whereby the Mastives of Hell are animated presently to
fall upon us. 'Tis thus, that the Devil gets _leave_ to worry us.

_Proposition IV._ Most horrible _woes_ come to be inflicted upon
Mankind, when the _Devil_ does in _great wrath_, make a _descent_ upon
them. The _Devil_ is a _Do-Evil_, and wholly set upon mischief. When our
Lord once was going to _Muzzel_ him, that he might not mischief others,
he cry'd out, _Art thou come to torment me?_ He is, it seems, himself
_Tormented_, if he be but _Restrained_ from the tormenting of Men. If
upon the sounding of the Three last _Apocalyptical Angels_, it was an
outcry made in Heaven, _Wo, wo, wo, to the inhabitants of the Earth by
reason of the voice of the Trumpet._ I am sure, a _descent_ made by the
Angel of _death_, would give cause for the like Exclamation: _Wo to the
world, by reason of the wrath of the Devil!_ what a _woful_ plight,
mankind would by the descent of the Devil be brought into, may be
gathered from the _woful_ pains, and wounds, and hideous desolations
which the Devil brings upon them, with whom he has with a _bodily
Possession_ made a Seisure. You may both in Sacred and Profane History,
read many a direful Account of the _woes_, which they that are possessed
by the Devil, do undergo: And from thence conclude, _What must the
Children of Men hope from such a Devil!_ Moreover, the _Tyrannical
Ceremonies_, whereto the Devil uses to subjugate such _Woful_ Nations or
Orders of Men, as are more Entirely under his Dominion, do declare what
_woful_ Work the Devil would make where he comes. The very Devotions of
those forlorn _Pagans_, to whom the Devil is a Leader, are most bloody
_Penances_; and what _Woes_ indeed must we expect from such a Devil of
a _Moloch_, as relishes no Sacrifices like those of Humane Heart-blood,
and unto whom there is no Musick like the bitter, dying, doleful Groans,
ejaculated by the Roasting Children of Men.

Furthermore, the servile, abject, needy circumstances wherein the Devil
keeps the Slaves, that are under his more sensible Vassalage, do suggest
unto us, how _woful_ the Devil would render all our Lives. We that live
in a Province, which affords unto us all that may be necessary or
comfortable for us, found the Province fill'd with vast Herds of
Salvages, that never saw so much as a _Knife_, or a _Nail_, or a
_Board_, or a Grain of _Salt_, in all their Days. No better would the
Devil have the World provided for. Nor should we, or any else, have one
convenient thing about us, but be as indigent as _usually_ our most
_Ragged Witches_ are; if _the Devil's Malice_ were not over-ruled by a
_compassionate God_, who _preserves Man and Beast_. Hence 'tis, that
_the Devil_, even like a _Dragon_, keeping a Guard upon such _Fruits_ as
would _refresh_ a languishing World, has hindred Mankind for many Ages,
from hitting those _useful Inventions_, which yet _were so obvious_ and
_facil_, that it is every bodies wonder, they were no sooner hit upon.
The _bemisted World_, must jog on for thousands of Years, without the
knowledg of _the Loadstone_, till a _Neapolitan_ stumbled upon it, about
_three hundred years_ ago. Nor must the World be _blest_ with such a
_matchless Engine_ of _Learning_ and _Vertue_, as that of _Printing_,
till about _the middle of the Fifteenth Century_. Nor could _One Old
Man, all over the Face of the whole Earth_, have the _benefit_ of such a
_Little_, tho most _needful_ thing, as a pair of _Spectacles_, till a
_Dutch-Man_, a _little while_ ago accommodated us.

Indeed, as the Devil does begrutch us all manner of _Good_, so he does
annoy us with all manner of _Wo_, as often as he finds himself capable
of doing it. But shall we mention some of the _special woes_ with which
the Devil does usually infest the World! Briefly then; _Plagues_ are
some of those _woes_ with which the Devil troubles us. It is said of the
_Israelites_, in _1 Cor. 10.10._ _They were destroyed of the destroyer._
That is, they had the _Plague_ among them. 'Tis the _Destroyer_, or _the
Devil_, that scatters _Plagues_ about the World. Pestilential and
Contagious Diseases, 'tis the Devil who does oftentimes invade us with
them. 'Tis no uneasy thing for the Devil to impregnate the Air about us,
with such Malignant _Salts_, as meeting with _the Salt_ of our
_Microcosm_, shall immediately cast us into that Fermentation and
Putrefaction, which will utterly dissolve all the Vital Tyes within us;
Ev'n as an _Aqua-Fortis_, made with a conjunction of _Nitre_ and
_Vitriol_, Corrodes what it Seizes upon. And when the Devil has raised
those _Arsenical Fumes_, which become _Venemous Quivers_ full of
_Terrible Arrows_, how easily can he shoot the deleterious _Miasms_ into
those Juices or Bowels of Mens Bodies, which will soon Enflame them with
a Mortal Fire! Hence come such _Plagues_, as that _Beesom of
Destruction_, which within our memory swept away such a Throng of People
from one _English_ City in one Visitation; And hence those Infectious
Fevers, which are but so many _Disguised Plagues_ among us, causing
Epidemical Desolations. Again, _Wars_ are also some of those _Woes_,
with which the Devil causes our Trouble. It is said in _Rev. 12.17._
_The Dragon was Wrath, and he went to make War;_ and there is in truth
scarce any _War_, but what is of the _Dragon's_ kindling. The Devil is
that _Vulcan_, out of whose Forge come the instruments of our _Wars_,
and it is he that finds us Employments for those Instruments. We read
concerning _Dæmoniacks_, or People in whom the Devil was, that they
would cut and wound themselves; and so, when the Devil is in Men, he
puts 'em upon dealing in that barbarous fashion with one another. _Wars_
do often furnish him with some Thousands of Souls in one Morning from
one Acre of Ground; and for the sake of such _Thyestæan_ Banquets, he
will push us upon as many _Wars_ as he can.

Once more, why may not _Storms_ be reckoned among those _Woes_, with
which the Devil does disturb us? It is not improbable that _Natural
Storms_ on the World are often of the Devils raising. We are told in
_Job 1.11, 12, 19._ that the Devil made a _Storm_, which hurricano'd the
House of _Job_, upon the Heads of them that were Feasting in it.
_Paracelsus_ could have informed the Devil, if he had not been informed,
as besure he was before, That if much _Aluminious_ matter, with _Salt
Petre_ not throughly prepared, be mixed, they will send up a cloud of
Smoke, which _will_ come down in Rain. But undoubtedly the _Devil_
understands as _well_ the way to make a _Tempest_ as to turn the _Winds_
at the _Solicitation_ of a _Laplander_; whence perhaps it is, that
Thunders are observed oftner to break upon _Churches_ than upon any
other _Buildings_; and besides many a Man, yea many a Ship, yea, many a
Town has miscarried, when the Devil has been permitted from above to
make an horrible Tempest. However that the Devil has raised many
_Metaphorical Storms_ upon the Church, is a thing, than which there is
nothing more notorious. It was said unto Believers in _Rev. 2.10._ _The
Devil shall cast some of you into Prison._ The Devil was he that at
first set _Cain upon Abel_ to butcher him, as the Apostle seems to
suggest, for his Faith in God, as a _Rewarder_. And in how many
_Persecutions_, as well as _Heresies_ has the Devil been ever since
Engaging all the Children of _Cain_! That Serpent the Devil has acted
his cursed Seed in unwearied endeavours to have them, _Of whom the World
is not worthy_, treated as those who are _not worthy to live in the
World_. By the impulse of the Devil, 'tis that first the old _Heathens_,
and then the mad _Arians_ were _pricking Briars_ to the true Servants of
God; and that the _Papists_ that came after them, have out done them all
for Slaughters, upon those that have been _accounted as the Sheep for
the Slaughters_. The late _French_ Persecution is perhaps the horriblest
that ever was in the World: And as the Devil of _Mascon_ seems before to
have meant it in his out-cries upon _the Miseries preparing for the poor
Hugonots_! Thus it has been all acted by a singular Fury of the old
Dragon inspiring of his Emissaries.

But in reality, _Spiritual Woes_ are the _principal Woes_ among all
those that the Devil would have us undone withal. _Sins_ are the worst
of _Woes_, and the Devil seeks nothing so much as to plunge us into
Sins. When men do commit a Crime for which they are to be Indicted, they
are usually _mov'd by the Instigation of the Devil_. The Devil will put
_ill men upon being worse_. Was it not he that said in _1 King. 22.22._
_I will go forth, and be a lying Spirit in the Mouth of all the
Prophets?_ Even so the Devil becomes an _Unclean Spirit_, _a Drinking
Spirit_, _a Swearing Spirit_, _a Worldly Spirit_, _a Passionate Spirit_,
_a Revengeful Spirit_, and the like in the Hearts of those that are
already too much of such a Spirit; and thus they become improv'd in
Sinfulness. Yea, the Devil will put _good men upon doing ill_. Thus we
read in _1 Chron. 21.1._ _Satan provoked David to number Israel._ And so
the _Devil provokes_ men that are Eminent in Holiness unto such things
as may become eminently Pernicious; he _provokes_ them especially unto
_Pride_, and unto many unsuitable Emulations. There are likewise most
lamentable Impressions which the _Devil_ makes upon the _Souls of Men_
by way of punishment upon them for their _Sins_. 'Tis thus when an
Offended God puts the Souls of Men over into the Hands of that Officer
_who has the power of Death, that is, the Devil_. It is the woful Misery
of Unbelievers in _2 Cor. 4.4._ _The god of this World has blinded their
minds._ And thus it may be said of those woful Wretches whom the _Devil_
is a God unto, _the Devil so muffles them that they cannot see the
things of their peace._ And _the Devil so hardens them, that nothing
will awaken their cares about their Souls:_ How come so many to be
_Seared_ in their Sins? 'Tis the Devil that with a red hot Iron fetcht
from his Hell does _cauterise_ them. Thus 'tis, till perhaps at last
they come to have a _Wounded Conscience_ in them, and the Devil has
often a share in their Torturing and confounding Anguishes. The _Devil_
who Terrified _Cain_, and _Saul_, and _Judas_ into Desperation, still
becomes a _King of Terrors_ to many Sinners, and frights them from
laying hold on the Mercy of God in the Lord Jesus Christ. In these
regards, _Wo to us, when the Devil comes down upon us._

_Proposition V._ Toward the _End_ of his _Time_ the _Descent_ of the
Devil in _Wrath_ upon the World will produce more _woful Effects_, than
what have been _in former Ages_. The dying Dragon, will bite more
cruelly and sting more bloodily than ever he did before: The Death-pangs
of the Devil will make him to be more of a _Devil_ than ever he was; and
the Furnace of this _Nebuchadnezzar_ will be heated _seven times_
hotter, just before its putting out.

We are in the first place to apprehend that there is a time fixed and
stated by God for the Devil to enjoy a dominion over our sinful and
therefore woful World. The _Devil_ once exclaimed in _Mat. 8.29._
_Jesus, thou Son of God, art thou come hither to Torment us before our
Time?_ It is plain, that until the second coming of our Lord the _Devil_
must have a time of plagueing the World, which he was afraid would have
Expired at his first. The _Devil_ is _by the wrath of God the Prince of
this World_; and the time of his Reign is to continue until the time
when our Lord himself shall _take to himself his great Power and Reign_.
Then 'tis that the _Devil_ shall hear the Son of God swearing with loud
Thunders against him, _Thy time shall now be no more!_ Then shall the
_Devil_ with his Angels receive their doom, which will be, _depart into
the everlasting Fire prepared for you._

We are also to apprehend, that in the _mean time_, the Devil can give a
shrewd guess, when he draws near to the _End of his Time_. When he saw
Christianity enthron'd among the _Romans_, it is here said, in our _Rev.
12.12._ _He knows he hath but a short time._ And how does he _know_ it?
Why _Reason_ will make the Devil to _know_ that God won't suffer him to
have _the Everlasting Dominion_; and that when God has once begun to
rescue the World out of his hands, he'll go through with it, until _the
Captives of the mighty shall be taken away and the prey of the terrible
shall be delivered._ But the Devil will have _Scripture_ also, to make
him _know_, that when his Antichristian _Vicar_, the _seven-headed
Beast_ on the _seven-hilled_ City, shall have spent his determined
years, he with his _Vicar_ must unavoidably go down into the _bottomless
Pit_. It is not improbable, that the Devil often hears the _Scripture_
expounded in our Congregations; yea that we never assemble without a
_Satan_ among us. As there are some Divines, who do with more
uncertainty conjecture, from a certain place in the Epistle to the
_Ephesians_, That the Angels do sometimes come into our Churches, to
gain some advantage from our Ministry. But be sure our _Demonstrable
Interpretations_ may give Repeated Notices to the Devil, _That his time
is almost out;_ and what the Preacher says unto the _Young Man_, _Know
thou, that God will bring thee into Judgment!_ THAT may our Sermons tell
unto the _Old Wretch_, _Know thou, that thy Judgment is at hand._

But we must now, likewise, apprehend, that in _such a time_, the _woes_
of the World will be heightened, beyond what they were at _any time_ yet
from the foundation of the World. Hence 'tis, that the Apostle has
forewarned us, in _2 Tim. 3.1._ _this know, that in the last days,
perillous times shall come._ Truly, when the Devil _knows_, that he is
got into his _Last days_, he will make _perillous times_ for us; the
times will grow more full of _Devils_, and therefore more full of
_Perils_, than ever they were before. Of this, if we would _know_, what
cause is to be assigned; It is not only, because the Devil grows more
_able_, and more _eager_ to vex the World; but also, and chiefly,
because the World is more _worthy_ to be vexed by the Devil, than ever
heretofore. The _Sins_ of men in this Generation, will be more _mighty
Sins_, than those of the former Ages; men will be more Accurate and
Exquisite and Refined in the arts of _Sinning_, than they use to be. And
besides, their own sins, the sins of all the former Ages will also lie
upon the sinners of this generation. Do we ask why the _mischievous
powers of darkness_ are to prevail more in our days, than they did in
those that are past and gone! 'Tis because that men by sinning over
again the sins of the former days, have a _Fellowship with all those
unfruitful works of darkness_. As 'twas said in _Matth. 23.36._ _All
these things shall come upon this generation;_ so, the men of the last
Generation, will find themselves involved in the gulf of all that went
before them. Of Sinners 'tis said, _They heap up wrath;_ and the sinners
of the Last Generations do not only add unto the _heap_ of sin that has
been pileing up ever since the Fall of man, but they Interest themselves
in every sin of that enormous heap. There has been a _Cry_ of all former
ages going up to God, _That the Devil may come down!_ and the sinners of
the Last Generations, do sharpen and louden that _cry_, till the thing
do come to pass, as Destructively as Irremediably. From whence it
follows, that the Thrice Holy God, with his Holy Angels, will now after
a sort more _abandon_ the World, than in the former ages. The roaring
Impieties of _the old World_, at last gave mankind such a distast in the
Heart of the Just God, that he came to say, _It Repents me that I have
made such a Creature!_ And however, it may be but a witty Fancy, in a
late Learned Writer, that the _Earth_ before the Flood was nearer to the
Sun, than it is at this Day; and that Gods Hurling down the _Earth_ to a
further distance from the _Sun_, were the cause of that Flood; yet we
may fitly enough say, that men perished by a _Rejection_ from the God of
Heaven. Thus the enhanc'd Impieties of this _our World_, will Exasperate
the Displeasure of God, at such a rate, as that he will more _cast us
off_, than heretofore; until at last, he do with a more than ordinary
Indignation say, _Go Devils; do you take them, and make them beyond all
former measures miserable!_

If Lastly, We are inquisitive after Instances of those aggravated
_woes_, with which the Devil will towards the _End_ of his _Time_
assault us; let it be remembred, That all the Extremities which were
foretold by the _Trumpets_ and _Vials_ in the Apocalyptick Schemes of
these things, to come upon the World, were the _woes_ to come from the
_wrath_ of the Devil, upon the _shortning_ of his _Time_. The horrendous
desolations that have come upon mankind, by the Irruptions of the old
_Barbarians_ upon the _Roman_ World, and then of the _Saracens_, and
since, of the _Turks_, were such _woes_ as men had never seen before.
The Infandous _Blindness_ and _Vileness_ which then came upon mankind,
and the Monstrous _Croisadoes_ which thereupon carried the _Roman_ World
by Millions together unto the Shambles; were also such _woes_ as had
never yet had a Parallel. And yet these were some of the things here
intended, when it was said, _Wo! For the Devil is come down in great
Wrath, having but a short time._

But besides all these things, and besides the increase of _Plagues_ and
_Wars_, and _Storms_, and _Internal Maladies_ now in our days, there are
especially two most extraordinary _Woes_, one would fear, will in these
days become very ordinary. One _Woe_ that may be look'd for is, A
frequent Repetition of _Earthquakes_, and this perhaps by the energy of
the Devil in the _Earth_. The Devil will be clap't up, as a Prisoner in
or near the Bowels of the earth, when once that _Conflagration_ shall be
dispatched, which will make, _The New Earth wherein shall dwell
Righteousness;_ and that _Conflagration_ will doubtless be much
promoted, by the Subterraneous _Fires_, which are a cause of the
_Earthquakes_ in our Dayes. Accordingly, we read, _Great Earthquakes in
divers places_, enumerated among the Tokens of the _Time_ approaching,
when the Devil shall have no longer _Time_. I suspect, That we shall now
be visited with more Usual and yet more Fatal _Earthquakes_, than were
our Ancestors; in asmuch as the _Fires_ that are shortly to _Burn unto
the Lowest Hell, and set on Fire the Foundations of the Mountains_, will
now get more Head than they use to do; and it is not impossible, that
the Devil, who is ere long to be punished in those _Fires_, may
aforehand augment his Desert of it, by having an hand in using some of
those _Fires_, for our Detriment. Learned Men have made no scruple to
charge the Devil with it; _Deo permittente, Terræ motus causat._ The
Devil surely, was a party in the _Earthquake_, whereby the Vengeance of
God, in one black Night sunk Twelve considerable Cities of _Asia_, in
the Reign of _Tiberious_. But there will be more such _Catastrophes_ in
our Dayes; _Italy_ has lately been _Shaking_, till its _Earthquakes_
have brought Ruines at once upon more than thirty Towns; but it will
within a little while, _shake_ again, and _shake_ till the Fire of God
have made an Entire _Etna_ of it. And behold, This very Morning, when I
was intending to utter among you such Things as these, we are cast into
an _Heartquake_ by Tidings of an _Earthquake_ that has lately happened
at _Jamaica_: an horrible _Earthquake_, whereby the _Tyrus_ of the
English _America_, was at once pull'd into the Jaws of the Gaping and
Groaning Earth, and many Hundreds of the Inhabitants buried alive. The
Lord sanctifie so dismal a Dispensation of his Providence, unto all the
_American_ Plantations! But be assured, my Neighbours, the _Earthquakes_
are not over yet! We have not yet seen _the last_. And then, Another
_Wo_ that may be Look'd for is, The Devils being now let Loose in
_preternatural Operations_ more than formerly; and perhaps in
_Possessions_ and _Obsessions_ that shall be very marvellous. You are
not Ignorant, That just before our Lords _First Coming_, there were most
observable Outrages committed by the Devil upon the Children of Men: And
I am suspicious, That there will again be an unusual Range of the Devil
among us, a little before the _Second Coming_ of our Lord, which will
be, to give the last stroke, in _Destroying the works of the Devil_. The
_Evening Wolves_ will be much abroad, when we are near the _Evening_ of
the World. The Devil is going to be Dislodged of the _Air_, where his
present Quarters are; God will with flashes of hot _Lightning_ upon
him, cause him to _fall as Lightning_ from his Ancient Habitations: And
the _Raised Saints_ will there have a _New Heaven_, which We _expect
according to the Promise of God_. Now a little before this thing, you be
like to see the Devil more _sensible_ and _visibly_ Busy upon _Earth_
perhaps, than ever he was before. You shall oftner hear about
_Apparitions_ of the Devil, and about poor people strangely Bewitched,
_Possessed_ and _Obsessed_, by Infernal Fiends. When our Lord is going
to set up His Kingdom, in the most _sensible_ and _visible_ manner, that
ever was, and in a manner answering _the Transfiguration_ in _the
Mount_, it is a Thousand to One, but _the Devil_ will in sundry _parts
of the world_, assay _the like_ for Himself, with a most Apish
Imitation: and Men, at least in _some_ Corners of the World, and perhaps
in _such_ as God may have some special Designs upon, will to their Cost,
be more Familiarized _with the World of Spirits_, than they had been
formerly.

So that, in fine, if just before _the End_, when _the times of the Jews_
were to be finished, a man then ran about every where, crying, _Wo to
the Nation! Wo to the City! Wo to the Temple! Wo! Wo! Wo!_ Much more may
the descent of the Devil, just before his _End_, when also _the times of
the Gentiles_ will be finished, cause us to cry out, _Wo! Wo! Wo!
because of the black things that threaten us!_

But it is now Time to make our Improvement of what has been said. And,
first, we shall entertain our selves with a few _Corollaries_, deduced
from what has been thus asserted.


_Corollary I._

What cause have we to bless God, for our preservation from the _Devils
wrath_, in this which may too reasonably be called the _Devils World_!
While we are in _this present evil world_, We are continually surrounded
with swarms of those Devils, who make this _present world_, become so
_evil_. What a wonder of Mercy is it, that no _Devil_ could ever yet
make a prey of us! We can set our foot no where but we shall tread in
the midst of most Hellish _Rattle-Snakes_; and one of those
_Rattle-Snakes_ once thro' the mouth of a Man, on whom he had Seized,
hissed out such a Truth as this, _If God would let me loose upon you, I
should find enough in the Best of you all, to make you all mine._ What
shall I say? The _Wilderness_ thro' which we are passing to the
_Promised Land_, is all over fill'd with _Fiery flying serpents_. But,
blessed be God; None of them have hitherto so fastned upon us, as to
confound us utterly! All our way to Heaven, lies by the _Dens of Lions_,
and the _Mounts of Leopards_; there are incredible Droves of Devils in
our way. But have we safely got on our way thus far? O let us be
thankful to our Eternal preserver for it. It is said in _Psal. 76.10._
_Surely the wrath of Man shall praise thee, and the Remainder of wrath
shalt thou restrain;_ But _surely_ it becomes us to praise God, in that
we have yet sustain'd no more Damage by the _wrath of the Devil_, and in
that he has restrain'd that Overwhelming _wrath_. We are poor,
Travellers in a World, which is as well the Devils _Field_, as the
Devils _Gaol_; a World in every Nook whereof, the Devil is encamped,
with _Bands of Robbers_, to pester all that have their _Face looking
Zion-ward_: And are we all this while preserved from the undoing Snares
of the _Devil_? it is, _Thou, O keeper of Israel, that hast hitherto
been our Keeper!_ And therefore, _Bless the Lord, O my soul, Bless his
Holy Name, who has redeemed thy Life from the Destroyer!_


_Corollary II._

We may see the rise of those multiply'd, magnify'd, and
Singularly-stinged Afflictions, with which _aged_, or _dying_ Saints
frequently have their _Death_ Prefaced, and their _Age_ embittered. When
the Saints of God are going to leave the World, it is usually a more
_Stormy World_ with them, than ever it was; and they find more _Vanity_,
and more _Vexation_ in the world than ever they did before. It is true,
_That many are the afflictions of the Righteous;_ but a little before
they bid adieu to all those many _Afflictions_, they often have greater,
harder, Sorer, Loads thereof laid upon them, than they had yet endured.
It is true, _That thro' much Tribulation we must enter in the Kingdom of
God;_ but a little before our _Entrance_ thereinto, our _Tribulation_
may have some sharper accents of Sorrow, than ever were yet upon it. And
what is the cause of this? It is indeed the _Faithfulness of our God
unto us_, that we should find the _Earth_ more full of _Thorns_ and
_Briars_ than ever, just before he fetches us from _Earth_ to _Heaven_;
that so we may go away the more willingly, the more easily, and with
less Convulsion, at his calling for us. O there are _ugly Ties_, by
which we are fastned unto this world; but God will by _Thorns and
Briars_ tear those _Ties_ asunder. But, _is not the Hand of Joab here?_
Sure, There is the _wrath_ of the _Devil_ also in it. A little before we
step into Heaven, the _Devil_ thinks with himself, _My time to abuse
that Saint is now but short; what Mischief I am to do that Saint, must
be done quickly, if at all; he'l shortly be out of my Reach for ever._
And for this cause he will now fly upon us with the Fiercest Efforts and
Furies of his _Wrath_. It was allowed unto the _Serpent_, in _Gen. 2.15._
_To Bruise the Heel_. Why, at the _Heel_, or at the _Close_, of our
Lives, the _Serpent_ will be nibbling, more than ever in our Lives
before: and it is, _Because now he has but a short time._ He knows, That
we shall very shortly be, _Where the wicked cease from Troubling, and
where the Weary are at Rest;_ wherefore that _Wicked_ one will now
_Trouble_ us, more than ever he did, and we shall have so much
_Disrest_, as will make us more _weary_ than ever we were, of things
here below.


_Corollary III._

What a Reasonable Thing then is it, that they whose _Time_ is but
_short_, should make as great _Use_ of their _Time_, as ever they can!
pray, let us learn some _good_, even from the _wicked One_ himself. It
has been advised, _Be wise as Serpents:_ why, there is a piece of
_Wisdom_, whereto that old _Serpent_, the Devil himself, may be our
Moniter. When the Devil perceives his _Time_ is but _short_, it puts him
upon _Great Wrath_. But how should it be with _us_, when we perceive
that our _Time_ is but _short_? why, it should put us upon _Great Work_.
The motive which makes the Devil to be more full of _wrath_; should make
us more full of _warmth_, more full of _watch_, and more full of _All
Diligence to make our Vocation, and Election sure_. Our _Pace_ in our
Journey _Heaven-ward_, must be Quickened, if our _space_ for that
Journey be shortned, even as _Israel_ went further the _two last_ years
of their Journey _Canaan-ward_, than they did in 38 years before. The
Apostle brings this, as a _spur_ to the Devotions of Christians, in _1
Cor. 7.29._ _This I say, Brethren, the time is short._ Even so, I _say_
this; some things I lay before you, which I do only _think_, or _guess_,
but here is a thing which I venture to _say_ with all the freedom
imaginable. You have now a _Time_ to _Get_ good, even a _Time_ to make
sure of _Grace and Glory, and every good thing_, by true Repentance:
But, _This I say, the time is but short._ You have now _Time_ to _Do_
good, even to _serve out your generation_, as by the _Will_, so for the
_Praise_ of God; but, _This I say, the time is but short._ And what I
say thus to _All_ People, I say to _Old_ People, with a peculiar
Vehemency: Sirs, It cannot be long before your _Time_ is out; there are
but a few sands left in the glass of your _Time_: And it is of all
things the saddest, for a man to say, _My Time is done, but my work
undone!_ O then, _To work_ as fast as you can; and of Soul-work, and
Church-work, dispatch as much as ever you can. Say to all _Hindrances_,
as the gracious _Jeremiah Burrows_ would sometimes to _Visitants_:
_You'll excuse me if I ask you to be short with me, for my work is
great, and my time is but short._ Methinks every _time_ we hear a Clock,
or see a Watch, we have an admonition given us, that our _Time_ is upon
the _wing_, and it will all be gone within a little while. I remember I
have read of a famous man, who having a _Clock-watch_ long lying by him,
out of Kilture in his Trunk, it unaccountably struck Eleven just before
he died. Why, there are many of you, for whom I am to do that office
this day: I am to tell you _You are come to your +Eleventh+ hour;_ there
is no more than a _twelfth part_ at most, of your life yet behind. But
if we neglect our business, till our _short Time_ shall be reduced into
_none_, then, _woe to us, for the great wrath of God will send us down
from whence there is no Redemption._


_Corollary IV._

How welcome should a _Death in the Lord_ be unto them that belong not
unto the Devil, but unto the Lord! While we are sojourning in this
World, we are in what may upon too many accounts be called _The Devils
Country_: We are where the Devil may come upon us in _great wrath_
continually. The day when God shall take us out of this World, will be,
_The day when the Lord will deliver us from the hand of all our Enemies,
and from the hand of Satan_. In such a day, why should not our song be
that of the Psalmist, _Blessed be my Rock, and let the God of my
Salvation be exalted!_ While we are here, we are in _the valley of the
shadow of death_; and what is it that makes it so? 'Tis because the
_wild Beasts of Hell_ are lurking on every side of us, and every minute
ready to salley forth upon us. But our _Death_ will fetch us out of that
_Valley_, and carry us where we shall be _for ever with the Lord_. We
are now under the daily _Buffetings_ of the Devil, and he does molest us
with such _Fiery Darts_, as cause us even to cry out, _I am weary of my
Life._ Yea, but are we as _willing to die_, as, _weary of Life_? Our
Death will then soon set us where we cannot be reach'd by the _Fist of
Wickedness_; and where the _Perfect cannot be shotten at_. It is said in
_Rev. 14.13._ _Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, they rest
from their labours._ But we may say, _Blessed are the Dead in the Lord,
inasmuch as they rest from the Devils!_ Our _dying_ will be but our
_taking wing_: When attended with a Convoy of winged Angels, we shall be
convey'd into that Heaven, from whence the Devil having been thrown he
shall never more come thither after us. What if God should now say to
us, as to _Moses_, _Go up and die!_ As long as we _go up_, when we
_die_, let us receive the Message with a joyful Soul; we shall soon be
there, where the Devil can't _come down_ upon us. If the _God of our
Life_ should now send that Order to us, which he gave to _Hezekiah_,
_Set thy house in order, for thou shalt die, and not live;_ we need not
be cast into such deadly Agonies thereupon, as _Hezekiah_ was: We are
but going to that _House_, the Golden Doors whereof, cannot be entred by
the Devil that here did use to persecute us. Methinks I see the Departed
_Spirit_ of a Believer, triumphantly carried thro' the Devils
_Territories_, in such a stately and Fiery Chariot, as the
_Spiritualizing Body of Elias_ had; methink I see the Devil, with whole
Flocks of _Harpies_, grinning at this Child of God, but unable to fasten
any of their griping Talons upon him: And then, upon the utmost edge of
our _Atmosphære_, methinks I overhear the holy Soul, with a most
heavenly Gallantry, deriding the defeated Fiend, and saying, _Ah! Satan!
Return to thy Dungeons again; I am going where thou canst not come for
ever!_ O 'tis a brave thing so to die! and especially so to die, _in our
time_. For, tho' when we call to mind, _That the Devils time is now but
short_, it may almost make us wish to _live_ unto the _end_ of it; and
to say with the Psalmist, _Because the Lord will shortly appear in his
Glory, to build up Zion. O my God! Take me not away in the midst of my
days._ Yet when we bear in mind, _that the Devils Wrath is now most
great_, it would make one willing to be _out of the way_. Inasmuch as
now is the time for the doing of those things in the prospect whereof
_Balaam_ long ago cry'd out _Who shall live when such things are done!_
We should not be inordinately loth to _die_ at such a time. In a word,
the _Times_ are so _bad_, that we may well count it, as _good_ a _time_
to die in, as ever we saw.


_Corollary V._

Good News for the _Israel_ of God, and particularly for his _New-English
Israel_. If the Devils _Time_ were above a _thousand years ago_,
pronounced _short_, what may we suppose it now in _our_ Time? Surely we
are not a _thousand years_ distant from those happy _thousand years_ of
rest and peace, and [which is better] _Holiness_ reserved for the People
of God in the latter days; and if we are not a _thousand years_ yet
short of that Golden Age, there is cause to think, that we are not an
_hundred_. That the blessed _Thousand years_ are not yet begun, is
abundantly clear from this, _We do not see the Devil bound;_ No, the
Devil was never more let _loose_ than in our Days; and it is very much
that any should imagine otherwise: But the same thing that proves the
_Thousand Years_ of prosperity for the Church of God, under the whole
Heaven, to be not yet _begun_, does also prove, that it is not very _far
off_; and that is the prodigious _wrath_ with which the Devil does in
our days Persecute, yea, desolate the World. Let us cast our Eyes almost
where we will, and we shall see the _Devils_ domineering at such a rate
as may justly fill us with astonishment; it is questionable whether
_Iniquity_ ever were so rampant, or whether _Calamity_ were ever so
pungent, as in this Lamentable _time_; We may truly say, _'Tis the Hour
and the Power of Darkness._ But, tho the _wrath_ be so _great_, the
_time_ is but _short_: when we are perplexed with the _wrath_ of the
Devil, the _Word_ of our God at the same time unto us, is that in _Rom.
16.20._ _The God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet Shortly._
Shortly, didst thou say, dearest Lord! O gladsome word! Amen, _Even so,
come Lord! Lord Jesus, come quickly! We shall never be rid of this
troublesome Devil, till thou do come to Chain him up!_

But because the people of God, would willingly be told _whereabouts_ we
are, with reference to the _wrath and the time_ of the Devil, you shall
give me leave humbly to set before you a few _Conjectures_.


_The first Conjecture._

The Devils _Eldest Son_ seems to be towards the _End_ of his last
_Half-time_; and if it be so, the Devils _Whole-time_, cannot but be
very near its _End_. It is a very scandalous thing that any
_Protestant_, should be at a loss where to find _the Anti-Christ_. But,
we have a sufficient assurance, that the Duration of _Anti-Christ_, is
to be but for a _Time_, and for _Times_, and for _Half a time_; that is
for _Twelve hundred and Sixty Years_. And indeed, those _Twelve Hundred
and Sixty Years_, were the very Spott of _Time_ left for the _Devil_,
and meant when 'tis here said, _He has but a short time._ Now, I should
have an _easie time_ of it, if I were never put upon an _Harder Task_,
than to produce what might render it extreamly probable, that Antichrist
entred his last _Half-time_, or the last _Hundred_ and _Fourscore_ years
of his Reign, _at_ or soon _after_ the celebrated _Reformation_ which
began at the year 1517 in the former century. Indeed, it is very
agreeable to see how Antichrist then lost _Half_ of his Empire; and how
that _half_ which then became _Reformed_, have been upon many accounts
little more than _Half-reformed_. But by this computation, we must needs
be within a very few years of such a _Mortification_ to befal the See of
_Rome_, as that Antichrist, who has lately been planting (what proves no
more lasting than) a _Tabernacle in the Glorious Holy Mountain between
the Seas_, must quickly, _Come to his End and none shall help him_. So
then, within a very little while, we shall see the Devil stript of the
grand, yea, the last, _Vehicle_, wherein he will be capable to abuse our
World. The _Fires_, with which, _That Beast_ is to be consumed, will so
singe the Wings of the _Devil_ too, that he shall no more set the
Affairs of _this_ world on _Fire_. Yea, they shall both go into the same
_Fire_, to be _tormented for ever and ever_.


_The Second Conjecture._

That which is, perhaps, the greatest Effect of the _Devils Wrath_, seems
to be in a manner at an _end_: and this would make one hope that the
_Devils time_ cannot be far from its _end_. It is in Persecution, that
the _wrath_ of the Devil uses to break forth, with its greatest fury.
Now there want not probabilities, that the _last Persecution_ intended
for the Church of God, before the Advent of our Lord, has been upon it.
When we see the _second Woe passing away_, we have a fair signal given
unto us, _That the last slaughter of our Lord's Witnesses is over;_ and
then what Quickly follows? The next thing is, _The Kingdoms of this
World, are become the Kingdoms of Our Lord, and of His Christ:_ and then
_down_ goes the Kingdom of the Devil, so that he cannot any more _come
down_ upon us. Now, the Irrecoverable and Irretrievable Humiliations
that have lately befallen the _Turkish Power_, are but so many
Declarations of the _second Woe passing away_. And the dealings of God
with the _European_ parts of the world, at this day, do further
strengthen this our expectation. We _do_ see, _at this hour a great
Earth-quake all Europe over_: and we _shall_ see, that this _great
Earth-quake_, and these great Commotions, will but contribute unto the
advancement of our Lords hitherto-depressed Interests. 'Tis also to be
remark'd that, a disposition to recognize the _Empire_ of God over the
_Conscience_ of man, does now prevail more in the world than formerly;
and God from on High more touches the Hearts of Princes and Rulers with
an averseness to Persecution. 'Tis particularly the unspeakable
happiness of the English Nation, to be under the Influences of that
excellent Queen, who could say, _In as much as a man cannot make himself
believe what he will, why should we Persecute men for not believing as
we do! I wish I could see all good men of one mind; but in the mean time
I pray, let them however love one another._ Words worthy to be written
in Letters of Gold! and by _us_ the more to be considered, because to
one of _Ours_ did that royal Person express Her self so excellently, so
obligingly. When the late King _James_ published his Declaration for
_Liberty of Conscience_, a worthy Divine in the Church of _England_,
then studying the _Revelation_, saw cause upon _Revelational_ Grounds,
to declare himself in such words as these, _Whatsoever others may intend
or design by this Liberty of Conscience, I cannot believe, that it will
ever be recalled in +England+, as long as the World stands._ And you
know how miraculously the _Earth-quake_ which then immediately came upon
the Kingdom, has established that _Liberty_! But that which exceeds all
the tendencies this way, is, the dispensation of God at this Day,
towards the blessed _Vaudois_. Those renowned _Waldenses_, which were a
sort of _Root_ unto all Protestant Churches, were never dissipated, by
all the Persecutions of many Ages, till within these few years, the
_French_ King and the Duke of _Savoy_ leagued for their dissipation. But
just _Three years and a half after_ the _scattering_ of that holy
people, to the surprise of all the World, _Spirit of life from God_ is
come into them; and having with a thousand Miracles repossessed
themselves of their antient Seats, their hot _Persecutor_ is become
their great _Protector_. Whereupon the reflection of the worthy person,
that writes the story is, _The Churches of +Piemont+, being the Root of
the Protestant Churches, they have been the first established; the
Churches of other places, being but the Branches, shall be established
in due time, God will deliver them speedily, He has already delivered
the Mother, and He will not long leave the Daughter behind: He will
finish what he has gloriously begun!_


_The Third Conjecture._

There is a _little room_ for hope, that the _great wrath_ of the Devil,
will not prove the present ruine of our poor _New-England_ in
particular. I believe, there never was a poor Plantation, more pursued
by the _wrath_ of the _Devil_, than our poor _New-England_; and that
which makes our condition very much the more deplorable is, that the
_wrath_ of the _great God_ Himself, at the same time also presses hard
upon us. It was a rousing _alarm_ to the Devil, when a great Company of
English _Protestants_ and _Puritans_, came to erect Evangelical
Churches, in a corner of the World, where he had reign'd without any
controul for many Ages; and it is a vexing _Eye-sore_ to the Devil, that
our Lord Christ should be known, and own'd, and preached in this
_howling Wilderness_. Wherefor he has left no _Stone unturned_, that so
he might undermine his Plantation, and force us out of our Country.

First, The Indian _Powawes_, used all their Sorceries to molest the
first Planters here; but God said unto them, _Touch them not!_ Then,
_Seducing Spirits_ came to _root_ in this Vineyard, but God so rated
them off, that they have not prevail'd much farther than the Edges of
our Land. After this, we have had a continual _blast_ upon some of our
principal Grain, annually diminishing a vast part of our _ordinary
Food_. Herewithal, wasting _Sicknesses_, especially Burning and Mortal
Agues, have Shot the Arrows of Death in at our Windows. Next, we have
had many Adversaries of our own Language, who have been perpetually
assaying to deprive us of those _English Liberties_, in the
encouragement whereof these Territories have been settled. As if this
had not been enough; The _Tawnies_ among whom we came, have watered our
Soil with the Blood of many Hundreds of our Inhabitants. Desolating
_Fires_ also have many times laid the chief Treasure of the whole
Province in Ashes. As for _Losses_ by Sea, _they_ have been multiply'd
upon us: and particularly in the present _French War_, the whole English
Nation have observ'd that no part of the Nation has proportionably had
so many Vessels taken, as our poor _New-England_. Besides all which, now
at last the Devils are (if I may so speak) _in Person_ come down upon us
with such a _Wrath_, as is justly _much_, and will quickly be _more_,
the Astonishment of the World. Alas, I may sigh over _this_ Wilderness,
as _Moses_ did over _his_, in _Psal. 90.7, 9._ _We are consumed by thine
Anger, and by thy Wrath we are troubled: All our days are passed away in
thy Wrath._ And I may add this unto it, _The Wrath of the Devil too has
been troubling and spending of us, all our days._

But what will become of this poor _New-England_ after all? Shall we
sink, expire, perish, before the _short time_ of the Devil shall be
finished? I must confess, That when I consider the lamentable
_Unfruitfulness_ of men, among us, under as powerful and perspicuous
Dispensations of the Gospel, as are in the World; and when I consider
the declining state of the _Power of Godliness_ in our Churches, with
the most horrible Indisposition that perhaps ever was, to recover out of
this declension; I cannot but _Fear_ lest it comes to this, and lest an
_Asiatic_ Removal of Candlesticks come upon us. But upon some other
Accounts, I would fain _hope_ otherwise; and I will give _you_
therefore the opportunity to try what Inferences may be drawn from these
probable Prognostications.

I say, _First_, That surely, _America's_ Fate, must at the long run
include _New-Englands_ in it. What was the design of our God, in
bringing over so many _Europæans_ hither of later years? Of what use or
state will _America_ be, when the _Kingdom of God_ shall come? If it
must all be the Devils propriety, while the _saved Nations_ of the other
Hæmisphere shall be _Walking in the Light of the New Jerusalem_, Our
_New-England_ has then, 'tis likely, done all that it was erected for.
But if God have a purpose to make here a seat for any of _those glorious
things which are spoken of thee, O thou City of God_; then even thou, _O
New-England_, art within a very little while of better days than ever
yet have dawn'd upon thee.

I say, _Secondly_, That tho' there be very _Threatning_ Symptoms on
_America_, yet there are some _hopeful_ ones. I confess, when one thinks
upon the crying Barbarities with which the most of those _Europæans_
that have Peopled this New world, became the Masters of it; it looks but
_Ominously_. When one also thinks how much the way of living in many
parts of _America_, is utterly inconsistent with the very Essentials of
_Christianity_; yea, how much Injury and Violence is therein done to
_Humanity_ it self; it is enough to damp the Hopes of the most Sanguine
Complexion. And the _Frown_ of Heaven which has hitherto been upon
Attempts of better Gospellizing the Plantations, considered, will but
increase the _Damp_. Nevertheless, on the other side, what shall be said
of all the _Promises_, That _our Lord Jesus Christ shall have the
uttermost parts of the Earth for his Possession?_ and of all the
_Prophecies_, That _All the ends of the Earth shall remember and turn
unto the Lord?_ Or does it look _agreeably_, That such a rich quarter of
the World, equal in some regards to all the rest, should never be out of
the _Devils_ hands, from the first Inhabitation unto the last
Dissolution of it? No sure; why may not the _last_ be the _first_? and
the _Sun of Righteousness_ come to shine _brightest_, in Climates which
it rose _latest_ upon!

I say, _Thirdly_, That _as_ it fares with _Old England_, so it will be
most likely to fare with _New-England_. For which cause, by the way,
there may be more of the Divine Favour in the present Circumstances of
our dependence on _England_, than we are well aware of. This is very
sure, if matters _go ill_ with our _Mother_, her poor American
_Daughter_ here, must feel it; nor could our former Happy Settlement
have hindred our sympathy in that Unhappiness. But if matters _go Well_
in the Three Kingdoms; as long as God shall bless the English Nation,
with Rulers that shall encourage _Piety_, _Honesty_, _Industry_, in
their Subjects, and that shall cast a Benign Aspect upon the Interests
of our Glorious Gospel, _Abroad_ as well as at _Home_; so long,
_New-England_ will at least keep its head above water: and so much the
more, for our comfortable Settlement in such a Form as we are now cast
into. Unless there should be any singular, destroying, _Topical
Plagues_, whereby an offended God should at last make us _Rise_; But,
_Alas, O Lord, what other Hive hast thou provided for us!_

I say, _Fourthly_, That the _Elder England_ will certainly and speedily
be Visited with the _ancient loving kindness_ of God. When one sees, how
strangely the Curse of our _Joshua_, has fallen upon the Persons and
Houses of them that have attempted the Rebuilding of the _Old_ Romish
_Jericho_, which has there been so far demolished, they cannot but say,
That the _Reformation_ there, shall not only be maintained, but also
pursued, proceeded, perfected; and that God will shortly there have a
_New Jerusalem_. Or, Let a Man in his thoughts run over but the series
of amazing Providences towards the English Nation for the last _Thirty
Years_: Let him reflect, how many _Plots_ for the ruine of the Nation,
have been strangely discovered? yea, how very unaccountably those very
_Persons_, yea, I may also say, and those very _Methods_ which were
intended for the tools of that ruine, have become the instruments or
occasions of Deliverances? A man cannot but say upon these Reflections,
as the Wife of _Manoah_ once prudently expressed her self, _If the Lord
were pleased to have Destroyed us, He would not have shew'd us all these
things._ Indeed, It is not unlikely, that the Enemies of the English
Nation, may yet provoke such a _Shake_ unto it, as may perhaps exceed
any that has hitherto been undergone: the Lord prevent the Machinations
of his Adversaries! But that _shake_ will usher in the most _glorious
Times_ that ever arose upon the English _Horizon_. As for the _French_
Cloud which hangs over _England_, tho' it be like to Rain showers of
_Blood_ upon a Nation, where the _Blood_ of the Blessed Jesus has been
too much treated as an _Unholy Thing_; yet I believe God will shortly
scatter it: and my belief is grounded upon a bottom that will bear it.
If that overgrown _French Leviathan_ should accomplish any thing like a
Conquest of _England_, what could there be to hinder him from the
Universal Empire of the _West_? But the _Visions_ of the Western World,
in the _Views_ both of _Daniel_ and of _John_, do assure us, that
whatever Monarch, shall while the _Papacy_ continues go to swallow up
the _Ten Kings_ which received _their Power_ upon the Fall of the
Western Empire, he must miscarry in the Attempt. The _French Phaetons_
Epitaph seems written in that, _Sure Word of Prophecy_.

[Since the making of this Conjecture, there are arriv'd unto us, the
News of a Victory obtain'd by the _English_ over the _French_, which
further confirms our Conjecture; and causes us to sing, _Pharaohs
Chariots, and his Hosts, has the Lord cast down into the Sea; Thy
right-hand has dashed in pieces the Enemy!_]

Now, _In the Salvation of_ England, the Plantations cannot but
_Rejoyce_, and _New-England_ also will _be Glad_.

But so much for our _Corollaries_, I hasten to the main thing designed
for your entertainment. And that is,




AN HORTATORY AND NECESSARY ADDRESS,

TO A COUNTRY NOW EXTRAORDINARILY ALARUM'D

BY THE WRATH OF THE DEVIL.

TIS THIS,


Let us now make a good and a right use of the prodigious _descent_ which
the _Devil_ in _Great Wrath_ is at this day making upon our Land. Upon
the Death of a Great Man once, an Orator call'd the Town together,
crying out, _Concurrite Cives, Dilapsa sunt vestra Moenia!_ that is,
_Come together, Neighbours, your Town-Walls are fallen down!_ But such
is the descent of the Devil at this day upon our selves, that I may
truly tell you, _The Walls of the whole World are broken down!_ The
usual _Walls_ of defence about mankind have such a Gap made in them,
that the very _Devils_ are broke in upon us, to seduce the _Souls_,
torment the _Bodies_, sully the _Credits_, and consume the _Estates_ of
our Neighbours, with Impressions both as _real_ and as _furious_, as if
the _Invisible_ World were becoming _Incarnate_, on purpose for the
vexing of us. And what use ought now to be made of so tremendous a
dispensation? We are engaged in a _Fast_ this day; but shall we try to
fetch _Meat out of the Eater_, and make the _Lion_ to afford some _Hony_
for our _Souls_?

That the Devil is _come down unto us with great Wrath_, we find, we
feel, we now deplore. In many ways, for many years hath the Devil been
assaying to Extirpate the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus here. _New-England_
may complain of the Devil, as in _Psal. 129.1, 2._ _Many a time have they
afflicted me, from my Youth, may +New-England+ now say; many a time have
they afflicted me from my Youth; yet they have not prevailed against
me._ But now there is a more than ordinary _affliction_, with which the
_Devil_ is Galling of us: and such an one as is indeed Unparallelable.
The things confessed by _Witches_, and the things endured by _Others_,
laid together, amount unto this account of our _Affliction_. The
_Devil_, Exhibiting himself ordinarily as a small _Black man_, has
decoy'd a fearful knot of proud, froward, ignorant, envious and
malicious creatures, to lift themselves in his horrid Service, by
entring their Names in a _Book_ by him tendred unto them. These
_Witches_, whereof above a Score have now _Confessed, and shown their
Deeds_, and some are now tormented by the Devils, for _Confessing_, have
met in Hellish _Randezvouzes_, wherein the Confessors do say, they have
had their diabolical Sacraments, imitating the _Baptism_ and the
_Supper_ of our Lord. In these hellish meetings, these Monsters have
associated themselves to do no less a thing than, _To destroy the
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, in these parts of the World;_ and in
order hereunto, First they each of them have their _Spectres_, or
Devils, commission'd by them, & representing of them, to be the Engines
of their Malice. By these wicked _Spectres_, they seize poor people
about the Country, with various & bloudy _Torments_; and of those
evidently Preternatural torments there are some have dy'd. They have
bewitched some, even so far as to make _Self-destroyers_: and others
are in many Towns here and there languishing under their _Evil hands_.
The people thus afflicted, are miserably scratched and bitten, so that
the Marks are most visible to all the World, but the causes utterly
invisible; and the same Invisible Furies do most visibly stick Pins into
the bodies of the afflicted, and _scale_ them, and hideously distort,
and disjoint all their members, besides a thousand other sorts of
Plagues beyond these of any natural diseases which they give unto them.
Yea, they sometimes drag the poor people out of their chambers, and
carry them over Trees and Hills, for divers miles together. A large part
of the persons tortured by these Diabolical _Spectres_, are horribly
tempted by them, sometimes with fair promises, and sometimes with hard
threatnings, but always with felt miseries, to sign the _Devils Laws_ in
a Spectral Book laid before them; which two or three of these poor
Sufferers, being by their tiresome sufferings overcome to do, they have
immediately been released from all their miseries and they appear'd in
_Spectre_ then to Torture those that were before their Fellow-Sufferers.
The _Witches_ which by their covenant with the Devil, are become Owners
of _Spectres_, are oftentimes by their own _Spectres_ required and
compelled to give their consent, for the molestation of some, which they
had no mind otherwise to fall upon; and cruel depredations are then made
upon the Vicinage. In the Prosecution of these Witchcrafts, among a
thousand other unaccountable things, the _Spectres_ have an odd faculty
of cloathing the most substantial and corporeal Instruments of Torture,
with Invisibility, while the wounds thereby given have been the most
palpable things in the World; so that the Sufferers assaulted with
Instruments of Iron, wholly unseen to the standers by, though, to their
cost, seen by themselves, have, upon snatching, wrested the Instruments
out of the _Spectres_ hands, and every one has then immediately not only
_beheld_, but _handled_, an Iron Instrument taken by a Devil from a
Neighbour. These wicked _Spectres_ have proceeded so far, as to steal
several quantities of Mony from divers people, part of which Money, has,
before sufficient Spectators, been dropt out of the Air into the Hands
of the Sufferers, while the _Spectres_ have been urging them to
subscribe their _Covenant with Death_. In such extravagant ways have
these Wretches propounded, the _Dragooning_ of as many as they can, in
their own Combination, and the _Destroying_ of others, with lingring,
spreading, deadly diseases; till our Countrey should at last become too
hot for us. Among the Ghastly Instances of the _success_ which those
Bloody Witches have had, we have seen even some of their own Children,
so dedicated unto the Devil, that in their Infancy, it is found, the
_Imps_ have sucked them, and rendred them Venemous to a Prodigy. We have
also seen the Devils first batteries upon the Town, where the first
Church of our Lord in this Colony was gathered, producing those
distractions, which have almost ruin'd the Town. We have seen likewise
the _Plague_ reaching afterwards into other Towns far and near, where
the Houses of good Men have the Devils filling of them with terrible
Vexations!

This is the Descent, which, it seems, the Devil has now made upon us.
But that which makes this Descent the more formidable, is; The
_multitude_ and _quality_ of Persons accused of an interest in this
_Witchcraft_, by the Efficacy of the _Spectres_ which take their Name
and shape upon them; causing very many good and wise Men to fear, That
many _innocent_, yea, and some _vertuous_ persons, are by the Devils in
this matter, imposed upon; That the Devils have obtain'd the power, to
take on them the likeness of harmless people, and in that likeness to
afflict other people, and be so abused by Præstigious _Dæmons_, that
upon their look or touch, the afflicted shall be odly affected.
Arguments from the _Providence of God_, on the one side, and from our
_Charity_ towards _Man_ on the other side, have made this now to become
a most agitated Controversie among us. There is an _Agony_ produced in
the Minds of Men, lest the Devil should sham us with _Devices_, of
perhaps a finer Thred, than was ever yet practised upon the World. The
whole business is become hereupon so _Snarled_, and the determination of
the Question one way or another, so _dismal_, that our Honourable Judges
have a Room for _Jehoshaphat's_ Exclamation, _We know not what to do!_
They have used, as Judges have heretofore done, the _Spectral
Evidences_, to introduce their further Enquiries into the _Lives_ of the
persons accused; and they have thereupon, by the wonderful Providence of
God, been so strengthened with _other evidences_, that some of the
_Witch Gang_ have been fairly Executed. But what shall be done, as to
those against whom the _evidence_ is chiefly founded in the _dark
world_? Here they do solemnly demand our Addresses to the _Father of
Lights_, on their behalf. But in the mean time, the Devil improves the
_Darkness_ of this Affair, to push us into a _Blind Mans Buffet_, and we
are even ready to be _sinfully_, yea, hotly, and madly, mauling one
another in the _dark_.

The consequence of these things, every _considerate_ Man trembles at;
and the more, because the frequent cheats of Passion, and Rumour, do
precipitate so many, that I wish I could say, The most were
_considerate_.

But that which carries on the formidableness of our Trials, unto that
which may be called, _A wrath unto the uttermost_, is this: It is not
without the _wrath_ of the Almighty _God_ himself, that the _Devil_ is
permitted thus to come down upon us in _wrath_. It was said, in _Isa.
9.19._ _Through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts, the Land is darkned._
Our Land is _darkned_ indeed; since the _Powers of Darkness_ are turned
in upon us: 'tis a _dark time_, yea a black night indeed, now the
_Ty-dogs_ of the Pit are abroad among us: but, _It is through the wrath
of the Lord of Hosts!_ Inasmuch as the _Fire-brands_ of _Hell_ it self
are used for the scorching of us, with cause enough may we cry out,
_What means the heat of this anger?_ Blessed Lord! Are all the other
Instruments of thy Vengeance, too good for the chastisement of such
transgressors as we are? Must the very _Devils_ be sent out of _Their
own place_, to be our Troublers: Must we be lash'd with _Scorpions_,
fetch'd from the _Place of Torment_? Must this _Wilderness_ be made a
Receptacle for the _Dragons of the Wilderness_? If a _Lapland_ should
nourish in it vast numbers, the successors of the old _Biarmi_, who can
with looks or words bewitch other people, or sell Winds to Marriners,
and have their _Familiar Spirits_ which they bequeath to their Children
when they die, and by their Enchanted Kettle-Drums can learn things done
a Thousand Leagues off; If a _Swedeland_ should afford a Village, where
some scores of Haggs, may not only have their Meetings with _Familiar
Spirits_, but also by their Enchantments drag many scores of poor
children out of their Bed-chambers, to be spoiled at those Meetings;
This, were not altogether a matter of so much wonder! But that
_New-England_ should this way be harassed! They are not _Chaldeans_,
that _Bitter and Hasty Nation_, but they are, _Bitter and Burning
Devils_; They are not _Swarthy Indians_, but they are _Sooty Devils_;
that are let loose upon us. Ah, Poor _New-England_! Must the plague of
_Old Ægypt_ come upon thee? Whereof we read in _Psal. 78.49._ _He cast
upon them the fierceness of his Anger, Wrath, and Indignation, and
Trouble, by sending Evil Angels among them._ What, O what must next be
looked for? Must that which is there next mentioned, be next
encountered? _He spared not their soul from death, but gave their life
over to the Pestilence._ For my part, when I consider what _Melancthon_
says, in one of his Epistles, _That these Diabolical Spectacles are
often Prodigies;_ and when I consider, how often people have been by
_Spectres_ called upon, just before their Deaths; I am verily afraid,
lest some wasting _Mortality_ be among the things, which this Plague is
the _Forerunner_ of. I pray God prevent it!

But now, _What shall we do?_

_I._ Let the Devils _coming down_ in _great wrath_ upon us, cause us to
_come down_ in _great grief_ before the Lord. We may truly and sadly
say, _We are brought very low!_ _Low_ indeed, when the Serpents of the
dust, are crawling and coyling about us, and Insulting over us. May we
not say, _We are in the very belly of Hell_, when _Hell_ it self is
feeding upon us? But how _Low_ is that! O let us then most penitently
lay our selves very _Low_ before the God of Heaven, who has thus Abased
us. When a Truculent _Nero_, a _Devil_ of a Man, was turned in upon the
World, it was said, in _1 Pet. 5.6._ _Humble your selves under the mighty
hand of God._ How much more now ought we to _humble our selves_ under
that _Mighty Hand_ of that God who indeed has the _Devil_ in a _Chain_,
but has horribly lengthened out the _Chain_! When the old people of God
heard any _Blasphemies_, tearing of his Ever-Blessed Name to pieces,
they were to _Rend their Cloaths_ at what they heard. I am sure that we
have cause to _Rend our Hearts_ this Day, when we see what an High
Treason has been committed against the most high God, by the Witchcrafts
in our Neighbourhood. We may say; and shall we not be _humbled_ when we
say it? _We have seen an horrible thing done in our Land!_ O 'tis a most
humbling thing, to think, that ever there should be such an abomination
among us, as for a crue of humane race, to renounce their _Maker_, and
to unite with the _Devil_, for the troubling of mankind, and for People
to be, (as is by some confess'd) _Baptized_ by a _Fiend_ using this form
upon them, _Thou art mine, and I have a full power over thee!_
afterwards communicating in an Hellish _Bread_ and _Wine_, by that Fiend
administred unto them. It was said in _Deut. 18.10, 11, 12._ _There shall
not be found among you an Inchanter, or a Witch, or a Charmer, or a
Consulter with Familiar Spirits, or a Wizzard, or a Necromancer; For all
that do these things are an Abomination to the Lord, and because of
these Abominations, the Lord thy God doth drive them out before thee._
That _New-England_ now should have these _Abominations_ in it, yea, that
some of no mean _Profession_, should be found guilty of them: Alas, what
_Humiliations_ are we all hereby oblig'd unto? O 'tis a _Defiled Land_,
wherein we live; Let us be humbled for these _Defiling Abominations_,
lest we be driven out of our Land. It's a very _humbling_ thing to
think, what reproaches will be cast upon us, for this matter, among _The
Daughters of the Philistines_. Indeed, enough might easily be said for
the vindication of _this_ Country from the _Singularity_ of this matter,
by ripping up, what has been discovered in _others_. _Great Brittain_
alone, and this also in our days of _Greatest Light_, has had that in
it, which may divert the Calumnies of an ill-natured World, from
centring here. They are words of the Devout Bishop _Hall_, _Satans
prevalency in this Age, is most clear in the marvellous Number of
Witches, abounding in all places. Now Hundreds are discovered in one
Shire; and, if Fame Deceives us not, in a Village of Fourteen Houses in
the North, are found so many of this Damned Brood. Yea, and those of
both Sexes, who have Professed much Knowledge, Holiness, and Devotion,
are drawn into this Damnable Practice._ I suppose the Doctor in the
first of those Passages, may refer to what happened in the Year 1645.
When so many Vassals of the Devil were Detected, that there were
_Thirty_ try'd at one time, whereas about _fourteen_ were Hang'd, and an
Hundred more detained in the Prisons of _Suffolk_ and _Essex_. Among
other things which many of these Acknowledged, one was, That they were
to undergo certain _Punishments_, if they did not such and such _Hurts_,
as were appointed them. And, among the rest that were then Executed,
there was an Old Parson, called _Lowis_, who confessed, That he had a
couple of _Imps_, whereof _one_ was always putting him upon the doing of
Mischief; Once particularly, that _Imp_ calling for his Consent so to
do, went immediately and Sunk a _Ship_, then under Sail. I pray, let not
_New-England_ become of an Unsavoury and a Sulphurous Resentment in the
Opinion of the World abroad, for the Doleful things which are now fallen
out among us, while there are such _Histories_ of other places abroad in
the World. Nevertheless, I am sure that _we_, the People of
_New-England_, have cause enough to _Humble_ our selves under our most
_Humbling_ Circumstances. We must no more be _Haughty, because of the
Lords Holy Mountain among us_; No it becomes us rather to be, _Humble,
because we have been such an Habitation of Unholy Devils_!

_II._ Since the Devil is _come down in great wrath_ upon us, let not us
in our _great wrath_ against one another provide a _Lodging_ for him. It
was a most wholesome caution, in _Eph. 4.26, 27._ _Let not the Sun go
down upon your wrath: Neither give place to the Devil._ The Devil is
come down to see what _Quarter_ he shall find among us: And if his
coming down, do now fill us with _wrath_ against one another, and if
between the cause of the _Sufferers_ on one hand, and the cause of the
_Suspected_ on t'other, we carry things to such extreams of _Passion_ as
are now gaining upon us, the Devil will Bless himself, to find such a
convenient _Lodging_ as we shall therein afford unto him. And it may be
that the _wrath_ which we have had against one another has had more than
a little influence upon the coming down of the Devil in that _wrath_
which now amazes us. Have not many of us been _Devils_ one unto another
for Slanderings, for Backbitings, for Animosities? For _this_, among
other causes, perhaps, God has permitted the Devils to be worrying, as
they now are, among us. But it is high time to leave off all _Devilism_,
when the _Devil_ himself is falling upon us: And it is _no time_ for us
to be Censuring and Reviling one another, with a _Devilish wrath_, when
the _wrath_ of the _Devil_ is annoying of us. The way for us to out-wit
the Devil, in the _Wiles_ with which he now _Vexes_ us, would be for us
to joyn as one man in our cries to God, for the Directing, and Issuing
of this Thorny Business; but if we do not _Lift up_ our Hands to
Heaven, _without Wrath_, we cannot then do it _without Doubt_, of
speeding in it. I am ashamed when I read French Authors giving this
Character of Englishmen [_Ils se haissent Les uns les autres, & sont en
Division Continuelle._] _They hate one another, and are always
Quarrelling one with another._ And I shall be much more ashamed, if it
become the Character of _New-Englanders_; which is indeed what the Devil
would have. _Satan_ would make us _bruise_ one another, by breaking of
the _Peace_ among us; but O let us disappoint him. We read of a thing
that sometimes happens to the _Devil_, when he is foaming with his
_Wrath_, in _Mar. 12.43._ _The unclean Spirit seeks rest, and finds none._
But we give _rest_ unto the Devil, by _wrath_ one against another. If we
would lay aside all fierceness, and keenness, in the disputes which the
Devil has raised among us; and if we would use to one another none but
the _soft Answers, which turn away wrath_: I should hope that we might
light upon such Counsels, as would quickly Extricate us out of our
_Labyrinths_. But the old _Incendiary_ of the world, is come from Hell,
with _Sparks_ of Hell-Fire flashing on every side of him; and we make
our selves _Tynder_ to the Sparks. When the Emperour _Henry_ III. kept
the Feast of _Pentecost_, at the City _Mentz_, there arose a dissension
among some of the people there, which came from words to blows, and at
last it passed on to the shedding of Blood. After the Tumult was over,
when they came to that clause in their Devotions, _Thou hast made this
day Glorious;_ the Devil to the unexpressible Terrour of that vast
Assembly, made the Temple Ring with that Outcry _But I have made this
Day Quarrelsome!_ We are truly come into a day, which by being well
managed might be very _Glorious_, for the exterminating of those
_Accursed things_, which have hitherto been the Clogs of our Prosperity;
but if we make this day _Quarrelsome_, thro' any _Raging Confidences_,
Alas, O Lord, _my Flesh Trembles for Fear of thee, and I am afraid of
thy Judgments._ _Erasmus_, among other Historians, tells us, that at a
Town in _Germany_, a Witch or Devil, appeared on the Top of a Chimney,
Threatning to set the Town on _Fire_: And at length, Scattering a Pot of
Ashes abroad, the Town was presently and horribly Burnt unto the Ground.
Methinks, I see the _Spectres_, from the Top of the Chimneys to the
Northward, threatning to scatter _Fire_, about the Countrey; but let us
quench that _Fire_, by the most amicable Correspondencies: Lest, as the
_Spectres_, have, they say, already most Literally burnt some of our
Dwellings there do come forth a further _Fire_ from the _Brambles_ of
Hell, which may more terribly _Devour_ us. Let us not be like a
_Troubled House_, altho' we are so much haunted by the _Devils_. Let our
_Long suffering_ be a well-placed piece of _Armour_, about us, against
the _Fiery Darts_ of the wicked ones. History informs us, That so long
ago, as the year, 858, a certain Pestilent and Malignant sort of a
_Dæmon_, molested _Caumont_ in _Germany_ with all sorts of methods to
stir up strife among the Citizens. He uttered Prophecies, he detected
Villanies, he branded people with all kind of Infamies. He incensed the
Neighbourhood against one Man particularly, as the cause of all the
mischiefs: who yet proved himself innocent. He threw stones at the
Inhabitants, and at length burnt their Habitations, till the Commission
of the _Dæmon_ could go no further. I say, Let us be well aware lest
such _Dæmons_ do _Come hither also_.

_III._ Inasmuch as the Devil is come down in _Great Wrath_, we had need
Labour, with all the Care and Speed we can to Divert the _Great Wrath_
of Heaven from coming at the same time upon us. The God of Heaven has
with long and loud Admonitions, been calling us to _a Reformation of our
Provoking Evils_, as the only way to avoid that _Wrath_ of His, which
does not only _Threaten_ but _Consume_ us. 'Tis because we have been
Deaf to those _Calls_ that we are now by a provoked God, laid open to
the _Wrath_ of the Devil himself. It is said in _Pr. 16.17._ _When a mans
ways please the Lord, he maketh even his Enemies to be at peace with
him._ The Devil is our grand _Enemy_; and tho' we would not be at peace
_with_ him, yet we would be at peace from him, that is, we would have
him unable to disquiet our _peace_. But inasmuch as the _wrath_ which we
endure from this _Enemy_, will allow us no _peace_, we may be sure, _our
ways have not pleased the Lord._ It is because we have _broken the
hedge_ of Gods _Precepts_, that the hedge of Gods _Providence_ is not so
entire as it uses to be about us; but _Serpents_ are _biting_ of us. O
let us then set our selves to make our _peace_ with our God, whom we
have _displeased_ by our iniquities: and let us not imagine that we can
encounter the _Wrath_ of the Devil, while there is the _Wrath_ of God
Almighty to set that Mastiff upon us. REFORMATION! REFORMATION! has been
the repeated _Cry_ of all the Judgments that have hitherto been upon us;
because we have been as _deaf Adders_ thereunto, the _Adders_ of the
Infernal Pit are now hissing about us. At length, as it was of old said,
_Luke 16.30._ _If one went unto them from the dead, they will repent;_
even so, there are some come unto us from the _Damned_. The great God
has loosed the Bars of the Pit, so that many _damned Spirits_ are come
in among us, to make us _repent_ of our Misdemeanours. The means which
the Lord had formerly employ'd for our _awakening_, were such, that he
might well have said, _What could I have done more?_ and yet after all,
he has done _more_, in some regards, than was ever done for the
awakening of any People in the World. The things now done to awaken our
Enquiries after our _provoking Evils_, and our endeavours to Reform
those Evils, are most _extraordinary_ things; for which cause I would
freely speak it, if we now do not some _extraordinary_ things in
returning to God; we are the most _incurable_, and I wish it be not
quickly said, the most _miserable_ People under the Sun. Believe me,
'tis a time for all people to do something _extraordinary, in searching
and trying of their ways, and in turning to the Lord_. It is at an
_extraordinary_ rate of _Circumspection_ and _Spiritual mindedness_,
that we should all now maintain a _walk with God_. At such a time as
this ought _Magistrates_ to do something _extraordinary_ in promoting of
what is laudable, and in restraining and chastising of _Evil Doers_. At
such a time as this ought _Ministers_ to do something _extraordinary_ in
pulling the Souls of men out of the _Snares_ of the Devil, not only by
publick Preaching, but by personal Visits and Counsels, _from house to
house_. At such a time as this ought _Churches_ to do something
_extraordinary_, in _renewing_ of their Covenants, and in _remembring_,
and _reviving_ the Obligations of what they have renewed. Some admirable
Designs about the _Reformation_ of Manners, have lately been on foot in
the English Nation, in pursuance of the most excellent Admonitions which
have been given for it, by the Letters of Their Majesties. Besides the
vigorous Agreements of the _Justices_ here and there in the Kingdom,
assisted by godly Gentlemen and Informers, to Execute the _Laws_ upon
prophane Offenders; there has been started a _Proposal_ for the
well-affected people in every Parish, to enter into orderly _Societies_,
whereof every Member shall bind himself, not only to _avoid_
Prophaneness in himself, but also according unto to their Place, to do
their utmost in first _Reproving_; and, if it must be so, then
_Exposing_, and so _Punishing_, as the Law directs, for others that
shall be guilty. It has been observed, that the English Nation has had
some of its greatest Successes, upon some special and signal _Actions_
this way; and a discouragement given under Legal Proceedings of this
kind, must needs be very exercising to the _Wise that observe these
things_. But, O why should not _New-England_ be the most forward part of
the English Nation in such _Reformations_? Methinks I hear the Lord from
Heaven saying over us, _O that my People had hearkened unto me; then I
should soon have subdued the Devils, as well as their other Enemies!_
There have been some feeble Essays towards _Reformation_ of late in our
_Churches_; but, I pray what comes of them? Do we stay till the _Storm_
of his _Wrath_ be over? Nay, let us be doing what we can, as fast as we
can, to divert the _Storm_. The Devils having broke in upon our World,
there is great asking, _Who is it that has brought them in?_ And many
do by _Spectral_ Exhibitions come to be _cry'd out_ upon. I hope in Gods
time it will be found, that among those that are thus _cry'd out_ upon,
there are persons yet _Clear from the great Transgression_; but indeed,
all the _Unreformed_ among us, may justly be _cry'd out_ upon, as having
too much of an hand in letting of the Devils into our Borders; 'tis
_our_ Worldliness, _our_ Formality, _our_ Sensuality, and _our_ Iniquity
that has help'd this letting of the Devils in. O let us then at last,
_consider our ways_. 'Tis a strange passage recorded by Mr. _Clark_ in
the Life of his Father, That the People of his Parish, refusing to be
Reclaimed from their _Sabbath breaking_, by all the zealous Testimonies
which that good Man bore against it; at last, on a night after the
people had retired home from a Revelling Prophanation of the _Lords
Day_, there was heard a great Noise, with rattling of Chains up and down
the Town, and an horrid Scent of Brimstone fill'd the Neighbourhood.
Upon which the _guilty Consciences_ of the Wretches told them, the Devil
was come to fetch them away; and it so terrifi'd them, that an Eminent
_Reformation_ follow'd the Sermons which that Man of God Preached
thereupon. Behold, Sinners, behold and _wonder_, lest you _perish_: the
very _Devils_ are walking about our Streets, with lengthened _Chains_,
making a dreadful Noise in our Ears, and _Brimstone_ even without a
Metaphor, is making an hellish and horrid stench in our Nostrils. I pray
leave off all those things whereof your _guilty Consciences_ may now
accuse you, lest these Devils do yet more direfully fall upon you.
_Reformation_ is at this time our only _Preservation_.

_IV._ When the Devil is come down in _great Wrath_, let every _great
Vice_ which may have a more particular tendency to make us a Prey unto
that _Wrath_, come into a due discredit with us. It is the general
Concession of all men, who are not become too _Unreasonable_ for common
Conversation, that the Invitation of _Witchcrafts_ is the thing that has
now introduced the Devil into the midst of us. I say then, let not only
all _Witchcrafts_ be duly abominated with us, but also let us be duly
watchful against all the _Steps_ leading thereunto. There are lesser
_Sorceries_ which they say, are too frequent in our Land. As it was said
in _2 King. 17.9._ _The Children of +Israel+ did secretly those things
that were not right, against the Lord their God._ So 'tis to be feared,
the Children of _New-England_ have _secretly_ done many things that have
been pleasing to the Devil. They say, that in some Towns it has been an
usual thing for People to cure Hurts with _Spells_, or to use detestable
Conjurations, with _Sieves_, _Keys_, and _Pease_, and _Nails_, and
_Horse-shoes_, and I know not what other Implements, to learn the things
for which they have a forbidden, and an impious _Curiosity_. 'Tis in the
Devils Name, that such things are done; and in Gods Name I do this day
charge them, as vile Impieties. By these Courses 'tis, that People play
upon _The Hole of the Asp_, till that cruelly venemous _Asp_ has pull'd
many of them into the deep _Hole_ of _Witchcraft_ it self. It has been
acknowledged by some who have sunk the deepest into this _horrible Pit_,
that they began at these little _Witchcrafts_; on which 'tis pity but
the Laws of the English Nation, whereby the incorrigible repetition of
those _Tricks_, is made _Felony_, were severely Executed. From the like
sinful _Curiosity_ it is, that the Prognostications of _Judicial
Astrology_, are so injudiciously regarded by multitudes among us; and
altho' the Jugling _Astrologers_ do scarce ever hit right, except it be
in such _Weighty Judgments_, forsooth, as that many _Old Men_ will die
such a year, and that there will be many _Losses_ felt by some that
venture to Sea, and that there will be much _Lying_ and _Cheating_ in
the World; yet their foolish Admirers will not be perswaded but that the
Innocent _Stars_ have been concern'd in these Events. It is a disgrace
to the English Nation, that the Pamphlets of such idle, futil, trifling
_Stargazers_ are so much considered; and the Countenance hereby given to
a Study, wherein at last, all is done by _Impulse_, if any thing be done
to any purpose at all, is not a little perillous to the Souls of Men. It
is (_a Science_, I dare not call it, but) a _Juggle_, whereof the
Learned _Hall_ well says, _It is presumptuous and unwarrantable, and
cry'd ever down by Councils and Fathers, as unlawful, as that which lies
in the mid-way between Magick and Imposture, and partakes not a little
of both._ Men consult the Aspects of Planets, whose Northern or Southern
motions receive denominations from a _Cælestial Dragon_, till the
_Infernal Dragon_ at length insinuate into them, with a _Poison_ of
_Witchcraft_ that can't be cured. Has there not also been a world of
_discontent_ in our Borders? 'Tis no wonder, that the _fiery Serpents_
are so Stinging of us; We have been a most _Murmuring Generation_. It is
not Irrational, to ascribe the late Stupendious growth of _Witches_
among us, partly to the bitter _discontents_, which Affliction and
Poverty has fill'd us with: it is inconceivable, what advantage the
Devil gains over men, by _discontent_. Moreover, the Sin of _Unbelief_
may be reckoned as perhaps the chief _Crime_ of our Land. We are told,
_God swears in wrath, against them that believe not;_ and what follows
then but this, _That the Devil comes unto them in wrath?_ Never were the
offers of the _Gospel_, more freely tendered, or more basely despised,
among any People under the whole Cope of Heaven, than in this _N. E._
Seems it at all marvellous unto us, that the _Devil_ should get such
footing in our Country? Why, 'tis because the _Saviour_ has been
slighted here, perhaps more than any where. The Blessed Lord Jesus
Christ has been profering to us, _Grace, and Glory, and every good
thing_, and been alluring of us to Accept of Him, with such Terms as
these, _Undone Sinner, I am All; Art thou willing that I should be thy
All?_ But, as a proof of that Contempt which this Unbelief has cast upon
these proffers, I would seriously ask of the so many Hundreds above a
Thousand People within these Walls; which of you all, O how few of you,
can indeed say, _Christ is mine, and I am his, and he is the Beloved of
my Soul?_ I would only say thus much: When the precious and glorious
Jesus, is Entreating of us to Receive _Him_, in all His _Offices_, with
all His _Benefits_; the Devil minds what Respect we pay unto that
Heavenly Lord; if we _Refuse Him that speaks from Heaven_, then he that,
_Comes from Hell_, does with a sort of claim set in, and cry out, _Lord,
since this Wretch is not willing that thou shouldst have him, I pray,
let me have him._ And thus, by the just vengeance of Heaven, the Devil
becomes a _Master_, a _Prince_, a _God_, unto the miserable Unbelievers:
but O what are many of them then hurried unto! All of these Evil
Things, do I now set before you, as _Branded_ with the Mark of the Devil
upon them.

_V._ With _Great Regard_, with _Great Pity_, should we Lay to Heart the
Condition of those, who are cast into Affliction, by the _Great Wrath_
of the Devil. There is a Number of our Good Neighbours, and some of them
very particularly noted for Goodness and Vertue, of whom we may say,
_Lord, They are vexed with Devils._ Their Tortures being primarily
Inflicted on their _Spirits_, may indeed cause the Impressions thereof
upon their Bodies to be the less _Durable_, tho' rather the more
_Sensible_: but they Endure Horrible Things, and many have been actually
Murdered. Hard _Censures_ now bestow'd upon these poor Sufferers, cannot
but be very Displeasing unto our Lord, who, as He said, about some that
had been Butchered by a _Pilate_, in _Luc. 13.2, 3._ _Think ye that these
were Sinners above others, because they suffered such Things? I tell you
No, But except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise Perish:_ Even so, he now
says, _Think ye that they who now suffer by the Devil, have been greater
Sinners than their Neighbours?_ No, Do you Repent of your _own Sins_,
Lest the Devil come to fall foul of _you_, as he has done to _them_. And
if this be so, How _Rash_ a thing would it be, if such of the poor
Sufferers, as carry it with a Becoming Piety, Seriousness, and
Humiliation under their present Suffering, should be unjustly
_Censured_; or have their very _Calamity_ imputed unto them as a
_Crime_? It is an easie thing, for us to fall into the Fault of, _Adding
Affliction to the Afflicted_, and of, _Talking to the Grief of those
that are already wounded_. Nor can it be wisdom to slight the Dangers of
such a Fault. In the mean time, We have no Bowels in us, if we do not
Compassionate the Distressed County of _Essex_, now crying to all these
Colonies, _Have pity on me, O ye my Friends, Have pity on me, for the
Hand of the Lord has Touched me, and the Wrath of the Devil has been
therewithal turned upon me._ But indeed, if an hearty _pity_ be due to
any, I am sure, the Difficulties which attend our Honourable _Judges_,
do demand no Inconsiderable share in that _Pity_. What a Difficult, what
an Arduous Task, have those Worthy Personages now upon their Hands? To
carry the _Knife_ so exactly, that on the one side, there may be no
Innocent Blood Shed, by too unseeing a _Zeal for the Children of
Israel_; and that on the other side, there may be no Shelter given to
those Diabolical _Works of Darkness_, without the Removal whereof we
never shall have _Peace_; or to those _Furies_ whereof several have
kill'd _more people_ perhaps than would serve to make a Village: _Hic
Labor, Hoc Opus est!_ O what need have we, to be concerned, that the
Sins of our _Israel_, may not provoke the God of Heaven to leave his
_Davids_, unto a wrong Step, in a matter of such Consequence, as is now
before them! Our Disingenuous, Uncharitable, Unchristian Reproaching of
such _Faithful Men_, after all, _The Prayers and Supplications, with
strong Crying and Tears_, with which we are daily plying the Throne of
Grace, that they may be kept, from what _They Fear_, is none of the way
for our preventing of what _We Fear_. Nor all this while, ought our
_Pity_ to forget such _Accused_ ones, as call for indeed our most
Compassionate _Pity_, till there be fuller Evidences that they are less
worthy of it. If _Satan_ have any where maliciously brought upon the
_Stage_, those that have hitherto had a just and good stock of
Reputation, for their just and good Living, among us; If the _Evil One_
have obtained a permission to _Appear_, in the Figure of such as we have
cause to think, have hitherto _Abstained_, even from the _Appearance of
Evil_: It is in Truth, such an Invasion upon _Mankind_, as may well
Raise an Horror in us all: But, O what Compassions are due to such as
may come under such Misrepresentations, of the _Great Accuser_! Who of
us can say, what may be shewn in the _Glasses_ of the Great _Lying
Spirit_? Altho' the _Usual Providence_ of God [we praise Him!] keeps us
from such a Mishap; yet where have we an _Absolute Promise_, that we
shall every one always be kept from it? As long as _Charity_ is bound to
Think _no Evil_, it will not Hurt us that are _Private Persons_, to
forbear the _Judgment_ which belongs not unto us. Let it rather be our
Wish, May the Lord help them to Learn the _Lessons_, for which they are
now put unto so hard a School.

_VI._ With a _Great Zeal_, we should lay hold on the _Covenant_ of God,
that we may secure _Us_ and _Ours_, from the _Great Wrath_, with which
the Devil Rages. Let us come into the _Covenant of Grace_, and then we
shall not be hook'd into a _Covenant with the Devil_, nor be altogether
unfurnished with Armour, against the Wretches that are in that
_Covenant_. The way to come under the Saving Influences of the _New
Covenant_, is, to close with the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the
All-sufficient _Mediator_ of it: Let us therefore do, _that_, by
Resigning up our selves unto the Saving, Teaching, and Ruling Hands of
this Blessed _Mediator_. Then we shall be, what we read in _Jude 1._
_Preserved in Christ Jesus_: That is, as the _Destroying Angel_, could
not meddle with such as had been distinguished, by the Blood of the
_Passeover_ on their Houses: Thus the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ,
Sprinkled on our Souls, will _Preserve_ us from the Devil. The _Birds of
prey_ (and indeed the _Devils_ most literally in the shape of great
_Birds_!) are flying about. Would we find a Covert from these
_Vultures_? Let us then Hear our Lord Jesus from Heaven Clocquing unto
us, _O that you would be gathered under my wings!_ Well; When this is
done, Then let us own the _Covenant_, which we are now come into, by
joining our selves to a Particular _Church_, walking in the Order of the
Gospel; at the doing whereof, according to that _Covenant_ of God, We
give up Our selves unto the Lord, and in Him unto One Another. While
others have had their Names Entred in the _Devils Book_; let our Names
be found in the _Church Book_, and let us be _Written among the Living
in Jerusalem_. By no means let, _Church work_ sink and fail in the midst
of us; but let the Tragical Accidents which now happen, exceedingly
Quicken that _work_. So many of the _Rising Generation_, utterly
forgetting the Errand of our Fathers to build Churches in this
Wilderness, and so many of our _Cottages_ being allow'd to Live, where
they do not, and perhaps cannot, wait upon God with the Churches of His
People; 'tis as likely as any one thing to procure the swarmings of
_Witch crafts_ among us. But it becomes us, with a like Ardour, to bring
our poor _Children_ with us, as we shall do, when we come our selves,
into the _Covenant_ of God. It would break an heart of Stone, to have
seen, what I have lately seen; Even poor Children of several Ages, even
from seven to twenty, more or less, _Confessing_ their Familiarity with
Devils; but at the same time, in Doleful bitter Lamentations, that made
a little Pourtraiture of _Hell_ it self, Expostulating with their
execrable Parents, for _Devoting_ them to the Devil in their Infancy,
and so _Entailing_ of Devillism upon them! Now, as the Psalmist could
say, _My Zeal hath consumed me, because my Enemies have forgotten thy
words:_ Even so, let the Nefarious wickedness of those that have
Explicitly dedicated their Children to the Devil, even with Devilish
Symbols, of such a Dedication, Provoke our _Zeal_ to have our Children,
Sincerely, Signally, and openly _Consecrated_ unto God; with an
_Education_ afterwards assuring and confirming that Consecration.

_VII._ Let our _Prayer_ go up with great Faith, against the Devil, that
comes down in great Wrath. Such is the Antipathy of the Devil to our
_Prayer_, that he cannot bear to stay long where much of it is: Indeed
it is _Diaboli Flagellum_, as well as, _Miseriæ Remedium_; the Devil
will soon be Scourg'd out of the Lord's Temple, by a _Whip_, made and
used, with the _effectual fervent Prayer of Righteous Men_. When the
Devil by Afflicting of us, drives us to our Prayers, he is _The Fool
making a Whip for his own Back_. Our Lord said of the Devil in _Matt.
17.21._ _This Kind goes not out, but by Prayer and Fasting._ But,
_Prayer and Fasting_ will soon make the Devil be gone. Here are _Charms_
indeed! Sacred and Blessed _Charms_, which the Devil cannot stand
before. A Promise of God, being well managed in the _Hands_ of them that
are much upon their Knees, will so resist the Devil, that he will _Flee
from us_. At every other Weapon the Devils will be too hard for us; the
_Spiritual Wickednesses in High Places_, have manifestly the Upper hand
of us; that _Old Serpent_ will be too old for us, too cunning, too
subtil; they will soon _out wit_ us, if we think to Encounter them with
any _Wit_ of our own. But when we come to _Prayers_, Incessant and
Vehement _Prayers_ before the Lord, there we shall be too hard for them.
When well-directed _Prayers_, that great Artillery of Heaven, are
brought into the Field, _There_ methinks I see, _There are these workers
of Iniquity fallen, all of them!_ And who can tell, how much the most
_Obscure Christian_ among you all, may do towards the Deliverance of our
Land from the Molestations which the Devil is now giving to us. I have
Read, That on a day of Prayer kept by some good People for and with a
Possessed Person, the Devil at last flew out of the Window, and
referring to a Devout, plain, mean Woman then in the Room, he cry'd out,
_O the Woman behind the Door! 'Tis that Woman that forces me away!_ Thus
the Devil that now troubles us, may be forced within a while to forsake
us; and it shall be said, _He was driven away by the Prayers of some
Obscure and Retired Souls, which the World has taken but little notice
of!_ The Great God is about a _Great Work_ at this day among us: Now,
there is extream Hazard, lest the Devil by Compulsion must submit to
that _Great Work_, may also by _Permission_, come to Confound that
_Work_; both in the Detections of some, and in the Confessions of
others, whose Ungodly deeds may be brought forth, by a _Great Work_ of
God; there is great Hazard lest the Devil intertwist some of his
Delusions. 'Tis PRAYER, I say, 'tis PRAYER, that must carry us well
through the strange things that are now upon us. Only that Prayer must
then be the Prayer of Faith: O where is our Faith in him, Who _hath
spoiled these Principalities and Powers, on his Cross, Triumphing over
them_!

_VIII._ Lastly, Shake off, every Soul, shake off the _hard Yoak_ of the
Devil. Where 'tis said, _The whole World lyes in Wickedness;_ 'tis by
some of the Ancients rendred, _The whole World lyes in the Devil._ The
Devil is a Prince, yea, the Devil is a God unto all the Unregenerate;
and alas, there is _A whole World of them_. Desolate Sinners, consider
what an horrid Lord it is that you are Enslav'd unto; and Oh shake off
your Slavery to such a Lord. Instead of _him_, now make your Choice of
the Eternal God in Jesus Christ; Chuse him with a most unalterable
Resolution, and unto him say, with _Thomas_, _My Lord, and my God!_ Say
with the Church, _Lord, other Lords have had the Dominion over us, but
now thou alone shalt be our Lord for ever._ Then instead of your
Perishing under the wrath of the Devils, God will fetch you to a place
among those that fill up the Room of the Devils, left by their Fall from
the Ethereal Regions. It was a most awful Speech made by the Devil,
Possessing a young Woman, at a Village in _Germany_, _By the command of
God, I am come to Torment the Body of this young Woman, tho I cannot
hurt her Soul; and it is that I may warn Men, to take heed of sinning
against God._ _Indeed_ (said he) _'tis very sore against my will that I
do it; but the command of God forces me to declare what I do; however I
know that at the Last Day, I shall have more Souls than God himself._
So spoke that horrible Devil! But O that none of our Souls may be found
among the Prizes of the Devil, in the Day of God! O that what the Devil
has been forced to declare, of his Kingdom among us, may prejudice our
Hearts against him for ever!

My Text says, _The Devil is come down in great Wrath, for he has but a
short time._ Yea, but if you do not by a speedy and through Conversion
to God, escape the Wrath of the Devil, you will your selves go down,
where the Devil is to be, and you will there be sweltring under the
Devils Wrath, not for a _short Time_, but, _World without end_; not for
a _Short Time_, but for _Infinite Millions of Ages_. The smoak of your
Torment under that Wrath, will _Ascend for ever and ever_! Indeed, the
Devil's time for his Wrath upon you in this World, can be but short, but
his time for you to do his Work, or, which is all one, to delay your
turning to God, that is a _Long Time_. When the Devil was going to be
Dispossessed of a Man, he Roar'd out, _Am I to be Tormented before my
time?_ You will _Torment_ the Devil, if you Rescue your Souls out of his
hands, by true Repentance: If once you begin to look that way, he'll Cry
out, _O this is before my Time, I must have more Time, yet in the
Service of such a guilty Soul._ But, I beseech you, let us join thus to
torment the Devil, in an holy Revenge upon him, for all the Injuries
which he has done unto us; let us tell him, _Satan, thy time with me is
but short, Nay, thy time with me shall be no more; I am unutterably
sorry that it has been so much; Depart from me thou Evil-Doer, that
would'st have me to be an Evil Doer like thy self; I will now for ever
keep the Commandments of that God, in whom I Live and Move, and have my
Being!_ The Devil has plaid a fine Game for himself indeed, if by his
troubling of our Land, the Souls of many People should come to _think
upon their ways, till even they turn their Feet into the Testimonies of
the Lord_. Now that the Devil may be thus outshot in his own Bow, is the
desire of all that love the Salvation of God among us, as well as of
him, who has thus Addressed you. _Amen._

       *       *       *       *       *

Having thus discoursed on the _Wonders of the Invisible World_, I shall
now, with God's help, go on to relate some Remarkable and Memorable
Instances of _Wonders_ which that _World_ has given to ourselves. And
altho the chief Entertainment which my Readers do expect, and shall
receive, will be a true History of what has occurred, respecting the
WITCHCRAFTS wherewith we are at this day Persecuted; yet I shall choose
to usher in the mention of those things, with




A NARRATIVE OF AN APPARITION WHICH

A GENTLEMAN IN BOSTON, HAD OF HIS BROTHER,

JUST THEN MURTHERED IN LONDON.


It was on the Second of _May_ in the Year 1687, that a most ingenious,
accomplished and well-disposed Gentleman, Mr. _Joseph Beacon_, by Name,
about Five a Clock in the Morning, as he lay, whether Sleeping or Waking
he could not say, (but judged the latter of them) had a View of his
Brother then at _London_, altho he was now himself at Our _Boston_,
distanced from him a thousand Leagues. This his Brother appear'd unto
him, in the Morning about Five a Clock at _Boston_, having on him a
_Bengal_ Gown, which he usually wore, with a Napkin tyed about his Head;
his Countenance was very Pale, Gastly, Deadly, and he had a bloody Wound
on one side of his Fore-head. _Brother!_ says the Affrighted _Joseph_.
_Brother!_ Answered the Apparition. Said _Joseph_, _What's the matter
Brother? How came you here!_ The Apparition replied, _Brother, I have
been most barbarously and injuriously Butchered, by a Debauched Drunken
Fellow, to whom I never did any wrong in my Life._ Whereupon he gave a
particular Description of the Murderer; adding, _Brother, This Fellow
changing his Name, is attempting to come over unto +New-England+, in
+Foy+, or +Wild+; I would pray you on the first Arrival of either of
these, to get an Order from the Governor, to Seize the Person, whom I
have now described; and then do you Indict him for the Murder of me your
Brother: I'll stand by you and prove the Indictment._ And so he
Vanished. Mr. _Beacon_ was extreamly astonished at what he had seen and
hear'd; and the People of the Family not only observed an extraordinary
Alteration upon him, for the Week following, but have also given me
under their Hands a full Testimony, that he then gave them an Account of
this Apparition.

All this while, Mr. _Beacon_ had no advice of any thing amiss attending
his Brother then in _England_; but about the latter end of _June_
following, he understood by the common ways of Communication, that the
_April_ before, his Brother going in haste by Night to call a Coach for
a Lady, met a Fellow then in Drink, with his _Doxy_ in his Hand: Some
way or other the Fellow thought himself Affronted with the hasty passage
of this _Beacon_, and immediately ran into the Fire-side of a
Neighbouring Tavern, from whence he fetch'd out a Fire-fork, wherewith
he grievously wounded _Beacon_ in the Skull; even in that very part
where the Apparition show'd his Wound. Of this Wound he Languished until
he Dyed on the Second of _May_, about five of the Clock in the Morning
at _London_. The Murderer it seems was endeavouring to Escape, as the
Apparition affirm'd, but the Friends of the Deceased _Beacon_, Seized
him; and Prosecuting him at Law, he found the help of such Friends as
brought him off without the loss of his Life; since which, there has no
more been heard of the Business.

This History I received of Mr. _Joseph Beacon_ himself; who a little
before his own Pious and hopeful Death, which follow'd not long after,
gave me the Story written and signed with his own Hand, and attested
with the Circumstances I have already mentioned.

       *       *       *       *       *

But I shall no longer detain my Reader, from his expected Entertainment,
in a brief account of the Tryals which have passed upon some of the
Malefactors lately Executed at _Salem_, for the _Witchcrafts_ whereof
they stood Convicted. For my own part, I was not present at any of them;
nor ever had I any Personal prejudice at the Persons thus brought upon
the Stage; much less at the Surviving Relations of those Persons, with
and for whom I would be as hearty a Mourner as any Man living in the
World: _The Lord Comfort them!_ But having received a Command so to do,
I can do no other than shortly relate the chief _Matters of Fact_, which
occurr'd in the Tryals of some that were Executed, in an Abridgment
Collected out of the _Court-Papers_, on this occasion put into my hands.
You are to take the _Truth_, just as it was; and the Truth will hurt no
good Man. There might have been more of these, if my Book would not
thereby have swollen too big; and if some other worthy hands did not
perhaps intend something further in these _Collections_; for which cause
I have only singled out Four or Five, which may serve to illustrate the
way of Dealing, wherein _Witchcrafts_ use to be concerned; and I report
matters not as an _Advocate_, but as an _Historian_.

They were some of the Gracious Words inserted in the Advice, which many
of the Neighbouring Ministers, did this Summer humbly lay before our
Honorable Judges, _We cannot but with all thankfulness, acknowledge the
success which the Merciful God has given unto the Sedulous and Assiduous
endeavours of Our Honourable Rulers, to detect the abominable
Witchcrafts which have been committed in the Country; Humbly Praying,
that the discovery of those mysterious and mischievous wickednesses, may
be Perfected._ If in the midst of the many Dissatisfactions among us,
the Publication of these Tryals, may promote such a Pious Thankfulness
unto God, for Justice being so far executed among us, I shall Rejoice
that God is Glorified; and pray, that no wrong steps of ours may ever
sully any of his Glorious Works. But we will begin with,




A MODERN INSTANCE OF WITCHES,

DISCOVERED AND CONDEMNED IN A TRYAL,

BEFORE THAT CELEBRATED JUDGE,

SIR MATTHEW HALE.


It may cast some Light upon the Dark things now in _America_, if we just
give a glance upon the _like things_ lately happening in _Europe_. We
may see the _Witchcrafts_ here most exactly resemble the _Witchcrafts_
there; and we may learn what sort of Devils do trouble the World.

The Venerable _Baxter_ very truly says, _Judge +Hale+ was a Person, than
whom, no Man was more Backward to Condemn a Witch, without full
Evidence._

Now, one of the latest Printed Accounts about a _Tryal of Witches_, is
of what was before him, and it ran on this wise. [Printed in the Year
1682.] And it is here the rather mentioned, because it was a Tryal, much
considered by the Judges of _New England_.

_I._ _Rose Cullender_ and _Amy Duny_, were severally Indicted, for
Bewitching _Elizabeth Durent_, _Ann Durent_, _Jane Bocking_, _Susan
Chandler_, _William Durent_, _Elizabeth_ and _Deborah Pacy_. And the
Evidence whereon they were Convicted, stood upon divers particular
Circumstances.

_II._ _Ann Durent_, _Susan Chandler_, and _Elizabeth Pacy_, when they
came into the Hall, to give Instructions for the drawing the Bills of
Indictments, they fell into strange and violent Fits, so that they were
unable to give in their Depositions, not only then, but also during the
whole Assizes. _William Durent_ being an Infant, his Mother Swore, That
_Amy Duny_ looking after her Child one Day in her absence, did at her
return confess, that she had _given suck to the Child_: (tho' she were
an Old Woman:) Whereat, when _Durent_ expressed her displeasure, _Duny_
went away with Discontents and Menaces.

The Night after, the Child fell into strange and sad Fits, wherein it
continued for Divers Weeks. One Doctor _Jacob_ advised her to hang up
the Childs Blanket, in the Chimney Corner all Day, and at Night, when
she went to put the Child into it, if she found any Thing in it then to
throw it without fear into the Fire. Accordingly, at Night, there fell a
great Toad out of the Blanket, which ran up and down the Hearth. A Boy
catch't it, and held it in the Fire with the Tongs: where it made an
horrible Noise, and Flash'd like to Gun-Powder, with a report like that
of a Pistol: Whereupon the Toad was no more to be seen. The next Day a
Kinswoman of _Duny's_, told the Deponent, that her Aunt was all
grievously scorch'd with the Fire, and the Deponent going to her House,
found her in such a Condition. _Duny_ told her, she might thank her for
it; but she should live to see some of her Children Dead, and her self
upon Crutches. But after the Burning of the Toad, this Child Recovered.

This Deponent further Testifi'd, That Her Daughter _Elizabeth_, being
about the Age of Ten Years, was taken in like manner, as her first Child
was, and in her Fits complained much of _Amy Duny_, and said, that she
did appear to Her, and afflict her in such manner as the former. One
Day she found _Amy Duny_ in her House, and thrusting her out of Doors,
_Duny_ said, _You need not be so Angry, your Child won't live long._ And
within three Days the Child Died. The Deponent added, that she was Her
self, not long after taken with such a Lameness, in both her Legs, that
she was forced to go upon Crutches; and she was now in Court upon them.
[It was Remarkable, that immediately upon the Juries bringing in _Duny_
Guilty, _Durent_ was restored unto the use of her Limbs, and went home
without her Crutches.]

_III._ As for _Elizabeth_ and _Deborah Pacy_, one Aged Eleven Years, the
other Nine; the elder, being in Court, was made utterly senseless,
during all the time of the Trial: or at least speechless. By the
direction of the Judg, _Duny_ was privately brought to _Elizabeth Pacy_,
and she touched her Hand: whereupon the Child, without so much as seeing
her, suddenly leap'd up and flew upon the Prisoner; the younger was too
ill, to be brought unto the Assizes. But _Samuel Pacy_, their Father,
testifi'd, that his Daughter _Deborah_ was taken with a sudden Lameness;
and upon the grumbling of _Amy Duny_, for being denied something, where
this Child was then sitting, the Child was taken with an extream pain in
her stomach, like the pricking of Pins; and shrieking at a dreadful
manner, like a Whelp, rather than a Rational Creature. The Physicians
could not conjecture the cause of the Distemper; but _Amy Duny_ being a
Woman of ill Fame, and the Child in Fits crying out of _Amy Duny_, as
affrighting her with the Apparition of her Person, the Deponent
suspected her, and procured her to be set in the stocks. While she was
there, she said in the hearing of Two Witnesses, _Mr. +Pacy+ keeps a
great stir about his Child, but let him stay till he has done as much by
his Children, as I have done by mine:_ And being Asked, What she had
done to her Children, she Answered, _She had been fain to open her
Childs Mouth with a Tap to give it Victuals._ The Deponent added, that
within Two Days, the Fits of his Daughters were such, that they could
not preserve either Life or Breath, without the help of a Tap. And that
the Children Cry'd out of _Amy Duny_, and of _Rose Cullender_, as
afflicting them with their Apparitions.

_IV._ The Fits of the Children were various. They would sometimes be
Lame on one side; sometimes on t'other. Sometimes very sore; sometimes
restored unto their Limbs, and then Deaf, or Blind, or Dumb, for a long
while together. Upon the Recovery of their Speech, they would Cough
extreamly; and with much Flegm, they would bring up Crooked Pins; and
one time, a Two-penny Nail, with a very broad Head. Commonly at the end
of every Fit, they would cast up a Pin. When the Children Read, they
could not pronounce the Name of, _Lord_, or _Jesus_, or _Christ_, but
would fall into Fits; and say, Amy Duny _says_, _I must not use that
Name._ When they came to the Name of _Satan_, or _Devil_, they would
clap their Fingers on the Book, crying out, _This bites, but it makes me
speak right well!_ The Children in their Fits would often Cry out,
_There stands_ Amy Duny, or _Rose Cullender_; and they would afterwards
relate, _That these Witches appearing before them, threatned them, that
if they told what they saw or heard, they would Torment them ten times
more than ever they did before._

_V._ _Margaret Arnold_, the Sister of Mr. _Pacy_, Testifi'd unto the
like Sufferings being upon the Children, at her House, whither her
Brother had Removed them. And that sometimes, the Children (_only_)
would see things like Mice, run about the House; and one of them
suddenly snap'd one with the Tongs, and threw it into the Fire, where it
screeched out like a Rat. At another time, a thing like a Bee, flew at
the Face of the younger Child; the Child fell into a Fit; and at last
Vomited up a _Two-penny Nail_, with a Broad Head; affirming, _That the
Bee brought this Nail, and forced it into her Mouth._ The Child would in
like manner be assaulted with Flies, which brought Crooked Pins, unto
her, and made her first swallow them, and then Vomit them. She one Day
caught an Invisible _Mouse_, and throwing it into the Fire, it Flash'd
like to Gun-Powder. None besides the Child saw the _Mouse_, but every
one saw the _Flash_. She also declared, out of her Fits, that in them,
_Amy Duny_ much tempted her to destroy her self.

_VI._ As for _Ann Durent_, her Father Testified, That upon a Discontent
of _Rose Cullender_, his Daughter was taken with much Illness in her
Stomach and great and sore Pains, like the Pricking of Pins: and then
Swooning Fits, from which Recovering, she declared, _She had seen the
Apparition of +Rose Cullender+, Threatning to Torment her._ She likewise
Vomited up diverse Pins. The Maid was Present at Court, but when
_Cullender_ look'd upon her, she fell into such Fits, as made her
utterly unable to declare any thing.

_Ann Baldwin_ deposed the same.

_VII._ _Jane Bocking_, was too weak to be at the Assizes. But her Mother
Testifi'd, that her Daughter having formerly been Afflicted with
Swooning Fits, and Recovered of them; was now taken with a great Pain in
her Stomach; and New Swooning Fits. That she took little Food, but every
Day Vomited Crooked Pins. In her first Fits, she would Extend her Arms,
and use Postures, as if she catched at something, and when her Clutched
Hands were forced open, they would find several Pins diversely Crooked,
unaccountably lodged there. She would also maintain a Discourse with
some that were Invisibly present, when casting abroad her Arms, she
would often say, _I will not have it!_ but at last say, _Then I will
have it!_ and closing her Hand, which when they presently after opened,
a Lath-Nail was found in it. But her great Complaints were of being
Visited by the shapes of _Amy Duny_, and _Rose Cullender_.

_VIII._ As for _Susan Chandler_, her Mother Testified, That being at the
search of _Rose Cullender_, they found on her Belly a thing like a Teat,
of an Inch long; which the _said Rose_ ascribed to a strain. But near
her Privy-parts, they found Three more, that were smaller than the
former. At the end of the long Teat, there was a little Hole, which
appeared, as if newly Sucked; and upon straining it, a white Milky
matter issued out. The Deponent further said, That her Daughter being
one Day concerned at _Rose Cullenders_ taking her by the Hand, she fell
very sick, and at Night cry'd out, _That +Rose Cullender+ would come to
Bed unto her._ Her Fits grew violent, and in the Intervals of them, she
declared, _That she saw +Rose Cullender+ in them, and once having of a
great Dog with her._ She also Vomited up Crooked Pins; and when she was
brought into Court, she fell into her Fits. She Recovered her self in
some Time, and was asked by the Court, whether she was in a Condition to
take an Oath, and give Evidence. She said, she could; but having been
Sworn, she fell into her Fits again, and, _Burn her! Burn her!_ were all
the words that she could obtain power to speak. Her Father likewise gave
the same Testimony with her Mother; as to all but the Search.

_IX._ Here was the Sum of the Evidence: Which Mr. Serjeant _Keeling_,
thought not sufficient to Convict the Prisoners. For admitting the
Children were Bewitched, yet, said he, it can never be Apply'd unto the
Prisoners, upon the Imagination only of the Parties Afflicted; inasmuch
as no person whatsoever could then be in Safety.

Dr. _Brown_, a very Learned Person then present, gave his Opinion, that
these Persons were Bewitched. He added, That in _Denmark_, there had
been lately a great Discovery of Witches; who used the very same way of
Afflicting people, by Conveying Pins and Nails into them. His Opinion
was, that the Devil in Witchcrafts, did Work upon the Bodies of Men and
Women, upon a _Natural Foundation_; and that he did Extraordinarily
afflict them, with such Distempers as their Bodies were most subject
unto.

_X._ The Experiment about the _Usefulness_, yea, or _Lawfulness_ whereof
Good Men have sometimes disputed, was divers Times made, That tho' the
Afflicted were utterly deprived of all sense in their Fits, yet upon the
_Touch_ of the Accused, they would so screech out, and fly up, as not
upon any other persons. And yet it was also found that once upon the
touch of an innocent person, the like effect follow'd, which put the
whole Court unto a stand: altho' a small Reason was at length attempted
to be given for it.

_XI._ However, to strengthen the Credit of what had been already
produced against the Prisoners, One _John Soam_ Testifi'd, That bringing
home his Hay in Three Carts, one of the Carts wrenched the Window of
_Rose Cullenders_ House, whereupon she flew out, with violent
Threatenings against the Deponent. The other Two Carts, passed by Twice,
Loaded, that Day afterwards; but the Cart which touched _Cullenders_
House, was Twice or Thrice that Day overturned. Having again Loaded it,
as they brought it thro' the Gate which Leads out of the Field, the Cart
stuck so fast in the Gates Head, that they could not possibly get it
thro', but were forced to cut down the Post of the Gate, to make the
Cart pass thro', altho' they could not perceive that the Cart did of
either side touch the Gate-Post. They afterwards, did with much
Difficulty get it home to the Yard; but could not for their Lives get
the Cart near the place, where they should unload. They were fain to
unload at a great Distance; and when they were Tired, the Noses of them
that came to Assist them, would burst forth a Bleeding; so they were
fain to give over till next morning; and then they unloaded without any
difficulty.

_XII._ _Robert Sherringham_ also Testifi'd, That the Axle-Tree of his
Cart, happening in passing, to break some part of _Rose Cullenders_
House, in her Anger at it, she vehemently threatned him, _His Horses
should suffer for it._ And within a short time, all his Four Horses
dy'd; after which he sustained many other Losses in the sudden Dying of
his Cattle. He was also taken with a Lameness in his Limbs; and so vexed
with Lice of an extraordinary Number and Bigness, that no Art could
hinder the Swarming of them, till he burnt up two Suits of Apparel.

_XIII._ As for _Amy Duny_, 'twas Testifi'd by one _Richard Spencer_ that
he heard her say, _The Devil would not let her Rest; until she were
Revenged on the Wife of +Cornelius Sandswel+._ And that _Sandswel_
testifi'd, that her Poultry dy'd suddenly, upon _Amy Dunys_ threatning
of them; and that her Husbands Chimney fell, quickly after _Duny_ had
spoken of such a disaster. And a Firkin of Fish could not be kept from
falling into the Water, upon suspicious words of _Duny's_.

_XIV._ The Judg told the Jury, they were to inquire now, first, whether
these Children were Bewitched; and secondly, Whether the Prisoners at
the Bar were guilty of it. He made no doubt, there were such Creatures
as Witches; for the Scriptures affirmed it; and the Wisdom of all
Nations had provided Laws against such persons. He pray'd the God of
Heaven to direct their Hearts in the weighty thing they had in hand;
for, _To Condemn the Innocent, and let the Guilty go free, were both an
Abomination to the Lord._

The Jury in half an hour brought them in _Guilty_ upon their several
Indictments, which were Nineteen in Number.

The next Morning, the Children with their Parents, came to the Lodgings
of the Lord Chief Justice, and were in as good health as ever in their
Lives; being Restored within half an Hour after the Witches were
Convicted.

The Witches were Executed; and _Confessed_ nothing; which indeed will
not be wondred by them, who Consider and Entertain the Judgment of a
Judicious Writer, _That the Unpardonable Sin, is most usually Committed
by Professors of the Christian Religion, falling into Witchcraft._

We will now proceed unto several of the like Tryals among our selves.




I.

THE TRYAL OF G. B. AT A COURT OF

OYER AND TERMINER,

HELD IN SALEM, 1692.


Glad should I have been, if I had never known the Name of this Man; or
never had this occasion to mention so much as the first Letters of his
Name. But the Government requiring some Account of his Trial to be
inserted in this Book, it becomes me with all Obedience to submit unto
the Order.

I. This _G. B._ Was Indicted for Witch-craft, and in the prosecution of
the Charge against him, he was Accused by five or six of the Bewitched,
as the Author of their Miseries; he was Accused by Eight of the
Confessing Witches, as being an head Actor at some of their Hellish
Randezvouzes, and one who had the promise of being a King in Satan's
Kingdom, now going to be Erected: He was accused by Nine Persons for
extraordinary Lifting, and such feats of Strength, as could not be done
without a Diabolical Assistance. And for other such things he was
Accused, until about thirty Testimonies were brought in against him; nor
were these judg'd the half of what might have been considered for his
Conviction: However they were enough to fix the Character of a Witch
upon him according to the Rules of Reasoning, by the Judicious _Gaule_,
in that Case directed.

II. The Court being sensible, that the Testimonies of the Parties
Bewitched, use to have a Room among the _Suspicions_ or _Presumptions_,
brought in against one Indicted for Witch-craft; there were now heard
the Testimonies of several Persons, who were most notoriously Bewitched,
and every day Tortured by Invisible Hands, and these now all charged the
Spectres of _G. B._ to have a share in their Torments. At the Examination
of this _G. B._ the Bewitched People were grievously harrassed with
Preternatural Mischiefs, which could not possibly be Dissembled; and
they still ascribed it unto the endeavours of _G. B._ to Kill them. And
now upon the Tryal of one of the Bewitched Persons, testified, that in
her Agonies, a little black Hair'd Man came to her, saying his Name was
_B._ and bidding her set her hand to a Book which he shewed unto her;
and bragging that he was a _Conjurer_, above the ordinary Rank of
Witches; That he often Persecuted her with the offer of that Book,
saying, _She should be well, and need fear nobody, if she would but Sign
it;_ But he inflicted cruel Pains and Hurts upon her, because of her
denying so to do. The Testimonies of the other Sufferers concurred with
these; and it was remarkable, that whereas _Biting_ was one of the ways
which the Witches used for the vexing of the Sufferers; when they cry'd
out of _G. B._ Biting them, the print of the Teeth would be seen on the
Flesh of the Complainers, and just such a Set of Teeth as _G. B's_ would
then appear upon them, which could be distinguished from those of some
other Mens. Others of them testified, That in their Torments, _G. B._
tempted them to go unto a Sacrament, unto which they perceived him with
a Sound of Trumpet, Summoning of other Witches, who quickly after the
Sound, would come from all Quarters unto the Rendezvouz. One of them
falling into a kind of Trance, affirmed, that _G. B._ had carried her
away into a very high Mountain, where he shewed her mighty and glorious
Kingdoms, and said, _He would give them all to her, if she would write
in his Book;_ but she told him, _They were none of his to give;_ and
refused the Motions; enduring of much Misery for that refusal.

It cost the Court a wonderful deal of Trouble, to hear the Testimonies
of the Sufferers; for when they were going to give in their Depositions,
they would for a long time be taken with Fits, that made them uncapable
of saying any thing. The Chief Judg asked the Prisoner, who he thought
hindred these Witnesses from giving their _Testimonies_? And he
answered, _He supposed it was the Devil._ That Honourable Person
replied, _How comes the Devil then to be so loath to have any Testimony
born against you?_ Which cast him into very great Confusion.

III. It has been a frequent thing for the Bewitched People to be
entertained with Apparitions of _Ghosts_ of Murdered People, at the same
time that the _Spectres_ of the Witches trouble them. These Ghosts do
always affright the Beholders more than all the other spectral
Representations; and when they exhibit themselves, they cry out, of
being Murthered by the Witch-crafts or other Violences of the Persons
who are then in Spectre present. It is further considered, that once or
twice, these _Apparitions_ have been seen by others, at the very same
time they have shewn themselves to the Bewitched; and seldom have there
been these _Apparitions_, but when something unusual or suspected, have
attended the Death of the Party thus Appearing. Some that have been
accused by these _Apparitions_ accosting of the Bewitched People, who
had never heard a word of any such Persons ever being in the World, have
upon a fair Examination, freely and fully confessed the Murthers of
those very Persons, altho' these also did not know how the Apparitions
had complained of them. Accordingly several of the Bewitched, had given
in their Testimony, that they had been troubled with the Apparitions of
two Women, who said, that they were _G. B's_ two Wives, and that he had
been the Death of them; and that the Magistrates must be told of it,
before whom if _B._ upon his Tryal denied it, they did not know but that
they should appear again in Court. Now, _G. B._ had been Infamous for the
Barbarous usage of his two late Wives, all the Country over. Moreover,
it was testified, the Spectre of _G. B._ threatning of the Sufferers,
told them, he had Killed (besides others) Mrs. _Lawson_ and her Daughter
_Ann_. And it was noted, that these were the Vertuous Wife and Daughter
of one at whom this _G. B._ might have a prejudice for his being
serviceable at _Salem Village_, from whence himself had in ill Terms
removed some Years before: And that when they dy'd, which was long
since, there were some odd Circumstances about them, which made some of
the Attendents there suspect something of Witch-craft, tho none Imagined
from what Quarter it should come.

Well, _G. B._ being now upon his Tryal, one of the Bewitched Persons was
cast into Horror at the Ghost of _B's_ two Deceased Wives then appearing
before him, and crying for _Vengeance_ against him. Hereupon several of
the Bewitched Persons were successively called in, who all not knowing
what the former had seen and said, concurred in their Horror of the
Apparition, which they affirmed that he had before him. But he, tho much
appalled, utterly deny'd that he discerned any thing of it; nor was it
any part of his _Conviction_.

IV. Judicious Writers have assigned it a great place in the Conviction
of _Witches_, _when Persons are Impeached by other notorious Witches, to
be as ill as themselves; especially, if the Persons have been much noted
for neglecting the Worship of God_. Now, as there might have been
Testimonies enough of _G. B's_ Antipathy to _Prayer_, and the other
Ordinances of God, tho by his Profession, singularly Obliged thereunto;
so, there now came in against the Prisoner, the Testimonies of several
Persons, who confessed their own having been horrible _Witches_, and
ever since their Confessions, had been themselves terribly Tortured by
the Devils and other Witches, even like the other Sufferers; and therein
undergone the Pains of many _Deaths_ for their Confessions.

These now testified, that _G. B._ had been at Witch-meetings with them;
and that he was the Person who had Seduc'd, and Compell'd them into the
snares of Witchcraft; That he promised them _Fine Cloaths_, for doing
it; that he brought Poppets to them, and Thorns to stick into those
Poppets, for the Afflicting of other People; and that he exhorted them
with the rest of the Crew, to Bewitch all _Salem Village_, but besure to
do it Gradually, if they would prevail in what they did.

When the _Lancashire Witches_ were Condemn'd I don't remember that there
was any considerable further Evidence, than that of the Bewitched, and
than that of some that confessed. We see so much already against _G. B._
But this being indeed not enough, there were other things to render what
had been already produced _credible_.

V. A famous Divine recites this among the Convictions of a Witch; _The
Testimony of the party Bewitched, whether Pining or Dying; together with
the joint Oaths of sufficient Persons that have seen certain Prodigious
Pranks or Feats wrought by the Party Accused._ Now, God had been pleased
so to leave this _G. B._ that he had ensnared himself by several
Instances, which he had formerly given of a Preternatural Strength, and
which were now produced against him. He was a very Puny Man, yet he had
often done things beyond the strength of a Giant. A Gun of about seven
foot Barrel, and so heavy that strong Men could not steadily hold it out
with both hands; there were several Testimonies, given in by Persons of
Credit and Honor, that he made nothing of taking up such a Gun behind
the Lock, with but one hand, and holding it out like a Pistol, at
Arms-end. _G. B._ in his Vindication, was so foolish as to say, That
_an +Indian+ was there, and held it out at the same time:_ Whereas none
of the Spectators ever saw any such _Indian_; but they supposed, the
_Black Man_, (as the Witches call the Devil; and they generally say he
resembles an _Indian_) might give him that Assistance. There was
Evidence likewise brought in, that he made nothing of taking up whole
Barrels fill'd with _Malasses_ or _Cider_, in very disadvantageous
Postures, and Carrying of them through the difficultest Places out of a
Canoo to the Shore.

Yea, there were two Testimonies, that _G. B._ with only putting the Fore
Finger of his Right hand into the Muzzle of an heavy Gun, a
Fowling-piece of about six or seven foot Barrel, did lift up the Gun,
and hold it out at Arms-end; a Gun which the Deponents thought strong
Men could not with both hands lift up, and hold out at the But-end, as
is usual. Indeed, one of these Witnesses was over-perswaded by some
Persons, to be out of the way upon _G. B's_ Tryal; but he came
afterwards with Sorrow for his withdraw, and gave in his Testimony: Nor
were either of these Witnesses made use of as Evidences in the Trial.

VI. There came in several Testimonies relating to the Domestick Affairs
of _G. B._ which had a very hard Aspect upon him; and not only prov'd him
a very ill Man; but also confirmed the belief of the Character, which
had been already fastned on him.

'Twas testified, that keeping his two Successive Wives in a strange kind
of Slavery, he would when he came home from abroad, pretend to tell the
Talk which any had with them; That he has brought them to the point of
Death, by his harsh Dealings with his Wives, and then made the People
about him, to promise that in case Death should happen, they would say
nothing of it; That he used all means to make his Wives Write, Sign,
Seal, and Swear a Covenant, never to reveal any of his Secrets; That his
Wives had privately complained unto the Neighbours about frightful
Apparitions of Evil Spirits, with which their House was sometimes
infested; and that many such things have been whispered among the
Neighbourhood. There were also some other Testimonies relating to the
Death of People whereby the Consciences of an Impartial Jury were
convinced that _G. B._ had Bewitched the Persons mentioned in the
Complaints. But I am forced to omit several passages, in this as well as
in all the succeeding Tryals, because the Scribes who took notice of
them, have not supplyed me.

VII. One Mr. _Ruck_, Brother-in-Law to this _G. B._ testified, that
_G. B._ and himself, and his Sister, who was _G. B's_ Wife, going out for
two or three Miles to gather Straw-berries, _Ruck_ with his Sister, the
Wife of _G. B._ Rode home very Softly, with _G. B._ on Foot in their
Company, _G. B._ stept aside a little into the Bushes; whereupon they
halted and Halloo'd for him. He not answering, they went away homewards,
with a quickened pace, without expectation of seeing him in a
considerable while; and yet when they were got near home, to their
Astonishment, they found him on foot with them, having a Basket of
Straw-berries. _G. B._ immediately then fell to Chiding his Wife, on the
account of what she had been speaking to her Brother, of him, on the
Road: which when they wondred at, he said, _He knew their thoughts._
_Ruck_ being startled at that, made some Reply, intimating, that the
Devil himself did not know so far; but _G. B._ answered, _My God makes
known your Thoughts unto me._ The Prisoner now at the Bar had nothing to
answer, unto what was thus witnessed against him, that was worth
considering. Only he said, _Ruck, and his Wife left a Man with him, when
they left him._ Which _Ruck_ now affirm'd to be false; and when the
Court asked _G. B._ _What the Man's Name was?_ his Countenance was much
altered; nor could he say, who 'twas. But the Court began to think, that
he then step'd aside, only that by the assistance of the _Black Man_, he
might put on his _Invisibility_, and in that _Fascinating Mist_,
gratifie his own Jealous Humour, to hear what they said of him. Which
trick of rendring themselves _Invisible_, our Witches do in their
Confessions pretend, that they sometimes are Masters of; and it is the
more credible, because there is Demonstration, that they often render
many other things utterly _Invisible_.

VIII. _Faltring, faulty, unconstant, and contrary Answers upon judicial
and deliberate Examination_, are counted some unlucky Symptoms of Guilt,
in all Crimes, especially in Witchcrafts. Now there never was a Prisoner
more eminent for them, than _G. B._ both at his Examination and on his
Trial. His _Tergiversations_, _Contradictions_, and _Falshoods_, were
very sensible: he had little to say, but that he had heard some things
that he could not prove, Reflecting upon the Reputation of some of the
Witnesses. Only he gave in a Paper to the Jury; wherein, altho' he had
many times before, granted, not only that there are _Witches_, but
also, that the present Sufferings of the Country are the effects of
_horrible Witchcrafts_, yet he now goes to evince it, _That there
neither are, nor ever were Witches, that having made a Compact with the
Devil, can send a Devil to Torment other people at a distance._ This
Paper was Transcribed out of _Ady_; which the Court presently knew, as
soon as they heard it. But he said, he had taken none of it out of any
Book; for which, his Evasion afterwards, was, That a Gentleman gave him
the Discourse in a Manuscript, from whence he Transcribed it.

IX. The Jury brought him in _Guilty_: But when he came to Die, he
utterly deni'd the Fact, whereof he had been thus convicted.




II.

THE TRYAL OF BRIDGET BISHOP, ALIAS

OLIVER, AT THE COURT OF OYER AND TERMINER,

HELD AT SALEM, JUNE 2. 1692.


I.

She was Indicted for Bewitching of several Persons in the Neighbourhood,
the Indictment being drawn up, according to the _Form_ in such Cases
usual. And pleading, _Not Guilty_, there were brought in several
persons, who had long undergone many kinds of Miseries, which were
preternaturally inflicted, and generally ascribed unto an _horrible
Witchcraft_. There was little occasion to prove the _Witchcraft_, it
being evident and notorious to all beholders. Now to fix the
_Witchcraft_ on the Prisoner at the Bar, the first thing used, was the
Testimony of the _Bewitched_; whereof several testifi'd, That the
_Shape_ of the Prisoner did oftentimes very grievously Pinch them, Choak
them, Bite them, and Afflict them; urging them to write their Names in a
_Book_, which the said Spectre called, _Ours_. One of them did further
testifie, that it was the _Shape_ of this Prisoner, with another, which
one day took her from her Wheel, and carrying her to the Riverside,
threatned there to Drown her, if she did not Sign to the _Book_
mentioned: which yet she refused. Others of them did also testifie, that
the said _Shape_ did in her Threats brag to them that she had been the
Death of sundry Persons, then by her named; that she had _Ridden_ a Man
then likewise named. Another testifi'd, the Apparition of _Ghosts_ unto
the Spectre of _Bishop_, crying out, _You Murdered us!_ About the Truth
whereof, there was in the Matter of Fact but too much suspicion.

II. It was testifi'd, That at the Examination of the Prisoner before the
Magistrates, the Bewitched were extreamly tortured. If she did but cast
her Eyes on them, they were presently struck down; and this in such a
manner as there could be no Collusion in the Business. But upon the
Touch of her Hand upon them, when they lay in their Swoons, they would
immediately Revive; and not upon the Touch of any ones else. Moreover,
Upon some Special Actions of her Body, as the shaking of her Head, or
the turning of her Eyes, they presently and painfully fell into the like
postures. And many of the like Accidents now fell out, while she was at
the Bar. One at the same time testifying, That she said, _She could not
be troubled to see the afflicted thus tormented._

III. There was Testimony likewise brought in, that a Man striking once
at the place, where a bewitched person said, the _Shape_ of this
_Bishop_ stood, the bewitched cried out, _That he had tore her Coat_, in
the place then particularly specifi'd; and the Woman's Coat was found to
be Torn in that very place.

IV. One _Deliverance Hobbs_, who had confessed her being a Witch, was
now tormented by the Spectres, for her Confession. And she now
testifi'd, That this _Bishop_ tempted her to Sign the _Book_ again, and
to deny what she had confess'd. She affirm'd, That it was the Shape of
this Prisoner, which whipped her with Iron Rods, to compel her
thereunto. And she affirmed, that this _Bishop_ was at a General Meeting
of the Witches, in a Field at _Salem_-Village, and there partook of a
Diabolical Sacrament in Bread and Wine then administred.

V. To render it further unquestionable, that the Prisoner at the Bar,
was the Person truly charged in THIS _Witchcraft_, there were produced
many Evidences of OTHER _Witchcrafts_, by her perpetrated. For Instance,
_John Cook_ testifi'd, That about five or six Years ago, one Morning,
about Sun-Rise, he was in his Chamber assaulted by the _Shape_ of this
Prisoner: which look'd on him, grinn'd at him, and very much hurt him
with a Blow on the side of the Head: and that on the same day, about
Noon, the same _Shape_ walked in the Room where he was, and an Apple
strangely flew out of his Hand, into the Lap of his Mother, six or eight
Foot from him.

VI. _Samuel Gray_ testifi'd, That about fourteen Years ago, he wak'd on
a Night, and saw the Room where he lay full of Light; and that he then
saw plainly a Woman between the Cradle, and the Bed-side, which look'd
upon him. He rose, and it vanished; tho' he found the Doors all fast.
Looking out at the Entry-door, he saw the same Woman, in the same Garb
again; and said, _In God's Name, what do you come for?_ He went to Bed,
and had the same Woman again assaulting him. The Child in the Cradle
gave a great Screech, and the Woman disappeared. It was long before the
Child could be quieted; and tho' it were a very likely thriving Child,
yet from this time it pined away, and, after divers Months, died in a
sad Condition. He knew not _Bishop_, nor her Name; but when he saw her
after this, he knew by her Countenance, and Apparel, and all
Circumstances, that it was the Apparition of this _Bishop_, which had
thus troubled him.

VII. _John Bly_ and his Wife testifi'd, That he bought a Sow of _Edward
Bishop_, the Husband of the Prisoner; and was to pay the Price agreed,
unto another person. This Prisoner being angry that she was thus hindred
from fingring the Mony, quarrell'd with _Bly_. Soon after which, the Sow
was taken with strange Fits; Jumping, Leaping, and Knocking her Head
against the Fence; she seem'd Blind and Deaf, and would neither Eat nor
be Suck'd. Whereupon a Neighbour said, she believed the Creature was
_Over-looked_; and sundry other Circumstances concurred, which made the
Deponents believe that _Bishop_ had bewitched it.

VIII. _Richard Coman_ testifi'd, That eight Years ago, as he lay awake
in his Bed, with a Light burning in the Room, he was annoy'd with the
Apparition of this _Bishop_, and of two more that were strangers to him,
who came and oppressed him so, that he could neither stir himself, nor
wake any one else, and that he was the Night after, molested again in
the like manner; the said _Bishop_, taking him by the Throat, and
pulling him almost out of the Bed. His Kinsman offered for this cause to
lodge with him; and that Night, as they were awake, discoursing
together, this _Coman_ was once more visited by the Guests which had
formerly been so troublesom; his Kinsman being at the same time struck
speechless, and unable to move Hand or Foot. He had laid his Sword by
him, which these unhappy Spectres did strive much to wrest from him;
only he held too fast for them. He then grew able to call the People of
his House; but altho' they heard him, yet they had not power to speak or
stir; until at last, one of the People crying out, _What's the matter?_
The Spectres all vanished.

IX. _Samuel Shattock_ testify'd, That in the Year, 1680, this _Bridget
Bishop_, often came to his House upon such frivolous and foolish
Errands, that they suspected she came indeed with a purpose of mischief.
Presently, whereupon, his eldest Child, which was of as promising Health
and Sense, as any Child of its Age, began to droop exceedingly; and the
oftner that _Bishop_ came to the House, the worse grew the Child. As the
Child would be standing at the Door, he would be thrown and bruised
against the Stones, by an invisible Hand, and in like sort knock his
Face against the sides of the House, and bruise it after a miserable
manner. Afterwards this _Bishop_ would bring him things to Dye, whereof
he could not imagin any use; and when she paid him a piece of Mony, the
Purse and Mony were unaccountably conveyed out of a lock'd Box, and
never seen any more. The Child was immediately, hereupon, taken with
terrible Fits, whereof his Friends thought he would have dyed: Indeed he
did almost nothing but Cry and Sleep for several Months together; and at
length his Understanding was utterly taken away. Among other Symptoms of
an Inchantment upon him, one was, That there was a Board in the Garden,
whereon he would walk; and all the Invitations in the World could never
fetch him off. About 17 or 18 years after, there came a Stranger to
_Shattock's_ House, who seeing the Child, said, _This poor Child is
Bewitched; and you have a Neighbour living not far off, who is a Witch._
He added, _Your Neighbour has had a falling out with your Wife; and she
said, in her Heart, your Wife is a proud Woman, and she would bring down
her Pride in this Child._ He then remembred, that _Bishop_ had parted
from his Wife in muttering and menacing Terms, a little before the Child
was taken Ill. The abovesaid Stranger would needs carry the bewitched
Boy with him, to _Bishop's_ House, on pretence of buying a pot of Cyder.
The Woman entertained him in furious manner; and flew also upon the Boy,
scratching his Face till the Blood came; and saying, _Thou Rogue, what
dost thou bring this Fellow here to plague me?_ Now it seems the Man had
said, before he went, That he would fetch Blood of _her_. Ever after the
Boy was follow'd with grievous Fits, which the Doctors themselves
generally ascribed unto _Witchcraft_; and wherein he would be thrown
still into the _Fire_ or the _Water_, if he were not constantly look'd
after; and it was verily believed that _Bishop_ was the cause of it.

X. _John Louder_ testify'd, That upon some little Controversy with
_Bishop_ about her Fowls, going well to Bed, he did awake in the Night
by Moonlight, and did see clearly the likeness of this Woman grievously
oppressing him; in which miserable condition she held him, unable to
help himself, till near Day. He told _Bishop_ of this; but she deny'd
it, and threatned him very much. Quickly after this, being at home on a
Lords day, with the doors shut about him, he saw a black Pig approach
him; at which, he going to kick, it vanished away. Immediately after,
sitting down, he saw a black Thing jump in at the Window, and come and
stand before him. The Body was like that of a Monkey, the Feet like a
Cocks, but the Face much like a Mans. He being so extreamly affrighted,
that he could not speak; this Monster spoke to him, and said, _I am a
Messenger sent unto you, for I understand that you are in some Trouble
of Mind, and if you will be ruled by me, you shall want for nothing in
this World._ Whereupon he endeavoured to clap his Hands upon it; but he
could feel no substance; and it jumped out of the Window again; but
immediately came in by the Porch, tho' the Doors were shut, and said,
_You had better take my Counsel!_ He then struck at it with a Stick, but
struck only the Ground, and broke the Stick: The Arm with which he
struck was presently Disenabled, and it vanished away. He presently went
out at the Back-door, and spied this _Bishop_, in her Orchard, going
toward her House; but he had not power to set one foot forward unto
her. Whereupon, returning into the House, he was immediately accosted by
the Monster he had seen before; which Goblin was now going to fly at
him; whereat he cry'd out, _The whole Armour of God be between me and
you!_ So it sprang back, and flew over the Apple-tree; shaking many
Apples off the Tree, in its flying over. At its leap, it flung Dirt with
its Feet against the Stomack of the Man; whereon he was then struck
Dumb, and so continued for three Days together. Upon the producing of
this Testimony, _Bishop_ deny'd that she knew this Deponent: Yet their
two Orchards joined; and they had often had their little Quarrels for
some years together.

XI. _William Stacy_ testify'd, That receiving Mony of this _Bishop_, for
work done by him; he was gone but a matter of three Rods from her, and
looking for his Mony, found it unaccountably gone from him. Some time
after, _Bishop_ asked him, whether her Father would grind her Grist for
her? He demanded why? She reply'd, _Because Folks count me a Witch._ He
answered, _No question but he will grind it for you._ Being then gone
about six Rods from her, with a small Load in his Cart, suddenly the
Off-wheel stump'd, and sunk down into an hole, upon plain Ground; so
that the Deponent was forced to get help for the recovering of the
Wheel: But stepping back to look for the hole, which might give him this
Disaster, there was none at all to be found. Some time after, he was
waked in the Night; but it seem'd as light as day; and he perfectly saw
the shape of this _Bishop_ in the Room, troubling of him; but upon her
going out, all was dark again. He charg'd _Bishop_ afterwards with it,
and she deny'd it not; but was very angry. Quickly after, this Deponent
having been threatned by _Bishop_, as he was in a dark Night going to
the Barn, he was very suddenly taken or lifted from the Ground, and
thrown against a Stone-wall: After that, he was again hoisted up and
thrown down a Bank, at the end of his House. After this again, passing
by this _Bishop_, his Horse with a small Load, striving to draw, all his
Gears flew to pieces, and the Cart fell down; and this Deponent going
then to lift a Bag of Corn, of about two Bushels, could not budge it
with all his Might.

Many other Pranks of this _Bishop's_ this Deponent was ready to testify.
He also testify'd, That he verily believ'd, the said _Bishop_ was the
Instrument of his Daughter _Priscilla's_ Death; of which suspicion,
pregnant Reasons were assigned.

XII. To crown all, _John Bly_ and _William Bly_ testify'd, That being
employ'd by _Bridget Bishop_, to help to take down the Cellar-wall of
the old House wherein she formerly lived, they did in holes of the said
old Wall, find several _Poppets_, made up of Rags and Hogs-bristles,
with headless Pins in them, the Points being outward; whereof she could
give no Account unto the Court, that was reasonable or tolerable.

XIII. One thing that made against the Prisoner was, her being evidently
convicted of _gross Lying_ in the Court, several times, while she was
making her Plea; but besides this, a Jury of Women found a preternatural
Teat upon her Body: But upon a second search, within 3 or 4 hours,
there was no such thing to be seen. There was also an Account of other
People whom this Woman had Afflicted; and there might have been many
more, if they had been enquired for; but there was no need of them.

XIV. There was one very strange thing more, with which the Court was
newly entertained. As this Woman was under a Guard, passing by the great
and spacious Meeting-house of _Salem_, she gave a look towards the
House: And immediately a _Dæmon_ invisibly entring the Meeting-house,
tore down a part of it; so that tho' there was no Person to be seen
there, yet the People, at the noise, running in, found a Board, which
was strongly fastned with several Nails, transported unto another
quarter of the House.




III.

THE TRYAL OF SUSANNA MARTIN, AT THE

COURT OF OYER AND TERMINER, HELD BY ADJOURNMENT

AT SALEM, JUNE 29. 1692.


I.

_Susanna Martin_, pleading _Not Guilty_ to the Indictment of
_Witchcraft_, brought in against her, there were produced the Evidences
of many Persons very sensibly and grievously Bewitched; who all
complained of the Prisoner at the Bar, as the Person whom they believed
the cause of their Miseries. And now, as well as in the other Trials,
there was an extraordinary Endeavour by _Witchcrafts_, with Cruel and
frequent Fits, to hinder the poor Sufferers from giving in their
Complaints, which the Court was forced with much Patience to obtain, by
much waiting and watching for it.

II. There was now also an account given of what passed at her first
Examination before the Magistrates. The Cast of her _Eye_, then striking
the afflicted People to the Ground, whether they saw that Cast or no;
there were these among other Passages between the Magistrates and the
Examinate.

_Magistrate._ Pray, what ails these People?

_Martin._ I don't know.

_Magistrate._ But what do you think ails them?

_Martin._ I don't desire to spend my Judgment upon it.

_Magistrate._ Don't you think they are bewitch'd?

_Martin._ No, I do not think they are.

_Magistrate._ Tell us your Thoughts about them then.

_Martin._ No, my thoughts are my own, when they are in, but when they
are out they are anothers. Their Master.----

_Magistrate._ Their Master? who do you think is their Master?

_Martin._ If they be dealing in the Black Art, you may know as well as
I.

_Magistrate._ Well, what have you done towards this?

_Martin._ Nothing at all.

_Magistrate._ Why, 'tis you or your Appearance.

_Martin._ I cannot help it.

_Magistrate._ Is it not _your_ Master? How comes your Appearance to hurt
these?

_Martin._ How do I know? He that appeared in the Shape of _Samuel_, a
glorified Saint, may appear in any ones Shape.

It was then also noted in her, as in others like her, that if the
Afflicted went to approach her, they were flung down to the Ground. And,
when she was asked the reason of it, she said, _I cannot tell; it may
be, the Devil bears me more Malice than another._

III. The Court accounted themselves, alarum'd by these Things, to
enquire further into the Conversation of the Prisoner; and see what
there might occur, to render these Accusations further credible.
Whereupon, _John Allen_ of _Salisbury_, testify'd, That he refusing,
because of the weakness of his Oxen, to Cart some Staves at the request
of this _Martin_, she was displeased at it; and said, _It had been as
good that he had; for his Oxen should never do him much more Service._
Whereupon, this Deponent said, _Dost thou threaten me, thou old Witch?
I'l throw thee into the Brook:_ Which to avoid, she flew over the
Bridge, and escaped. But, as he was going home, one of his Oxen tired,
so that he was forced to Unyoke him, that he might get him home. He then
put his Oxen, with many more, upon _Salisbury_ Beach, where Cattle did
use to get _Flesh_. In a few days, all the Oxen upon the Beach were
found by their Tracks, to have run unto the Mouth of _Merrimack-River_,
and not returned; but the next day they were found come ashore upon
_Plum-Island_. They that sought them, used all imaginable gentleness,
but they would still run away with a violence, that seemed wholly
Diabolical, till they came near the mouth of _Merrimack-River_; when
they ran right into the Sea, swimming as far as they could be seen. One
of them then swam back again, with a swiftness, amazing to the
Beholders, who stood ready to receive him, and help up his tired
Carcass: But the Beast ran furiously up into the Island, and from
thence, thorough the Marshes, up into _Newbury_ Town, and so up into the
Woods; and there after a while found near _Amesbury_. So that, of
fourteen good Oxen, there was only this saved: The rest were all cast
up, some in one place, and some in another, Drowned.

IV. _John Atkinson_ testifi'd, That he exchanged a Cow with a Son of
_Susanna Martin's_, whereat she muttered, and was unwilling he should
have it. Going to receive this Cow, tho he Hamstring'd her, and Halter'd
her, she, of a Tame Creature, grew so mad, that they could scarce get
her along. She broke all the Ropes that were fastned unto her, and
though she were ty'd fast unto a Tree, yet she made her escape, and gave
them such further trouble, as they could ascribe to no cause but
Witchcraft.

V. _Bernard Peache_ testifi'd, That being in Bed, on the Lord's-day
Night, he heard a scrabbling at the Window, whereat he then saw _Susanna
Martin_ come in, and jump down upon the Floor. She took hold of this
Deponent's Feet, and drawing his Body up into an Heap, she lay upon him
near Two Hours; in all which time he could neither speak nor stir. At
length, when he could begin to move, he laid hold on her Hand, and
pulling it up to his Mouth, he bit three of her Fingers, as he judged,
unto the Bone. Whereupon she went from the Chamber, down the Stairs, out
at the Door. This Deponent thereupon called unto the People of the
House, to advise them of what passed; and he himself did follow her.
The People saw her not; but there being a Bucket at the Left-hand of the
Door, there was a drop of Blood found upon it; and several more drops of
Blood upon the Snow newly fallen abroad: There was likewise the print of
her 2 Feet just without the Threshold; but no more sign of any Footing
further off.

At another time this Deponent was desired by the Prisoner, to come unto
an Husking of Corn, at her House; and she said, _If he did not come, it
were better that he did!_ He went not; but the Night following, _Susanna
Martin_, as he judged, and another came towards him. One of them said,
_Here he is!_ but he having a Quarter-staff, made a Blow at them. The
Roof of the Barn, broke his Blow; but following them to the Window, he
made another Blow at them, and struck them down; yet they got up, and
got out, and he saw no more of them.

About this time, there was a Rumour about the Town, that _Martin_ had a
Broken Head; but the Deponent could say nothing to that.

The said _Peache_ also testifi'd the Bewitching the Cattle to Death,
upon Martin's Discontents.

VI. _Robert Downer_ testified, That this Prisoner being some Years ago
prosecuted at Court for a Witch, he then said unto her, _He believed she
was a Witch._ Whereat she being dissatisfied, said, _That some She-Devil
would shortly fetch him away!_ Which words were heard by others, as well
as himself. The Night following, as he lay in his Bed, there came in at
the Window, the likeness of a _Cat_, which flew upon him, took fast hold
of his Throat, lay on him a considerable while, and almost killed him.
At length he remembred what _Susanna Martin_ had threatned the Day
before; and with much striving he cried out, _Avoid, thou She-Devil! In
the Name of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Avoid!_
Whereupon it left him, leap'd on the Floor, and flew out at the Window.

And there also came in several Testimonies, that before ever _Downer_
spoke a word of this Accident, _Susanna Martin_ and her Family had
related, _How this +Downer+ had been handled_!

VII. _John Kembal_ testified, that _Susanna Martin_, upon a Causeless
Disgust, had threatned him, about a certain Cow of his, _That she should
never do him any more Good:_ and it came to pass accordingly. For soon
after the Cow was found stark dead on the dry Ground, without any
Distemper to be discerned upon her. Upon which he was followed with a
strange Death upon more of his Cattle, whereof he lost in one Spring to
the Value of Thirty Pounds. But the said _John Kembal_ had a further
Testimony to give in against the Prisoner which was truly admirable.

Being desirous to furnish himself with a Dog, he applied himself to buy
one of this _Martin_, who had a Bitch with Whelps in her House. But she
not letting him have his choice, he said, he would supply himself then
at one _Blezdels_. Having mark'd a Puppy, which he lik'd at _Blezdels_,
he met _George Martin_, the Husband of the Prisoner, going by, who asked
him, _Whether he would not have one of his Wife's Puppies?_ and he
answered, _No._ The same Day, one _Edmond Eliot_, being at _Martin's_
House, heard _George Martin_ relate, where this _Kembal_ had been, and
what he had said. Whereupon _Susanna Martin_ replied, _If I live,
I'll give him Puppies enough!_ Within a few days after, this _Kembal_,
coming out of the Woods, there arose a little Black Cloud in the N. W.
and _Kembal_ immediately felt a force upon him, which made him not able
to avoid running upon the stumps of Trees, that were before him, albeit
he had a broad, plain Cart-way, before him; but tho' he had his Ax also
on his Shoulder to endanger him in his Falls, he could not forbear going
out of his way to tumble over them. When he came below the Meeting
House, there appeared unto him, a little thing like a _Puppy_, of a
Darkish Colour; and it shot backwards and forwards between his Legs. He
had the Courage to use all possible Endeavours of Cutting it with his
Ax; but he could not Hit it: the Puppy gave a jump from him, and went,
as to him it seem'd into the Ground. Going a little further, there
appeared unto him a Black Puppy, somewhat bigger than the first, but as
Black as a Cole. Its Motions were quicker than those of his Ax; it flew
at his Belly, and away; then at his Throat; so, over his Shoulder one
way, and then over his Shoulder another way. His Heart now began to fail
him, and he thought the Dog would have tore his Throat out. But he
recovered himself, and called upon God in his Distress; and naming the
Name of JESUS CHRIST, it vanished away at once. The Deponent spoke not
one Word of these Accidents, for fear of affrighting his Wife. But the
next Morning, _Edmond Eliot_, going into _Martin's_ House, this Woman
asked him where Kembal was? He replied, _At home, a Bed, for ought he
knew._ She returned, _They say, he was frighted last Night._ Eliot
asked, _With what?_ She answered, _With Puppies._ _Eliot_ asked, _Where
she heard of it, for he had heard nothing of it?_ She rejoined, _About
the Town._ Altho' _Kembal_ had mentioned the Matter to no Creature
living.

VIII. _William Brown_ testifi'd, That Heaven having blessed him with a
most Pious and Prudent Wife, this Wife of his, one day met with _Susanna
Martin_; but when she approach'd just unto her, _Martin_ vanished out of
sight, and left her extreamly affrighted. After which time, the said
_Martin_ often appear'd unto her, giving her no little trouble; and when
she did come, she was visited with Birds, that sorely peck'd and prick'd
her; and sometimes, a Bunch, like a Pullet's Egg, would rise in her
Throat, ready to choak her, till she cry'd out, _Witch, you shan't choak
me!_ While this good Woman was in this extremity, the Church appointed a
Day of Prayer, on her behalf; whereupon her Trouble ceas'd; she saw not
_Martin_ as formerly; and the Church, instead of their Fast, gave Thanks
for her Deliverance. But a considerable while after, she being Summoned
to give in some Evidence at the Court, against this _Martin_, quickly
thereupon, this _Martin_ came behind her, while she was milking her Cow,
and said unto her, _For thy defaming her at Court, I'll make thee the
miserablest Creature in the World._ Soon after which, she fell into a
strange kind of distemper, and became horribly frantick, and uncapable
of any reasonable Action; the Physicians declaring, that her Distemper
was preternatural, and that some Devil had certainly bewitched her; and
in that condition she now remained.

IX. _Sarah Atkinson_ testify'd, That _Susanna Martin_ came from
_Amesbury_ to their House at _Newbury_, in an extraordinary Season,
when it was not fit for any to Travel. She came (as she said, unto
_Atkinson_) all that long way on Foot. She brag'd and shew'd how dry she
was; nor could it be perceived that so much as the Soles of her Shoes
were wet. _Atkinson_ was amazed at it; and professed, that she should
her self have been wet up to the knees, if she had then came so far; but
_Martin_ reply'd, _She scorn'd to be Drabbled!_ It was noted, that this
Testimony upon her Trial, cast her in a very singular Confusion.

X. _John Pressy_ testify'd, That being one Evening very unaccountably
Bewildred, near a Field of _Martins_, and several times, as one under an
Enchantment, returning to the place he had left, at length he saw a
marvellous Light, about the bigness of an Half-bushel, near two Rod, out
of the way. He went, and struck at it with a Stick, and laid it on with
all his might. He gave it near forty blows; and felt it a palpable
substance. But going from it, his Heels were struck up, and he was laid
with his Back on the Ground, sliding, as he thought, into a Pit; from
whence he recover'd by taking hold on the Bush; altho' afterwards he
could find no such Pit in the place. Having, after his Recovery, gone
five or six Rod, he saw _Susanna Martin_ standing on his Left-hand, as
the Light had done before; but they changed no words with one another.
He could scarce find his House in his Return; but at length he got home
extreamly affrighted. The next day, it was upon Enquiry understood, that
_Martin_ was in a miserable condition by pains and hurts that were upon
her.

It was further testify'd by this Deponent, That after he had given in
some Evidence against _Susanna Martin_, many years ago, she gave him
foul words about it; and said, _He should never prosper more;_
particularly, _That he should never have more than two Cows; that tho'
he was never so likely to have more, yet he should never have them._ And
that from that very day to this, namely for twenty years together, he
could never exceed that number; but some strange thing or other still
prevented his having any more.

XI. _Jervis Ring_ testify'd, That about seven years ago, he was
oftentimes and grievously oppressed in the Night, but saw not who
troubled him; until at last he Lying perfectly Awake, plainly saw
_Susanna Martin_ approach him. She came to him, and forceably bit him by
the Finger; so that the Print of the bite is now, so long after, to be
seen upon him.

XII. But besides all of these Evidences, there was a most wonderful
Account of one _Joseph Ring_, produced on this occasion.

This Man has been strangely carried about by _Dæmons_, from one
_Witch-meeting_ to another, for near two years together; and for one
quarter of this time, they have made him, and keep him Dumb, tho' he is
now again able to speak. There was one _T. H._ who having, as 'tis
judged, a design of engaging this _Joseph Ring_ in a snare of Devillism,
contrived a while, to bring this _Ring_ two Shillings in Debt unto him.

Afterwards, this poor Man would be visited with unknown shapes, and this
_T. H._ sometimes among them; which would force him away with them, unto
unknown Places, where he saw Meetings, Feastings, Dancings; and after
his return, wherein they hurried him along through the Air, he gave
Demonstrations to the Neighbours, that he had indeed been so
transported. When he was brought unto these hellish Meetings, one of the
first Things they still did unto him, was to give him a knock on the
Back, whereupon he was ever as if bound with Chains, uncapable of
stirring out of the place, till they should release him. He related,
that there often came to him a Man, who presented him a _Book_, whereto
he would have him set his Hand; promising to him, that he should then
have even what he would; and presenting him with all the delectable
Things, Persons, and Places, that he could imagin. But he refusing to
subscribe, the business would end with dreadful Shapes, Noises and
Screeches, which almost scared him out of his Wits. Once with the Book,
there was a Pen offered him, and an Ink-horn with Liquor in it, that
seemed like Blood: But he never toucht it.

This Man did now affirm, That he saw the Prisoner at several of those
hellish Randezvouzes.

Note, this Woman was one of the most impudent, scurrilous, wicked
Creatures in the World; and she did now throughout her whole Tryal,
discover her self to be such an one. Yet when she was asked, what she
had to say for her self? Her chief Plea was, _That she had lead a most
virtuous and holy Life._




IV.

THE TRYAL OF ELIZABETH HOW, AT THE

COURT OF OYER AND TERMINER, HELD BY ADJOURNMENT

AT SALEM, JUNE 30. 1692.


I.

_Elizabeth How_ pleading _Not Guilty_ to the Indictment of Witchcrafts,
then charged upon her; the Court, according to the usual Proceedings of
the Courts in _England_, in such Cases, began with hearing the
Depositions of several afflicted People, who were grievously tortured by
sensible and evident _Witchcrafts_, and all complained of the Prisoner,
as the cause of their Trouble. It was also found that the Sufferers were
not able to bear her _Look_, as likewise, that in their greatest Swoons,
they distinguished her _Touch_ from other Peoples, being thereby raised
out of them.

And there was other Testimony of People to whom the shape of this _How_,
gave trouble nine or ten years ago.

II. It has been a most usual thing for the bewitched Persons, at the
same time that the _Spectres_, representing the _Witches_, troubled
them, to be visited with Apparitions of _Ghosts_, pretending to have
been Murdered by the _Witches_ then represented. And sometimes the
Confessions of the Witches afterwards acknowledged those very Murders,
which these _Apparitions_ charged upon them; altho' they had never heard
what Informations had been given by the Sufferers.

There were such Apparitions of Ghosts testified by some of the present
Sufferers; and the Ghosts affirmed, that this _How_ had Murdered them:
Which things were _fear'd_ but not _prov'd_.

III. This _How_ had made some Attempts of joyning to the Church at
_Ipswich_, several years ago; but she was denyed an admission into that
Holy Society, partly through a suspicion of Witchcraft, then urged
against her. And there now came in Testimony, of preternatural
Mischiefs, presently befalling some that had been Instrumental to debar
her from the Communion whereupon she was intruding.

IV. There was a particular Deposition of _Joseph Stafford_, That his
Wife had conceived an extream Aversion to this _How_, on the Reports of
her Witchcrafts: But _How_ one day, taking her by the Hand, and saying,
_I believe you are not ignorant of the great Scandal that I lye under,
by an evil Report raised upon me._ She immediately, unreasonably and
unperswadeably, even like one Enchanted, began to take this Woman's
part. _How_ being soon after propounded, as desiring an Admission to the
Table of the Lord, some of the pious Brethren were unsatisfy'd about
her. The Elders appointed a Meeting to hear Matters objected against
her; and no Arguments in the World could hinder this Goodwife _Stafford_
from going to the Lecture. She did indeed promise, with much ado, that
she would not go to the Church-meeting, yet she could not refrain going
thither also. _How's_ Affairs there were so canvased, that she came off
rather _Guilty_ than _Cleared_; nevertheless Goodwife _Stafford_ could
not forbear taking her by the Hand, and saying, _Tho' you are Condemned
before Men, you are Justify'd before God._ She was quickly taken in a
very strange manner, Ranting, Raving, Raging and crying out, _Goody
+How+ must come into the Church; she is a precious Saint; and tho' she
be condemned before Men, she is Justify'd before God._ So she continued
for the space of two or three Hours; and then fell into a Trance. But
coming to her self, she cry'd out, _Ha! I was mistaken;_ and afterwards
again repeated, _Ha! I was mistaken!_ Being asked by a stander by,
_Wherein?_ she replyed, _I thought Goody +How+ had been a precious Saint
of God, but now I see she is a Witch: She has bewitched me, and my
Child, and we shall never be well, till there be a Testimony for her,
that she may be taken into the Church._ And _How_ said afterwards, that
she was very sorry to see _Stafford_ at the Church-meeting mentioned.
_Stafford_, after this, declared herself to be afflicted by the Shape of
_How_; and from that Shape she endured many Miseries.

V. _John How_, Brother to the Husband of the Prisoner testified, that he
refusing to accompany the Prisoner unto her Examination, as was by her
desired, immediately some of his Cattle were Bewitched to Death, leaping
three or four foot high, turning about, speaking, falling, and dying at
once; and going to cut off an Ear, for an use, that might as well
perhaps have been omitted, the Hand wherein he held his Knife was taken
very numb, and so it remained, and full of Pain, for several Days, being
not well at this very Time. And he suspected the Prisoner for the Author
of it.

VI. _Nehemiah Abbot_ testify'd, that unusual and mischievous Accidents
would befal his Cattle, whenever he had any Difference with this
Prisoner. Once, particularly, she wished his Ox choaked; and within a
little while that Ox was choaked with a Turnep in his Throat. At another
Time, refusing to lend his Horse, at the Request of her Daughter, the
Horse was in a preternatural manner abused. And several other odd things
of that kind were testified.

VII. There came in Testimony, that one Good-wife _Sherwin_, upon some
Difference with _How_, was Bewitched; and that she dyed, charging this
_How_ with having an Hand in her Death. And that other People had their
Barrels of Drink unaccountably mischieved, spoil'd and spilt, upon their
displeasing of her.

The things in themselves were trivial, but there being such a Course of
them, it made them the more considered. Among others, _Martha Wood_,
gave her Testimony, That a little after her Father had been employed in
gathering an account of _How's_ Conversation, they once and again lost
great Quantities of Drink out of their Vessels, in such a manner, as
they could ascribe to nothing but Witchcraft. As also, That _How_ giving
her some Apples, when she had eaten of them, she was taken with a very
strange kind of Amaze, insomuch that she knew not what she said or did.

VIII. There was likewise a Cluster of Depositions, That one _Isaac
Cummings_ refusing to lend his Mare unto the Husband of this _How_, the
Mare was within a Day or two taken in a strange condition: The Beast
seemed much abused, being bruised as if she had been running over the
Rocks, and marked where the Bridle went, as if burnt with a red hot
Bridle. Moreover, one using a Pipe of Tobacco for the Cure of the
Beast, a blue Flame issued out of her, took hold of her Hair, and not
only spread and burnt on her, but it also flew upwards towards the Roof
of the Barn, and had like to have set the Barn on Fire: And the Mare
dyed very suddenly.

IX. _Timothy Pearley_ and his Wife, testifyd, Not only unaccountable
Mischiefs befel their Cattle, upon their having of Differences with this
Prisoner: but also that they had a Daughter destroyed by Witchcrafts;
which Daughter still charged _How_ as the Cause of her Affliction. And
it was noted, that she would be struck down whenever _How_ were spoken
of. She was often endeavoured to be thrown into the Fire, and into the
Water, in her strange Fits: Tho' her Father had corrected her for
charging _How_ with bewitching her, yet (as was testified by others
also) she said, She was sure of it, and must dye standing to it.
Accordingly she charged _How_ to the very Death; and said, _Tho' How
could afflict and torment her Body, yet she could not hurt her Soul:_
And, _That the Truth of this matter would appear, when she should be
dead and gone._

X. _Francis Lane_ testified, That being hired by the Husband of this
_How_ to get him a parcel of Posts and Rails, this _Lane_ hired _John
Pearly_ to assist him. This Prisoner then told _Lane_, That she believed
the Posts and Rails would not do, because _John Pearly_ helped him; but
that if he had got them alone, without _John Pearly's_ help, they might
have done well enough. When _James How_ came to receive his Posts and
Rails of _Lane_, _How_ taking them up by the Ends, they, tho' good and
sound, yet unaccountably broke off, so that _Lane_ was forced to get
thirty or forty more. And this Prisoner being informed of it, she said,
She told him so before, because _Pearly_ helped about them.

XI. Afterwards there came in the Confessions of several other (penitent)
Witches, which affirmed this _How_ to be one of those, who with them had
been baptized by the Devil in the River, at _Newbury_-Falls: before
which he made them there kneel down by the Brink of the River and
worshiped him.




V.

THE TRIAL OF MARTHA CARRIER, AT THE

COURT OF OYER AND TERMINER, HELD BY ADJOURNMENT

AT SALEM, AUGUST 2. 1692.


I.

_Martha Carrier_ was Indicted for the bewitching certain Persons,
according to the Form usual in such Cases, pleading _Not Guilty_, to her
Indictment; there were first brought in a considerable number of the
bewitched Persons; who not only made the Court sensible of an horrid
Witchcraft committed upon them, but also deposed, That it was _Martha
Carrier_, or her Shape, that grievously tormented them, by Biting,
Pricking, Pinching and Choaking of them. It was further deposed, That
while this _Carrier_ was on her Examination, before the Magistrates, the
Poor People were so tortured that every one expected their Death upon
the very spot, but that upon the binding of _Carrier_ they were eased.
Moreover the Look of _Carrier_ then laid the Afflicted People for dead;
and her Touch, if her Eye at the same time were off them, raised them
again: Which Things were also now seen upon her Tryal. And it was
testified, That upon the mention of some having their Necks twisted
almost round, by the Shape of this _Carrier_, she replyed, _Its no
matter though their Necks had been twisted quite off._

II. Before the Trial of this Prisoner, several of her own Children had
frankly and fully confessed, not only that they were Witches themselves,
but that this their Mother had made them so. This Confession they made
with great Shews of Repentance, and with much Demonstration of Truth.
They related Place, Time, Occasion; they gave an account of Journeys,
Meetings and Mischiefs by them performed, and were very credible in what
they said. Nevertheless, this Evidence was not produced against the
Prisoner at the Bar, inasmuch as there was other Evidence enough to
proceed upon.

III. _Benjamin Abbot_ gave his Testimony, That last March was a
twelvemonth, this _Carrier_ was very angry with him, upon laying out
some Land, near her Husband's: Her Expressions in this Anger, were,
_That she would stick as close to +Abbot+ as the Bark stuck to the Tree;
and that he should repent of it afore seven Years came to an End, so as
Doctor +Prescot+ should never cure him._ These Words were heard by
others besides _Abbot_ himself; who also heard her say, _She would hold
his Nose as close to the Grindstone as ever it was held since his Name
was +Abbot+._ Presently after this, he was taken with a Swelling in his
Foot, and then with a Pain in his Side, and exceedingly tormented. It
bred into a Sore, which was launced by Doctor _Prescot_, and several
Gallons of Corruption ran out of it. For six Weeks it continued very
bad, and then another Sore bred in the Groin, which was also lanced by
Doctor _Prescot_. Another Sore then bred in his Groin, which was
likewise cut, and put him to very great Misery: He was brought unto
Death's Door, and so remained until _Carrier_ was taken, and carried
away by the Constable, from which very Day he began to mend, and so grew
better every Day, and is well ever since.

_Sarah Abbot_ also, his Wife, testified, That her Husband was not only
all this while Afflicted in his Body, but also that strange
extraordinary and unaccountable Calamities befel his Cattel; their Death
being such as they could guess at no Natural Reason for.

IV. _Allin Toothaker_ testify'd, That _Richard_, the son of _Martha
Carrier_, having some difference with him, pull'd him down by the Hair
of the Head. When he Rose again, he was going to strike at _Richard
Carrier_; but fell down flat on his Back to the ground, and had not
power to stir hand or foot, until he told _Carrier_ he yielded; and then
he saw the shape of _Martha Carrier_, go off his breast.

This _Toothaker_, had Received a wound in the _Wars_; and he now
testify'd, that _Martha Carrier_ told him, _He should never be Cured._
Just afore the Apprehending of _Carrier_, he could thrust a knitting
Needle into his wound, four inches deep; but presently after her being
siezed, he was throughly healed.

He further testify'd, that when _Carrier_ and he sometimes were at
variance, she would clap her hands at him, and say, _He should get
nothing by it;_ whereupon he several times lost his Cattle, by strange
Deaths, whereof no natural causes could be given.

V. _John Rogger_ also testifyed, That upon the threatning words of this
malicious _Carrier_, his Cattle would be strangely bewitched; as was
more particularly then described.

VI. _Samuel Preston_ testify'd, that about two years ago, having some
difference with _Martha Carrier_, he lost a _Cow_ in a strange
Preternatural unusual manner; and about a month after this, the said
_Carrier_, having again some difference with him, she told him; _He had
lately lost a Cow, and it should not be long before he lost another;_
which accordingly came to pass; for he had a thriving and well-kept
_Cow_, which without any known cause quickly fell down and dy'd.

VII. _Phebe Chandler_ testify'd, that about a Fortnight before the
apprehension of _Martha Carrier_, on a Lords-day, while the Psalm was
singing in the _Church_, this _Carrier_ then took her by the shoulder
and shaking her, asked her, _where she lived_: she made her no Answer,
although as _Carrier_, who lived next door to her Fathers House, could
not in reason but know who she was. Quickly after this, as she was at
several times crossing the Fields, she heard a voice, that she took to
be _Martha Carriers_, and it seem'd as if it was over her head. The
voice told her, _she should within two or three days be poisoned._
Accordingly, within such a little time, one half of her right hand,
became greatly swollen, and very painful; as also part of her Face;
whereof she can give no account how it came. It continued very bad for
some dayes; and several times since, she has had a great pain in her
breast; and been so siezed on her leggs, that she has hardly been able
to go. She added, that lately, going well to the House of God,
_Richard_, the son of _Martha Carrier_, look'd very earnestly upon her,
and immediately her hand, which had formerly been poisoned, as is
abovesaid, began to pain her greatly, and she had a strange Burning at
her stomach; but was then struck deaf, so that she could not hear any of
the prayer, or singing, till the two or three last words of the Psalm.

VIII. One _Foster_, who confessed her own share in the Witchcraft for
which the Prisoner stood indicted, affirm'd, that she had seen the
prisoner at some of their _Witch-meetings_, and that it was this
_Carrier_, who perswaded her to be a Witch. She confessed, that the
Devil carry'd them on a pole, to a Witch-meeting; but the pole broke,
and she hanging about _Carriers_ neck, they both fell down, and she then
received an hurt by the Fall, whereof she was not at this very time
recovered.

IX. One _Lacy_, who likewise confessed her share in this Witchcraft, now
testify'd, that she and the prisoner were once Bodily present at a
_Witch-meeting_ in _Salem Village_; and that she knew the prisoner to be
a Witch, and to have been at a Diabolical sacrament, and that the
prisoner was the undoing of her, and her Children, by enticing them into
the snare of the Devil.

X. Another _Lacy_, who also confessed her share in this Witchcraft, now
testify'd, that the prisoner was at the _Witch-meeting_, in _Salem
Village_, where they had Bread and Wine Administred unto them.

XI. In the time of this prisoners Trial, one _Susanna Sheldon_, in open
Court had her hands Unaccountably ty'd together with a Wheel-band, so
fast that without cutting, it could not be loosed: It was done by a
_Spectre_; and the Sufferer affirm'd, it was the _Prisoners_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Memorandum._ This Rampant Hag, _Martha Carrier_, was the person, of
whom the Confessions of the Witches, and of her own Children among the
rest, agreed, That the Devil had promised her, she should be _Queen of
Heb_.




Having thus far done the Service imposed upon me; I will further pursue
it, by relating a few of those Matchless CURIOSITIES, with which the
_Witchcraft_ now upon us, has entertained us. And I shall Report nothing
but with Good Authority, and what I would invite all my Readers to
examine, while 'tis yet Fresh and New, that if there be found any
mistake, it may be as willingly _Retracted_, as it was unwillingly
_Committed_.


THE FIRST CURIOSITIE.

I. 'Tis very Remarkable to see what an Impious and Impudent _imitation_
of Divine Things, is Apishly affected by the Devil, in several of those
matters, whereof the Confessions of our _Witches_, and the Afflictions
of our _Sufferers_ have informed us.

That Reverend and Excellent Person, Mr. _John Higginson_, in my
Conversation with him, Once invited me to this Reflection; that the
Indians which came from far to settle about _Mexico_, were in their
Progress to that Settlement, under a Conduct of the _Devil_, very
strangely Emulating what the Blessed God gave to _Israel_ in the
Wilderness.

_Acosta_, is our Author for it, that the Devil in their Idol
_Vitzlipultzli_, governed that mighty Nation. 'He commanded them to
leave their Country, promising to make them _Lords_ over all the
Provinces possessed by _Six_ other Nations of Indians, and give them a
Land abounding with all precious things. They went forth, carrying their
Idol with them, in a Coffer of _Reeds_, supported by Four of their
Principal _Priests_; with whom he still _Discoursed_ in secret,
Revealing to them the Successes, and Accidents of their way. He advised
them, when to _March_, and where to _Stay_, and without his Commandment
they moved not. The first thing they did, where-ever they came, was to
Erect a _Tabernacle_, for their false god; which they set always in the
midst of their Camp, and they placed the _Ark_ upon an _Alter_. When
they, Tired with pains, talked of, _proceeding no further_ in their
Journey, than a certain pleasant Stage, whereto they were arrived, this
Devil in one Night, horribly kill'd them that had started this Talk, by
pulling out their Hearts. And so they passed on till they came to
_Mexico_.'

The Devil which _then_ thus imitated what was in the Church of the _Old
Testament_, now among _Us_ would Imitate the Affairs of the Church in
the _New_. The _Witches_ do say, that they form themselves much after
the manner of _Congregational Churches_; and that they have a _Baptism_
and a _Supper_, and _Officers_ among them, abominably Resembling those
of our Lord.

But there are many more of these Bloody _Imitations_, if the Confessions
of the _Witches_ are to be Received; which I confess, ought to be but
with very much Caution.

What is their stricking down with a fierce _Look_? What is their making
of the Afflicted _Rise_, with a touch of their _Hand_? What is their
Transportation thro' the _Air_? What is their Travelling _in Spirit_,
while their Body is cast into a Trance? What is their causing of
_Cattle_ to run mad and perish? What is their Entring their Names in a
_Book_? What is their coming together from all parts, at the Sound of a
_Trumpet_? What is their Appearing sometimes Cloathed with _Light_ or
_Fire_ upon them? What is their Covering of themselves and their
Instruments with _Invisibility_? But a Blasphemous Imitation of certain
Things recorded about our Saviour or His Prophets, or the Saints in the
Kingdom of God.


A SECOND CURIOSITIE.

II. In all the _Witchcraft_ which now Grievously Vexes us, I know not
whether anything be more Unaccountable, than the Trick which the Witches
have to render themselves, and their Tools _Invisible_. _Witchcraft_
seems to be the Skill of Applying the _Plastic Spirit_ of the World,
unto some unlawful purposes, by means of a Confederacy with _Evil
Spirits_. Yet one would wonder how the _Evil Spirits_ themselves can do
some things; especially at _Invisibilizing_ of the Grossest Bodies. I
can tell the Name of an Ancient Author, who pretends to show the _way_,
how a man may come to walk about _Invisible_, and I can tell the Name
of another Ancient Author, who pretends to Explode that way. But I will
not speak too plainly Lest I should unawares Poison some of my
_Readers_, as the pious _Hemingius_ did one of his _Pupils_, when he
only by way of Diversion recited a _Spell_, which, they had said, would
cure _Agues_. This much I will say; The notion of procuring
_Invisibility_, by any _Natural Expedient_, yet known, is, I Believe, a
meer PLINYISM; How far it may be obtained by a _Magical Sacrament_, is
best known to the Dangerous Knaves that have try'd it. But our _Witches_
do seem to have got the knack: and this is one of the Things, that make
me think, _Witchcraft_ will not be fully understood, until the day when
there shall not be one Witch in the World.

There are certain people very _Dogmatical_ about these matters; but I'll
give them only these three Bones to pick.

First, One of our bewitched people, was cruelly assaulted by a
_Spectre_, that, she said, ran at her with a _spindle_: tho' no body
else in the Room, could see either the _Spectre_ or the _spindle_. At
last, in her miseries, giving a snatch at the _Spectre_, she pull'd the
_spindle_ away, and it was no sooner got into her hand, but the other
people then present, beheld, that it was indeed a Real, Proper, Iron
_spindle_, belonging they knew to whom; which when they lock'd up very
safe, it was nevertheless by _Demons_ unaccountably stole away, to do
further mischief.

Secondly, Another of our bewitched people, was haunted with a most
abusive _Spectre_, which came to her, she said, with a _sheet_ about
her. After she had undergone a deal of Teaze, from the Annoyance of the
_Spectre_, she gave a violent snatch at the sheet, that was upon it;
wherefrom she tore a corner, which in her hand immediately became
_Visible_ to a Roomful of Spectators; a palpable Corner of a Sheet. Her
Father, who was now holding her, catch'd that he might keep what his
Daughter had so strangely siezed, but the unseen _Spectre_ had like to
have pull'd his hand off, by endeavouring to wrest it from him; however
he still held it, and I suppose has it, still to show; it being but a
few hours ago, namely about the beginning of this _October_, that this
Accident happened; in the family of one _Pitman_, at _Manchester_.

Thirdly, A young man, delaying to procure Testimonials for his Parents,
who being under confinement on suspicion of _Witchcraft_, required him
to do that service for them, was quickly pursued with odd
Inconveniences. But once above the Rest, an Officer going to put his
_Brand_ on the Horns of some _Cows_, belonging to these people, which
tho' he had siez'd for some of their debts, yet he was willing to leave
in their possession, for the subsistance of the poor Family; this young
man help'd in holding the Cows to be thus branded. The three first
_Cows_ he held well enough; but when the hot Brand was clap'd upon the
Fourth, he _winc'd_ and _shrunk_ at such a Rate, as that he could hold
the Cow no longer. Being afterwards Examined about it, he confessed,
that at that very instant when the _Brand_ entered the _Cow's Horn_,
exactly the like burning _Brand_ was clap'd upon his own Thigh; where he
has exposed the lasting marks of it, unto such as asked to see them.

Unriddle these Things,--_Et Eris mihi magnus Apollo._


A THIRD CURIOSITIE.

III. If a Drop of _Innocent Blood_ should be shed, in the Prosecution of
the _Witchcrafts_ among us, how unhappy are we! For which cause, I
cannot express my self in better terms, than those of a most Worthy
Person, who lives near the present Center of these things. _The Mind of
+God+ in these matters, is to be carefully lookt into, with due
Circumspection, that Satan deceive us not with his Devices, who
transforms himself into an Angel of Light, and may pretend justice and
yet intend mischief._ But on the other side, if the storm of Justice do
now fall only on the Heads of those guilty _Witches_ and _Wretches_
which have defiled our Land, _How Happy!_

The Execution of some that have lately Dyed, has been immediately
attended, with a strange Deliverance of some, that had lain for many
years, in a most sad Condition, under, they knew not whose _evil hands_.
As I am abundantly satisfy'd, That many of the Self-Murders committed
here, have been the effects of a Cruel and Bloody _Witchcraft_, letting
fly _Demons_ upon the miserable _Seneca's_; thus, it has been admirable
unto me to see, how a Devilish _Witchcraft_, sending Devils upon them,
has driven many poor people to _Despair_, and persecuted their minds,
with such Buzzes of _Atheism_ and _Blasphemy_, as has made them even run
_distracted with Terrors_: And some long _Bow'd down_ under such a
_spirit of Infirmity_, have been marvelously Recovered upon the death of
the Witches.

One _Whetford_ particularly ten years ago, challenging of _Bridget
Bishop_ (whose Trial you have had) with steeling of a Spoon, _Bishop_
threatned her very direfully: presently after this, was _Whetford_ in
the Night, and in her Bed, visited by _Bishop_, with one _Parker_, who
making the Room light at their coming in, there discoursed of several
mischiefs they would inflict upon her. At last they pull'd her out, and
carried her unto the Sea-side, there to _drown_, her; but she calling
upon God, they left her, tho' not without Expressions of their Fury.
From that very time, this poor _Whetford_ was utterly spoilt, and grew a
Tempted, Froward, Crazed sort of a Woman; a vexation to her self, and
all about her; and many ways unreasonable. In this Distraction she lay,
till those women were Apprehended, by the Authority; _then_ she began to
mend; and upon their Execution, was presently and perfectly Recovered,
from the ten years madness that had been upon her.


A FOURTH CURIOSITIE.

IV. 'Tis a thousand pitties, that we should permit our Eyes, to be so
_Blood-shot_ with passions, as to loose the sight of many wonderful
things, wherein the Wisdom and Justice of God, would be Glorify'd. Some
of those things, are the frequent \Apparitions\ of Ghosts, whereby many
Old \Murders\ among us, come to be considered. And, among many instances
of this kind, I will single out one, which concerned a poor man, lately
_Prest_ unto Death, because of his Refusing to _Plead_ for his Life. I
shall make an Extract of a Letter, which was written to my Honourable
Friend, _Samuel Sewal_, Esq.; by Mr. _Putman_, to this purpose;

'The Last Night my Daughter _Ann_, was grievously Tormented by Witches,
Threatning that she should be _Pressed_ to Death, before _Giles Cory_.
But thro' the Goodness of a Gracious God, she had at last a little
Respite. Whereupon there appeared unto her (she said) a man in a Winding
Sheet, who told her that _Giles Cory_ had Murdered him, by _Pressing_
him to Death with his Feet; but that the Devil there appeared unto him,
and Covenanted with him, and promised him, _He should not be Hanged._
The Apparition said, God Hardned his heart; that he should not hearken
to the Advice of the Court, and so Dy an easy Death; because as it said,
_It must be done to him as he has done to me._ The Apparition also said,
That _Giles Cory_, was carry'd to the Court for this, and that the Jury
had found the Murder, and that her Father knew the man, and the thing
was done before she was born. Now Sir, This is not a little strange to
us; that no body should Remember these things, all the while that _Giles
Cory_ was in Prison, and so often before the Court. For all people now
Remember very well, (and the Records of the Court also mention it,) That
about Seventeen Years ago, _Giles Cory_ kept a man in his House, that
was almost a Natural Fool: which Man Dy'd suddenly. A Jury was
impannel'd upon him, among whom was Dr. _Zorobbabel Endicot_; who found
the man bruised to Death, and having clodders of Blood about his Heart.
The Jury, whereof several are yet alive brought in the man Murdered; but
as if some Enchantment had hindred the Prosecution of the Matter, the
Court Proceeded not against _Giles Cory_, tho' it cost him a great deal
of Mony to get off.' Thus the Story.




_The Reverend and Worthy Author, having at the Direction of His
EXCELLENCY the Governour, so far Obliged the Publick, as to give some
Account of the Sufferings brought upon the Countrey by +Witchcraft+; and
of the Tryals which have passed upon several Executed for the Same:_

_Upon Perusal thereof, We find the Matters of Fact and Evidence, Truly
reported. And a Prospect given, of the +Methods of Conviction+, used in
the Proceedings of the Court at +Salem+_

  Boston Octob. 11.                   William Stoughton
        1692.                         Samuel Sewall.




But is _New-England_, the only Christian Countrey, that hath undergone
such Diabolical Molestations? No, there are other Good people, that have
in this way been harassed; but none in circumstances more like to
_Ours_, than the people of God, in _Sweedland_. The story is a very
Famous one; and it comes to Speak English by the Acute Pen of the
Excellent and Renowned Dr. _Horneck_. I shall only single out a few of
the more Memorable passages therein Occurring; and where it agrees with
what happened among ourselves, my Reader shall understand, by my
inserting a Word of every such thing in \Black Letter\.

I. It was in the Year 1669. and 1670. That at _Mohra_ in _Sweedland_,
the \Devils\ by the help of \Witches\, committed a most horrible outrage.
Among other Instances of Hellish Tyranny there exercised. One was, that
Hundreds of their Children, were usually in the Night fetcht from their
Lodgings, to a Diabolical Rendezvouz, at a place they called,
_Blockula_, where the Monsters that so Spirited them, \Tempted\ them all
manner of Ways to \Associate\ with them. Yea, such was the perillous
Growth of this _Witchcraft_, that Persons of Quality began to send their
Children into other Countries to avoid it.

II. The Inhabitants had earnestly sought God by \Prayer\; and \Yet\
their Affliction \Continued\. Whereupon \Judges\ had a Special
\Commission\ to find and root out the Hellish Crew; and the rather,
because another County in the Kingdom, which had been so molested, was
delivered upon the Execution of the _Witches_.

III. The \Examination\, was begun with a Day of \Humiliation\; appointed
by Authority. Whereupon the Commissioners \Consulting\, how they might
resist such a Dangerous Flood, the \Suffering Children\, were first
Examined; and tho' they were Questioned \One\ by \One\ apart, yet their
\Declarations All Agreed\. The \Witches\ Accus'd in these Declarations,
were then Examined; and tho' at first they obstinately \Denied\, yet at
length many of them ingeniously \Confessed\ the Truth of what the
children had said; owning with Tears, that the \Devil\, whom they call'd
_Locyta_, had \Stopt\ their \Mouths\; but he being now \Gone\ from them,
they could \No Longer Conceal\ the Business. The things by them
\Acknowledged\, most wonderfully \Agreed\ with what other Witches, in
other places had confessed.

IV. They confessed, that they did use to \Call upon\ the \Devil\, who
thereupon would \Carry\ them away, over the Tops of Houses, to a Green
Meadow, where they gave themselves unto him. Only one of them said,
That sometimes the _Devil_ only took away her \Strength\, leaving her
\Body\ on the ground; but she went at other times in \Body\ too.

V. Their manner was to come into the \Chambers\ of people, and fetch away
their children upon Beasts, of the Devils providing: promising \Fine
Cloaths\ and other Fine Things unto them, to inveagle them. They said,
they never had power to do thus, till of late; but now the Devil did
\Plague\ and \Beat\ them, if they did not gratifie him, in this piece of
Mischief. They said, they made use of all sorts of \Instruments\ in their
Journeys! Of \Men\, of \Beasts\, of \Posts\; the _Men_ they commonly laid
asleep at the place, whereto they rode them; and if the children
mentioned the \Names\ of them that stole them away, they were miserably
\Scurged\ for it, until some of them were killed. The \Judges\ found the
marks of the Lashes on some of them; but the Witches said, \They would
Quickly vanish\. Moreover the Children would be in \strange Fits\, after
they were brought Home from these Transportations.

VI. The \First Thing\, they said, they were to do at _Blockula_, was to
give themselves unto the Devil, and \Vow\ that they would serve him.
Hereupon, they \cut their Fingers\, and with \Blood\ writ their \Names\
in his \Book\. And he also caused them to be \Baptised\ by such
\Priests\, as he had, in this Horrid company. In \some\ of them, the
\Mark\ of the \cut Finger\ was to be found; they said, that the Devil
gave \Meat\ and \Drink\, as to _Them_, so to the Children they brought
with them: that afterwards their Custom was to _Dance_ before him; and
_swear_ and _curse_ most horribly; they said, that the Devil show'd them
a great, Frightful, Cruel _Dragon_, telling them, \If they confessed any
Thing\, he would let loose that Great Devil upon them; they added, that
the Devil had a \Church\, and that when the \Judges\ were coming, he
told them, \he would kill them all\; and that some of them had
\Attempted to Murder the Judges\, but \could not\.

VII. Some of the \Children\, talked much of a \White Angel\, which did
use to \Forbid\ them, what the Devil had bid them to do, and \Assure\
them that these doings would \Not last long\; but that what had been
done was permitted for the wickedness of the People. This \White Angel\,
would sometimes rescue the Children, from \Going in\, with the Witches.

VIII. The Witches confessed many mischiefs done by them, declaring with
what kind of \Enchanted Tools\, they did their Mischiefs. They sought
especially to \kill the Minister\ of _Elfdale_, but could not. But some of
them said, that such as they wounded, would \Be recovered\, upon or before
their Execution.

IX. The \Judges\ would fain have seen them show some of their \Tricks\;
but they Unanimously declared, that, \Since they had confessed\, all,
they found all their \Witchcraft\ gone; and the Devil then Appeared very
Terrible unto them, threatning with an \Iron Fork\, to thrust them into
a Burning Pit, if they persisted in their Confession.

X. There were discovered no less than _threescore and ten_ Witches in
One Village, \three and twenty\ of which \freely confessing\ their Crimes,
were condemned to dy. The rest, (\One\ pretending she was with Child) were
sent to _Fahluna_, where most of them were afterwards executed. Fifteen
Children, which confessed themselves engaged in this Witchery, dyed as
the rest. Six and Thirty of them between _nine_ and _sixteen_ years of
Age, who had been less guilty, were forced to run the Gantlet, and be
lashed on their hands once a Week, for a year together; twenty more who
had less inclination to these Infernal enterprises, were lashed with
Rods upon their Hands for three Sundays together, at the Church door;
the number of the seduced Children, was about three hundred. This
course, together with \Prayers\, in all the Churches thro' the Kingdom,
issued in the deliverance of the Country.

XI. The most Accomplished Dr. _Horneck_ inserts a most wise caution, in
his preface to this Narrative, says he, _there is no Public Calamity,
but some ill people, will serve themselves of the sad providence, and
make use of it for their own ends; as +Thieves+ when an house or town is
on fire, will steal what they can._ And he mentions a Remarkable Story
of a young Woman, at _Stockholm_, in the year 1676, Who accused her own
Mother of being a Witch; and swore positively, that she had carried her
away in the Night; the poor Woman was burnt upon it: professing her
innocency to the last. But tho' she had been an Ill Woman, yet it
afterwards prov'd that she was not _such_ an one; for her Daughter came
to the Judges, with hideous Lamentations, Confessing, That she had
wronged her Mother, out of a wicked spite against her; whereupon the
Judges gave order for her Execution too.

But, so much of these things; And, now, _Lord, make these Labours of thy
Servant, Profitable to thy People._




MATTER OMITTED IN THE TRIALS.


Nineteen Witches have been Executed at _New-England_, one of them was a
Minister, and two Ministers more are Accus'd. There is a hundred Witches
more in Prison, which broke Prison, and about two Hundred more are
Accus'd, some Men of great Estates in _Boston_, have been accus'd for
_Witchcraft_. Those Hundred now in Prison accus'd for Witches, were
Committed by fifty of themselves being _Witches_, some of _Boston_, but
most about _Salem_, and the Towns Adjacent. Mr. _Increase Mather_ has
Published a Book about _Witchcraft_, occasioned by the late Trials of
Witches, which will be speedily printed in _London_ by _John Dunton_.




THE DEVIL DISCOVERED.

2 Cor. II. 11. _We are not Ignorant of His DEVICES._


Our Blessed Saviour has blessed us, with a counsil, as Wholsome and as
Needful as any that can be given us, in _Math. 26.41._ _Watch and Pray,
that yee Enter not into Temptation._ As there is a Tempting _Flesh_, and
a Tempting _World_, which would seduce us from Our Obedience to the Laws
of God, so there is a Busy _Devil_, who is by way of Eminency called,
_The Tempter_; because by him, the Temptations of the _Flesh_ and the
_World_ are managed.

It is not _One Devil_ alone, that has Cunning or Power enough to apply
the Multitudes of _Temptations_, whereby Mankind is daily diverted from
the Service of God; No, the _High Places_ of Our Air, are Swarming full
of those _Wicked Spirits_, whose Temptations trouble us; they are so
many, that it seems no less than a _Legion_, or more than twelve
thousands may be spared, for the Vexation of one miserable man. But
because those Apostate Angels, are all _United_, under one Infernal
Monarch, in the Designs of Mischief, 'tis in the Singular Number, that
they are spoken of. Now, the _Devil_, whose Malice and Envy, prompts him
to do what he can, that we may be as unhappy as himself, do's ordinarily
use more _Fraud_, than _Force_, in his assaulting of us; he that
assail'd our First Parents, in a _Serpent_, will still _Act Like a
Serpent_, rather than a _Lion_, in prosecuting of his wicked purposes
upon us, and for us to guard against the _Wiles_ of the _Wicked One_, is
one of the greatest cares, with which our God ha's charged us.

We are all of us liable to various _Temptations_ every day, whereby if
we are carried aside from the strait _Paths of Righteousness_, we get
all sorts of wounds unto our selves. Of _Temptations_, I may say, as the
Wise Man said, of _Mortality_; _there is no discharge from that war._ The
_Devils_ fell hard upon both _Adams_, nor may any among the Children of
both, imagine to be excused. The _Son_ of God Himself, had this _Dog_ of
Hell, barking at Him; and much more may the Children of _Men_, look to
be thus Visited; indeed, there is hardly any _Temptation_, but what is,
_Common to Man_. When I was considering, how to spend one Hour in
Raising a most Effectual and Profitable _Breast-work_, against the
inroads of this Enemy, I perceived it would be done, by a short answer
to this.




CASE.

_What are those Usual +Methods+ of +Temptation+, with which the Powers
of Darkness do assault the Children of Men?_


The _Corinthians_, having upon the Apostles Direction, Excommunicated
one of their Society, who had married his Mother-in-law, & this, as it
is thought, while his own Father was Living too; the Apostle encourages
them to Re-admit that man, upon his very deep and sharp _Repentance_. He
gives divers Reasons of his propounding this unto them; whereof one is,
_Lest Satan should get advantage of them_; for, had the man miscarried,
under any Rigour of the Sentence continued upon him, after his
_Repentance_, 'tis well if the Church itself had not quickly fallen to
pieces thereupon; besure, the Success of the Gospel had been more than a
little Incommoded. The Apostle upon this Occasion, intimates, That
_Satan_ has his _Devices_; by which word are meant, Artifices or
Contrivances used for the _Deceiving_ of those that are Treated with
them well, But what shall _we do_ that we may come to this _Corinthian
Attainment_, _We are not Ignorant of Satan's Devices?_ [_Non cuivis
homini Contingit!_]

Truly, the Devil has _Mille Nocendi Artes_; and it will be impossible
for us, to run over all the _Stratagems_ and _Policies_ of our
Adversary. I shall only attempt a few Observations upon the
_Temptations_ of our Lord Jesus Christ: who was _Tempted in all things
like unto us, except in our Sins_. When we read the _Temptations_ of
our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Fourth Chapter of _Matthew_ There, Thence,
you will understand, what was once counted so difficult; Even, _The way
of a Serpent upon the Rock_. There are certain Ancient and Famous
_Methods_ which the Devil in his _Temptations_, does mostly accustome
himself unto; which is not so much from any Barrenness, or Sluggishness
in the Devil, but because he has had the Encouragement of a, _Probatum
est_, upon those horrid Methods. How did the Devil assault the First
_Adam_? It was with Temptations drawn from _Pleasure_, and _Profit_, and
_Honour_, which, as the Apostle notes, in _1 Joh. 2.16._ are, _All that is
in the World_. With the very same temptations it was, that he fell upon
the Second _Adam_ too. Now, in those _Temptations_, you will see the
more _Usual Methods_, whereby the _Devil_ would be Ensnaring of us; and
I beseech you to attend unto the following Admonitions, as those
_Warnings_ of God, which the Lives of your souls depend upon your taking
of.

There were especially Three _Remarkable_ Assaults of _Temptations_,
which the _Devil_ it seems, visibly made upon our Lord; after he had
been more invisibly for Forty dayes together _Tempting_ of that Holy
One; and we may make a few distinct _Remarks_ upon them all.


§ The first of our Lords three Temptations is thus related, in _Mat. 4.3._
_He was an Hungry; and when the Tempter came to him, he said, If thou be
the Son of God, Command that these Stones be made Bread._

From whence, take these _Remarks_.

I. The Devil will ordinarily make our _Conditions_, to be the
Advantages of his _Temptations_. When our Lord was _Hungry_, then
_Bread! Bread!_ shall be all the Cry of his Temptation; the Devil puts
him upon a wrong step, for the getting of _Bread_. There is no
Condition, but what has indeed some _Hunger_ accompanying of it; and the
Devil marks what it is, that we are _Hungry_ for. One mans Condition
makes him _Hunger_ for Preferments, or Employments, another mans makes
him _Hunger_ for Cash or Land, or Trade; another mans makes him _Hunger_
for Merriments, or Diversions: And the Condition of every Afflicted Man,
makes him _Hunger_ with Impatience for Deliverance. Now the Devil will
be sure to suit his Perswasions with our _Conditions_. When he has our
_Condition_ to speak with him, & for him, then thinks he, _I am sure
this man will now hearken to my Proposals!_ Hence, if men are in
_Prosperity_, the Devil will tempt them to Forgetfulness of God; if they
are in _Adversity_, he will tempt them to Murmuring at God; in all the
expressions of those impieties. Wise _Agur_ was aware of this; in _Prov.
30.9._ says he, if a man be _Full_, he shall be tempted, _to deny God,
and say, who is the Lord?_ if a man be Poor, he shall be tempted, _to
steal, and take the Name of God in vain._ The Devil will talk suitably;
if you ponder your Conditions, you may expect you shall be tempted
agreeably thereunto.

II. The Devil does often manage his _temptations_, by urging of our
_Necessities_. Our Lord, was thus by the Devil bawl'd upon; _You want
Bread, and you'll starve, if in my way you get it not._ The Devil will
show some forbidden thing unto us, and plead concerning it, as of
_Bread_ we use to say, _it must be had._ _Necessity_ has a wonderful
compulsion in it. You may see what _Necessity_ will do, if you read in
_Deut. 28.56._ _the tender and the delicate Woman among you, her eye shall
be evil towards the Children that she shall bear, for she shall eat them
for want of all things._ The Devil will perswade us that there is a
_Necessity_ of our doing what he does propound unto us; and then tho'
the _Laws_ of God about us were so many _Walls_ of Stone, yet we shall
break through them all. That little inconvenience, of our coming to beg
our _Bread_, O what a fearful Representation does the Devil make of it!
and when once the Devil scares us to think of a sinful thing, _it must
be done_, we soon come to think, _it may be done_. When the Devil has
frighted us into an Apprehension, that it is a _Needful_ thing which we
are prompted unto, he presently Engages all the Faculties of our Souls,
to prove, that it may be a _Lawful_ one; the Devil told _Esau_, _You'll
dye if you don't sell your Birthright;_ the Devil told _Aaron_, _You'll
pull all the people about your ears, if you do not countenance their
superstitions;_ and then they comply'd immediately. Yea, sometimes if
the Devil do but Feign a Necessity, he does thereby _Gain_ the Hearts of
Men; he did but feign a Need, when he told _Saul_, _the Cattel must be
spared, and the sacrifice must be precipitated_, & he does but feign a
Need, when he tells many a man, _if you do no servile work on the
+Sabbath-day+, and if you don't Rob God of his evening, you'll never
subsist in the world._ All the denials of God, in the world, use to be
from this Fallacy impos'd upon us. It never can be necessary for us to
violate any Negative Commandment in the Law of our God; where God says,
_thou shalt not_, we cannot upon any pretence reply, I _must_. But the
Devil will put a most formidable and astonishing face of necessity upon
many of those _Abominable things, which are hateful to the soul of God_.
He'll say nothing to us about, the one thing needful; but the petite and
the sorry _Need-nots_ of this world, he'll set off with most bloody
Colours of _Necessity_. He will not say, _'tis necessary for you to
maintain the Favour of your God, and secure the +welfare of your Soul+;_
but he'll say, _'tis necessary for you to keep in with your Neighbours;
and that you and yours may have a good Living among them._

III. The Devil does insinuate his most Horrible _Temptations_, with
pretence, of much _Friendship_ and _Kindness_ for us. He seemed very
unwilling that our Lord should want any thing that might be comfortable
for him; but, he was a _Devil_ still! The _Devil_ flatters our Mother
_Eve_, as if he was desirous to make her more Happy than her Maker did;
but there was the _Devil_ in that flattery. _Sub Amici fallere
Nomen_,----to Salute men with profers to do all manner of Service for
them; and at the same time to Stab them as _Joab_ did _Abner_ of old;
this is just like the _Devil_, and the _Devil_ truly has many Children
that Imitate him in it. Some very Affectionate Things were spoken once
unto our Lord; _Lord, be it far from thee, that thou shouldest suffer
any Trouble!_ But our Lords Answer was, in _Mat. 16.23._ _Get thee behind
me Satan._ The Devil will say to a man, _I would have thee to Consult
thy own Interest, and I would have Trouble to be far from thee._ He
speaks these _Fair Things_, by the Mouths of our professed Friends unto
us, as he did by the Tongue of a Speckled Snake unto our Deluded
Parents at the first. But all this while, 'tis a Direction that has been
wisely given us; _When he speaks fair, Believe him not, for there are
seven Abominations in his Heart._

IV. Things in themselves _Allowable_ and _Convenient_, are oftentimes
turned into sore _Temptations_ by the Devil. He press'd our Lord unto
the making of _Bread_; Why, that very thing was afterwards done by our
Lord, in the Miracles of the _Loaves_; and yet it is now a motion of the
_Devil_, _Pray, make thy self a Little Bread._ The Devil will frequently
put men by, from the doing of a _seasonable Duty_; but how? Truly by
putting us upon another _Duty_, which may be at that juncture a most
_Unseasonable_ Thing. It is said in _Eccl. 8.5._ _A Wise Mans heart
discerns both Time and Judgment._ The _Ill-Timing_ of good Things, is
One of the chief Intregues, which the Devil has to Prosecute. The Devil
himself, will Egg us on to many a _Duty_; and why so? But because at
that very Time a more proper and Useful Duty, will have a _Supersedeas_
given thereunto. And, thus there are many Things, whereof we can say,
though no more than this, yet so much as this, _They are Lawful ones_,
by which Lawful Things----_Perimus Omnes._ Where shall we find that the
Devil has laid our most fatal Snares? Truly, our Snares are on the
_Bed_, where it is _Lawful_ for us to Sleep; at the _Board_, where it is
_Lawful_ for us to Sit; in the _Cup_, where 'tis _Lawful_ to Drink; and
in the _Shops_, where we have _Lawful_ Business to do. The _Devil_ will
decoy us, unto the utmost Edge of the _Liberty_ that is _Lawful_ for us;
and then one Little push, hurries us into a Transgression against the
Lord. And the _Devil_ by Inviting us to a _Lawful_ thing, at a wrong
time for it, Layes us under further Entanglement of Guilt before God.
'Tis _Lawful_ for People to use Recreations; but in the Evening of the
Lords Day, or the Morning of any Day, how Ensnaring are they! The
_Devil_ then too commonly bears part in the Sport. If _Promiscuous
Dancing_ were Lawful; though almost all the Christian Churches in the
World, have made a Scandal of it; yet for Persons to go presently from a
_Sermon_ to a _Dance_, is to do a thing, which Doubtless the _Devil_
makes good Earnings of.

V. To _distrust_ Gods Providence and Protection, is one of the worst
things, into which the Devil by his _Temptations_ would be hurrying of
us. He would fain have driven our Lord unto a Suspicion of Gods care
about Him, said the Devil, _You may dy for lack of Bread, if you do not
look better after your self, than God is like to do for you._ It is an
usual thing for Persons to dispair of Gods _Fatherly Care_ Concerning
them; they torture themselves with distracting and amazing Fears, that
they shall come to want before they dy; Yea, they even say with _Jonas_,
in _Chap. 2.4._ _I am cast out of the sight of God;_ He wont look after
me! But it is the Devil that is the Author of all such Melancholly
Suggestions in the minds of men. It is a thought that often raises a
Feaver in the Hearts of _Married_ Persons, when Charges grow upon them;
_God will never be able in the way of my Calling, to feed and cloath all
my Little Folks._ It is a Thought with which _Aged_ persons are often
tormented, _Tho' God has all my dayes hitherto supplied me, yet I shall
be pinched with Straits before I come to my Journeys end._ 'Tis a
malicious Devil that raises these _Evil surmisings_ in the hearts of
Men. And sometimes a distemper of Body affords a Lodging for the Devil,
from whence he shoots the cruel Bombs of such _Fiery Thoughts_ into the
minds of many other persons. With such thoughts does the Devil choose to
persecute us; because thereby we come to _Forfeit_ what we _Question_.
We _Question_ the Care of God, and so we _Forfeit_ it, until perhaps the
Devil do utterly _drown us in Perdition_. Our God says, _Trust in the
Lord, and do good, and verily thou shall be fed._ But the Devil says,
_don't you trust in God; be afraid that you shall not be fed;_ and thus
he hinders men from the _doing of Good_.

VI. There is nothing more Frequent in the _Temptations_ of the Devil,
then for our _Adoption_ to be doubted, because of our _Affliction_. When
our Lord was in his Penury, then says the Devil, _If thou be the Son of
God;_ he now makes an _If_, of it; _What? the Son of God, and not be
able to Command a Bit of Bread!_ Thus, when we are in very Afflictive
Circumstances, this will be the Devils Inference, _Thou art not a Child
of God._ The Bible says in _Heb. 12.7._ _If you are Chastened, it is a
shrow'd sign that you can't be Children._ Since he can't Rob us of our
_Grace_, he would Rob us of our _Joy_; and therefore having Accused us
unto God, he then Accuses God unto us. When _Israel_ was weak and faint
in the Wilderness, then did _Amalek_ set upon them; just so does the
Devil set upon the people of God, when their Losses, their Crosses,
their Exercises have Enfeebled their Souls within them; and what says
the Devil? E'en the same that was mutter'd in the Ear of the Afflicted
_Job_, _Is not this the Uprightness of thy Ways? Remember, I pray thee,
who ever perished, being Innocent? If thou wert a Child of God, He would
never follow thee, with such Testimonies of his Indignation._ This is
the _Logic_ of the Devil; and he thus interrupts that patience, and that
Chearfulness wherewith we should _suffer the will of God_.

VII. To dispute the Divine Original and Authority of _Gods Word_, is not
the least of those _Temptations_ with which the Devil troubles us. God
from Heaven, had newly said unto our Lord, _this is my Beloved Son_; but
now the Devil would have him to make a dispute of it, _If thou be the
son of God._ The Devil durst not be so Impudent, and Brasen fac'd, as to
bid men use _Pharaohs_ Language, _Who is the Lord, that I should obey
his voice?_ But he will whisper into our Ears, what he did unto our
Mother _Eve_ of old, _It is not the Lord that hath spoken what you call
his Word._ The Devil would have men say unto the _Scripture_, what they
said unto the _Prophet_, in _Jer. 43.2._ _Thou speakest falsely; the Lord
our God hath not sent thee to speak what thou sayst unto us;_ & he would
fain have secret & cursed Misgivings in our hearts, _that things are not
altogether so as the Scripture has represented them._ The Devil would
with all his heart make one huge Bonefire of all the Bibles in the
world; & he has got Millions of persecutors to _assist him in the
suppression of that miraculous book_. _It was the +devil+ once in the
tongue of a Papist_, that cry'd out, _A plague on this bible; this 'tis
that does all our mischief._ But because he can't _Suppress_ this Book,
he sets himself, to _Disgrace_ it all that he can. Altho' the Scripture
carries its _own Evidence_ with it, and be all over, so pure, so great,
so true, and so powerful, that it is impossible it should proceed from
any but God alone; yet the Devil would gladly bring some Discredit upon
it, as if it were but some _Humane Contrivance_; Of nothing, is the
Devil more desirous, than this; That we should not count, _Christ_ so
precious, _Heaven_ so Glorious, _Hell_ so Dreadful, and _Sin_ so odious,
as the Scripture has declared it.


§. The Second of our Lords Three Temptations, is related after this
manner, in _Mat. 4.5, 6._ _Then the Devil taketh him up, into the Holy
City, and setteth him upon a Pinacle of the Temple; and saith unto him,
if thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down; for it is written, He
shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their Hands, they
shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy Foot against a
Stone._

From whence take these _Remarks_.

I. The places of the greatest _Holiness_ will not secure us from
Annoyance by the _Temptations_ of the Devil, to the greatest wickedness.
When our Lord was in the Holy City, the Devil fell upon him there.
Indeed, there is now no proper _Holiness_ of _Places_ in our Days; the
Signs and Means of Gods more special Presence are not under the Gospel,
ty'd unto any certain _places_: Nevertheless there are _places_, where
we use to enjoy much of God; and where, altho' God visit not the
_Persons_ for the sake of the _Places_, yet he visits the _Places_ for
the sake of the _Persons_. But, I am to tell you that the Devil will
visit those _Places_ and best _Persons_ there. No _Place_, that I know
of, has got such a _Spell_ upon it, as will always keep the Devil out.
The _Meeting-House_ wherein we Assemble for the Worship of God, is
fill'd with many Holy People, and many Holy Concerns continually; but if
our Eyes were so refined as the Servant of the Prophet had his of old, I
suppose we should now see a Throng of _Devils_ in this very place. The
Apostle has intimated, that Angels come in among us; there are Angels it
seems that hark, how I _Preach_, and how you _Hear_, at this Hour. And
our own sad Experience is enough to intimate, That the _Devils_ are
likewise Rendevouzing here. It is Reported, in _Job 1.5._ _When the Sons
of God came to present themselves before the Lord, Satan came also among
them._ When we are in our Church-Assemblies, O how many _Devils_, do you
imagine, croud in among us! There is a _Devil_ that rocks one to Sleep,
there is a _Devil_ that makes another to be thinking of, he scarce knows
what himself; and there is a _Devil_, that makes another, to be pleasing
himself with wanton and wicked Speculations. It is also possible, that
we have our _Closets_, or our _Studies_, gloriously perfumed with
Devotions every day; but alas, can we shut the Devil out of them? No,
Let us go where we will, we shall still find a Devil nigh unto us. Only,
when we come to Heaven, we shall be out of his reach for ever; _O thou
foul Devil; we are going where thou canst not come!_ He was hissed out
of _Paradise_, and shall never enter it any more. Yea, more than so,
when the _New Jerusalem_ comes down into the _High Places_ of our Air,
from whence the Devil shall then be banished, there shall be no Devil
within the Walls of that Holy City. _Amen, Even so Lord Jesus, Come
quickly._

II. Any other acknowledgments of the Lord Jesus Christ, will be
permitted by the Temptations of the Devil, provided those
Acknowledgments of him, which are _True_ and _Full_, may be thereby
prevented. What was it, that the Devil hurried our Lord Jesus Christ
unto the Top of the _Temple_ for? Surely it could not meerly be to find
_Precipices_; any part of the Wilderness would have afforded _Them_. No,
it was rather to have _Spectators_. And why so, Why, the carnal Jews had
an Expectation among them; that _Elias_ was to fly from Heaven to the
Temple; and the Devil seems willing, that our Lord should be cry'd up
for _Elias_, among the giddy multitude; or any thing in the World, tho
never so considerable otherwise, rather than to be received as the
Christ of God. The Devil will allow his Followers to think very highly
of the Lord Jesus Christ; O but he is very lothe to have them think,
_All_. We read in _Col. 1.19._ _It has pleased the Father, that in Him
there should all Fullness dwell._ But it is pleasing to the Devil that
we deny something of the Immense _Fullness_, which is in our Lord. The
Devil would confess to our Lord, _Thou art the Holy One of God!_ but
then he claps in, _Thou art Jesus of Nazareth;_ which was to conceal our
Lords being _Jesus of Bethlehem_, and so his being, _The True Messiah_.
All the _Heresies_, and all the Persecutions, that ever plagued the
Church of God, have still been, to strike at some _Glory_ of our Lord
Jesus Christ. A CHRIST Entirely Acknowledged, will save the Souls of
them that so Acknowledge Him; but, says the Devil, _Whatever tides I
must not give way to that._ As they say, the Devil makes Witches unable
to utter all the _Lords Prayer_, or some such System of Religion,
without some Deprevations of it; thus the Devil will consent that we may
make a very large Confession of the Lord Jesus Christ; only he will have
us to deprave it, at least in some one Important Article. Some one
Honour, some one Office, and some one _Ordinance_ of the Lord Jesus
Christ, must be always left unacknowledged, by those that will do as the
Devil would have them.

III. _High Stations_ in the Church of God, lay men open to violent and
peculiar _Temptations_ of the Devil. When our Lord was upon the
_Pinacle_, that is not the _Fane_, or _Spire_, but the _Battlements_ of
the _Temple_, there did the Devil pester him, with singular
Molestations, and he therein seems to intend an Entanglement for the
Jews, as well as for our Lord. Believe me they that stand High, cannot
stand safe. The Devil is a _Nimrod_, a mighty Hunter; and common or
little Game, will not serve his Turn: he is a _Leviathan_, of whom we
may say, as in _Job. 41.34._ _He beholds all high things._ Men of high
Attainments, and Men of high Employments, in the Church of God, must
look, like _Peter_ to be more _Sifted_, and like _Paul_, to be more
_Buffeted_ than other Men. _Ferunt Summos Fulmina Montes._----The Devil
can raise a Storm, when God permitteth it, but as for those Men that
stand near Heaven, the Devil will attack them with his most cruel storms
of Thunder and Lightening. It was said, _let him that standeth take
heed;_ but we may say, _They that stand most high, have cause to take
most heed._ The Devil is a _Goliah_; and when he finds a _Champion_,
he'l be sure most fiercely to Combate such a Man. He is for, _Killing
many Birds with one stone_; and he knows that he shall hinder a world
of _Good_, and produce a world of _Ill_, if once he can bring a Man
Eminently Stationed into his Toyls. Hence 'tis that the _Ministers_ of
God, are more dogg'd by the Devil, than other persons are. Especially
such _Ministers_, as more in the highest Orb of Serviceableness; and
most of all such _Ministers_ as have spent many years in Laudable
Endeavours to be serviceable; Those Ministers are the _Stars_ of Heaven,
at which the _Tayl_ of the _Dragon_, will give the most sweeping and
most stinging strokes; the Devil will find that for them, that shall
make them _Walk softly_ all their Days. These are the Men, that have
creepled, and vexed the Devil more than other Men; for which the Devil
has an old Quarrel with them. O Neighbours, little do you think, what
black Days of Mourning, and Fasting, and Praying before the Lord, a
Raging Devil does fill the lives of such _Men of God_ withall.

IV. The Devil will make a deceitful and unfaithful use of the
_Scriptures_ to make his _Temptations_ forceable. When the Devil
Solicited our Lord, unto an evil thing, he quoted the _Ninty First_
Psalm unto him, tho' indeed he fallaciously clip'd it, and maim'd it, of
one clause very material in it. O never does the Devil make such
dangerous Passes at us, as when he does wrest our _own Sword_ out of our
Hands, and push _That_ upon us. We have to defend us, that Weapon in
_Eph. 6.16._ _The Sword of the Spirit, which, is the word of God_; but
when the Devil has that very Weapon to fight us with, he makes terrible
work of it. When the Devil would poyson men with false _Doctrines_, he'l
quote Scriptures for them; a _Quaker_ himself, will have the First
Chapter of _John_ always in his mouth. When the Devil would perswade men
to vile _Actions_, he'l quote Scriptures for them; he'l encourage men to
go on in Sin, by showing them, where 'tis said, _The Lord is ready to
Pardon._ I say this, The one story of _Davids_ Fall, in the Scripture,
has been made by the Devil an Engine for the Damnation of many Millions.
The Devil will fright men from doing those things, that are, _the Things
of their Peace_; but How? He'l turn a _Scripture_ into a _Scare-crow_
for them. The Devil will fright them from all constant Prayer to God, by
quoting that Scripture, _The Sacrifice of the Wicked, is an Abomination
to the Lord;_ the Devil will fright them from the Holy Supper of God, by
quoting that Scripture, _He that Eats and Drinks unworthily, Eats and
Drinks damnation to himself._ And thus the Devil will by some abused
Scripture, Terrifie the Children of God; the Scripture is written as we
are told, _For our Comfort_; but it is quoted by the Devil, _for our
terror_. How many Godly Souls have been cast into sinful Doubts and
Fears, by the Devils foolish glosses upon that Scripture, _He that
doubts is Damned;_ and that, _the fearful shall have their portion in
the burning Lake;_ The Devil sometimes has play'd the _Preacher_, but I
say, _Beware all silly Souls when such a fool is Preaching._

V. Grievous and Pulling Hurries to _Self-Murder_ are none of the
smallest outrages, which the Devil in his _Temptations_ commits upon us.
Why, did the Devil say to our Lord, _Cast thy self down_, but in hopes
that our Lord would have broke his Bones, in the fall? The Devil is an
_Old Murtherer_; and he loves to _Murder_ men; but no _Murder_ gives
him so much satisfaction, as that which at his instigation, men
perpetrate upon themselves. We see that such as are _Bewitched_ and
_Possessed_ by the Devil, do quickly lay violent hands upon themselves,
if they be not watched continually, and we see that when persons have
begun that _Unnatural_ business of _killing themselves_, there is a
_Preternatural_ Stupendious Prodigious Assistance, by the Devil given
thereunto. When people are going to Harm themselves, we call upon them,
like those to the Jailor, in _Acts 16.28._ _Do thy self no harm!_ And we
have this Argument for it, _It is the Devil that is dragging of you to
this mischief; but will you believe, will you obey such an one as the
Devil is?_ What was it that made _Judas_ to strangle himself? We read it
was when the _Devil was in him_. I suppose there are few
_self-murderers_, but what are first very strangely fallen into the
Devils hands; and possibly, 'tis by some Extraordinary _Discontent_,
against God, or _back-sliding_ from him, that the Devil first entred
into those disturbed Souls. Indeed, some very great Saints of God, have
sometimes had hideous Royls raised by the Devil in their minds; untill
they have e'en cry'd out with _Job_, _I choose strangling rather than
Life;_ and sometimes the ill Humours or Vapours in the Bodies of such
Good Men, do so harbour the Devil that they have this woful motion every
day thence made unto them; _You must Kill your self! you must! you
must!_ But it is rarely any other than a _Saul_, an _Abimelek_, an
_Achitophel_, or a _Judas_; rarely any other, than a very Reprobate,
whom the Devil can drive, while the man is _Compos Mentis_, to
Consummate such a Villany. Yea, no Child of God, in his Right Senses
can go so far in this impiety, as to be left without all Time and Room
for true _Repentance_ of the Crime; 'tis _thus_ done, by none but those
that go to the Devil. A _self-murder_, acted by one that is upon other
accounts a Reasonable man, is but such an attempt of Revenge upon the
God that made him, as none but one full of the Devil can be guilty of.
If any of you are Dragoon'd by the Devil, unto the murdering of your
selves, my Advice to you is, _Disclose it_, _Reveal it_, _make it known
immediately_. One that Cut his own Throat among us, Expired crying out,
_O that I had told! O that I had told._ You may spoil the Devil, if
you'l _Tell_ what he is a doing of.

VI. Presumptuous and Unwarrantable _Trials_ of the Blessed God, are some
of those things whereinto the Devil would fain hook us with his
_Temptations_. This was that which the Devil would have brought our Lord
unto, even, _A tempting of the Lord our God_. It is the charge of our
God upon us, in _Deut. 6.16._ _Thou shalt not Tempt the Lord thy God._
But that which the Devil _Tries_, is, to put us upon _Trying_ in a
sinful way, whether God be such a God as indeed he is. 'Tis true as to
the ways of Obedience, our God says unto us, _Prove me, in those ways;
Try, whether I won't be as good as my Word._ But then there are ways of
_Presumption_, wherein the Devil would have us to trie, what a God it
is, _With whom we have to do_. The Devil would have us to trie the
Purpose of God, about our selves or others; but how? By going to the
_Devil_ himself; by Consulting _Astrologers_, or _Fortune Tellers_; or
perhaps by letting the Bible fall open, to see what is the first
Sentence we light upon. The Devil would have us trie the Mercy of God,
but how? By running into _Dangers_, which we have no call unto. He would
have us trie the Power of God; but how? By looking for good things,
without the use of Means for the getting of them. He would have us trie
the Justice of God; but how? By venturing upon Sin in a _Corner_, with
an Imagination that God will never bring us out. He would have us trie
the Promise of God; but how? By _Limiting_ the Lord, unto such or such a
way of manifesting Himself, or else believing of nothing at all. He
would have us trie the Threatning of God; but how? By going on
impenitently in those things, for which the _Wrath of God comes upon the
Children of Disobedience_. Thus would the Devil have us to affront the
Majesty of Heaven every day.

VII. The _Temptations_ of the Devil, aim at puffing and bloating of us
up, with _Pride_; as much perhaps as any one iniquity. The Devil would
have had Our Lord make a _Vain glorious_ Discovery of himself unto the
World, by _Flying in the air_, so as no mortal can. _Hoc Ithacus
velit_--the Devil would have us to soar aloft, and not only to be above
other men, but also to _know_ that we are so, _Pride_ is the Devils own
sin; and he affects especially to be, _The King over the Children of
Pride_, it is a caution in _1 Tim. 3.6._ A Pastor must not be _A Novice_;
_Lest being lifted up with Pride, He fall into the condemnation of the
Devil._ (_Summo ac Pio cum Tremore Hunc Textum Legamus nos Ministri
Juvenes!_) Accordingly, the Devil would have us to be inordinately taken
and moved with what _Excellencies_ our God has bestowed upon us. If our
_Estates_ rise, he would have us rise in our Spirits too. If we have
been blessed with Beauty, with Breeding, with Honour, with Success, with
Attire, with Spiritual Priviledges, or with Praise-worthy Performances;
Now says the Devil, _Think thy self better than other Men._ Yea, the
Devil would have us arrogate unto our selves, those _Excellencies_ which
really we never were owners of; and _Boast of a false Gift_. He would
have us moreover to Thirst after Applause among others that may see Our
_Excellencies_! and be impatient if we are not accounted _some-body_. He
would have us furthermore, to aspire after such a _Figure_, as God has
never yet seen fitting for us; and croud into some _High Chair_ that
becomes us not. Thus would the Devil Elevate us into the _Air_, above
our Neighbours; and why so? 'Tis that we may be punished with such
_Falls_, as may make us cry out with _David_, _O my Bones are broken
with my Falls!_ The Devil can't endure to see men lying in the _Dust_;
because there is no falling thence. He is a _Fallen Spirit_ himself, and
it pleases him to see the _Falls_ of men.


§. The Third of Our Lords Three Temptations, is related in such Terms as
these. _Matth. 4.8, 9._ _Again the Devil taketh him up, into an exceeding
High Mountain, and sheweth him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the
glory of them: and saith unto him, all these things will I give thee, if
thou wilt fall down and Worship me._ From whence take these Remarks.

I. The Devil in his _Temptations_ will set the Delight of this world
before us; but he'll set a fair, and a false _Varnish_ upon those
Delights. They were some unknown _Perspectives_, which the Devil had,
both for the Refracting of the _Medium_, and for the Magnifying of the
Object, whereby he gave our Lord at once a prospect of the whole Roman
Empire; but what was it? It was the _World_, and the _Glory_ of it; he
says not a word of the _World_, and the _Trouble_ of it. No sure; not a
word of that; the Devil will not have his Hook so barely expos'd unto
us. The Devil sets off the Delights of Sin, which he offers unto us,
with a stretched and raised Rhetorick; but he will not own, _That in the
midst of our Laughter, our Heart shall be sorrowful;_ and _That the end
of our Mirth shall be Heaviness._ There is but one Glass in the
Spectacles, with which the Devil would have us to read, those passages
in _Eccles. 11.9._ _Rejoyce, O young Man in thy youth, and let thy Heart
chear thee in the Dayes of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy Heart,
and in the sight of thine Eyes._ Thus far the Devil would have us to
Read; and he'll make many a fine Comment upon it; he'll tell us, That if
we'll follow the Courses of the World, we shall swim in all the Delights
of the World. But he is not willing you should Read out the next words;
_But know thou, that for all these things God shall bring thee into
Judgment._ O he's loth we should be aware of the dreadful Issues, and
Reckonings that our Worldly Delights will be attended with. He sets
before us, _The Pleasures of Sin_; but he will not say, _These are but
for a Season._ He sets before us, _The sweet Waters of Stealth_; but he
will not say, _There is Death in the Pot._ He is a _Mountebank_, that
will bestow nothing but Romantic Praises upon all that he makes us the
Offers of.

II. There are most Hellish _Blasphemies_ often buzz'd by the
_Temptations_ of the Devil, into the minds of the best Men alive. What a
most Execrable Thing was here laid before our Lord Himself: Even, To own
the _Devil as God_! a thing that can't be uttered, without unutterable
Horror of Soul. The best man on earth, may have such _Fiery Darts_ from
Hell shot into his mind. One that was acted by the _Devil_, had the
impudence to propound this unto such a good man as _Job_, _Curse God_. And
the Devil pleases himself, by chusing the Hearts of good men, with his
base Injections, _That there is no God_, or, _That God is not a
Righteous God_; and a thousand more such things, too Devilish to be
mentioned. A good man is extreamly grieved at it, when he hears a
_Blasphemy_ from the mouth of another man; said the Psalmist, in _Psal.
44.15, 16._ _My Confusion is continually before me, for the voice of him
that Blasphemeth._ But much more when a good man finds a _Blasphemy_ in
his own Heart; O it throws him into most Fevourish Agonies of Soul. For
this cause, a mischievous Devil, will _Flie blow_ the Heart of such a
man, with such Blasphemous Thoughts, as make him crie out, _Lord I am
e'n weary of my life._ Yea, the Devil serves the man just as the
Mistress of _Joseph_ dealt with him; he importunes the man to think
wickedly from Day to Day; and if the man refuse, he cries out at last,
_Behold, what wicked thoughts this man has lodging in him._ Sayst thou
so? _Satan!_ No, they are Baits of thy own; and at thy Door alone shall
they be laid for ever.

III. There is a sort of Witchcrafts in those things, whereto the
Temptations of the Devil would inveigle us. To worship the Devil is
Witchcraft, and under that notion was our Lord urged unto sin. We are
told in _1 Sam. 15.23._ _Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft:_ When
the Devil would have us to sin, he would have us to do the things which
the forlorn Witches use to do. Perhaps there are few persons, ever
allured by the Devil unto an Explicit Covenant with himself. If any
among ourselves be so, my councel is, that you hunt the Devil from you,
with such words as the Psalmist had, _Be gone, Depart from me, ye evil
Doers, for I will keep the Commandments of my God._ But alas, the most
of men, are by the Devil put upon doing the things that are Analogous to
the worst usages of Witches. The Devil says to the sinner, _Despise thy
Baptism, and all the Bond of it, and all the Good of it._ The Devil says
to the sinner, _Come, cast off the Authority of God, and refuse the
Salvation of Christ for ever._ Yea, the Devil who is called, _The God of
this World_, would have us to take Him for Our God, and rather Hear Him,
Trust Him, Serve Him, than the God that formed us.

IV. The _Temptations_ of the Devil do Tug and Pull for nothing more,
than that the Rulers of the World may yield Homage unto him. Our Lord
has had this by his Father Engag'd unto him, _That he shall one day be
Governour of the Nations._ The Devil doe's extreamly dread the approach
of that Illustrious time, when _The Kingdom of God shall come and his
Will be done, as in Heaven, and on Earth._ For this cause it was that he
was desirous, Our Lord should rather have accepted of him, that Kingdom,
which _Antichrist_ afterwards accepted of him, for the Establishment of
_Devil-worship_, in the World. I may tell you, The Devil is mighty
unwilling, that there should be one _Godly Magistrate_ upon the face of
the Earth. Such is the influence of _Government_, that the Devil will
every where stickle mightily, to have that siding with him. What
_Rulers_ would the Devil have, to command all mankind, if he might have
his will? Even, such as are called in _Psal. 94.20._ _The throne of
iniquity, which frames mischief by a Law_; such as will promote Vice, by
both Connivance, and Example; and such as will oppress all that shall be
_Holy, and Just, and Good_. All men have cause therefore to be jealous,
what Use the Devil may make of them, with reference to the Affairs of
Government; but Rulers may most of all think, that the Lord Jesus from
Heaven calls upon them, _Satan has desired that he might Sift you, and
have you; O Look to it, what side you take._

Thus have you in the Temptations of our Lord, seen the principal of
those Devices, which the Devil has to Entrap our Souls. But what shall
we now do, that we may be fortified against those Devices? O that we
might be well furnished with the _Whole Armour of God_! But me thinks,
there were some things attending the Temptations of our Lord, which
would especially Recommend those few Hints unto us for our Guard.

First, If you are not fond of Temptation, be not fond of Needless, or
Too much Retirement. Where was it, that the Devil fell upon our Lord? it
was when he was Alone in the Wilderness. We should all have our Times to
be Alone every Day; and if the Devil go to scare us out of our
Chambers, with such a Bugbear, as that he'll appear to us, yet stay in
spite of his teeth, stay to finish your Devotions; he Lyes, he dare not
shew his head. But on the other-side by being too solitary, we may lay
our selves too much open to the Devil; You know who says, _Wo to him
that is alone._

Secondly, Let an _Oracle_ of God be your defence against a _Temptation_
of _Hell_. How did our Lord silence the _Devil_? It was with an, _It is
written!_ And _all_ his Three Citations were from that one Book of
_Deuteronomy_. What a _full_ Armoury then have we, in _all_ the sacred
Pages that lie before us? Whatever the Words of the _Devil_ are, drown
them with the words of the _Great God_. Say, _It is Written_ The
_Belshazzar_ of _Hell_ will Tremble and Withdraw, if you show these
_Hand-Writings_ of the Lord.

Lastly, Since the Lord Jesus Christ has conquered all the _Temptations_
of the Devil, Flie to that Lord, Crie to that Lord, that He would give
you a share in his Happy Victory. It was for Us that our Lord overcome
the Devil: and when he did but say, _Satan, Get hence_, away presently
the Tygre flew: Does the Devil molest Us? Then let us Repair to our
Lord, who says, _I know how to succour the Tempted._ Said the
_Psalmist_, _Psal. 61.2._ _Lead me to the Rock that is higher than I._ A
Woman in this Land being under the Possession of Devils, the Devils
within her, audibly spoke of diverse Harms they would inflict upon her;
but still they made this answer, _Ah! She Runs to the Rock! She Runs to
the Rock!_ and that hindered all. O this _Running to the Rock_; 'tis
the best Preservation in the World; the _Vultures_ of _Hell_ cannot prey
upon the _Doves_ in the _Clefts_ of that _Rock_. May our God now lead us
thereunto.




  A FURTHER
  ACCOUNT
  OF THE
  TRYALS
  OF THE
  \New-England Witches\.

  WITH THE
  OBSERVATIONS
  Of a Person who was upon the Place several
  Days when the suspected Witches were
  first taken into Examination.

  To which is added,

  \Cases of Conscience\
  Concerning Witchcrafts and Evil Spirits Personating
  Men.

  Written at the Request of the Ministers of _New-England_.

  By _Increase Mather_, President of _Harvard_ Colledge.

  \Licensed and Entred according to Order.\

  _London_: Printed for \J. Dunton\, at the _Raven_ in the _Poultrey_.
      1693. Of whom may be had the _Third Edition_ of Mr. _Cotton
      Mather's First Account_ of the Tryals of the _New-England_
      Witches, Printed on the same size with this _Last Account_, that
      they may bind up together.




  A TRUE NARRATIVE of some Remarkable
    Passages relating to sundry Persons afflicted
    by _Witchcraft_ at _Salem_ Village in _New-England_,
    which happened from the _19th._ of _March_
    to the _5th._ of _April_, 1692.

COLLECTED BY DEODAT LAWSON.


On the Nineteenth day of _March_ last I went to _Salem_ Village, and
lodged at _Nathaniel Ingersol's_ near to the Minister Mr. _P.'s_ House,
and presently after I came into my Lodging, Capt. _Walcut's_ Daughter
_Mary_ came to Lieut. _Ingersol's_ and spake to me; but suddenly after,
as she stood by the Door, was bitten, so that she cried out of her
Wrist, and looking on it with a Candle, we saw apparently the marks of
Teeth, both upper and lower set, on each side of her Wrist.

In the beginning of the Evening I went to give Mr. _P._ a Visit. When I
was there, his Kinswoman, _Abigail Williams_, (about 12 Years of Age)
had a grievous fit; she was at first hurried with violence to and fro in
the Room (though Mrs. _Ingersol_ endeavoured to hold her) sometimes
making as if she would fly, stretching up her Arms as high as she could,
and crying, _Whish, Whish, Whish_, several times; presently after she
said, there was Goodw. _N._ and said, _Do you not see her? Why there she
stands!_ And she said, Goodw. _N._ offered her THE BOOK, but she was
resolved she would not take it, saying often, _I wont, I wont, I wont
take it, I do not know what Book it is: I am sure it is none of God's
Book, it is the Devil's Book for ought I know._ After that, she ran to
the Fire, and begun to throw Fire-brands about the House, and run
against the Back, as if she would run up Chimney, and, as they said, she
had attempted to go into the Fire in other Fits.

On Lords Day, the Twentieth of _March_, there were sundry of the
afflicted Persons at Meeting, as Mrs. _Pope_, and Goodwife _Bibber_,
_Abigail Williams_, _Mary Walcut_, _Mary Lewes_, and Doctor _Grigg's_
Maid. There was also at Meeting, Goodwife _C._ (who was afterward
Examined on suspicion of being a _Witch_:) They had several sore Fits in
the time of Publick Worship, which did something interrupt me in my
first Prayer, being so unusual. After _Psalm_ was sung _Abigail
Williams_ said to me, _Now stand up, and name your Text!_ And after it
was read, she said, _It is a long Text._ In the beginning of Sermon,
Mrs. _Pope_, a Woman afflicted, said to me, _Now there is enough of
that._ And in the Afternoon, _Abigail Williams_, upon my referring to my
_Doctrine_, said to me, _I know no Doctrine you had, If you did name
one, I have forgot it._

In Sermon time, when Goodwife _C._ was present in the Meeting-House,
_Ab. W._ called out, _Look where Goodwife C. sits on the Beam suckling
her Yellow Bird betwixt her fingers!_ _Ann Putman_, another Girle
afflicted, said, _There was a Yellow Bird sat on my Hat as it hung on
the Pin in the Pulpit;_ but those that were by, restrained her from
speaking loud about it.

On _Monday_ the _21st._ of _March_, the Magistrates of _Salem_ appointed
to come to Examination of Goodwife _C._ And about Twelve of the Clock
they went into the Meeting-House, which was thronged with Spectators.
Mr. _Noyes_ began with a very pertinent and pathetical _Prayer_; and
Goodwife _C._ being called to answer to what was alledged against her,
she desired to go to _Prayer_, which was much wondred at, in the
presence of so many hundred People: The Magistrates told her, they would
not admit it; they came not there to hear her Pray, but to Examine her,
in what was Alledged against her. The Worshipful Mr. _Hathorne_ asked
her, _Why she afflicted those Children?_ She said, she did not Afflict
them. He asked her, who did then? She said, _I do not know; How should I
know?_ The Number of the Afflicted Persons were about that time Ten,
_viz._ Four Married Women, Mrs. _Pope_, Mrs. _Putman_, Goodwife
_Bibber_, and an Ancient Woman, named _Goodall_; three Maids, _Mary
Walcut_, _Mercy Lewes_, at _Thomas Putman's_, and a Maid at _Dr.
Griggs's_; there were three Girls from 9 to 12 Years of Age, each of
them, or thereabouts, _viz._ _Elizabeth Parris_, _Abigail Williams_, and
_Ann Putman_; these were most of them at Goodwife _C.'s_ Examination,
and did vehemently Accuse her in the Assembly of Afflicting them, by
_Biting_, _Pinching_, _Strangling_, _&c._ And that they in their Fits
see her Likeness coming to them, and bringing a _Book_ to them; she
said, she had no _Book_; they affirmed, she had a _Yellow Bird_, that
used to suck betwixt her Fingers, and being asked about it, if she had
any _Familiar Spirit_, that attended her? she said, _She had no
Familiarity with any such thing._ She was a _Gospel Woman_: Which Title
she called her self by; and the Afflicted Persons told her, Ah! she was
_A Gospel Witch_. _Ann Putman_ did there affirm, that one day when
Lieutenant _Fuller_ was at Prayer at her Father's House, she saw the
shape of Goodwife _C._ and she thought Goodwife _N._ Praying at the same
time to the Devil; she was not sure it was Goodwife _N._ she thought it
was; but very sure she saw the shape of Goodwife _C._ The said _C._
said, they were poor distracted Children, and no heed to be given to
what they said. Mr. _Hathorne_ and Mr. _Noyes_ replyed, It was the
Judgment of all that were present, they were _Bewitched_, and only she
the Accused Person said, they were _Distracted_. It was observed several
times, that if she did but bite her under lip in time of Examination,
the Persons afflicted were bitten on their Arms and Wrists, and produced
the _Marks_ before the Magistrates, Ministers, and others. And being
watched for that, if she did but _Pinch_ her Fingers, or _Grasp_ one
Hand hard in another, they were Pinched, and produced the _Marks_ before
the Magistrates, and Spectators. After that, it was observed, that if
she did but lean her _Breast_ against the Seat in the Meeting-House,
(being the _Bar_ at which she stood), they were afflicted. Particularly
Mrs. _Pope_ complained of grievous Torment in her _Bowels_, as if they
were torn out. She vehemently accused the said _C._ as the Instrument,
and first threw her Muff at her; but that flying not home, she got off
her _shoe_, and hit Goodwife _C._ on the Head with it. After these
Postures were watched, if the said _C._ did but stir her Feet, they were
afflicted in their _Feet_, and stamped fearfully. The afflicted Persons
asked her, why she did not go to the Company of Witches which were
before the Meeting-House Mustering? Did she not hear the _Drum_ beat?
They accused her of having Familiarity with the _Devil_, in the time of
Examination, in the shape of a Black _Man_ whispering in her Ear; they
affirmed, that her _Yellow Bird_ sucked betwixt her Fingers in the
Assembly; and Order being given to see if there were any sign, the Girl
that saw it, said, it was too late now; she had removed a _Pin_, and put
it on her _Head_; which was found _there_ sticking upright.

They told her, she had Covenanted with the _Devil_ for ten Years, six of
them were gone, and four more to come. She was required by the
Magistrates to answer that Question in the Catechism, _How many persons
be there in the God-head?_ She answered it but oddly, yet was there no
great thing to be gathered from it; she denied all that was charged upon
her, and said, _They could not prove a Witch;_ she was that Afternoon
Committed to _Salem_ Prison; and after she was in Custody, she did not
so appear to them, and afflict them as before.

On Wednesday the _23d._ of _March_, I went to _Thomas Putman's_, on
purpose to see his Wife: I found her lying on the Bed, having had a sore
Fit a little before; she spake to me, and said, she was glad to see me;
her Husband and she both desired me to Pray with her while she was
sensible; which I did, though the Apparition said, _I should not go to
Prayer._ At the first beginning she attended; but after a little time,
was taken with a Fit; yet continued silent, and seemed to be _Asleep_:
When Prayer was done, her Husband going to her, found her in a _Fit_; he
took her off the Bed, to set her on his Knees, but at first she was so
stiff, she could not be bended; but she afterwards sat down, but quickly
began to strive violently with her _Arms_ and _Leggs_; she then began to
Complain of, and as it were to Converse Personally with, Goodwife _N._
saying, _Goodwife N. Be gone! Be gone! Be gone! are you not ashamed, a
Woman of your Profession, to afflict a poor Creature so? What hurt did I
ever do you in my life? You have but two Years to live, and then the
Devil will torment your Soul; for this your Name is blotted out of God's
Book, and it shall never be put in God's Book again; be gone for shame,
are you not afraid of that which is coming upon you? I know, I know what
will make you afraid; the wrath of an Angry God, I am sure that will
make you afraid; be gone, do not torment me, I know what you would have_
(we judged she meant, _her Soul_) _but it is out of your reach; it is
cloathed with the white Robes of Christ's Righteousness._ After this,
she seemed to dispute with the Apparition about a particular _Text_ of
Scripture. The Apparition seemed to deny it; (the Womans Eyes being fast
closed all this time) she said, _She was sure there was such a Text_,
and she would tell it; and then the Shape would be gone, for, said she,
_I am sure you cannot stand before that Text!_ Then she was sorely
Afflicted, her Mouth drawn on one side, and her Body strained for about
a Minute, and then said, _I will tell, I will tell; it is, it is, it
is_, three or four times, and then was afflicted to hinder her from
telling, at last she broke forth, and said, _It is the third Chapter of
the Revelations._ I did something scruple the reading it, and did let my
scruple appear, lest Satan should make any Superstitiously to improve
the Word of the Eternal God. However, tho' not versed in these things, I
judged I might do it this once for an Experiment. I began to _read_, and
before I had near read through the first Verse, she opened her Eyes, and
was well; this Fit continued near half an hour. Her Husband and the
Spectators told me, she had often been so relieved by reading Texts that
she named, something pertinent to her Case; as _Isa. 40.1._ _Isa. 49.1._
_Isa. 50.1._ and several others.

On Thursday the Twenty-Fourth of _March_, (being in course the
Lecture-Day at the Village,) Goodwife. _N._ was brought before the
Magistrates Mr. _Hathorne_ and Mr. _Corwin_, about Ten of the Clock in
the Forenoon, to be Examined in the Meeting-House, the Reverend Mr.
_Hale_ begun with Prayer, and the Warrant being read, she was required
to give Answer, _Why she afflicted those persons?_ She pleaded her own
Innocency with earnestness. _Thomas Putman's_ Wife, _Abigail Williams_,
and _Thomas Putman's_ Daughter accused her that she appeared to them,
and afflicted them in their Fits; but some of the others said, that they
had seen her, but knew not that ever she had hurt them; amongst which
was _Mary Walcut_, who was presently after she had so declared bitten,
and cryed out of her in the Meeting-House, producing the _Marks_ of
_Teeth_ on her wrist. It was so disposed, that I had not leisure to
attend the whole time of Examination, but both Magistrates and Ministers
told me, that the things alledged by the afflicted, and defences made by
her, were much after the same manner as the former was. And her motions
did produce like effects, as to _Biting_, _Pinching_, _Brusing_,
_Tormenting_, at their _Breasts_, by her _Leaning_, and when bended
back, were as if their Backs were broken. The afflicted Persons said,
the _Black Man_ whispered to her in the Assembly, and therefore she
could not hear what the Magistrates said unto her. They said also, that
she did then ride by the Meeting-House, behind the _Black Man_. _Thomas
Putman's_ Wife had a grievous Fit in the time of Examination, to the
very great impairing of her strength, and wasting of her spirits,
insomuch as she could hardly move hand or foot when she was carried out.
Others also were there grievously afflicted, so that there was once such
a hideous scrietch and noise (which I heard as I walked at a little
distance from the Meeting-House) as did amaze me, and some that were
within, told me the whole Assembly was struck with Consternation, and
they were afraid, that those that sate next to them were under the
Influence of _Witchcraft_. This Woman also was that day committed to
_Salem_ Prison. The Magistrates and Ministers also did inform me, that
they apprehended a Child of _Sarah G._ and examined it, being between 4
and 5 years of Age. And as to matter of Fact, they did unanimously
affirm, that when this _Child_ did but cast its Eye upon the afflicted
Persons, they were tormented; and they held her _Head_, and yet so many
as her _Eye_ could fix upon were afflicted. Which they did several times
make careful Observation of: The afflicted complained, they had often
been _Bitten_ by this Child, and produced the marks of _a small set of
teeth_ accordingly; this was also committed to _Salem_ Prison, the Child
looked _hail, and well_ as other Children. I saw it at Lieut.
_Ingersol's_. After the Commitment of Goodw. _N._ _Tho. Putman's_ Wife
was much better, and had no violent Fits at all from that _24th._ of
March, to the _5th._ of _April_. Some others also said they had not seen
her so frequently appear to them, to hurt them.

On the _25th._ of _March_ (as Capt. _Stephen Sewal_ of _Salem_ did
afterwards inform me) _Eliz. Paris_ had sore Fits at his House, which
much troubled _himself, and his Wife_, so as he told me they were almost
discouraged. She related, that the great _Black Man_ came to her, and
told her, if she would be ruled by him, she should have whatsoever she
desired, and go to a _Golden City_. She relating this to Mrs. _Sewal_,
she told the Child, it was the _Devil_, and he was a _Lyar from the
Beginning_, and bid her tell him so, if he came again: which she did
accordingly, at the next coming to her, in her Fits.

On the _26th._ of _March_, Mr. _Hathorne_, Mr. _Corwin_, and Mr.
_Higison_, were at the Prison-Keeper's House to Examine the Child, and
it told them there, it had a little _Snake_ that used to suck on the
lowest Joynt of its Fore-Finger; and when they enquired where, pointing
to other places, it told them, not there, but _there_, pointing on the
lowest Joint of the Fore-Finger, where they observed a deep Red Spot,
about the bigness of a _Flea-bite_; they asked who gave it that _Snake_?
whether the great Black Man? It said no, its Mother gave it.

The 31 of _March_ there was a _Publick Fast_ kept at _Salem_ on account
of these Afflicted Persons. And _Abigail Williams_ said, that the
Witches had a _Sacrament_ that day at an house in the Village, and that
they had _Red Bread_ and _Red Drink_. The first of _April_, _Mercy
Lewis_, _Thomas Putman's_ Maid, in her Fit, said, they did eat _Red
Bread_, like _Man's Flesh_, and would have had her eat some, but she
would not; but turned away her head, and spit at them, and said, _I will
not Eat, I will not Drink, it is Blood, &c._, she said, _That is not the
Bread of Life; that is not the Water of Life; Christ gives the Bread of
Life; I will have none of it!_ The first of _April_ also _Mercy Lewis_
aforesaid saw in her Fit a _White Man_, and was with him in a glorious
Place, which had no _Candles_ nor _Sun_, yet was full of Light and
_Brightness_; where was a great Multitude in White glittering Robes, and
they Sung the Song in the fifth of _Revelation_, the 9th verse, and the
110 _Psalm_, and the 149 _Psalm_; and said with her self, _How long
shall I stay here! let me be along with you:_ She was loth to leave this
place, and grieved that she could tarry no longer. This _white Man_ hath
appeared several times to some of them, and given them notice how long
it should be before they had another Fit, which was sometimes a day, or
day and half, or more or less, it hath fallen out accordingly.

The 3d of _April_, the Lord's-day, being Sacrament-day, at the Village,
_Goodw. C._ upon Mr. _Parris's_ naming his Text, _John 6.70._ _One of
them is a Devil_, the said _Goodw. C._ went immediately out of the
Meeting-House, and flung the Door after her violently, to the amazement
of the Congregation. She was afterwards seen by some in their Fits, who
said, _O +Goodw. C.+ I did not think to see you here!_ (and being at
their _Red bread and drink_) said to her, _Is this a time to receive the
Sacrament, you ran away on the Lord's-Day, and scorned to receive it in
the Meeting-House, and, Is this a time to receive it? I wonder at you!_
This is the sum of what I either saw my self, or did receive Information
from persons of undoubted Reputation and Credit.




REMARKS OF THINGS MORE THAN ORDINARY ABOUT THE

AFFLICTED PERSONS.


1. They are in their Fits tempted to be _Witches_, are shewed the List
of the Names of others, and are tortured, because they will not yeild to
Subscribe, or meddle with, or touch the BOOK, and are promised to have
present Belief if they would do it.

2. They did in the Assembly mutually _Cure_ each other, even with a
_Touch_ of their Hand, when Strangled, and otherwise Tortured; and would
endeavour to get to their Afflicted, to relieve them.

3. They did also foretel when anothers Fit was a-coming, and would say,
_Look to her!_ she will have a Fit presently, which fell out
accordingly, as many can bear witness, that heard and saw it.

4. That at the same time, when the _Accused_ Person was present, the
_Afflicted Persons_ saw her Likeness in other places of the
Meeting-House, suckling her _Familiar_, sometimes in one place and
posture, and sometimes in another.

5. That their Motions in their Fits are _Preternatural_, both as to the
manner, which is so strange as a well person could not Screw their Body
into; and as to the violence also it is preternatural being much beyond
the Ordinary force of the same person when they are in their right mind.

6. The _eyes_ of some of them in their fits are exceeding fast closed,
and if you ask a question they can give no answer, and I do believe they
cannot hear at that time, yet do they plainely converse with the
Appearances, as if they did discourse with real persons.

7. They are utterly pressed against any persons _Praying_ with them, and
told by the appearances, they shall not go to _Prayer_, so _Tho.
Putman's_ wife was told, _I should not Pray;_ but she said, _I should:_
and after I had done, reasoned with the _Appearance_, _Did not I say he
should go to Prayer._

8. The forementioned _Mary W._ being a little better at ease, the
Afflicted persons said, _she had signed the Book_; and that was the
reason she was better. Told me by _Edward Putman_.




REMARKS CONCERNING THE ACCUSED.


1. For introduction to the discovery of those that afflicted them, It is
reported Mr. _Parris's_ Indian Man, and Woman, made a Cake of _Rye
Meal_, and the Childrens water, baked it in the Ashes, and gave it to a
Dog, since which they have discovered, and seen particular persons
hurting of them.

2. In Time of Examination, they seemed little affected, though all the
Spectators were much grieved to see it.

3. _Natural_ Actions in them produced _Preternatural_ actions in the
Afflicted, so that they are their own _Image_ without any _Poppits_ of
Wax or otherwise.

4. That they are accused to have a Company about 23 or 24 and they did
_Muster in Armes_, as it seemed to the Afflicted Persons.

5. Since they were confined, the Persons have not been so much Afflicted
with their appearing to them, _Biteing_ or _Pinching_ of them &c.

6. They are reported by the Afflicted Persons to keep dayes of _Fast_
and dayes of _Thanksgiving_, and _Sacraments_; Satan endeavours to
Transforme himself to an _Angel of Light_, and to make his Kingdom and
Administrations to resemble those of our Lord Jesus Christ.

7. Satan Rages Principally amongst the Visible Subjects of Christ's
Kingdom and makes use (at least in appearance) of some of them to
Afflict others; that _Christ's Kingdom, may be divided against it self_,
and so be weakened.

8. Several things used in _England_ at Tryal of Witches, to the Number
of 14 or 15 which are wont to pass instead of, or in Concurrence with
_Witnesses_, at least 6 or 7 of them are found in these accused: see
_Keebles Statutes_.

9. Some of the most solid Afflicted Persons do affirme the same things
concerning _seeing_ the accused _out_ of their Fitts as well as _in_
them.

10. The Witches had a _Fast_, and told one of the Afflicted Girles, she
must not _Eat_, because it was _Fast Day_, she said, she _would_: they
told her they would _Choake_ her then; which when she did eat, was
endeavoured.




A FURTHER ACCOUNT OF THE TRYALS OF

THE NEW-ENGLAND WITCHES, SENT IN A LETTER FROM

THENCE, TO A GENTLEMAN IN LONDON.


Here were in _Salem_, _June 10, 1692_, about 40 persons that were
afflicted with horrible torments by _Evil Spirits_, and the afflicted
have accused 60 or 70 as Witches, for that they have _Spectral
appearances_ of them, tho the Persons are absent when they are
tormented. When these Witches were Tryed, several of them confessed a
contract with the Devil, by signing his Book, and did express much
sorrow for the same, declaring also thir _Confederate Witches_, and said
the Tempters of them desired 'em to sign the _Devils Book_, who
tormented them till they did it. There were at the time of
_Examination_, before many hundreds of Witnesses, strange Pranks play'd;
such as the taking Pins out of the Clothes of the afflicted, and
thrusting them into their flesh, many of which were taken out again by
the _Judges_ own hands. Thorns also in like kind were thrust into their
flesh; the accusers were sometimes _struck dumb, deaf, blind_, and
sometimes lay as if they were dead for a while, and all foreseen and
declared by the afflicted just before it 'twas done. Of the afflicted
there were two Girls, about _12 or 13 years of age_, who saw all that
was done, and were therefore called the _Visionary Girls_; they would
say, _Now he, or she, or they, are going to bite or pinch the Indian_;
and all there present in Court saw the visible marks on the _Indians_
arms; they would also cry out, _Now look, look, they are going to bind
such an ones Legs_, and all present saw the same person spoken of, fall
with her Legs twisted in an extraordinary manner; Now say they, we shall
all fall, and immediately 7 or 8 of the afflicted fell down, with
_terrible shrieks and Out-crys_; at the time when one of the Witches was
_sentenc'd, and pinnion'd_ with a Cord, at the same time was the
afflicted _Indian_ Servant going home, (being about 2 or 3 miles out of
town,) and had both his Wrists at the same instant bound about with a
like Cord, in the same manner as she was when she was sentenc'd, but
with that violence, that the Cord entred into his flesh, not to be
untied, nor hardly cut----Many _Murders_ are suppos'd to be in this way
committed; for these Girls, and others of the afflicted, say, _they see
Coffins, and bodies in Shrowds_, rising up, and looking on the accused,
crying, _Vengeance, Vengeance on the Murderers_----Many other strange
things were transacted before the Court in the time of their
Examination; and especially one thing which I had like to have forgot,
which is this, One of the accus'd, whilst the rest were under
Examination, was drawn up by a Rope to the Roof of the house where he
was, and would have been choak'd in all probability, had not the Rope
been presently cut; the Rope hung at the Roof by some _invisible tye_,
for there was no hole where it went up; but after it was cut the
_remainder_ of it was found in the Chamber just above, lying by the very
place where it hung down.

In _December 1692_, the Court sate again at _Salem_ in _New-England_,
and cleared about 40 persons suspected for Witches, and Condemned three.
The Evidence against these three was the same as formerly, so the
Warrant for their Execution was sent, and the _Graves digged_ for the
said three, and for about five more that had been Condemned at _Salem_
formerly, but were Repreived by the Governour.

In the beginning of _February 1693_, the Court sate at _Charles-Town_
where the Judge exprest himself to this effect.

_That who it was that obstructed the Execution of Justice, or hindred
those good proceedings they had made, he knew not, but thereby the
Kingdom of Satan was advanc'd_, &c. _and the Lord have mercy on this
Country:_ and so declined coming any more into Court. In his absence
_Mr. D----_ sate as Chief Judge 3 several days, in which time 5 or 6
were clear'd by Proclamation, and almost as many by Trial; so that all
are acquitted.

The most remarkable was an Old Woman named _Dayton_, of whom it was
said, _If any in the World were a Witch, she was one, and had been so
accounted 30 years._ I had the Curiosity to see her tried; she was a
decrepid Woman of about 80 years of age, and did not use many words in
her own defence. She was accused by about 30 Witnesses; but the matter
alledged against her was such as needed little apology, on her part not
one passionate word, or immoral action, or evil, was then objected
against her for 20 years past, only strange accidents falling out, after
some Christian admonition given by her, as saying, _God would not
prosper them, if they wrong'd the Widow._ Upon the whole, there was not
proved against her any thing worthy of Reproof, or just admonition, much
less so heinous a Charge.

So that by the _Goodness_ of God we are once more out of present danger
of this _Hobgoblin Monster_; the standing Evidence used at _Salem_ were
called, but did not appear.

There were others also at _Charles-town_ brought upon their _Tryals_,
who had formerly confess'd themselves to be Witches; but upon their
tryals deny'd it, and were all clear'd; So that at present there is no
_further prosecution of any_.




  CASES of CONSCIENCE
  Concerning
  Evil Spirits
  Personating MEN;
  WITCHCRAFTS,
  Infallible Proofs of Guilt in such as are
  Accused with that CRIME.

  All Considered according to the Scriptures, History,
  Experience, and the Judgment of many Learned
  MEN.

  By _Increase Mather_, President of _Harvard_ Colledge at _Cambridge_,
  and Teacher of a Church at _Boston_ in _New England_.

  PROV. xxii. xxi.

  _----That thou mightest Answer the Words of Truth, to them
  that send unto thee._

  _Efficiunt Dæmones, ut quæ non sunt, sic tamen, quasi sint,
    conspicienda hominibus exhibeant._ _Lactantius_ Lib. 2. _Instit._
    Cap. 15. _Diabolus Consulitur, cum iis mediis utimur aliquid
    Cognoscendi, quæ a Diabolo sunt introducta._ _Ames Cas. Cons._ L. 4.
    Cap. 23.

  Printed at _Boston_, and Re-printed at _London_, for \John Dunton\, at
  the _Raven_ in the _Poultrey_. 1693.




CHRISTIAN READER.


_So Odious and Abominable is the Name of a Witch, to the Civilized, much
more the Religious part of Mankind, that it is apt to grow up into a
Scandal for any, so much as to enter some sober cautions against the
over hasty suspecting, or too precipitant Judging of Persons on this
account. But certainly, the more execrable the Crime is, the more
critical care is to be used in the exposing of the Names, Liberties, and
Lives of Men (especially of a Godly Conversation) to the imputation of
it. The awful hand of God now upon us, in letting loose of evil Angels
among us to perpetrate such horrid Mischiefs, and suffering of Hell's
Instruments to do such fearful things as have been scarce heard of; hath
put serious persons into deep Musings, and upon curious Enquiries what
is to be done for the detecting and defeating of this tremendous design
of the grand Adversary: And, tho' all that fear God are agreed, +That no
evil is to be done, that good may come of it+; yet hath the Devil
obtained not a little of his design, in the divisions of Reuben, about
the application of this Rule._

_That there are Devils and Witches, the Scripture asserts, and
experience confirms, That they are common enemies of Mankind, and set
upon mischief, is not to be doubted: That the Devil can (by Divine
Permission) and often doth vex men in Body and Estate, without the
Instrumentality of Witches, is undeniable: That he often hath, and
delights to have the concurrence of Witches, and their consent in
harming men, is consonant to his native Malice to Man, and too
lamentably exemplified: That Witches, when detected and convinced, ought
to be exterminated and cut off, we have God's warrant for, +Exod. 22.18.+
Only the same God who hath said, +thou shalt not suffer a Witch to
live+; hath also said, +at the Mouth of two Witnesses, or three
Witnesses shall he that is worthy of Death, be put to Death: But at the
Mouth of one Witness, he shall not be put to Death+, +Deut. 17.6.+ Much
debate is made about what is sufficient Conviction, and some have (in
their Zeal) supposed that a less clear evidence ought to pass in this
than in other Cases, supposing that else it will be hard (if possible)
to bring such to condign Punishment, by reason of the close conveyances
that there are between the Devil and Witches; but this is a very
dangerous and unjustifiable tenet. Men serve God in doing their Duty, he
never intended that all persons guilty of Capital Crimes should be
discovered and punished by men in this Life, though they be never so
curious in searching after Iniquity. It is therefore exceeding necessary
that in such a day as this, men be informed what is Evidence and what is
not. It concerns men in point of Charity; for tho' the most shining
Professor may be secretly a most abominable Sinner, yet till he be
detected, our Charity is bound to Judge according to what appears: and
notwithstanding that a clear evidence must determine a case; yet
presumptions must be weighed against presumptions, and Charity is not to
be forgone as long as it has the most preponderating on its side. And it
is of no less necessity in point of Justice; there are not only
Testimonies required by God, which are to be credited according to the
Rules given in his Word referring to witnesses: But there is also an
Evidence supposed to be in the Testimony, which is throughly to be
weighed, and if it do not infallibly prove the Crime against the person
accused, it ought not to determine him guilty of it; for so a righteous
Man may be Condemned unjustly. In the case of Witchcrafts we know that
the Devil is the immediate Agent in the Mischief done, the consent or
compact of the Witch is the thing to be Demonstrated._

_Among many Arguments to evince this, that which is most under present
debate, is that which refers to something vulgarly called +Spectre
Evidence+, and a certain sort of Ordeal or trial by the sight and touch.
The principal Plea to justifie the convictive Evidence in these, is
fetcht from the Consideration of the Wisdom and Righteousness of God in
Governing the World, which they suppose would fail, if such things were
permitted to befal an innocent person; but it is certain, that too
resolute conclusions drawn from hence, are bold usurpations upon
spotless +Sovereignty+: and tho' some things if suffered to be common,
would subvert this Government, and disband, yea ruine Humane Society;
yet God doth sometimes suffer such things to evene, that we may thereby
know how much we are beholden to him, for that restraint which he lays
upon the Infernal Spirits, who would else reduce a World into a Chaos.
That the Resolutions of such Cases as these is proper for the Servants
of Christ in the Ministry cannot be denied; the seasonableness of doing
it now, will be justified by the Consideration of the necessity there is
at this time of a right Information of men's Judgments about these
things, and the danger of their being misinformed._

_The Reverend, Learned, and Judicious Author of the ensuing Cases, is
too well known to need our Commendation: All that we are concerned in,
is to +assert our hearty Consent to, and Concurrence with the substance
of what is contained in the following Discourse+: And, with our hearty
Request to God, that he would discover the depths of this Hellish
Design; direct in the whole management of this Affair; prevent the
taking any wrong steps in this dark way; and that he would in particular
Bless these faithful Endeavours of his Servant to that end, we Commend
it and you to his Divine Benediction._

  William Hubbard.
  Samuel Phillips.
  Charles Morton.
  James Allen.
  Michael Wigglesworth.
  Samuel Whiting, _Sen._
  Samuel Willard.
  John Baily.
  Jabez Fox.
  Joseph Gerrish.
  Samuel Angier.
  John Wise.
  Joseph Capen.
  Nehemiah Walter.




CASES OF CONSCIENCE CONCERNING

WITCHCRAFTS.


The First Case that I am desired to express my Judgment in, is this,
_Whether it is not Possible for the Devil to impose on the imaginations
of Persons Bewitched, and to cause them to Believe that an Innocent, yea
that a Pious person does torment them, when the Devil himself doth it;
or whether Satan may not appear in the Shape of an Innocent and Pious,
as well as of a Nocent and Wicked Person, to Afflict such as suffer by
Diabolical Molestations?_

The Answer to the Question must be Affirmative; Let the following
Arguments be duely weighed in the Ballance of the Sanctuary.


_Argu. 1._ There are several Scriptures from which we may infer the
Possibility of what is Affirmed.

1. We find that the _Devil by the Instigation of the Witch at Endor
appeared in the Likeness of the Prophet Samuel_. I am not ignorant that
some have asserted that, which, if it were proved, would evert this
Argument, _viz._ that it was the true and not a delusive _Samuel_ which
the Witch brought to converse with _Saul_. Of this Opinion are some of
the Jewish Rabbies[1] and some Christian Doctors[2] and many late Popish
Authors[3] amongst whom _Cornel. a Lapide_ is most elaborate. But that
it was a _Dæmon_ representing _Samuel_ has been evinced by learned and
Orthodox Writers: especially [4]_Peter Martyr_, [5]_Balduinus
[6]Lavater_, and our incomparable _John Rainolde_. I shall not here
insist on the clearing of that, especially considering, that elsewhere I
have done it: only let me add, that the Witch said to _Saul_, _I see
Elohim_, i. e. _A God_; (for the whole Context shows, that a single
Person is intended) _Ascending out of the Earth_. _1 Sam. 28.13._ The
Devil would be Worshipped as a God, and _Saul_ now, that he was become a
_Necromancer_, must bow himself to him. Moreover, had it been the true
_Samuel_ from Heaven reprehending _Saul_, there is great Reason to
believe, that he would not only have reproved him for his sin, in not
executing Judgment on the _Amalekites_; as in Ver. 18. But for his
Wickedness in consulting with Familiar Spirits: For which Sin it was in
special that he died. _2 Chron. 10.13._ But in as much as there is not
one word to testify against that Abomination, we may conclude that it
was not real _Samuel_ that appeared to _Saul_: and if it were the Devil
in his likeness, the Argument seems very strong, that if the Devil may
appear in the form of a Saint in Glory, much more is it possible for him
to put on the likeness of the most Pious and Innocent Saint on Earth.
There are, who acknowledge that a _Dæmon_ may appear in the shape of a
Godly Person, _But not as doing Evil_. Whereas the Devil in _Samuel's_
likeness told a pernicious Lye, when he said, _Thou hath disquieted me._
It was not in the Power of _Saul_, nor of all the Devils in Hell, to
disquiet a Soul in Heaven, where _Samuel_ had been for Two years before
this Apparition. Nor did the _Spectre_ speak true, when he said, _Thou
and thy Sons shall be with me:_ Tho' _Saul_ himself at his Death went to
be with the Devil, his Son _Jonathan_ did not so. Besides, (which suits
with the matter in hand) the Devil in _Samuels_ shape confirmed
_Necromancy_ and _Cursed Witchery_. He that can in the likeness of
Saints encourage Witches to Familiarity with Hell, may possibly in the
likeness of a Saint afflict a Bewitched Person. But this we see from
Scripture, Satan may be permitted to do.

And whereas it is objected, that the Devil may appear indeed in the form
of Dead Persons, but that he cannot represent such as are living; The
contrary is manifest. No Question had _Saul_ said to the Witch, bring me
_David_ who was then living, she could as easily have shown living
_David_ as dead _Samuel_, as easily as that great Conjurer of whom
[7]_Wierus_ speaks, brought the appearance of _Hector_ and _Achilles_,
and after that of _David_ before the Emperour _Maximilian_.

And that evil Angels have sometimes appeared in the likeness of living
absent persons, is a thing abundantly confirmed by History.

[8]_Austin_ tells us of one that went for resolution in some intricate
Questions to a Philosopher, of whom he could get no Answer; but in the
Night the Philosopher comes to him, and resolves all his Doubts. Not
long after, he demanded the reason why he could not answer him in the
Day as well as in the Night; The Philosopher professed he was not with
him in the Night, only acknowledged that he dreamed of his having such
conversation of his Friend, but he was all the time at home, and asleep.
_Paulus_ and _Palladius_ did both of them profess to _Austin_, that one
in his shape, had divers times, and in divers places appeared to them:
[9]_Thyreus_ mentions several Apparitions of absent living persons,
which happened in his time, and which he had the certain knowledge of. A
Man that is in one place cannot (_Autoprosopos_) at the same time be in
another. It remains then that such _Spectres_ are Prodigious and
Supernatural, and not without Diabolical Operation. It has been
Controverted among Learned Men, whether innocent Persons may not by the
malice and deluding Power of the Devil be represented as present amongst
Witches at their dark Assemblies. The mentioned _Thyreus_ says, that the
Devil may, and often does represent the forms of Innocent Persons out of
those Conventions, and that there is no Question to be made of it, but
as to his natural Power and Art he is able to make their shapes appear
amongst his own Servants, but he supposeth the Providence of God will
not suffer such an Injury to be done to an Innocent Person. With him
[10]_Delrio_, and _Spineus_ concur. But _Cumanus_ in his _Lucerna
Inquisitorum_ (a Book which I have not yet seen) defends the Affirmative
in this Question. _Bins Fieldius_ in his Treatise, concerning the
Confession of Witches, inclines to the Negative, only [11]he
acknowledges _Dei extraordinaria Permissione posse Innocentes sic
representari._ And he that shall assert, that Great and Holy God never
did nor ever will permit the Devil thus far to abuse an Innocent Person,
affirms more than he is able to prove. The story of _Germanus_ his
discovering a Diabolical illusion of this nature, concerning a great
number of Persons that seemed to be at a Feast when they were really at
home and asleep, is mentioned by many Authors. But the particulars
insisted on, do sufficiently evince the Truth of what we assert, _viz._
That the Devil may by Divine Permission appear in the shape of Innocent
and Pious Persons. Nevertheless, It is evident from another Scripture,
_viz._ that in _2 Cor. 11.14._ _For Satan himself is transformed into an
Angel of Light._ He seems to be what he is not, and makes others seem to
be what they are not. He represents evil men as good, and good men as
evil. The Angels of Heaven, (who are the Angels of Light) love Truth and
Righteousness, the Devil will seem to do so too; and does therefore
sometimes lay before men excellent good Principles and exhort them (as
he did _Theodore Maillit_) to practise many things, which by the Law of
Righteousness they are obliged unto, and hereby he does more effectually
deceive. Is it not strange, that he has sometimes intimated to his most
devoted servants, that if they would have familiar Conversation with
him, they must be careful to keep themselves from enormous Sins, and
pray constantly for Divine Protection? But so has he transformed
himself into an Angel of Light, as [12]_Boissardus_ sheweth. He has
frequently appeared to Men pretending to be a good Angel, so to
_Anatolius_ of old; and the late instances of [13]Dr. _Dee_ and _Kellet_
are famously known. How many deluded _Enthusiasts_ both in former and
latter times have been imposed on by Satans appearing visibly to them,
pretending to be a good Angel. And moreover, he may be said to transform
himself into an _Angel of Light_, because of his appearing in the Form
of _Holy Men_, who are the _Children of Light_, yea in the shape and
habit of Eminent Ministers of God. So did he appear to Mr. _Earl_ of
_Colchester_ in the likeness of Mr. _Liddal_ an Holy Man of God, and to
the _Turkish Chaous_ Baptized at _London_, _Anno 1658._ pretending to be
Mr. _Dury_ an Excellent Minister of Christ. And how often has he
pretended to be the Apostle _Paul_ or _Peter_ or some other celebrated
Saint? Ecclesiastical Histories abound with Instances of this nature.
Yea, sometimes he has transfigured himself into the Form of Christ. It
is reported that he appeared to [14]St. _Martin_ Gloriously arrayed, as
if he had been Christ. So likewise to [15]_Secundellus_, and to another
Saint, who suspecting it was Satan, transforming himself into an _Angel
of Light_ had this expression, _If I may see Christ in Heaven it is
enough, I desire not to see him in this World_; whereupon the _Spectre_
vanished. It has been related of _Luther_, that after he had been
Fasting and Praying in his Study, the Devil come pretending to be
Christ, but _Luther_ saying, _away thou confounded Devil, I acknowledge
no Christ but what is in my Bible_, nothing more was seen. Thus then the
Devil is able (by Divine Permission) to Change himself into what form or
figure he pleaseth,

    _Omnia transformat sese in miracula rerum._

A Third Scripture to our purpose is that, in _Rev. 12.10._ where the
Devil is called the _Accuser of the Brethren_. Such is the malice and
impudence of the Devil, as that he does accuse good Men, and that before
God, and that not only of such Faults as they really are guilty of, he
accused _Joshua_ with his filthy Garments, when through his Indulgence
some of his Family had transgressed by unlawful Marriages, _Zach. 3.23._
with _Ezra. 10.18._ but also with such Crimes, as they are altogether
free from. He represented the Primitive Christians as the vilest of men,
and as if at their Meetings they did commit the most nefandous Villanies
that ever were known; and that not only Innocent, but Eminently Pious
Persons should thro' the malice of the Devil be accused with the Crime
of Witchcraft, is no new thing. Such an Affliction did the Lord see meet
to exercise the great _Athanasius_ with[16] only the Divine Providence
did wonderfully vindicate him from that as well as from some other foul
Aspersions. The _Waldenses_ (altho' the Scriptures call them _Saints_,
_Rev. 13.7._) have been traduced by Satan and by the World as horrible
Witches; so have others in other places, only because they have done
extraordinary things by their Prayers: It is by many Authors related,
that a City in _France_ was molested with a Diabolical _Spectre_, which
the People were wont to call _Hugon_; near that place a number of
Protestants were wont to meet to serve God, whence the Professors of the
true reformed Religion were nic-named _Hugonots_, by the Papists, who
designed to render them before the World, as the Servants and
Worshippers of that _Dæmon_, that went under the name of _Hugon_. And
how often have I read in Books written by Jesuits, that _Luther_ was a
Wizard, and that he did himself confess that he had familiarity with
Satan! Most impudent Untruths! nor are these things to be wondered at,
since the Holy Son of God himself was reputed a _Magician_, and one that
had Familiarity with the greatest of Devils. The Blaspheming Pharisees
said, _he casts out the Devils thro' the Prince of Devils_, _Matth. 9.34._
There is then not the best Saint on Earth (Man or Woman) that can assure
themselves that the Devil shall not cast such an Imputation upon them.
_It is enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the Servant
as his Lord: If they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub, how
much more them of his Household_, _Matth. 10.25._ It is not for men to
determine how far the Holy God may permit the wicked one to proceed in
his Accusations. The sacred story of _Job_ giveth us to understand, that
the Lord whose ways are past finding out, does for wise and holy Ends
suffer Satan by immediate Operation, (and consequently by Witchcraft)
greatly to afflict innocent Persons, as in their Bodies and Estates, so
in their Reputations. I shall mention but one Scripture more to confirm
the Truth in hand: It is that in _Eccles. 9.2, 3._ where it is said,
_All things come alike to all, there is one event to the Righteous and
to the Wicked, as is the Good, so is the Sinner, this is an evil amongst
all things under the Sun, that there is one Event happeneth to all._ And
in _Eccles. 7.15._ 'tis said, _There is a just man that perisheth in his
Righteousness._

From hence we infer, that there is no outward Affliction whatsoever but
may befal a good Man; now to be represented by Satan as a Tormentor of
Bewitched or Possessed Persons, is a sore Affliction to a good man. To
be tormented by Satan is a sore Affliction, yet nothing but what befel
_Job_, and a Daughter of _Abraham_, whom we read of in the Gospel: To be
represented by Satan as tormenting others, is an Affliction like the
former; the Lord may bring such extraordinary Temptations on his own
Children, to afflict and humble them, for some Sin they have been guilty
of before him. A most wicked Person in St. _Ives_, got a Knife, and went
with it to a Ministers House, designing to stab him, but was
disappointed; afterwards Conscience being awakened, the Devil appears to
this Person in the Shape of that Minister, with a Knife in his hand
exhorting to Self-murder: Was not here a Punishment suitable to the Sin
which that Person had been guilty of? Perhaps some of those whom Satan
has represented as committing Witchcrafts, have been tampering with some
foolish and wicked Sorceries, tho' not to that degree, which is Criminal
and Capital by the Laws both of God and Men; for this Satan may be
permitted so to scourge them; or it may be, they have misrepresented and
abused others, for which cause the Holy God may justly give Satan leave
falsely to represent them.

Have we not known some that have bitterly censured all that have been
complained of by bewitched Persons, saying it was impossible they should
not be guilty; soon upon which themselves or some near Relations of
theirs, have been to the lasting Infamy of their Families, accused after
the same manner, and Personated by the Devil! Such tremendous Rebukes on
a few, should make all men to be careful how they joyn with Satan in
Condemning the Innocent.


Arg. 2. _Because it is possible for the Devil in the Shape of an
innocent Person to do other mischiefs._ As for those who acknowledge
that Satan may personate a pious Person, but not to do mischief, their
Opinion has been confuted by more than a few unhappy Instances. Mr.
_Clark_[17] speaks of a Man that had been an Atheist, or a Sadduce, not
believing that there are any Devils or any (to us) invisible World; this
Man was converted, but as a Punishment of his Infidelity, evil Angels
did often appear to him in the Shape of his most intimate Friends, and
would sometimes seduce him into great Inconveniences. It has been
elsewhere, and but now noted, that a _Dæmon_ in the shape of excellent
Mr. _Dury_ appeared to the _Turkish Chaos_, _Anno. 1658._ to disswade
him from prosecuting his desires of Baptism into the Name of Christ:
Also to Mr. _Earle_ in the likeness of his Friends, to discourage him
from doing things lawful and good. A multitude of _Jews_ were once
deluded by a Person pretending to be _Moses_ from Heaven, and that if
they would follow him they should pass safe through the Sea (as did
their Fathers of old through the Red Sea) whereby great numbers of them
were deceived and perished in the Waters. [18]Learned and judicious Men
have concluded that this _Moses Creensis_ was a _Dæmon_, transforming
himself into _Moses_: And that the Devil has frequently appeared[19] in
the shape of famous Persons to the end that he might seduce Men into
Idolatry, (a Sin equal to that of Witchcraft) no Man that has made it
his Concern to enquire into things of this nature can be ignorant. Many
Examples of this kind are collected by Mr. _Bromhall_ in his _Treatise
of Spectres, and the cunning Devil, to strengthen Men in their
worshipping of Saints departed:_ And by Mr. _Bovet_ in his
_Pandemonium_. It is credibly reported that the Devil in the likeness of
a faithful Minister (as St. _Ives_ before mentioned, near _Boston_ in
_Lincolnshire_) came to one that was in trouble of Mind, telling her the
longer she lived, the worse it would be for her; and therefore advising
her to Self-murder: An eminent Person still living had the account of
this Matter from Mr. _Cotton_ (the famous Teacher of both _Bostons_.) He
was well acquainted with that Minister, who related to him the whole
Story, with all the Circumstances of it: For Mr. _Cotten_ was so
affected with the Report, as to take a Journey on purpose to the Town
where this happened, that so he might obtain a satisfactory account
about it, which he did. Some Authors say, that a _Dæmon_ appeared in the
form of _Sylvanus_ (_Hierom's_ Friend) attempting a dishonest thing, the
Devil thereby designing to blast the Reputation of a famous Bishop. I
have in another Book mentioned that celebrated Instance concerning an
honest Citizen in _Zurick_ (the Metropolis of _Helvetia_) in whose shape
the Devil appeared, committing an abominable Fact (not fit to be named)
very early in the Morning, seen by the Prefect of the City, and his
Servant; they were amazed to behold a Man of good Esteem for his
Conversation, perpetrating a thing so vile and abominable; but going
from the _Spectre_ in the Field, to the Citizen's House in the Town,
they found him at home, and in his Bed, nor had he been abroad that
Morning, which convinced them, that what they saw was an Illusion of the
Devil: This Passage is mentioned as a thing known and certain by
_Lavater_ in his Treatise of _Spectres_,[20] who was a most learned and
judicious Preacher in that City. Our _Juel_ saith of him, that he must
ingeniously confess, that he never understood _Solomon's Proverbs_ until
_Lavater_ expounded them to him: That Book of his _De Spectris_ hath
been published in _Latin_, High and Low _Dutch_, _French_, _Italian_.
The learned _Zanchy_[21] speaks highly of it, professing that he had
read it both with Pleasure and Profit. _Voetius_[22] takes notice of
that passage which we have quoted out of _Lavater_ as a thing memorable.

Some Popish Authors argue, That the Devil cannot personate an innocent
Man as doing an act of Witchcraft, because then he might as well
represent them as committing Theft, Murder, _&c._ And if so, there would
be no living in the World: But I turn the Argument against them, he may
(as the mentioned Instances prove) personate honest Men as doing other
Evils; and no solid Reason can be given why he may not as well personate
them under the Notion of Witches, as under the Notion of Thieves,
Murderers, and Idolaters: As for the Objection, that then there would be
no living in the World, we shall consider it under the next Argument.


Arg. 3. _If Satan may not represent one that is not a Covenant Servant
of his, as afflicting those that are bewitched or possessed, then it is
either because he wants Will, or Power to do this, or because God will
never permit him thus to do._ No man but a Sadduce doubts of the ill
will of Devils; nothing is more pleasing to the Malice of those wicked
Spirits than to see Innocency wronged: And the Power of the Enemy is
such, as that having once obtained a Divine Concession to use his Art,
he can do this and much more than this amounts unto: We know by
Scripture-Revelation, that the Sorcerers of _Egypt_ caused many untrue
and delusive [23]Representations before _Pharaoh_ and his Servants.
_Exod. 7.11, 22._ and _8.7._ And we read of the working of Satan in all
Power and Signs, and lying Wonders. _2 Thess. 2.9._ His Heart is beyond
what the wisest of Men may pretend unto: He has perfect skill in
Opticks, and can therefore cause that to be visible to one, which is not
so to another, and things also to appear far otherwise then they are: He
has likewise the Art of Limning in the Perfection of it, and knows what
may be done by Colours. It is an odd passage[24] which I find in the
_Acta Eruditorum_, printed by _Lipsick_, that about Thirty-two Years
ago an indigent Merchant in _France_ was instructed by a _Dæmon_, that
with Water of _Borax_ he might colour Taffities, so as to cause them to
glister and look very gay: He searcheth into the Nature, Causes, and
Reasons of things, whereby he is able to produce wonderful effects. So
that if he does not form the Shape of an innocent Person as afflicting
others, it is not from want of either will or power. They that affirm,
that God never did, nor ever will permit him thus to do, alledge that it
is inconsistent with the Righteousness and Providence of God, in
governing Humane Affairs thus to suffer Men to be imposed on: It must be
acknowledged[25] that the Divine Providence has taken care, that the
greatest part of Mankind shall not be left to unavoidable Deception, so
as to be always abused by the mischievous Agents of Hell, in the Objects
of plain Sence: But yet it is not for sinful and silly Mortals to
prescribe Rules to the most High in his Government of the World, or to
direct him how far he may permit Satan to use his power: I am apt to
think that there are some amongst us, who if they had lived in _Job's_
days, and seen the Devil tormenting of him, and heard him complaining of
being scared with Dreams, and terrified with Night-visions, they would
have joined with his uncharitable Friends in censuring him as a most
guilty Person: But we should consider, that the most high God doth
sometimes deal with Men in a way of absolute Sovereignty, performing the
thing which is appointed for them, and many such things are with him: If
he does destroy the _perfect with the wicked, and laugh at the tryal of
the innocent_, (_Job 9.22, 23._) Who shall enter into his Councils! who
has given him a Charge over the Earth! or who has disposed the whole
World! Men are not able to give an account of his ordinary Works, much
less of his secret Counsels, and the dark Dispensations of his
Providence: They do but darken Counsel by Words without Knowledge when
they undertake it: If we are not able to see how this or that can stand
with the Righteousness of him that governs the World, shall we say that
the Almighty will pervert Judgment? or that he that governs the Earth
hateth Right? Shall we condemn him that is most just? But whereas 'tis
objected; where is Providence? And how shall Men live on the Earth, if
the Devil may be permitted to use such Power? I demand, where was
Providence, when Satan had Power to cause Sons of _Belial_ to lye and
swear away the Life of innocent _Naboth_, laying such Crimes to his
charge as he was never guilty of? And what an Hour of Darkness was it?
How far was the Power of Hell permitted to prevail, when Christ the Son
of God was accused, condemned, and hanged for a Crime that he never was
guilty of? That was the strangest Providence that has happened since the
World began, and yet in the Issue the most glorious: We must therefore
distinguish between what does ordinarily come to pass by the Providence
of God, and things which are extraordinary: It is not an usual thing for
a _Naboth_ to have his Life taken from him by false Accusations, or for
an _Athanasius_ or a _Susanna_ to be charged, and perhaps brought before
Courts of Judicature for Crimes of which they were altogether innocent.

But if we therefore conclude, that such a thing as this can never happen
in the World, we shall offend against the Generation of the Just: It is
not ordinary for Devils to be permitted to reveal the secret Sins of
Men; yet this has been done more than once or twice: Nor is it ordinary
for _Dæmons_ to steal Money out of Mens Pockets, and Purses, or Wine and
Cyder out of their Cellars. Yet some such Instances have there been
amongst our selves. It is not usual for Providence to permit the Devil
to come from Hell and to throw Fire on the tops of Houses, and to cause
a whole Town to be burnt to Ashes thereby; there would (it must be
confessed) be no living in the World, if evil Angels should be permitted
to do thus when they had a mind to it; nevertheless, Authors worthy of
Credit, tell us, that this has sometimes happened. Both _Erasmus_[26]
and _Cardanus_ write that the Town of _Schiltach_ in _Germany_, was in
the Month of _April_, 1533. set on fire by a Devil, and burnt to the
ground in an Hour's space: 'Tis also reported by _Sigibert_, _Aventinus_
and others, that some Cottages and Barns in a Town called _Bingus_ were
fired by a wicked _Genius_; that spiteful _Dæmon_ said it was for the
Impieties of such a Man whom he named, that he was sent to molest them:
The poor Man to satisfie his Neighbours, who were ready to Stone him,
carried an hot Iron in his Hand, but receiving no hurt thereby, he was
judged to be innocent. It is not ordinary for a Devil upon the dying
Curse of a Servant, to have a Commission from Heaven to tear and torment
a bloody cruel Master; yet such a thing may possibly come to pass. There
is a fearful Story to this purpose, in the account of the _Bucuneers_
of _America_,[27] wherein my Author relates that a Servant, who was
_Spirited_ or _Kidnapt_ (as they call it) into _America_, falling into
the Hands of a Tyrannical Master, he ran away from him, but being taken
and brought back, the hard-hearted Tyrant lashed him on his naked Back,
until his Body ran in an entire stream of Blood; to make the Torment of
this miserable Creature intolerable, he anointed his Wounds with Juice
of Lemon mingled with Salt and Pepper, being ground small together, with
which torture the miserable Wretch gave up the Ghost, with these dying
Words, _I beseech the Almighty God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, that he
permit a wicked Spirit, to make thee feel as many Torments before thy
Death, as thou hast caused me to feel before mine:_ Scarce four days
were past after this horrible Fact, when the Almighty Judge gave
Permission to the Father of Wickedness to possess the Body of that cruel
Master, and to make him lacerate his own Flesh until he died, belike
surrendring his Ghost into the Hands of the infernal Spirit, who had
tormented his Body: But of this Tragical Story enough.

To proceed, Is it not usual for Persons after their Death to appear unto
the Living: But it does not therefore follow, that the great God will
not suffer this to be: For both in former and latter Ages, Examples
thereof have not been wanting: No longer since than the last Winter,
there was much discourse in _London_ concerning a Gentlewoman, unto whom
her dead Son (and another whom she knew not) had appeared: Being then
in _London_, I was willing to satisfie my self, by enquiring into the
Truth of what was reported; and on _Febr. 23. 1691._ my Brother (who is
now a Pastor to a Congregation in that City) and I discoursed the
Gentlewoman spoken of; she told us, that a Son of hers, who had been a
very civil young Man, but more airy in his Temper than was pleasing to
his serious Mother, being dead, she was much concerned in her Thoughts
about his Condition in the other World; but a Fortnight after his Death
he appeared to her, saying, _Mother you are solicitous about my
Spiritual Welfare; trouble your self no more, for I am happy_, and so
vanished; should there be a continual Intercourse between the Visible
and Invisible World, it would breed Confusion. But from thence to infer,
that the great Ruler of the Universe will never permit any thing of this
nature to be, is an inconsequent Conclusion; it is not usual for Devils
to be permitted to come and violently carry away persons through the
Air, several miles from their Habitations: Nevertheless, this was done
in _Sweedland_ about twenty Years ago, by means of a cursed Knot of
Witches there. And a learned Physician now living, giveth an account of
several Children, who by Diabolical Frauds were stollen from their
Parents, and others left in their room: And of two, that in the
night-time a Line was by invisible Hands put about their Necks, with
which they had been strangled, but that some near them happily prevented
it. _V. Germ. Ephem. Anno 1689._ pag. 51. 516.

Let me further add here; It has very seldom been known, that Satan has
Personated innocent Men doing an ill thing, but Providence has found
out some way for their Vindication; either they have been able to prove
that they were in another place when that Fact was done, or the like. So
that perhaps there never was an Instance of any innocent Person
Condemned in any Court of Judicature on Earth, only through Satans
deluding and imposing on the Imaginations of Men, when nevertheless, the
Witnesses, Juries, and Judges, were all to be excused from blame.


Arg. 4. _It is certain both from Scripture and History, that Magicians
by their Inchantments and Hellish Conjurations, may cause a false
Representation of Persons and Things._ An inchanted eye shall see such
things as others cannot discern; it is a thing too well known to be
denied, that some by rubbing their eyes with a bewitched Water, have
immediately thereupon seen that which others could not discern; and
there are Persons in the World, who have a strange _Spectral sight_. Mr.
_Glanvil_[28] speaks of a Dutchman that could see Ghosts which others
could perceive nothing of. There are in _Spain_ a sort of men whom they
call _Zahurs_, these can see into the Bowels of the Earth; they are able
to discover Minerals and hidden Treasures; nevertheless, they have their
extraordinary sight only on _Tuesdays_ and _Fridays_, and not on the
other days of the Week. _Delrio_ saith, that when he was at _Madrid_,
_Anno Dom. 1575._ he saw some of these strange sighted Creatures. Mr.
_George Sinclare_, in his Book Entituled, _Satans Invisible World
discovered_,[29] has these Words, 'I am undoubtedly informed, that men
and women in the High-lands can discern Fatality approaching others, by
seeing them in the Waters or with Winding Sheets about them. And that
others can lecture in a Sheeps shoulder-bone a Death within the Parish
seven or eight Days before it come. It is not improbable but that such
Preternatural Knowledge comes first by a Compact with the Devil, and is
derived downward by Succession to their Posterity: Many such I suppose
are Innocent, and have this sight against their Will and Inclination.'
Thus Mr. _Sinclare_, I concur with his supposal, that such Knowledge is
originally from Satan, and perhaps the Effect of some old Inchantment.
There are some at this day in the World, that if they come into a House
where one of the Family will die within a Fortnight, the smell of a dead
Corpse offends them to such a degree, as that they cannot stay in that
House. It is reported that near unto the Abby of St. _Maurice_ in
_Burgundy_[30] there is a Fishpond in which are Fishes put according to
the number of the Monks of that place; if any one of them happened to be
sick, there is a Fish seen to Float and Swim above Water half dead, and
if the Monk shall die, the Fish a few days before dieth. In some parts
in _Wales_ Death-lights or Corps Candles (as they call them) are seen in
the night time going from the House where some body will shortly die,
and passing in to the Church-yard. Of this, my Honoured and never to be
forgotten Friend Mr. _Richard Baxter_,[31] has given an Account in his
Book about Witchcrafts lately Published: what to make of such things,
except they be the effects of some old Inchantment, I know not; nor what
Natural Reason to assign for that which I find amongst the Observations
of the _Imperial Academy_ for the Year 1687, _viz._ That in an Orchard
where are choice _Damascen_ Plumbs, the Master of the Family being sick
of a _Quartan Ague_, whilst he continued very ill, four of his
Plumb-trees instead of Damascens brought forth a vile sort of yellow
Plumbs: but recovering Health, the next Year the Tree did (as formerly)
bear Damascens again; but when after that he fell into a fatal Dropsie,
on those Trees were seen not Damascens, but another sort of Fruit. The
same Author[32] gives Instances of which he had the certain knowledge,
concerning Apple-trees and Pear-trees, that the Fruit of them would on a
sudden wither as if they had been baked in an Oven, when the owners of
them were mortally sick. It is no less strange that in the Illustrious
Electoral[33] House of _Brandenburg_ before the Death of some one of the
Family Feminine Spectres appeared: [34]and often in the Houses of Great
men, Voices and Visions from the Invisible World have been the
Harbingers of Death. When any Heir in the Worshipful Family of the
_Breertons_ in _Cheshire_ is near his Death, there are seen in a Pool
adjoyning, Bodies of Trees swimming for certain days together, on which
Learned _Cambden_[35] has this note, _These and such like things are
done either by the Holy Tutelar Angels of Men, or else by the Devils,
who by Gods Permission mightily shew their Power in this Inferiour
World._ As for Mr. _Sinclare's_ Notion that some Persons may have a
_second Sight_, (as 'tis termed) and yet be themselves Innocent, I am
satisfied that he judgeth right; for this is common amongst the
_Laplanders_, who are horribly addicted to Magical Incantations: They
bequeath their _Dæmons_ to their Children as a Legacy, by whom they are
often assisted (like Bewitched Persons as they are) to see and do things
beyond the Power of Nature. An Historian who deserves Credit,
relates,[36] that a certain _Laplander_ gave him a true and particular
Account of what had happened to him in his Journey to _Lapland_; and
further complained to him with Tears, that things at great distance were
represented to him, and how much he desired to be Delivered from that
Diabolical Sight, but could not; this doubtless was caused by some
Inchantment. But to proceed to what I intend; the Eyes of Persons by
reason of Inchanting Charms, may not only see what others do not, but be
under such power of Fascination, as that things which are not, shall
appear to them as real: The Apostle speaks of _Bewitched Eyes_, _Gal.
3.1._ and we know from Scripture, that the Imaginations of men have by
Inchantments been imposed upon; and Histories abound with very strange
Instances of this Nature: The old Witch _Circe_ by an Inchanted Cup
caused _Ulysses_ his Companions to imagine themselves to be turned into
Swine; and how many Witches have been themselves so bewitched by the
Devil, as really to believe that they were transformed into Wolves, or
Dogs, or Cats. It is reported of _Simon Magus_,[37] that by his
Sorceries he would so impose on the Imaginations of People, as that they
thought he had really changed himself into another sort of Creature.
_Opollonius_ of _Tyana_ could out do _Simon_ with his Magick: The great
_Bohemian_ Conjurer _Zyto_[38] by his Inchantments, caused certain
Persons whom he had a mind to try his Art upon, to imagine that their
Hands were turned into the Feet of an Ox, or into the Hoofs of a Horse,
so that they could not reach to the Dishes before them to take any thing
thence; he sold Wisps of Straw to a Butcher who bought them for Swine;
that many such prestigious Pranks were played, by the unhappy _Faustus_,
is attested by _Camerarius_, _Wyerus_, _Voetius_, _Lavater_, and
_Lonicer_.

There is newly Published a Book (mentioned in the _Acta Eruditorum_)
wherein the Author [39](_Wiechard Valvassor_) relates, that a _Venetian_
Jew instructed him (only he would not attend his Instructions) how to
make a Magical Glass which should represent any Person or thing
according as he should desire. If a Magician by an Inchanted Glass can
do this, he may as well by the help of a Dæmon cause false _Idæas_ of
Persons and Things to be impressed on the Imaginations of bewitched
Persons; the Blood and Spirits of a Man, that is bitten with a Mad-Dog,
are so envenomed, as that strange Impressions are thereby made on his
Imagination: let him be brought into a Room where there is a
Looking-Glass, and he will (if put upon it) not only say but swear that
he sees a Dog, tho' in truth there is no Dog it may be within 20 Miles
of him; and is it not then possible for the Dogs of Hell to poyson the
Imaginations of miserable Creatures, so as that they shall believe and
swear that such Persons hurt them as never did so? I have heard of an
Inchanted Pin, that has caused the Condemnation and Death of many scores
of innocent Persons. There was a notorious _Witchfinder_ in _Scotland_,
that undertook by a Pin, to make an infallible Discovery of suspected
Persons, whether they were Witches or not, if when the Pin was run an
Inch or two into the Body of the accused Party no Blood appeared, nor
any sense of Pain, then he declared them to be Witches; by means hereof
my Author tells me no less then 300 persons were Condemned for Witches
in that Kingdom. This Bloody Jugler after he had done enough in
_Scotland_, came to the Town of _Berwick_ upon _Tweed_; an honest Man
now living in _New-England_ assureth me, that he saw the Man thrust a
great Brass Pin two Inches into the Body of one, that some would in that
way try whether there was Witchcraft in the Case or no: the accused
Party was not in the least sensible of what was done, and therefore in
danger of receiving the Punishment justly due for Witchcraft; only it so
happened, that Collonel _Fenwick_ (that worthy Gentleman, who many years
since lived in _New-England_) was then the Military Governour in that
Town; he sent for the Mayor and Magistrates advising them to be careful
and cautious in their proceedings; for he told them, it might be an
Inchanted Pin, which the Witchfinder made use of: Whereupon the
Magistrates of the place ordered that he should make his Experiment
with some other Pin as they should appoint: But that he would by no
means be induced unto, which was a sufficient Discovery of the Knavery
and Witchery of the Witchfinder. There is a strange Diabolical Energy
goeth along with _Incantations_. If _Balak_ had not known that he would
not have sent for _Balaam_, to see whether he could inchant the Children
of _Israel_. The Scripture intimates that Inchantments will keep a
Serpent from biting, _Eccles. 10.11._ A Witch in _Sweedland_ confessed,
that the Devil gave her a wooden Knife; and that if she did but touch
any living thing with that Knife, it would die immediately: And that
there is a wonderful Power of the Devil attending things inchanted, we
have confirmed by a prodigious Instance in Major _Weir_, a _Scotch_ Man:
That wretched Man was a perfect Prodigy; a Man of great Parts; esteemed
a Saint, yet lived in secret Uncleanness with his own Sister for thirty
four Years together: After his wickedness was discovered, he did not
seem to be troubled at any of his Crimes, excepting that he had caused a
poor Woman to be publickly whipped, because she reported that she had
seen him committing Bestiality; which thing was true, only the Woman
could not prove it. This horrid Creature, if he had his _Inchanted
Staff_ in his Hand could pray to admiration, and do extraordinary
things, as is more amply related in the Postscript to Mr. _Sinclares_
his Book before mentioned: But if he had not his Inchanted Rod to lean
upon, he could not transform himself into an Angel of Light: But by all
these things we may conclude, that it is not impossible, but that a
guilty Conjurer, that so he may render himself the less suspected, may
by his Magical Art and Inchantment, cause innocent Persons to be
represented as afflicting those whom the Devil and himself are the
Tormentors of.


Arg. 5. _The Truth we affirm is so evident, as that many Learned and
Judicious Men have freely subscribed unto it._

The memorable Relation of the Devils assuming the shape of an innocent
Citizen in _Zurick_, is in the Judgment of that great Divine _Lud
Lavater_, of weighty Consideration: And he declares, that he does
therefore mention it, that so Judges might be cautelous in their
Proceedings in Cases of this nature, inasmuch as the Devil does often in
that way intangle innocent Persons, and bring them into great Troubles.
His Words are, [40]_Hanc Historiam ideo recito, ut Judices, in
hujusmodi, Casibus cauti sint: Diabolus enim hac via sæpe innocentibus
insidiatur._ He confirms what he saith by reciting a Passage out of
_Alertus Granzius_, who writes that the Devil was seen in the shape of a
Nobleman to come out of the Empress's Chamber: But to clear her
Innocency, she (according to the superstitious _Ordeals_ then in
fashion) walked blindfold over a great many of glowing hot Irons without
touching any of them. _Voetius_ in his [41]Disputation of _Spectres_
proposeth that Question, whether the Devil may not untruly personate a
Godly Man, and answers in the Affirmative: And withal adds, that it is a
sufficient Argument (_ad hominem_) to answer the Papists with their own
Histories, which give Instances of Satan's appearing in the Figure of
Saints, nay of Christ himself. And in his Discourse concerning the
_Operations of Dæmons_[42] he has the like _Problem_, whether the Devil
may not possibly put on the shape of a true Believer, a real Saint, not
only of such as are dead, but still living, and answers, _Quidni?_ Why
not? It is true Popish _Casuists_[43] do generally incline to the
Negative in this Question: Nevertheless, the Instance of _Germanus_, who
saw a Company of honest People represented by the Devil, as if they had
been feasting together, when they were really asleep in their Beds, does
a little puzzle them, so as that they are necessitated to take up with
this Conclusion, [44]_That by an extraordinary Permission of God,
innocent Persons may be represented by Satan in the Nocturnal
Conventicles of Witches:_ And if so, much more as afflicting bewitched
Persons. _Delrio_ giveth an account of an innocent Monk, whose
Reputation was indangered by a _Dæmon's_ appearing in his shape. He
writes more like a Divine than Jesuits use to do, when he saith that,
[45]_It is not absolutely to be denied, but that the Devils may exhibite
the Forms of innocent Persons, if God permit it, who when he does permit
it, usually by some Providence discovers the Fraud of the Devils, that
so the Innocent may be vindicated, or if not, it is to bring them to
repentance for some Sin, or to try their Patience._ It is rare to see
such Words dropping from the Pen of a Jesuit: As for Protestant Writers,
I cannot call to mind one of any Note, that does deny the Possibility
of the Affirmative, in the Question before us. Dr. _Henkelius_ has
lately [46]published a learned and elaborate Discourse concerning the
right Method of curing such as are obsessed with _Cacodæmons_, in which
he asserts, that _Satan may possibly assume the Form of innocent and
pious Persons, that so he might thereby destroy their Reputations, and
expose them to undue Punishments._ As for our _English_ Divines, there
are not many greater _Casuists_ than Mr. _Perkins_; nor do I know any
one that has written on the Case of Witchcraft with more Judgment and
Clearness of Understanding: He has these Words,[47] "If a Man being
dangerously sick and like to die upon suspicion, will take it on his
death, that such an one has bewitched him, it is an allegation which may
move the Judge to examine the Party, but it is of no moment for
Conviction." The like is asserted by [48]Mr. _Cooper_, Mr. _Bernard_,
(once a famous Minister at _Batcomb_ in _Somerset_) his Book called _A
Guide to Grand Jury-men in Cases of Witchcraft_, is a solid and wise
Treatise. What his Judgment was in the Case now under debate, we may
see, _pag._ 209, 210. where his Words are these; "An Apparation of the
Party suspected, whom the Afflicted in their Fits seem to see, is a
great suspicion; yet this is but a presumption, tho' a strong one,
because these Apparitions are wrought by the Devil, who can represent to
the Phansie such as the Parties use to fear, in which his representation
he may well lye as in his other Witness: For if the Devil can represent
to the Witch a seeming _Samuel_, saying, I see Gods ascending out of the
Earth, to beguile _Saul_, may we not think he can represent a common
ordinary Person, Man or Woman unregenerate, tho' no Witch to the Phansie
of vain Persons, to deceive them and others that will give Credit to the
Devil." Thus Mr. _Bernard_.

As for the Judgment of the Elders in _New-England_, so far as I can
learn, they do generally concur with Mr. _Perkins_, and Mr. _Bernard_.
This I know, that at a Meeting of Ministers at _Cambridge_, _August 1.
1692._ where were present seven elders besides the President of the
_Colledge_, the Question then discoursed on, was, _Whether the Devil may
not sometimes have a Permission to represent an innocent Person as
tormenting such as are under Diabolical Molestations?_ The Answer which
they all concurred in, was in these words, _viz._ _That the Devil may
sometimes have a Permission to represent an innocent Person as
tormenting such as are under Diabolical Molestations; but that such
things are rare and extraordinary, especially when such Matters come
before Civil Judicatures:_ And that some of the most eminent Ministers
in the Land, who were not at that Meeting are of the same Judgment, I am
assured: And I am also sure, that in Cases of this nature the _Priest's
Lips should keep Knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his Mouth_,
_Mal. 2.7._


Arg. 6. _Our own Experience has confirmed the Truth of what we affirm._

I have in another Book given an account concerning _Elizabeth Knap_ of
_Groton_, who complained that a Woman as eminent for Piety as any in
that Town, did appear to her, and afflict her: But afterwards she was
satisfied that that Person never did her any harm, but that the Devil
abused them both. About two Years ago, a bewitched Person in
_Chelmsford_ in her Fits, complained that a worthy good Man, a near
Relation of hers did afflict her: So did she likewise complain of
another Person in that town of known integrity and Piety.

I have my self known several of whom I ought to think that they are now
in Heaven, considering that they were of good Conversation, and reputed
Pious by those that had the greatest Intimacy with them, of whom
nevertheless, some complained that their Shapes appeared to them, and
threatned them: Nor is this answered by saying, we do not know but those
Persons might be Witches: We are bound by the Rule of Charity to think
otherwise: And they that censure any, meerly because such a sad
Affliction as their being falsly represented by Satan has befallen them,
do not do as they would be done by. I bless the Lord, it was never the
portion allotted to me, nor to any Relation of mine to be thus abused:
But no Man knoweth what may happen to him, since _there be just Men unto
whom it happeneth according to the Work of the Wicked_, _Eccles. 8.14._
But what needs more to be said, since there is one amongst our selves
whom no Man that knows him, can think him to be a Wizzard, whom yet some
bewitched Persons complained of, that they are in his Shape tormented:
And the Devils have of late accused some eminent Persons.

It is an awful thing which the Lord has done to convince some amongst us
of their Error: This then I declare and testifie, that to take away the
Life of any one, meerly because a _Spectre_ or Devil, in a bewitched or
possessed Person does accuse them, will bring the Guilt of innocent
Blood on the Land, where such a thing shall be done: Mercy forbid that
it should, (and I trust that as it has not it never will be so) in
_New-England_. What does such an Evidence amount unto more than this:
Either such an one did afflict such an one, or the Devil in his
likeness, or his Eyes were bewitched.

The things which have been mentioned make way for, and bring us unto the
second Case, which is to come under our Consideration, _viz._

_If one bewitched is struck down at the Look or cast of the Eye of
another, and after that recovered again by a Touch from the same Person,
Is not this an infallible Proof, that the Person suspected and
complained of is in League with the Devil?_

_Answer;_ It must be owned that by such things as these Witchcrafts and
Witches have been discovered more than once or twice: And that an ill
Fame, or other Circumstances attending the suspected Party, this may be
a Ground for Examination; but this alone does not afford sufficient
Matter for Conviction: As _Spectres_ or _Devils_ appearing in the Shapes
of Men that have been murdered, declaring that they were murdered by
such Persons and in such a place, may give just occasion to the
Magistrate for Enquiry into the Matter: One great Witch-Advocate[49]
confesseth, that by this means Murders have been brought to light; yet
that alone, if other Circumstances did not concur, would not by the Law
of God take away the Life of any Man. If my Reader pleaseth, he shall
hear what old Mr. _Bernard_ of _Batcomb_ saith to a Case not unlike to
this, and the former: His Words are these,[50] 'The naming of the
suspected in their Fits, and also where they have been, and what they
have done here or there, as Mr. _Throgmorton's_ Children could do, and
that often and ever found true; this is a great Presumption: yet is this
but a Presumption, because this is only the Devils Testimony, who can
lie, and that more often than speak Truth. Christ would not allow his
Witness of him in a point most true; nor St. _Paul_ in the due Praises
of him and _Sylas_; his Witness then may not be received as sufficient
in case of ones Life: He may accuse an Innocent, as I shewed before in
Mr. _Edmund's_ giving over his Practice to find Stollen Goods; and Satan
we read would accuse _Job_ to God himself to be an Hypocrite, and to be
ready to be a Blasphemer, and he is called the Accuser of the Brethren.
Albeit, I cannot deny but this has very often proved true, yet seeing
the Devil is such an one as you heard, Christian Men should not take his
Witness, to give in Verdict upon Oath, and so swear that the Devil has
therein spoken the Truth; be it far from good men to confirm any Word of
the Devil by Oath, if it be not an evident Truth without the Devil's
Testimony, who in speaking the Truth, has a lying Intent, and speaks
some Truths of things done, which may be found to be so, that he may
wrap with them some pernicious Lye, which cannot be tried to be true,
but must rest upon his own testimony to ensnare the Blood of the
Innocent.' Thus Mr. _Bernard_ resolved the Case above sixty Years ago;
and truly in my Opinion like a Wise and Orthodox Divine, what he says,
reacheth both this and the former Case. Dr. _Cotta_ (a Learned
Physician) in his Book, about _The Tryal of Witchcraft, shewing the true
and right Method of the Discovery, with a Confutation of Erroneous ways_
(which Book he dedicates to the Right Honourable Sir _Edward Cook_, Lord
Chief Justice of _England_,)[51] He discourses concerning _Exploration
of Witches by the touch of the Witch curing the touched bewitched_, and
sheweth the Fallibility and Vanity of that way of Tryal, tho' he had
often seen Persons bewitched in that way immediately delivered from the
present Fit or Agony which was upon them: But he taketh it to be a
Diabolical Miracle. He argueth thus,[52] 'No Man can doubt but that the
Vertue wherewith this touch was indued, is supernatural: If it be so,
How can man to whom nothing is simply possible that is not natural be
justly reputed an Agent therein? If he cannot be esteemed in himself any
possible or true Agent, then it remaineth that he can only be interested
therein as an Accessary in Consent, or as a Servant unto a Superior
Power: If that Superior Power be the Devil, the least reasonable doubt,
whether the Devil alone, or with the Consent or Contract of the
suspected Person has produced that wonderful effect; with what Religion
or Reason can any Man incline rather to credit the Devil's mouth in the
Bewitched, than to pity the Accused, and believe them against the
subtility of a deceitful Devil: If the Devil by Divine Permission may
cause supernatural Concomitances and Consequences to attend the natural
Actions of Men without their allowance, as is manifest in possessed
Persons, how is it reasonable and just that the Impositions of the Devil
should be imputed unto any Man: And (saith he) God forbid that the
Devil's Signs and Wonders, nay his Truths should become any legal
Allegations or Evidences in Law. We may therefore conclude it unjust,
that the forenamed miraculous Effect by the Devil wrought and imputed by
the Bewitched, should be esteemed an infallible mark against any Man, as
therefore convinced for that the Devil and the Bewitched have so
decyphered him!' Thus that Learned Man. But to the Case in hand, I have
several things to offer.

1. _It is possible that the Persons in Question may be possessed with
Cacodæmons:_ That bewitched Persons are many times really possessed with
evil Spirits, is most certain. And as Mr. _Perkins_ observes, no Man can
prove but that Witchcraft might be the Cause of many of those
Possessions, which we read of in the Gospel: And that Devils have been
immitted into the Bodies of miserable Creatures by Magicians and
Witches, Histories and Experience do abundantly testifie. _Hierom_[53]
relates concerning a certain Virgin, that a young Man, whose Amours she
despised, prevailed with a Magician to send an evil Spirit into her, by
means whereof she was strangely besotted. 'Tis reported[54] of _Simon
Magus_, that after he had used an Hellish Sacrifice, to be revenged of
some that had called him a great Witch, he caused infernal Spirits to
enter into them. Many confessing Witches have acknowledged, that they
were the Cause of such and such Persons being possessed of evil Angels,
as [55]_Thyræus_ and others have observed: Now no Credit ought to be
given to what _Dæmons_ in such as are by them obsessed shall say. Our
Saviour by his own unerring Example has taught us not to receive the
Devil's Testimony in any thing. The Papists are justly condemned for
bringing Diabolical Testimony to confirm the Principles of their
Religion. _Peter Cotton_ the Jesuite[56] enquired of the Devil in a
possessed Person, what was the clearest Scripture to prove Purgatory. At
the time when _Luther_ died, all the possessed People in the
_Netherlands_ were quiet: The Devils in them, said the Reason was,
because _Luther_[57] had been a great Friend of theirs, and they owed
him that respect as to go as far as _Germany_ to attend his Funeral.
Another time when there was a talk of some Ministers of the Reformed
Religion, the Devils in the Obsessed laughed and said, they were not at
all afraid of them, for the _Calvinists_ and they were very good
Friends. The Jesuits insult with these Testimonies as if they were
Divine Oracles: But the Father of Lyes is never to be believed: He will
utter twenty great truths to make way for one lye: He will accuse twenty
Witches, if he can but thereby bring one innocent Person into trouble:
He mixeth Truths with Lyes, that so those truths giving credit unto
lyes, Men may believe both, and so be deceived: And whereas some say,
that the Persons in question are only bewitched and not possessed, let
it be considered that possessed Persons are called _Energumens_ from
#ERGOMAI# _Agitor_: They whose Bodies are preternaturally
agitated, so as to be in danger of being thrown into the Fire, or into
the Water, though they may be bewitched, are undoubtedly possessed with
_Dæmons_, _Mark 9.22, 25._ Learned Men[58] give it as a most certain
sign of Possession, when the afflicted Party can see and hear that which
no one else can discern any thing of, and when they can discover
[59]secret things, _Acts 6.16._ past, or future, [60]as a possessed
Person in _Germany_ foretold the War which broke out in the Year, 1546.
And when the Limbs of miserable Creatures, are bent and disjointed so as
could not possible be without a Luxation of Joints, were it not done by
a preternatural Hand, and yet no hurt raised thereby that argueth
Possession. Also, when Persons are by the Devil cast into Fits, in the
which they speak of things, that afterwards they have no remembrance
of,[61] or, if they are by cruel Devils tortured, so as to cause
horrendous Clamours in the distressed Sufferers, that's another sign of
Obsession by evil Spirits: If all these things concur in the Persons
concerning where the Question is, we may conclude them to be
_Dæmoniacks_: And if so, no _Juror_ can with a safe Conscience look on
the Testimony of such, as sufficient to take away the Life of any Man.

2. _Falling down by the cast of an Eye proceeds not from a natural, but
an arbitrary Cause;_[62] not from any Poyson in the Eye of the Witch,
but from the Agency of some _Dæmon_: The opinion of Fascination by the
Eye is an old Fable, and (saith Mr. _Perkins_) as fond as old.
_Pliny_[63] speaks of a People that killed folks by looking on them; and
he adds, that they had two Apples in each Eye: and _Tully_ writes of
women who had two Apples in one Eye that always did mischief with their
meer looks; so _Ovid_, _Pupula duplex fulminat._ And _Plutarch_[64]
writes that some persons have such a Poyson in their Eyes, as that their
Friends and Familiars are Fascinated thereby; nay he speaks of one that
Bewitched himself sick by looking on his own Face in a Glass: Others
write of Fascination by a meer Prolation of Words; and for ought I know,
there may be as much Witchery in the Tongue as there is in the Eye.
_Sennertus_[65] has discovered the Superstition of these Fancies; Sight
does not proceed from an Emission of Rays from the Eye, but by a
reception of the visible Species; and if it be (as Philosophers
conclude) an innocent Action and not an Emission of optick Spirits, so
that sight as such, does receive something from the Object, and not act
upon it, the Notion of Fascination by the Eye is unphilosophical: It is
true, that sore Eyes will affect those that look upon them, _Dum
spectant Oculi Læsos, Leduntur & ipsi_, for which a natural Reason is
easily to be assigned; but if the Witches Eyes are thus infected with a
natural Contagion, Whence is it, that only Bewitched Persons are hurt
thereby? If the vulgar Error concerning the _Basilisks_ killing with
the Look of his Poysonful Eye were a Truth, whatever person that
Serpent cast his Eye upon would be poysoned. So if Witches had a
physical Venom in their Eyes, others as well as Fascinated Persons would
be sensible thereof; there is as much Truth in this fancy of Physical
Venom in the Eye of a Witch, as there is in what _Pliny_[66] and others
relate concerning the _Thibians_, _viz._ that they have two Apples in
one Eye, and the Effigies of an Horse in the other Eye; and that they
are a people that cannot be drowned.

3. _As for that which concerns the Bewitched Persons being recovered out
of their Agonies by the Touch of the suspected Party, it is various and
fallible._

For sometimes the afflicted Person is made sick, (instead of being made
whole) by the Touch of the Accused; sometimes the Power of Imagination
is such, as that the Touch of a Person innocent and not accused shall
have the same effect. It is related in the Account of the Tryals of
Witches at _Bury_ in _Suffolk_ 1664, during the time[67] of the Tryal,
there were some Experiments made with the Persons afflicted, by bringing
the accused to touch them, and it was observed that by the least Touch
of one of the supposed Witches, they that were in their Fits, to all
mens Apprehension wholly deprived of all Sense and Understandings, would
suddenly shriek out and open their Hands.

Mr. Serjeant _Keeling_ did not think that sufficient to Convict the
Prisoners, for admitting that the Children were in truth Bewitched, yet
(saith he) it cannot be applyed to the Prisoners upon the Imagination
only of the Parties afflicted; for if that might be allowed, no Person
whatsoever can be in safety, for perhaps they might fancy another Person
who might altogether be innocent in such matters: To avoid this Scruple
it was privately desired by the Judge, that some Gentlemen there in
Court would attend one of the distempered Persons in the farther part of
the Hall, whilst she was in her Fits, and then to send for one of the
Witches to try what would happen, which they did accordingly. One of
them was conveyed from the Bar, and brought to the Afflicted Maid. They
put an Apron before her Eyes, and then another person (not the Witch)
touched her, which produced the same effect, as the Touch of the Witch
did in the Court. Whereupon the Gentlemen returned much unsatisfied.
_Bodin_[68] relates, that a Witch who was Tryed at _Nants_, was
commanded by the Judges to touch a Bewitched person, a thing often
practised by the Judges of _Germany_ in the _Imperial Chamber_. The
Witch was extreamly unwilling, but being Compelled by the Judges, she
cryed out, _I am undone;_ and as soon as ever she touched the Afflicted
person, the Witch fell down dead, and the other recovered. That horrid
Witch of _Salisbury_, _Ann Bodenham_[69] who had been Servant to the
Notorious Conjurer Dr. _Lamb_, could not bear the sight of one that was
Bewitched by her. As soon as ever she saw the Afflicted Person, she ran
about shrieking, and crying, and roaring after an hideous manner, that
the Devil would tear her in pieces, if that person came near her. And
whilst the Witch was in such Torment, the Bewitched was at ease. By
these things we see, that the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom of
darkness, are not always and in all places the same.

And it is good for men to concern themselves with them as little as may
be.

I think there is weight in Dr. _Cotta's_[70] Argument, _viz._

_That the Gift of healing the Sick and Possessed, was a special Grace
and Favour of God, for the Confirmation of the Truth of the Gospel, but
that such a Gift should be annexed to the Touch of Wicked Witches, as an
infallible sign of their guilt, is not easie to be believed._ It is a
thing well known, that if a person possessed by an Evil Spirit, is (as
oft it so happens) never so outragious whilst a good man is Praying with
and for the Afflicted, let him lay his hand on them, and the Evil Spirit
is quiet. I hope this is no evidence of any Covenant, or voluntary
Communion between the Good Man that is Praying and the Evil Spirit; no
more does the Case before us evince any such thing.

4. _There are that Question the Lawfulness of the Experiment._ For if
this healing power in the Witch is not a Divine but a Diabolical Gift,
it may be dangerous to meddle too much with it. If the Witch may be
ordered to touch afflicted Persons in order to their healing or recovery
out of a sick Fit, why may not the Diseased Person be as well ordered to
touch the Witch for the same cause? And if to touch him, why not to
scratch him and fetch Blood out of him, which is but an harder kind of
touch? But as for this Mr. _Perkins_ doubts not to call it a _Practice
of Witchcraft_. It is not safe to meddle with any of the Devils
Sacraments or Institutions; _For my own part, I should be loath to say
to a Man, that I knew or thought was a Witch, do you look on such a
Person, and see if you can Witch them into a Fit, and there is such an
afflicted Person do you take them by the Hand, and see if you can Witch
them well again. If it is by vertue of some Contract with the Devil that
witches have Power to do such things, it is hard to conceive how they
can be bid to do them, without being too much concerned in that Hellish
Covenant._ I take it to be (as elsewhere[71] I have expressed) a solid
Principle, which the Learned _Sennertus_ insists on, _viz._ _That they
who force another to do that which he cannot possibly do, but by vertue
of a Compact with the Devil, have themselves implicitely Communion with
the Diabolical Covenant._ The Devil is pleased and honoured when any of
his Institutions are made use of; this way of discovering Witches, is no
better than that of putting the Urine of the afflicted Person into a
Bottle, that so the Witch may be tormented and discovered: The Vanity
and Superstition of which practice I have formerly shewed, and testified
against. _There was a Conjurer his name was +Edward Drake+[72] who
taught a Man to use that Experiment for the Relief of his afflicted
Daughter, who found benefit thereby;_ But we ought not to practice
Witchcraft to discover Witches, nor may we make use of a _White healing
Witch_ (as they call them) to find out a _Black and Bloody one_. And how
did men first come to know that Witches would be discovered in such
ways as these, which have been mentioned? If Satan himself were the
first Discoverer (as there is reason to believe) the experiment must
needs have deceit in it. See Dr. Willet on _Exod. 7._ _Quest. 9._ And
such Experiments better become Pagans or Papists than Professors in
_New-England_; whereas 'tis pleaded, that such things are practised by
the Judges of the Imperial Chamber, I reply, that those Judges (as
_Bodin_ relates, _Lib. 3. Dæmon. Cap. 6._) have required suspected
Witches to pronounce over the afflicted persons, these words, _I bless
thee in the Name of the Father, &c._ upon which they have immediately
recovered; but is the dark day come upon us, that such Superstitions as
these shall be practised in _New-England_: The Lord Jesus forbid it. See
_Baldwin's_ Testimony against the Practice of the _Camera Imperialis_,
Cas. Consc. L. 3. c. 3. p. 634.

5. _If the Testimony of a bewitched or possessed Person, is of validity
as to what they see done to themselves, then it is so as to others, whom
they see afflicted no less than themselves:_ But what they affirm
concerning others, is not to be taken for Evidence. Whence had they this
Supernatural Sight? It must needs be either from Heaven or from Hell: If
from Heaven, (as _Elisha's_ Servant, and _Balaam's_ Ass could discern
Angels) let their Testimony be received: But if they had this Knowledge
from Hell, tho' there may possibly be truth in what they affirm, they
are not legal Witnesses: For the Law of God allows of no Revelation from
any other Spirit but himself, _Isa. 8.19._ It is a Sin against God to
make use of the Devil's help to know that which cannot be otherwise
known: And I testifie against it, as a great Transgression, which may
justly provoke the Holy One of _Israel_, to let loose Devils on the
whole Land, _Luke 4.35._ See Mr. _Bernard's_ Guide to Juries in Cases of
Witchcraft, p. 136, 137, 138. And _Brockmand_, _Theol. de Angelis_, p.
227. Altho' the Devil's Accusations may be so far regarded as to cause
an enquiry into the truth of things, _Job 1.11, 12. & 2.5, 6._ yet not
so as to be an Evidence or Ground of Conviction: The Persons, concerning
whom the Question is, see things through Diabolical Mediums; on which
account their Evidence is not meer humane Testimony; and if it be in any
part Diabolical, it is not to be owned as Authentick; for the Devil's
Testimony ought not to be received neither in whole nor in part.

6. I am told by credible Persons, who say it is certainly true, that a
bewitched Person has complained that she was cast into Fits by the Look
of a Dog; and that she was no more able to bear the sight of that Dog,
than of the Person whom she accused as bewitching her: And that
thereupon the Dog was shot to death: This Dog was no Devil; for then
they could not have killed him. I suppose no one will say that Dogs are
Witches: It remains then that the casting down with the Look is no
infallible sign of a Witch.

7. It has always been said, that it is a difficult thing to find out
Witches: But if the Representation of such a Person as afflicting, or
the Look or Touch be an infallible proof of the guilt of Witchcraft in
the Persons complained of, 'tis the easiest thing in the World to
discover them; for it is done to our hand, and there needs no enquiry
into the Matter.

8. _Let them say this is an infallible Proof, produce any Word out of
the Law of God which does in the least countenance that Assertion:_ The
Word of God instructs Jurors and Judges to proceed upon clear humane
Testimony, _Deut. 35.30._ But the Word no where giveth us the least
Intimation, that every one is a Witch, at whose look the bewitched
Person shall fall into Fits; nor yet that any other means should be used
for the discovery of Witches, than what may be used for the finding out
of Murderers, Adulterers, and other Criminals.

9. Sometimes Antipathies in Nature have strange and unaccountable
Effects. I have read of a Man that at the sight of his own Son, who was
no Wizzard would fall into Fits. There are that find in their Natures an
averseness to some Persons whom they never saw before, of which they can
give no better an account than he in _Martial_, concerning _Sabidius_.

    _Non Amo te Sabidi, nec possum dicere quare._

That some Persons at the Sight of Bruit-Creatures, Cats, Spiders, _&c._
nay, at the sight of Cheeses, Milk, Apples, will fall into Fits, is too
well known to be denied. _Pensingius_ in his Learned Discourse _De
Pulvere Sympathetico_, p. 128. saith, there was one in the City of
_Groning_ that could not bear the sight of a Swine's Head: And that he
knew another who was not able to look on the Picture thereof. _Amatus
Lusitanus_ speaks of one that at the sight of a Rose would swoon away:
This proveth that the falling into a Fit at the sight of another is not
always a sign of Witchcraft. It may proceed from Nature, and the Power
of Imagination.

To conclude; Judicious _Casuists_[73] have determined, that to make use
of those _Media_ to come to the Knowledge of any Matter, which have no
such power in them by Nature, nor by Divine Institution is an Implicit
going to the Devil to make a discovery: Now there is no natural Power in
the Look or Touch of a Person to bewitch another; nor is this by Divine
Institution the means whereby Witchcraft is discovered: Therefore it is
an unwarrantable Practice.

We proceed now to the third Case proposed to Consideration; If the
things which have been mentioned are not infallible Proofs of Guilt in
the accused Party, it is then Queried, _Whether there are any
Discoveries of this Crime, which Jurors and Judges may with a safe
Conscience proceed upon to the Conviction and Condemnation of the
Persons under Suspicion?_

Let me here premise Two things,

1. The Evidence in this Crime ought to be as clear as in any other
Crimes of a Capital nature. The Word of God does no where intimate, that
a less clear Evidence, or that fewer or other Witnesses may be taken as
sufficient to convict a Man of Sorcery, which would not be enough to
convict him were he charged with another evil worthy of Death, _Numb.
35.30._ if we may not take the Oath of a distracted Person, or of a
possessed Person in a Case of Murder, Theft, Felony of any sort, then
neither may we do it in the Case of Witchcraft.

2. Let me premise this also, that there have been ways of trying Witches
long used in many Nations, especially in the dark times of Paganism and
Popery, which the righteous God never approved of. But which (as
judicious Mr. _Perkins_ expresseth it in plain _English_) were invented
by the Devil, that so innocent Persons might be condemned, and some
notorious Witches escape: Yea, many Superstitious and Magical
experiments have been used to try Witches by: Of this sort is that of
scratching the Witch, or seething the Urine of the Bewitched Person, or
making a Witch-cake with that Urine: And that tryal of putting their
Hands into scalding Water, to see if it will not hurt them: And that of
sticking an Awl under the Seat of the suspected Party, yea, and that way
of discovering Witches by tying their Hands and Feet, and casting them
on the Water, to try whether they will sink or swim: I did publickly
bear my Testimony against this Superstition in a Book printed at
_Boston_ eight Years past.

I hear that of late some in a Neighbour Colony have been playing with
this Diabolical invention: It is to be lamented, that in such a _Land of
Uprightness_ as _New-England_ once was, a Practice which Protestant
Writers generally condemn as sinful, and which the more sober and
learned Men amongst Papists themselves have not only judged unlawful,
but (to express it in their own terms) to be no less than a _Mortal
Sin_, should ever be heard of. Were it not that the coming of Christ to
judge the Earth draweth near, I should think that such Practices are an
unhappy Omen that the Devil and Pagans will get these dark Territories
into their Possession again: But that I may not be thought to have no
reason for my calling the impleaded Experiment into Question, I have
these things further to alledge against it.

1. It has been rejected long agone, by Christian Nations as a thing
Superstitious and Diabolical: In _Italy_ and _Spain_ it is wholly
disused; and [74]in the _Low-Countries_, and in _France_, where the
Judges are Men of Learning. In some parts of _Germany_ old _Paganism_
Customs are observed more than in other Countries, nevertheless all the
[75]_Academies_ throughout _Germany_ have disapproved of this way of
Purgation.

2. The Devil is in it, all Superstition is from him; and when Secret
things, or latent Crimes, are discovered by superstitious Practices,
some Compact and Communion with the Devil is the Cause of it, as
_Austin_[76] has truly intimated; and so it is here; for if a Witch
cannot be drowned, this must proceed either from some natural Cause,
which it doth not, for it is against Nature for Humane Bodies, when
Hands and Feet are tied, not to sink under the Water: Besides, they that
plead for this Superstition, say that if Witches happen to be condemned
for some other Crime and not for Witchcraft, they will not swim like a
Cork above Water, which Cause sheweth that the Cause of this Natation is
not _Physical_: And if not, then either it must proceed from a Divine
Miracle to save a Witch from drowning; or lastly, it must be a
diabolical Wonder: This superstitious Experiment is commonly known by
the Name of, _The Vulgar Probation_, because it was never appointed by
any lawful Authority, but from the Suggestion of the Devil taken up by
the rude Rabble: And some [77]learned Men are of Opinion, that the first
_Explorator_ (_being a white Witch_) did explicitely covenant with the
Devil, that he should discover latent Crimes in this way: And that it is
by Virtue of that first Contract that the Devil goeth to work to keep
his Servants from sinking, when this Ceremony of his ordaining is used.
Moreover, we know that _Diabolus est Dei Simia_, the Devil seeks to
imitate Divine Miracles. We read in Ecclesiastical Story, that some of
the Martyrs when they were by Persecutors ordered to be drowned, prov'd
to be immersible: This Miracle would the Devil imitate in causing
Witches, who are his Martyrs, not to sink when they are cast into the
Waters.

3. This way of Purgation is of the same nature with the old _Ordeals_ of
the Pagans. If Men were accused with any Crime, to clear their
innocency, they were to take an hot Iron into their Hands, or to suffer
scalding Water to be poured down their Throats, and if they received no
hurt thereby they were acquitted. This was the Devil's Invention, and
many times (as the Devil would have it) they that submitted to these
Tryals suffered no inconvenience. Nevertheless, it is astonishing to
think what innocent Blood has been shed in the World by means of this
_Satanical_ device. Witches have often (as [78]_Sprenger_ observes)
desired that they might stand or fall by this Tryal by hot Iron, and
sometimes come off well: Indeed, this _Ordeal_ was used in other Cases,
and not in Cases of Witchcraft only: And so was the _Vulgar
Probation_ by casting into the Water practiced upon Persons accused[79]
with other Crimes as well as that of Witchcraft: How it came to be
restrained to that of Witchcraft I cannot tell; it is as supernatural
for a Body whose Hands and Feet are tied to swim above the Water, as it
is for their Hands not to feel a red hot Iron. If the one of these
_Ordeals_ is lawful to be used, then so is the other too: But as for the
fiery _Ordeal_ it is rejected and exploded out of the World; for the
same reason then the tryal by Water should be so.

4. It is a tempting of God when Men put the Innocency of their
Fellow-Creatures upon such tryals; to desire the Almighty to shew a
Miracle to clear the Innocent, or to convict the Guilty is a most
presumptuous tempting of him. Was it not a Miracle when _Peter_ was kept
from sinking under the Water by the Omnipotency of Christ? As for Satan,
we know that his Ambition is to make his Servants believe that his Power
is equal to God's, and that therefore he can preserve whom he pleaseth.
I have read[80] of certain Magicians, who were seen walking on the
Water: If then guilty Persons shall float on the Waters, either it is
the Devil that causes them to do so, (as no doubt it is) and what have
Men to do to set the Devil on work; or else it is a Divine Miracle, like
that of _Peter's_ not sinking, or that of the Iron that swam at the Word
of _Elisha_. And shall Men try whether God will work a Miracle to make a
discovery? If a Crime cannot be found out but by Miracle, it is not for
any Judge on Earth to usurp that Judgment which is reserved for the
Divine Throne.

5. This pretended Gift of Immersibility attending Witches, is a most
fallible deceitful thing; for many a Witch has sunk under the Water.
_Godelmannus_[81] giveth an account of six notorious and clearly
convicted Witches, that when they were brought to their _vulgar
Probation_, sunk down under the Water like other Persons; _Althusius_
affirms the like concerning others; in the _Bohemian_ History[82] it is
related, that _Uratslaus_ the King of _Bohemia_, extirpated Witches out
of his Kingdom, some of which he delivered to the Ax, others of them to
the Fire, and others of them he caused to be drowned: If Witches are
immersible, how came they to die by drowning in _Bohemia_? Besides, it
has sometimes been known that Persons who have floated on the Water when
the Hangman has made the Experiment on them, have sunk down like a
Stone, when others have made the tryal.

6. The Reasons commonly alledged for this Superstition are of no moment:
It is said they hate the Water; whereas they have many times desired
that they might be cast on the Water in order to their purgation: It is
alledged, that Water is used in _Baptism_, therefore Witches swim: A
weak Phansie; all the Water in the World is not consecrated Water.
Cannot Witches eat Bread or drink Wine, notwithstanding those Elements
are made use of in the Blessed Sacrament: But (say some) the Devils by
sucking of them make them so light that the Water bears them; whereas
some Witches are twice as heavy as many an innocent Person: Well, but
then they are possessed with the Devil: Suppose so; Is the Devil afraid
if they should sink, that he should be drowned with them? But why then
were the _Gadarens_ Hogs drowned when the Devil was in them.

These things being premised, I answer the Question affirmatively; _There
are Proofs for the Conviction of Witches which Jurors may with a safe
Conscience proceed upon, so as to bring them in guilty._ The Scripture
which saith, _Thou shalt not suffer a Witch to live_, clearly implies,
that some in the World may be known and proved to be Witches: For until
they be so, they may and must be suffered to live. Moreover we find in
Scripture, that some have been convicted and executed for Witches: For
_Saul cut off those that had familiar Spirits, and the Wizzards out of
the Land_, _1 Sam. 28.9._

It may be wondered that _Saul_ who did like him that said, _Flectere si
nequeo Superos Acheronta Movebo_, should cause the Wizzards in the Land
to be put to death. The _Jewish Rabbies_ say, the reason was, because
those Wizzards foretold that _David_ should be King. It is (as Mr.
_Gaul_ observes[83]) the Opinion of some learned Protestants, that
_Saul_ in his Zeal did over do: And that under the Pretext[84] of
Witches he slew the _Gibeonites_, for which that Judgment followed, _2
Sam. 21.1._ _Neither_ (saith Mr. _Gaule_) _want we the storied Examples
of God's Judgments upon those that defamed, prosecuted and executed them
for Witches, that indeed were none._ But we have in the Scripture the
Example of a better Man than _Saul_ to encourage us to make enquiry
after Wizzards and Witches in order to their Conviction and Execution.
This did the rarest King that ever lived caused to be done, _viz._
_Josiah_, _2 Kings 23.24._ _The Workers with familiar Spirits and the
Wizzards, that were spied in the Land of +Judah+, did +Josiah+ put away,
that he might perform the Words of the Law._ It seems there were some
that sought to hide those Workers of Iniquity, but that incomparable
King spied them out, and rid the Land and the World of them.

_Q._ But then the Enquiry is, _What is sufficient Proof?_

_A._ This Case has been with great Judgment answered by several Divines
of our own, particularly by Mr. _Perkins_, and Mr. _Bernard_; also Mr.
_John Gaul_ a worthy Minister at _Staughton_, in the County of
_Huntington_, has published a very Judicious Discourse, called, _Select
Cases of Conscience touching Witches and Witchcrafts_, Printed at
_London_ A.D. 1646. wherein he does with great Prudence and Evidence of
Scripture light handle this and other Cases: Such Jurors as can obtain
those Books, I would advise them to read, and seriously as in the fear
of God to consider them, and so far as they keep to the Law and to the
Testimony, and speak according to that Word, receive the Light which is
in them. But the Books being now rare to be had, let me express my
Concurrence with them in these two particulars.

1. _That a free and voluntary Confession of the Crime made by the Person
suspected and accused after Examination, is a sufficient Ground of
Conviction._

Indeed, If Persons are Distracted, or under the Power of _Phrenetick
Melancholy_, that alters the Case; but the Jurors that examine them, and
their Neighbours that know them, may easily determine that Case; or if
Confession be extorted,[85] the Evidence is not so clear and convictive;
but if any Persons out of Remorse of Conscience, or from a Touch of God
in their Spirits, confess and shew their Deeds, as the Converted
Magicians in _Ephesus_ did, _Acts 19.18, 19._ nothing can be more clear.
Suppose a Man to be suspected for Murder, or for committing a Rape, or
the like nefandous Wickedness, if he does freely confess the Accusation,
that's ground enough to Condemn him. The Scripture approveth of Judging
the wicked Servant out of his own Mouth, _Luke 19.22._ It is by some
objected, that Persons in Discontent may falsly accuse themselves. I
say, if they do so, and it cannot be proved that they are false Accusers
of themselves, they ought to dye for their Wickedness, and their Blood
will be upon their own Heads; the Jury, the Judges, and the Land is
Clear: I have read a very sad and amazing, and yet a true Story to this
purpose.

There was in the Year 1649, in a Town called _Lauder_ in _Scotland_, a
certain woman accused and imprisoned on suspicion of Witchcraft, when
others in the same Prison with her were Convicted, and their Execution
ordered to be on the Monday following, she desired to speak with a
Minister, to whom she declared freely that she was guilty of Witchcraft,
acknowledging also many other Crimes committed by her, desiring that she
might die with the rest: She said particularly that she had Covenanted
with the Devil, and was become his Servant about twenty years before,
and that he kissed her and gave her a Name, but that since he had never
owned her. Several Ministers who were jealous that she accused herself
untruly, charged it on her Conscience, telling her that they doubted she
was under a Temptation of the Devil to destroy her own Body and Soul,
and adjuring her in the Name of God to declare the Truth:
Notwithstanding all this, she stifly adhered to what she had said, and
was on Monday morning Condemned, and ordered to be Executed that day.
When she came to the place of Execution, she was silent until the
Prayers were ended, then going to the Stake where she was to be Burnt,
she thus expressed herself, _All you that see me this day! Know ye that
I am to die as a Witch, by my own Confession! and I free all Men,
especially the Ministers and Magistrates, from the guilt of my Blood, I
take it wholly on my self, and as I must make answer to the God of
Heaven, I declare I am as free from Witchcraft as any Child, but being
accused by a Malicious Woman, and Imprisoned under the Name of a Witch,
my Husband and Friends disowned me, and seeing no hope of ever being in
Credit again, through the Temptation of the Devil, I made that
Confession to destroy my own Life, being weary of it, and chusing rather
to Die than to Live._ This her lamentable Speech did astonish all the
Spectators, few of whom could restrain from Tears. The Truth of this
Relation (saith my Author[86]) is certainly attested by a worthy Divine
now living, who was an Eye and an Ear-Witness of the whole matter; but
thus did that miserable Creature suffer Death, and this was a just
Execution. When the _Amalekite_ confessed that he killed _Saul_, whom he
had no legal Authority to meddle with, although 'tis probable that he
belyed himself, _David_ gave order for his Execution, and said to him,
_Thy Blood be upon thy Head, for thy Mouth hath Testified against thee_,
_2 Sam. 1.16._ But as for the Testimony of Confessing Witches against
others, the case is not so clear as against themselves, they are not
such credible Witnesses, as in a Case of Life and Death is to be
desired: It is beyond dispute, that the Devil makes his Witches to dream
strange things of themselves and others which are not so. There was (as
Authors beyond Exception relate) in appearance a sumptuous Feast
prepared, the Wine and Meat set forth in Vessels of Gold; a certain
Person whom an amorous young Man had fallen in Love with, was
represented and supposed to be really there; but _Apollonius
Tyanæus_[87] discovered the Witchery of the Business, and in an instant
all vanished, and nothing but dirty Coals were to be seen: The like to
this is mentioned in the _Arausican_ Council. There were certain Women
that imagined they rode upon Beasts in the Night, and that they had
_Diana_ and _Herodius_ in company with them, besides a Troop of other
Persons; the Council giveth this Sentence on it; _Satanas qui se
transfigurat in Angelum Lucis, transformat se in diversarum personarum
species, & mentem quam captivam tenet, in somnis deludit._ Satan
transforms himself into the likeness of divers Persons, and deludes the
Souls that are his Captives with Dreams and Fancies; see Dr. _Willet_ on
_1 Sam. 28._ _p. 165_. What Credit can be given to those that say they
can turn Men into Horses? If so, they can as well turn Horses into Men;
but all the Witches on Earth in Conjunction with all the Devils in
Hell, can never make or unmake a rational Soul, and then they cannot
transform a Bruit into a Man, nor a Man into a Bruit; so that this
Transmutation is fantastical. The Devil may and often does impose on the
Imaginations of his Witches and Vassals, that they believe themselves to
be Converted into Beasts, and reverted into Men again; as
_Nebuchadnezzar_ whilst under the Power of a Dæmon really imagined
himself to be an Ox, and would lye out of Doors and eat Grass: The Devil
has inflicted on many a Man the Disease called _Lycanthropia_, from
whence they have made lamentable Complaints of their being Wolves: In a
word, there is no more Reality in what many Witches confess of strange
things seen or done by them, whilst Satan had them in his full Power,
than there is in _Lucian's_ ridiculous Fable of his being Bewitched into
an _Asse_, and what strange Feats he then played; so that what such
persons relate concerning Persons and Things at Witch-meetings, ought
not to be received with too much Credulity.

I could mention dismal Instances of Innocent Blood which has been shed
by means of the Lies of some Confessing Witches; there is a very sad
Story mentioned in the Preface to the Relation of the Witchcrafts in
_Sweedland_, how that in the Year 1676, at _Stockholm_, a young Woman
accused her own Mother (who had indeed been a very bad Woman, but not
guilty of Witchcraft,) and Swore that she had carried her to the
Nocturnal Meetings of Witches, upon which the Mother was burnt to Death.
Soon after the Daughter came crying and howling before the Judges in
open Court, declaring, that to be revenged on her Mother for an Offence
received, she had falsely accused her with a Crime which she was not
guilty of; for which she also was justly Executed. A most wicked Man in
_France_ freely confessed himself to be a Magician, and accused many
others, whose Lives were thereupon taken from them; and a whole Province
had like to have been ruined thereby, but the Impostor was discovered:
The Confessing pretended Wizzard was burnt at _Paris_ in the year 1668.
I shall only take notice further of an awful Example mentioned by A. B.
_Spotswood_ in his History of _Scotland_, p. 449. His words are these,
'This Summer (_viz._ Anno 1597.) there was a great business for the
Tryal of Witches, amongst others, one _Margaret Atkin_ being apprehended
on suspicion, and threatned with Torture, did confess herself Guilty;
being examined touching her Associates in that Trade, she named a few,
and perceiving her Delations find Credit, made offer to detect all of
that sort, and to purge the Country of them; so she might have her Life
granted: For the reason of her Knowledge, she said, _That they had a
secret mark all of that sort in their Eyes, whereby she could surely
tell, how soon she looked upon any, whether they were Witches or not;_
and in this she was so readily believed, that for the space of 3 or 4
Months she was carried from Town to Town to make Discoveries in that
kind; many were brought in question by her Delations, especially at
_Glasgow_, where _diverse Innocent Women, through the Credulity of the
Minister Mr. +John Cowper+, were condemned and put to Death_; in the end
she was found to be a meer deceiver, and sent back to _Fife_, where she
was first apprehended: At her Tryal she affirmed all to be false that
she had confessed of herself or others, and persisted in this to her
Death, which made many fore-think their too great forwardness that way,
and moved the King to recall his Commission given out against such
Persons, discharging all Proceedings against them, except in case of a
voluntary Confession, till a solid Order should be taken by the Estates
touching the form that should be kept in their Tryal.' Thus that famous
Historian.

2. _If two credible Persons shall affirm upon Oath that they have seen
the party accused speaking such words, or doing things which none but
such as have Familiarity with the Devil ever did or can do, that's a
sufficient Ground for Conviction._

Some are ready to say, that Wizzards are not so unwise as to do such
things in the sight or hearing of others, but it is certain that they
have very often been known to do so: How often have they been seen by
others using Inchantments? Conjuring to raise Storms? And have been
heard calling upon their Familiar Spirits? And have been known to use
Spells and Charms? And to shew in a Glass or in a Shew-stone persons
absent? And to reveal Secrets which could not be discovered but by the
Devil? And have not men been seen to do things which are above humane
Strength, that no man living could do without Diabolical Assistances?
_Claudia_ was seen by Witnesses enough, to draw a Ship which no humane
Strength could move. _Tuccia_ a Vestal Virgin was seen to carry Water in
a Sieve: The Devil never assists men to do supernatural things
undesired. When therefore such like things shall be testified against
the accused Party not by _Spectres_ which are Devils in the Shape of
Persons either living or dead, but by real men or women who may be
credited; it is proof enough that such an one has that Conversation and
Correspondence with the Devil, as that he or she, whoever they be, ought
to be exterminated from amongst men. This notwithstanding I will add; It
were better that ten suspected Witches should escape, than that one
innocent Person should be Condemned; that is an old saying, and true,
_Prestat reum nocentem absolvi, quam ex prohibitis Indiciis & illegitima
probatione condemnari._ It is better that a Guilty Person should be
Absolved, than that he should without sufficient ground of Conviction be
condemned. I had rather judge a Witch to be an honest woman, than judge
an honest woman as a Witch. The Word of God directs men not to proceed
to the execution of the most capital offenders, until such time as upon
searching diligently, the matter is _found to be a Truth, and the thing
certain_, _Deut. 13.14, 15._

An Acquaintance[88] of mine at _London_, in his description of
_New-England_ declares, that as to their Religion, the people there are
like Mr. _Perkins_; it is no dishonour to us, if that be found true: I
am sorry that any amongst us begin to slight so great a Man, whom the
most Learned[89] in Foreign Lands, speak of with Admiration, on the
account of his polite and acute Judgment: It is a grave and good Advice
which he giveth in his Discourse of Witchcrafts (Chap. 7. Sect. 2.)
wherewith I conclude; 'I would therefore wish and advise all Jurors who
give the Verdict upon Life and Death in the Court of Assizes, to take
good heed, that as they be diligent in zeal of God's glory, and the good
of his Church, in detecting of Witches, by all sufficient and lawful
means, so likewise they would be careful what they do, and not to
condemn any party suspected upon bare Presumptions, without sound and
sufficient Proofs that they be not guilty through their own Rashness of
shedding Innocent Blood.'

    _Boston, New-England, Octob. 3. 1692._




POSTSCRIPT.


The Design of the preceding _Dissertation_, is not to plead for
Witchcrafts, or to appear as an Advocate for Witches: I have therefore
written another Discourse, proving that there are such horrid Creatures
as Witches in the World; and that they are to be extirpated and cut off
from amongst the People of God, which I have Thoughts and Inclinations
in due time to publish; and I am abundantly satisfied that there have
been, and are still most cursed Witches in the Land. More than one or
two of those now in Prison, have freely and credibly acknowledged their
Communion and Familiarity with the Spirits of Darkness; and have also
declared unto me the Time and Occasion, with the particular
Circumstances of their Hellish Obligations and Abominations.

Nor is there designed any Reflection on those worthy Persons who have
been concerned in the late Proceedings at _Salem_: They are wise and
good Men, and have acted with all Fidelity according to their Light, and
have out of tenderness declined the doing of some things, which in our
own Judgments they were satisfied about: Having therefore so arduous a
Case before them, Pitty and Prayers rather than Censures are their due;
on which account I am glad that there is published to the World (by my
Son) a _Breviate of the Tryals_ of some who were lately executed,
whereby I hope the thinking part of Mankind will be satisfied, that
there was more than that which is called _Spectre Evidence_ for the
Conviction of the Persons condemned. I was not myself present at any of
the Tryals, excepting one, _viz._ that of _George Burroughs_; had I been
one of his Judges, I could not have acquitted him: For several Persons
did upon Oath testifie, that they saw him do such things as no Man that
has not a Devil to be his Familiar could perform: And the Judges affirm,
that they have not convicted any one meerly on the account of what
_Spectres_ have said, or of what has been represented to the Eyes or
Imaginations of the sick bewitched Persons. If what is here exposed to
publick view, may be a means to prevent it for the future, I shall not
repent of my Labour in this Undertaking. I have been prevailed with so
far as I am able to discern the Truth in these dark Cases, to declare my
Sentiments, with the Arguments which are of weight with me, hoping that
what is written may be of some use to discover the _Depths of Satan_;
and to prevent innocent ones having their Lives endangered, or their
Reputations ruined, by being through the Subtility and Power of the
Devils, in consideration with the Ignorance and Weakness of Men,
involved amongst the Guilty. It becomes those of my Profession to be
very tender in Cases of Blood, and to imitate our Lord and Master, _Who
came not to destroy the Lives of Men, but to save them_.

I likewise design in what I have written, to give my testimony against
these unjustifiable ways of discovering Witchcrafts, which some among us
have practised. I hear that of late there was a _Witch-cake_ made with
the Urine of bewitched Creatures, as one Ingredient by several Persons
in a place, which has suffered much by the Attack of Hell upon it: This
I take to be not only wicked Superstition, but great Folly: For tho' the
Devil does sometimes operate with the _Experiments_, yet not always,
especially if a _Magical Faith_ be wanting. I shall here take occasion
to recite some Passages in a Letter, which I received from that Eminent
pious and learned Man, Mr. _Samuel Cradock_; during my abode in
_London_; the Letter bears date _Febr. 26. 1690_. Then take it in his
own Words, which are these; 'We have at this present one in our next
Town, who has a Son who has strange Fits, and such as they impute to
Witchcraft: He come to consult with me about it, but before he came, he
had used a means which I should never had directed him unto, _viz._ He
took the Nails of his Son's Hands and Feet, and some of his Hair, and
mixed them in Rye-Paste with his Water, and so set it all by the Fire
till it was consumed, and his Son (as he says) was well after, and free
from his Fits for a whole Month, but then they came again, and _He tried
that means a second time, and then it would not do;_ He removed his Son
into _Cambridgeshire_ the next County, and then he was well, but as soon
as he brought him home he was afflicted as before. The Boy says, He saw
a thing like a Mole following of him, which once spoke to him, and told
him he came to do the Office he was to do: I advised his Father to make
use of the Medicine prescribed by our Saviour, _viz._ Fasting and
Prayer. Here have been others in this Town, that though they were under
_Ill-handling_ as they call it: One Family had their Milk so affected,
that they could not possibly make any Cheese, but it hov'd and swelled,
and was good for nothing: They are now rid of that trouble, but how they
got rid of it I do not know': Thus my Letter. By which it is evident
that Towns in _England_ as well as _New-England_ are molested with
_Dæmons_, only I wish that the Superstitions practiced in other places
to get rid of such troublesome Guests had never been known, much less
used amongst us or them.

Some I hear have taken up a Notion, that the Book newly published by my
Son, is contradictory to this of mine: 'Tis strange that such
Imaginations should enter into the Minds of Men: I perused and approved
of that Book before it was printed; and nothing but my Relation to him
hindred me from recommending it to the World: But my self and Son agreed
unto the humble Advice which twelve Ministers concurringly presented
before his Excellency and Council, respecting the present Difficulties,
which let the World judge, whether there be anything in it dissentany
from what is attested by either of us.

It was in the Words following:--


  The Return of several Ministers consulted by his Excellency,
    and the Honourable Council, upon the present Witchcrafts
    in _Salem_ Village.

                                        Boston, _June 15, 1692_.

I. _The afflicted State of our poor Neighbours, that are now suffering
by Molestations from the Invisible World, we apprehend so deplorable,
that we think their Condition calls for the utmost help of all Persons
in their several Capacities._ II. _We cannot but with all Thankfulness
acknowledge, the Success which the merciful God has given unto the
sedulous and assiduous Endeavors of our honourable Rulers, to detect the
abominable Witchcrafts which have been committed in the Country; humbly
praying that the discovery of these mysterious and mischievous
Wickednesses, may be perfected._ III. _We judge that in the prosecution
of these, and all such Witchcrafts, there is need of a very critical and
exquisite Caution, lest by too much Credulity for things received only
upon the Devil's Authority, there be a Door opened for a long Train of
miserable Consequences, and Satan get an advantage over us, for we
should not be ignorant of his Devices._ IV. _As in Complaints upon
Witchcrafts, there may be Matters of Enquiry, which do not amount unto
Matters of Presumption, and there may be Matters of Presumption which
yet may not be reckoned Matters of +Conviction+; so 'tis necessary that
all Proceedings thereabout be managed with an exceeding tenderness
towards those that may be complained of; especially if they have been
Persons formerly of an unblemished Reputation._ V. _When the first
Enquiry is made into the Circumstances of such as may lie under any just
Suspicion of Witchcrafts, we could wish that there may be admitted as
little as is possible, of such Noise, Company, and Openness, as may too
hastily expose them that are examined: and that there may nothing be
used as a Test, for the Trial of the suspected, the Lawfulness whereof
may be doubted among the People of God; but that the Directions given by
such judicious Writers as +Perkins+ and +Bernard+, be consulted in such
a Case._ VI. _Presumptions whereupon Persons may be committed, and much
more Convictions, whereupon Persons may be condemned as guilty of
Witchcrafts, ought certainly to be more considerable, than barely the
accused Person being represented by a Spectre unto the Afflicted;
inasmuch as 'tis an undoubted and a notorious thing, that a Dæmon may,
by God's Permission, appear even to ill purposes, in the Shape of an
innocent, yea, and a vertuous Man: Nor can we esteem Alterations made in
the Sufferers, by a Look or Touch of the Accused to be an infallible
Evidence of Guilt; but frequently liable to be abused by the Devil's
Legerdemains._ VII. _We know not, whether some remarkable Affronts given
to the Devils, by our disbelieving of those Testimonies, whose whole
force and strength is from them alone, may not put a Period, unto the
Progress of the dreadful Calamity begun upon us, in the Accusation of so
many Persons, whereof we hope, some are yet clear from the great
Transgression laid unto their Charge._ VIII. _Nevertheless, We cannot
but humbly recommend unto the Government, the speedy and vigorous
Prosecution of such as have rendered themselves obnoxious, according to
the Direction given in the Laws of God, and the wholesome Statutes of
the +English+ Nation, for the Detection of Witchcrafts._




FOOTNOTES:


[1] R. Sactias. R. Eleazer Athias. Lyranus. _Sic &_ Josephus.

[2] Ambrose, Hierom, Basil, Nazianzen.

[3] Thomas, Tostatus, Suarez. _Cajetan_, _In Ecclesia_, _Chap. 46. 22,
23_.

[4] _In Locum._

[5] _In 2 Cor. 11, 14, Pag. 555._

[6] _De Spectris_, _Cap. 7_.

[7] _Præstig. Dæmon._ Lib. 1. C. 16.

[8] De C. D. l. 18.

[9] _De Appar. Spirituum_, Lib. 2. Cap. 7.

[10] _Misq. Magicar._ Lib. 2. C. 12.

[11] _De Confes. Sag._ pag. 191.

[12] _De secretis mag._ p. 31. see also _Lavater de Spect._ Lib. 2. Cap.
18.

[13] _Dr. Casaubon_: of Spirits.

[14] _Sulpitius Severus in vita Martini._

[15] _Guaccius_, _compend. malefic._ p. 342.

[16] _Binsfield_, _de Confess. Sag._ p. 187.

[17] Examples, Vol. 1. p. 510.

[18] _Socrate's_ Hist. p. 7. C. 38.

[19] _Lege Villalpond de Magia_, &c. L. 2. Cap. 27.

[20] Part 1. Chap. 19. Pag. 8.

[21] _Epistol._ 2.

[22] In Disput. _de Magia_. P. 575.

[23] In Mr. _Couper's_ Mystery of Witchcraft, Pag. 174, 175.

[24] _Acta Eruditorum Anno 1690._ Pag. 113.

[25] In Mr. _Glanvil's_ Philosophical Considerations.

[26] _De subtilitate._ Lib. 29.

[27] P. 75, 76.

[28] In his Sadducism Triumph. Collection, p. 201.

[29] P. 215. (Disa. Magic.) l. 1. c. 3. p. 22.

[30] Vairus de Fascino. Lib. 2.

[31] P. 131.

[32] V. Germ. Ephemer. Anno 16. p. 379.

[33] Henkelius de obsessis, pag. 86.

[34] Camerar. cent. I. c. 73. Cardan de rerum varietate, Lib. 16. cap.
93.

[35] In his _Britannia_, p. 609.

[36] See the Hist. of _Lapland_, and Mr. _Burton's_ Hist. of _Dæmons_.

[37] _Schotten_, Physic. curios, lib. 1. c. 16.

[38] See _Wanly_ of the Wonders of the World, p. 215.

[39] Ubi Supra.

[40] _De Spectris_, p. 86, 87.

[41] _Disput. Select._ Vol. 1. pag. 1008.

[42] P. 944.

[43] _Thyræus de Apparitionibus_, Lib. 2. Cap. 14.

[44] _Binsfield de confessionibus sagarum_, p. 183. 191.

[45] _Disquis. Magic._ Lib. 2. Q. 12. p. 143.

[46] Printed at _Frankfort_, _Anno 1681_.

[47] Discourse of Witchcraft, _Ch. 7._ _Sect. 2._ p. 644.

[48] In his Witchcraft discovered, p. 277.

[49] _Webster's_ displaying of supposed Witchcraft, p. 298. 308.

[50] _Ubi supra_, p. 207, 208.

[51] Ch. 15. p. 14, &c.

[52] Pag. 121, 122.

[53] _In vita Hilarion._

[54] _Anastasius_, Qu. 23.

[55] In Disput. de _Dæmoniacis_, part 1. chap. 16. p. 30.

[56] _Thuanus_, lib. 130. p. 1136.

[57] _Thyræus_, _ubi supra_, p. 16.

[58] _Henkel_, _ubi supra_, p. 47. 50.

[59] _Brockmand_, _Theol._ p. 265.

[60] _Melancthon_, Epist.

[61] _Tostatus_, in Mat. 8. Q. 114.

[62] _Baldwin_, Case of Cons. l. 3. c. 3. p. 621.

[63] Lib. 7. Cap. 2.

[64] _5 Sympos._ Cap. 7.

[65] _Med. Precl._ lib. 6. pars 9. cap. 1.

[66] Lib. 2. cap. 2. _Wierus_, l. 6. c. 9. p. 683.

[67] See the Tryal, p. 40. 43. 45.

[68] In _Dæmonomania_. See Mr. _Bromhal's_ History of Apparitions, p.
136.

[69] See the Printed Relation, p. 30, 31.

[70] Ubi supra, p. 121.

[71] Remarkable Providences, p. 267.

[72] See Mr. _Burton's_ History of Dæmons, p. 136. and Mr. _Robert's_
Nar. of the Witches in _Suffolk_.

[73] _Ames._ _Cas. Consc._ L. 4. C. 23.

[74] _Delrio._ _Disquiss. Magic._ pag. 642.

[75] _Malderus de Magia_, cap. 10. _dub._ 11.

[76] _De Doctr. Christiana_, Lib. 2. Cap. 20. 22.

[77] _Delrio & Malderus._

[78] _In malleo malleficarum_, p. 421.

[79] _Menna_, _de purgatione vulgari_, cap. _ult._

[80] _Cæsarius_, Lib. 9.

[81] _De Lamiis_, L. 3. C. 4.

[82] _Dubravius_, Hist. _Cohim._ Lib. 8.

[83] In his Cases about Witchcraft, p. 181.

[84] So Dr. _Willet_, conjectures on _1 Sam. 21.1._

[85] _V. Bodin_, _Dæmonomania_, L. 4.

[86] Mr. _Sinclare_, Invisible World, p. 45. and _Burton_, Hist. of
Dæmons, p. 122.

[87] Boisard in vita Apollonii.

[88] Mr. _Merden_ in his Geogra. Phy. p. 577.

[89] Voetius, Biblioth, l. 2. Lecus, in Compend. Histor.


                        THE END.




  CHISWICK PRESS:--PRINTED BY WHITTINGHAM AND WILKINS,
              TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE.


------------------------------------------------------------------------

Transcriber's Note, continued.--

The format of all biblical citations has been regularized.

Footnote markers in the original were sometimes placed before the word
they refer to, and sometimes after--this has been retained.

The following changes were also made:

--p. viii: slighest to slightest

--p. ix: Mrs. Hales to Mrs. Hale

--p. xvii: Original title page used two large, ornate "U"s instead of a
"W" in Witches.

--p. 10: oe-ligature to ae-ligature (Antipædobaptist)

--p. 11: . to , (thus maintained in the Country,)

--p. 19: a to as (cry'd out upon as imploying)

--p. 22: Omisera to O misera

--p. 54: singlar to singular

--p. 61: Catastrophe's to Catastrophes (there will be more such
_Catastrophes_)

--p. 62: _times of the_ Jews to _times of the Jews_

--pp. 63-69: Corollary I. to Corollary V. formatted as headers. In the
original, IV. and V. were out-of-line headers and I., II. and III. were
in-line.

--p. 80: Moenia had oe-ligature in original (Dilapsa sunt vestra
Moenia!)

--p. 97: oe-ligature to ae-ligature (Cælestial)

--p. 100: We _Fear_ to _We Fear_

--p. 138: II. to III. (Incorrect numbering of header corrected)

--p. 135: Ground-sel to Ground (but struck only the Ground) It appears
that the "-sel" was mistakenly introduced during printing, as the word
"Counsel" in the previous sentence was split over two lines and
hyphenated ("Coun-sel".) However, this mistake is not unique to this
reprint.

--p. 170: Berecovered to Be recovered

--p. 184: on to one (that rocks one to Sleep)

--p. 193: The Sweet Waters of Stealth? to The Sweet Waters of Stealth;

--p. 245: viz. to _viz._ (_viz._ That in an Orchard)

--p. 247: missing period added after Lonicer

--pp. 267-268: Although listed in the Table of Contents, Point 6
("Bewitched Persons have sometimes been struck down with the Look of
Dogs") was not numbered in the original, causing points 7 through 9 to
be numbered incorrectly. This was corrected.

--p. 267: Brochmand to Brockmand

--p. 273: extra "the" removed (so was the _Vulgar Probation_)

Two other problems were noted but left unchanged:

--p. 99: The biblical citation _Luc. 13.2, 3._ refers to Luke 13.2, 3.

--p. 268: Mather cites Deut. 35.30, but Deuteronomy only has 34
Chapters. The context suggests he may have meant Numbers 35.30.

--Footnote [77]: _Delri. & Malderus._ to _Delrio & Malderus._

Also note that spelling--other than the corrections noted above--has
been left as it appeared in the original copy of this book. This
includes many archaic spellings that appear only once, such as thir (p.
214), doe's (p. 195), and ha's (p. 173).

------------------------------------------------------------------------





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Wonders of the Invisible World, by 
Cotton Mather and Increase Mather

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WONDERS OF THE INVISIBLE WORLD ***

***** This file should be named 28513-8.txt or 28513-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/5/1/28513/

Produced by Julie Barkley, S.D., and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
