The Project Gutenberg EBook of Imogen, by William Godwin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Imogen
       A Pastoral Romance

Author: William Godwin

Posting Date: August 7, 2012 [EBook #9152]
Release Date: October, 2005
First Posted: September 8, 2003

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IMOGEN ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, David Garcia and Distributed Proofreaders










IMOGEN

A Pastoral Romance

_From the Ancient British_

By WILLIAM GODWIN






Preface

[_By_ WILLIAM GODWIN]


The following performance, as the title imports, was originally composed
in the Welch language. Its style is elegant and pure. And if the
translator has not, as many of his brethren have done, suffered the
spirit of the original totally to evaporate, he apprehends it will be
found to contain much novelty of conception, much classical taste, and
great spirit and beauty in the execution. It appears under the name of
Cadwallo, an ancient bard, who probably lived at least one hundred years
before the commencement of our common era. The manners of the primitive
times seem to be perfectly understood by the author, and are described
with the air of a man who was in the utmost degree familiar with them.
It is impossible to discover in any part of it the slightest trace of
Christianity. And we believe it will not be disputed, that in a country
so pious as that of Wales, it would have been next to impossible for the
poet, though ever so much upon his guard, to avoid all allusion to the
system of revelation. On the contrary, every thing is Pagan, and in
perfect conformity with the theology we are taught to believe prevailed
at that time.

These reasons had induced us to admit, for a long time, that it was
perfectly genuine, and justly ascribed to the amiable Druid. With
respect to the difficulty in regard to the preservation of so long a
work for many centuries by the mere force of memory, the translator,
together with the rest of the world, had already got over that objection
in the case of the celebrated Poems of Ossian. And if he be not blinded
by that partiality, which the midwife is apt to conceive for the
productions, that she is the instrument of bringing into the world, the
Pastoral Romance contains as much originality, as much poetical beauty,
and is as happily calculated to make a deep impression upon the memory,
as either Fingal, or Temora.

The first thing that led us to doubt its authenticity, was the striking
resemblance that appears between the plan of the work, and Milton's
celebrated Masque at Ludlow Castle. We do not mean however to hold forth
this circumstance as decisive in its condemnation. The pretensions of
Cadwallo, or whoever was the author of the performance, are very high to
originality. If the date of the Romance be previous to that of Comus, it
may be truly said of the author, that he soared above all imitation, and
derived his merits from the inexhaustible source of his own invention.
But Milton, it is well known, proposed some classical model to himself
in all his productions. The Paradise Lost is almost in every page an
imitation of Virgil, or Homer. The Lycidas treads closely in the steps
of the Daphnis and Gallus of Virgil. The Sampson Agonistes is formed
upon the model of Sophocles. Even the little pieces, L'Allegro and Il
Penseroso have their source in a song of Fletcher, and two beautiful
little ballads that are ascribed to Shakespeare. But the classical model
upon which Comus was formed has not yet been discovered. It is
infinitely unlike the Pastoral Comedies both of Italy and England. And
if we could allow ourselves in that licence of conjecture, which is
become almost inseparable from the character of an editor, we should
say: That Milton having written it upon the borders of Wales, might have
had easy recourse to the manuscript whose contents are now first given
to the public: And that the singularity of preserving the name of the
place where it was first performed in the title of his poem, was
intended for an ingenuous and well-bred acknowledgement of the source
from whence he drew his choicest materials.

But notwithstanding the plausibility of these conjectures, we are now
inclined to give up our original opinion, and to ascribe the performance
to a gentleman of Wales, who lived so late as the reign of king William
the third. The name of this amiable person was Rice ap Thomas. The
romance was certainly at one time in his custody, and was handed down as
a valuable legacy to his descendants, among whom the present translator
has the honour to rank himself. Rice ap Thomas, Esquire, was a man of a
most sweet and inoffensive disposition, beloved and respected by all his
neighbours and tenants, and "passing rich with 'sixty' pounds a year."
In his domestic he was elegant, hospitable, and even sumptuous, for the
time and country in which he lived. He was however naturally of an
abstemious and recluse disposition. He abounded in singularities, which
were pardoned to his harmlessness and his virtues; and his temper was
full of sensibility, seriousness, and melancholy. He devoted the greater
part of his time to study; and he boasted that he had almost a complete
collection of the manuscript remains of our Welch bards. He was often
heard to prefer even to Taliessin, Merlin, and Aneurim, the effusions of
the immortal Cadwallo, and indeed this was the only subject upon which
he was ever known to dispute with eagerness and fervour. In the midst of
the controversy, he would frequently produce passages from the Pastoral
Romance, as decisive of the question. And to confess the truth, I know
not how to excuse this piece of jockeyship and ill faith, even in Rice
ap Thomas, whom I regard as the father of my family, and the chief
ornament of my beloved country.

Some readers will probably however be inclined to apologise for the
conduct of Mr. Thomas, and to lay an equivalent blame to my charge. They
will tell me, that nothing but the weakest partiality could blind me to
the genuine air of antiquity with which the composition is every where
impressed, and to ascribe it to a modern writer. But I am conscious to
my honesty and defy their malice. So far from being sensible of any
improper bias in favour of my ancestor, I am content to strengthen their
hands, by acknowledging that the manuscript, which I am not at all
desirous of refusing to their inspection, is richly emblazoned with all
the discoloration and rust they can possibly desire. I confess that the
wording has the purity of Taliessin, and the expressiveness of Aneurim,
and is such as I know of no modern Welchman who could write. And yet, in
spite as they will probably tell me of evidence and common sense, I
still aver my persuasion, that it is the production of Rice ap Thomas.

But enough, and perhaps too much, for the question of its antiquity. It
would be unfair to send it into the world without saying something of
the nature of its composition. It is unlike the Arcadia of sir Philip
Sidney, and unlike, what I have just taken the trouble of running over,
the Daphnis of Gessner. It neither on the one hand leaves behind it the
laws of criticism, and mixes together the different stages of
civilization; nor on the other will it perhaps be found frigid,
uninteresting, and insipid. The prevailing opinion of Pastoral seems to
have been, that it is a species of composition admirably fitted for the
size of an eclogue, but that either its nature will not be preserved, or
its simplicity will become surfeiting in a longer performance. And
accordingly, the Pastoral Dramas of Tasso, Guarini, and Fletcher,
however they may have been commended by the critics, and admired by that
credulous train who clap and stare whenever they are bid, have when the
recommendation of novelty has subsided been little attended to and
little read. But the great Milton has proved that this objection is not
insuperable. His Comus is a master-piece of poetical composition. It is
at least equal in its kind even to the Paradise Lost. It is interesting,
descriptive and pathetic. Its fame is continually increasing, and it
will be admired wherever the name of Britain is repeated, and the
language of Britain is understood.

If our hypothesis respecting the date of the present performance is
admitted, it must be acknowleged that the ingenious Mr. Thomas has
taken the Masque of Milton for a model; and the reader with whom Comus
is a favourite, will certainly trace some literal imitations. With
respect to any objections that may be made on this score to the Pastoral
Romance, we will beg the reader to bear in mind, that the volumes before
him are not an original, but a translation. Recollecting this, we may,
beside the authority of Milton himself, and others as great poets as
ever existed who have imitated Homer and one another at least as much as
our author has done Comus, suggest two very weighty apologies. In the
first place, imitation in a certain degree, has ever been considered as
lawful when made from a different language: And in the second, these
imitations come to the reader exaggerated, by being presented to him in
English, and by a person who confesses, that he has long been conversant
with our greatest poets. The translator has always admired Comus as much
as the Pastoral Romance; he has read them together, and been used to
consider them as illustrating each other. Any verbal coincidences into
which he may have fallen, are therefore to be ascribed where they are
due, to him, and not to the author. And upon the whole, let the
imperfections of the Pastoral Romance be what they will, he trusts he
shall be regarded as making a valuable present to the connoisseurs and
the men of taste, and an agreeable addition to the innocent amusements
of the less laborious classes of the polite world.






BOOK THE FIRST

CHARACTER OF THE SHEPHERDESS AND HER LOVER.--FEAST OF RUTHYN.--SONGS OF
THE BARDS.


Listen, O man! to the voice of wisdom. The world thou inhabitest was not
intended for a theatre of fruition, nor destined for a scene of repose.
False and treacherous is that happiness, which has been preceded by no
trial, and is connected with no desert. It is like the gilded poison
that undermines the human frame. It is like the hoarse murmur of the
winds that announces the brewing tempest. Virtue, for such is the decree
of the Most High, is evermore obliged to pass through the ordeal of
temptation, and the thorny paths of adversity. If, in this day of her
trial, no foul blot obscure her lustre, no irresolution and instability
tarnish the clearness of her spirit, then may she rejoice in the view of
her approaching reward, and receive with an open heart the crown that
shall be bestowed upon her.

The extensive valley of Clwyd once boasted a considerable number of
inhabitants, distinguished for primeval innocence and pastoral
simplicity. Nature seemed to have prepared it for their reception with
all that luxuriant bounty, which characterises her most favoured spots.
The inclosure by which it was bounded, of ragged rocks and snow-topt
mountains, served but for a foil to the richness and fertility of this
happy plain. It was seated in the bosom of North Wales, the whole face
of which, with this one exception, was rugged and hilly. As far as the
eye could reach, you might see promontory rise above promontory. The
crags of Penmaenmawr were visible to the northwest, and the unequalled
steep of Snowden terminated the prospect to the south. In its farthest
extent the valley reached almost to the sea, and it was intersected,
from one end to the other, by the beautiful and translucent waters of
the river from which it receives its name.

In this valley all was rectitude and guileless truth. The hoarse din of
war had never reached its happy bosom; its river had never been
impurpled with the stain of human blood. Its willows had not wept over
the crimes of its inhabitants, nor had the iron hand of tyranny taught
care and apprehension to seat themselves upon the brow of its shepherds.
They were strangers to riches, and to ambition, for they all lived in a
happy equality. He was the richest man among them, that could boast of
the greatest store of yellow apples and mellow pears. And their only
objects of rivalship were the skill of the pipe and the favour of
beauty. From morn to eve they tended their fleecy possessions. Their
reward was the blazing hearth, the nut-brown beer, and the merry tale.
But as they sought only the enjoyment of a humble station, and the
pleasures of society, their labours were often relaxed. Often did the
setting sun see the young men and the maidens of contiguous villages,
assembled round the venerable oak, or the wide-spreading beech. The
bells rung in the upland hamlets; the rebecs sounded with rude harmony;
they danced with twinkling feet upon the level green or listened to the
voice of the song, which was now gay and exhilarating, and now soothed
them into pleasing melancholy.

Of all the sons of the plain, the bravest, and the most comely, was
Edwin. His forehead was open and ingenuous, his hair was auburn, and
flowed about his shoulders in wavy ringlets. His person was not less
athletic than it was beautiful. With a firm hand he grasped the
boar-spear, and in pursuit he outstripped the flying fawn. His voice was
strong and melodious, and whether upon the pipe or in the song, there
was no shepherd daring enough to enter the lists with Edwin. But though
he excelled all his competitors, in strength of body, and the
accomplishments of skill, yet was not his mind rough and boisterous.
Success had not taught him a despotic and untractable temper, applause
had not made him insolent and vain. He was gentle as the dove. He
listened with eager docility to the voice of hoary wisdom. He had always
a tear ready to drop over the simple narrative of pastoral distress.
Victor as he continually was in wrestling, in the race, and in the song,
the shout of triumph never escaped his lips, the exultation of insult he
was never heard to utter. On the contrary, with mild and unfictitious
friendship, he soothed the breast of disappointment, and cheered the
spirits of his adversary with honest praise.

But Edwin was not more distinguished among his brother shepherds, than
was Imogen among the fair. Her skin was clear and pellucid. The fall of
her shoulders was graceful beyond expression. Her eye-brows were arched,
and from her eyes shot forth the grateful rays of the rising sun. Her
waist was slender; and as she ran, she outstripped the winds, and her
footsteps were printless on the tender herb. Her mind, though soft, was
firm; and though yielding as wax to the precepts of wisdom, and the
persuasion of innocence, it was resolute and inflexible to the
blandishments of folly, and the sternness of despotism. Her ruling
passion was the love of virtue. Chastity was the first feature in her
character. It gave substance to her accents, and dignity to her
gestures. Conscious innocence ennobled all her reflexions, and gave to
her sentiments and manner of thinking, I know not what of celestial and
divine.

Edwin and Imogen had been united in the sports of earliest infancy. They
had been mutual witnesses to the opening blossoms of understanding and
benevolence in each others breasts. While yet a boy, Edwin had often
rescued his mistress from the rude vivacity of his playmates, and had
bestowed upon her many of those little distinctions which were
calculated to excite the flame of envy among the infant daughters of the
plain. For her he gathered the vermeil-tinctured pearmain, and the
walnut with an unsavoury rind; for her he hoarded the brown filberd, and
the much prized earth-nut. When she was near, the quoit flew from his
arm with a stronger whirl, and his steps approached more swiftly to the
destined goal. With her he delighted to retire from the heat of the sun
to the centre of the glade, and to sooth her ear with the gaiety of
innocence, long before he taught her to hearken to the language of love.
For her sake he listened with greater eagerness to the mirthful
relation, to the moral fiction, and to the song of the bards. His store
of little narratives was in a manner inexhaustible. With them he
beguiled the hour of retirement, and with them he hastened the sun to
sink behind the western hill.

But as he grew to manly stature, and the down of years had begun to
clothe his blushing cheek, he felt a new sensation in his breast
hitherto unexperienced. He could not now behold his favourite companion
without emotion; his eye sparkled when he approached her; he watched her
gestures; he hung upon her accents; he was interested in all her
motions. Sometimes he would catch the eye of prudent age or of
sharp-sighted rivalry observing him, and he instantly became embarrassed
and confused, and blushed he knew not why. He repaired to the
neighbouring wake, in order to exchange his young lambs and his hoard of
cheeses. Imogen was not there, and in the midst of traffic, and in the
midst of frolic merriment he was conscious to a vacancy and a
listlessness for which he could not account. When he tended his flocks,
and played upon his slender pipe, he would sink in reverie, and form to
himself a thousand schemes of imaginary happiness. Erewhile they had
been vague and general. His spirit was too gentle for him not to
represent to himself a fancied associate; his heart was not narrow
enough to know so much as the meaning of a solitary happiness. But
Imogen now formed the principal figure in these waking dreams. It was
Imogen with whom he wandered beside the brawling rill. It was Imogen
with whom he sat beneath the straw-built shed, and listened to the
pealing rain, and the hollow roaring of the northern blast. If a moment
of forlornness and despair fell to his lot, he wandered upon the heath
without his Imogen, and he climbed the upright precipice without her
harmonious voice to cheer and to animate him. In a word, passion had
taken up her abode in his guileless heart before he was aware of her
approach. Imogen was fair; and the eye of Edwin was enchanted. Imogen
was gentle; and Edwin loved.

Simple as was the character of the inhabitants of this happy valley, it
is not to be supposed that Edwin found many obstacles to the enjoyment
of the society of his mistress. Though strait as the pine, and beautiful
as the gold-skirted clouds of a summer morning, the parents of Imogen
had not learned to make a traffic of the future happiness of their care.
They sought not to decide who should be the fortunate shepherd that
should carry her from the sons of the plain. They left the choice to her
penetrating wit, and her tried discretion. They erected no rampart to
defend her chastity; they planted no spies to watch over her reputation.
They entrusted her honour to her own keeping. They were convinced, that
the spotless dictates of conscious innocence, and that divinity that
dwells in virtue and awes the shaggy satyr into mute admiration, were
her sufficient defence. They left to her the direction of her conduct.
The shepherdess, unsuspicious by nature, and untaught to view mankind
with a wary and a jealous eye, was a stranger to severity and caprice.
She was all gentleness and humanity. The sweetness of her temper led her
to regard with an eye of candour, and her benevolence to gratify all the
innocent wishes, of those about her. The character of a woman
undistinguishing in her favours, and whose darling employment is to
increase the number of her admirers, is in the highest degree unnatural.
Such was not the character of Imogen. She was artless and sincere. Her
tongue evermore expressed the sentiments of her heart. She drew the
attention of no swain from a rival; she employed no stratagems to
inveigle the affections; she mocked not the respect of the simple
shepherd with delusive encouragement. No man charged her with broken
vows; no man could justly accuse her of being cruel and unkind.

It may therefore readily be supposed, that the subject of love rather
glided into the conversation of Edwin and Imogen, than was regularly and
designedly introduced. They were unknowing in the art of disguising
their feelings. When the tale spoke of peril and bravery, the eyes of
Edwin sparkled with congenial sentiments, and he was evermore ready to
start from the grassy hilloc upon which they sat. When the little
narrative told of the lovers pangs, and the tragic catastrophe of two
gentle hearts whom nature seemed to have formed for mildness and
tranquility, Imogen was melted into the softest distress. The breast of
her Edwin would heave with a sympathetic sigh, and he would even
sometimes venture, from mingled pity and approbation, to kiss away the
tear that impearled her cheek. Intrepid and adventurous with the hero,
he began also to take a new interest in the misfortunes of love. He
could not describe the passionate complaints, the ingenuous tenderness
of another, without insensibly making the case his own. "Had the lover
known my Imogen, he would no longer have sighed for one, who could not
have been so fair, so gentle, and so lovely." Such were the thoughts of
Edwin; and till now Edwin had always expressed his thoughts. But now the
words fell half-formed from his trembling lips, and the sounds died away
before they were uttered. "Were I to speak, Imogen, who has always
beheld me with an aspect of benignity, might be offended. I should say
no more than the truth; but Imogen is modest. She does not suspect that
she possesses half the superiority over such as are called fair, which I
see in her. And who could bear to incur the resentment of Imogen? Who
would irritate a temper so amiable and mild? I should say no more than
the truth; but Imogen would think it flattery. Let Edwin be charged with
all other follies, but let that vice never find a harbour in his bosom;
let the imputation of that detested crime never blot his untarnished
name."

Edwin had received from nature the gift of an honest and artless
eloquence. His words were like the snow that falls beneath the beams of
the sun; _they melted as they fell_. Had it been his business to
have pleaded the cause of injured innocence or unmerited distress, his
generous sympathy and his manly persuasion must have won all hearts. Had
he solicited the pursuit of rectitude and happiness, his ingenuous
importunity could not have failed of success. But where the mind is too
deeply interested, there it is that the faculties are most treacherous.
Ardent were the sighs of Edwin, but his voice refused its assistance,
and his tongue faultered under the attempts that he made. Fluent and
voluble upon all other subjects, upon this he hesitated. For the first
time he was dissatisfied with the expressions that nature dictated. For
the first time he dreaded to utter the honest wishes of his heart,
apprehensive that he might do violence to the native delicacy of Imogen.

But he needed not have feared. Imogen was not blind to those perfections
which every mouth conspired to praise. Her heart was not cold and
unimpassioned; she could not see these perfections, united with youth
and personal beauty, without being attracted. The accents of Edwin were
music to her ear. The tale that Edwin told, interested her twice as much
as what she heard from vulgar lips. To wander with Edwin along the
flowery mead, to sit with Edwin in the cool alcove, had charms for her
for which she knew not how to account, and which she was at first
unwilling to acknowledge to her own heart. When she heard of the feats
of the generous lover, his gallantry in the rural sports, and his
reverence for the fair, it was under the amiable figure of Edwin that he
came painted to her treacherous imagination. She was a stranger to
artifice and disguise, and the renown of Edwin was to her the feast of
the soul, and with visible satisfaction she dwelt upon his praise. Even
in sleep her dreams were of the deserving shepherd. The delusive
pleasures that follow in the train of dark-browed night, all told of
Edwin. The unreal mockery of that capricious being, who cheats us with
scenes of fictitious wretchedness, was full of the unmerited calamities,
the heartbreaking woe, or the untimely death of Edwin. From Edwin
therefore the language of love would have created no disgust. Imogen was
not heedless and indiscreet; she would not have sacrificed the dignity
of innocence. Imogen was not coy; she would not have treated her admirer
with affected disdain. She had no guard but virgin modesty and that
conscious worth, _that would be wooed, and not unsought be won_.

Such was the yet immature attachment of our two lovers, when an
anniversary of religious mirth summoned them, together with their
neighbour shepherds of the adjacent hamlet, to the spot which had long
been consecrated to rural sports and guiltless festivity, near the
village of Ruthyn. The sun shone with unusual splendour; the Druidical
temples, composed of immense and shapeless stones, heaped upon each
other by a power stupendous and incomprehensible, reflected back his
radiant beams. The glade, the place of destination to the frolic
shepherds, was shrouded beneath two venerable groves that encircled it
on either side. The eye could not pierce beyond them, and the
imagination was in a manner embosomed in the vale. There were the
quivering alder, the upright fir, and the venerable oak crowned with
sacred mistletoe. They grew upon a natural declivity that descended
every way towards the plain. The deep green of the larger trees was
fringed towards the bottom with the pleasing paleness of the willow.
From one of the groves a little rivulet glided across the plain, and was
intersected on one side by a stream that flowed into it from a point
equally distant from either extremity of its course. Both these streams
were bordered with willows. In a word, upon the face of this beautiful
spot all appeared tranquility and peace. It was without a path, and you
would imagine that no human footsteps had ever invaded the calmness of
its solitude. It was the eternal retreat of the venerable anchorite; it
was the uninhabited paradise in the midst of the trackless ocean.

Such was the spot where the shepherds and shepherdesses of a hundred
cots were now assembled. In the larger compartiments of the vale, the
more muscular and vigorous swains pursued the flying ball, or contended
in the swift-footed race. The bards, venerable for their age and the
snowy whiteness of their hair, sat upon a little eminence as umpires of
the sports. In the smaller compartiments, the swains, mingled with the
fair, danced along the level green, or flew, with a velocity that
beguiled the eager sight, beneath the extended arms of their fellows.
Here a few shepherds, apart from the rest, flung the ponderous quoit
that sung along the air. There two youths, stronger and more athletic
than the throng, grasped each others arms with an eager hand, and
struggled for the victory. Now with manly vigour the one shook the
sinewy frame of the other; now they bended together almost to the earth,
and now with double force they reared again their gigantic stature. At
one time they held each other at the greatest possible distance; and
again, their arms, their legs and their whole bodies entwined, they
seemed as if they had grown together. When the weaker or less skilful
was overthrown, he tumbled like a vast and mountain oak, that for ages
had resisted the tumult of the winds; and the whole plain resounded at
his fall. Such as were unengaged formed a circle round the wrestlers,
and by their shouts and applause animated by turns the flagging courage
of either.

And now the sun had gained his meridian height, and, fatigued with
labour and heat, they seated themselves upon the grass to partake of
their plain and rural feast. The parched wheat was set out in baskets,
and the new cheeses were heaped together. The blushing apple, the golden
pear, the shining plum, and the rough-coated chesnut were scattered in
attractive confusion. Here were the polished cherry and the downy peach;
and here the eager gooseberry, and the rich and plenteous clusters of
the purple grape. The neighbouring fountain afforded them a cool and
sparkling beverage, and the lowing herds supplied the copious bowl with
white and foaming draughts of milk. The meaner bards accompanied the
artless luxury of the feast with the symphony of their harps.

The repast being finished, the company now engaged in those less active
sports, that exercise the subtility of the wit, more than the agility or
strength of the body. Their untutored minds delighted themselves in the
sly enigma, and the quaint conundrum. Much was their laughter at the
wild guesses of the thoughtless and the giddy; and great the triumph of
the swain who penetrated the mystery, and successfully removed the
abstruseness of the problem. Many were the feats of skill exhibited by
the dextrous shepherd, and infinite were the wonder and admiration of
the gazing spectators. The whole scene indeed was calculated to display
the triumph of stratagem and invention. A thousand deceits were
practised upon the simple and unsuspecting, and while he looked round to
discover the object of the general mirth, it was increased into bursts
of merriment, and convulsive gaiety. At length they rose from the
verdant green, and chased each other in mock pursuit. Many flew towards
the adjoining grove; the pursued concealed himself behind the dark and
impervious thicket, or the broad trunk of the oak, while the pursuers ran
this way and that, and cast their wary eyes on every side. Carefully
they explored the bushes, and surveyed each clump of tufted trees. And
now the neighbouring echoes repeated the universal shout, and proclaimed
to the plain below, that the object of their search was found. Fatigue
however, in spite of the gaiety of spirit with which their sports were
pursued, began to assert his empire, and they longed for that
tranquility and repose which were destined to succeed.

At this instant the united sound of the lofty harp, the melodious rebec,
and the chearful pipe, summoned them once again to the plain. From every
side they hastened to the lawn, and surrounded, with ardent eyes, and
panting expectation, the honoured troop of the bards, crowned with
laurel and sacred mistletoe. And now they seated themselves upon the
tender herb; and now all was stilness and solemn silence. Not one
whisper floated on the breeze; not a murmur was heard. The tumultuous
winds were hushed, and all was placid composure, save where the gentle
zephyr fanned the leaves. The tinkling rill babbled at their feet; the
feathered choristers warbled in the grove; and the deep lowings of the
distant herds died away upon the ear. The solemn prelude began from a
full concert of the various instruments. It awakened attention in the
thoughtless, and composed the frolic and the gay into unbroken
heedfulness. The air was oppressed with symphonious sounds, and the ear
filled with a tumult of harmony.

On a sudden the chorus ceased: Those instruments which had united their
force to fill the echoes of every grove, and of every hill, were silent.
And now a bard, of youthful appearance, but who was treated with every
mark of honour and distinction, and seated on the left hand of the hoary
Llewelyn, the prince of song, struck the lyre with a lofty and daring
hand. His eye sparkled with poetic rapture, and his countenance beamed
with the sublime smile of luxuriant fancy and heaven-born inspiration.
He sung of the wanton shepherd, that followed, with ungenerous
perseverance, the chaste and virgin daughter of Cadwallo. The Gods took
pity upon her distress, the Gods sent down their swift and winged
messenger to shield her virtue, and deliver her from the persecution of
Modred. With strong and eager steps the ravisher pursued: timid
apprehension, and unviolated honour, urged her rapid flight. But Modred
was in the pride of youth; muscular and sinewy was the frame of Modred.
Beauteous and snowy was the person of the fair: her form was delicate,
and her limbs were tender. If heaven had not interposed, if the Gods had
not been on her side, she must have fallen a victim to savage fury and
brutal lust. But, in the crisis of her fate, she gradually sunk away
before the astonished eyes of Modred. That beauteous frame was now no
more, and she started from before him, swifter than the winds, a timid
and listening hare. Still, still the hunter pursued; he suspended not
the velocity of his course. The speed of Modred was like the roe upon
the mountains; every moment he gained upon the daughter of Cadwallo. But
now the object of his pursuit vanished from his sight, and eluded his
eager search. In vain he explored every thicket, and surveyed all the
paths of the forest. While he was thus employed, on a sudden there burst
from a cave a hungry and savage wolf; it was the daughter of Cadwallo.
Modred started with horror, and in his turn fled away swifter than the
winds. The fierce and ravenous animal pursued; fire flashed from the
eye, and rage and fury sat upon the crest. Mild and gentle was the
daughter of Cadwallo; her heart relented; her soft and tender spirit
belied the savage form. They approached the far famed stream of Conway.
Modred cast behind him a timid and uncertain eye; the virgin passed
along, no longer terrible, a fair and milk white hind. Modred inflamed
with disappointment, reared his ponderous boar spear, and hurled it from
his hand. Too well, ah, cruel and untutored swain! thou levelest thy
aim. Her tender side is gored; her spotless and snowy coat is deformed
with blood. Agitated with pain, superior to fear, she plunges in the
flood. When lo! a wonder; on the opposite shore she rises, radiant and
unhurt, in her native form. Modred contemplates the prodigy with
astonishment; his lust and his brutality inflame him more than ever.
Eagerly he gazes on her charms; in thought he devours her inexpressive
beauties. And now he can no longer restrain himself; with sudden start
he leaps into the river. The waves are wrought into a sudden tempest;
they hurry him to and fro. He buffets them with lusty arms; he rides
upon the billows. But vain is human strength; the unseen messenger of
the Gods laughs at the impotent efforts of Modred. At length the waters
gape with a frightful void; the bottom, strewed with shells, and
overgrown with sea-weed, is disclosed to the sight. Modred, unhappy
Modred, sinks to rise no more. His beauty is tarnished like the flower
of the field; his blooming cheek, his crimson lip, is pale and
colourless. Learn hence, ye swains, to fear the Gods, and to reverence
the divinity of virtue. Modred never melted for another's woe; the tear
of sympathy had not moistened his cheek. The heart of Modred was
haughty, insolent and untractable; he turned a deaf ear to the
supplication of the helpless, he listened not to the thunder of the
Gods. Let the fate of Modred be remembered for a caution to the
precipitate; let the children of the valley learn wisdom. Heaven never
deserts the cause of virtue; chastity wherever she wanders (_be it not
done in pride or in presumption_) is sacred and invulnerable.

Such was the song of the youthful bard. Every eye was fixed upon his
visage while he struck the lyre; the multitude of the shepherds appeared
to have no faculty but the ear. And now the murmur of applause began;
and the wondering swains seemed to ask each other, whether the God of
song were not descended among them. "Oh glorious youth," cried they,
"how early is thy excellence! Ere manhood has given nerve and vigour to
thy limbs, ere yet the flowing beard adorns thy gallant breast, nature
has unlocked to thee her hidden treasures, the Gods have enriched thee
with all the charms of poetry. Great art thou among the bards;
illustrious in wisdom, where they all are wise. Should gracious heaven
spare thy life, we will cease to weep the death of Hoel; we will lament
no longer the growing infirmities of Llewelyn."

While they yet spoke, a bard, who sat upon the right hand of the prince,
prepared to sweep the string. He was in the prime of manhood. His
shining locks flowed in rich abundance upon his strong and graceful
shoulders. His eye expressed more of flame than gaiety, more of
enthusiasm than imagination. His brow, though manly, and, as it should
seem, by nature erect, bore an appearance of solemn and contemplative.
He had ever been distinguished by an attachment to solitude, and a love
for those grand and tremendous objects of uncultivated nature with which
his country abounded. His were the hanging precipice, and the foaming
cataract. His ear drank in the voice of the tempest; he was rapt in
attention to the roaring thunder. When the contention of the elements
seemed to threaten the destruction of the universe, when Snowdon bowed
to its deepest base, it was then that his mind was most filled with
sublime meditation. His lofty soul soared above the little war of
terrestrial objects, and rode expanded upon the wings of the winds. Yet
was the bard full of gentleness and sensibility; no breast was more
susceptible to the emotions of pity, no tongue was better skilled in the
soft and passionate touches of the melting and pathetic. He possessed a
key to unlock all the avenues of the heart.

Such was the bard, and this was the subject of his song. He told of a
dreadful famine, that laid waste the shores of the Menai. Heaven, not to
punish the shepherds, for, alas, what had these innocent shepherds done?
but in the mysterious wisdom of its ways, had denied the refreshing
shower, and the soft-descending dew. From the top of Penmaenmawr, as far
as the eye could reach, all was uniform and waste. The trees were
leafless, not one flower adorned the ground, not one tuft of verdure
appeared to relieve the weary eye. The brooks were dried up; their beds
only remained to tell the melancholy tale, Here once was water; the
tender lambs hastened to the accustomed brink, and lifted up their
innocent eyes with anguish and disappointment. The meadows no longer
afforded pasture of the cattle; the trees denied their fruits to man. In
this hour of calamity the Druids came forth from their secret cells, and
assembled upon the heights of Mona. This convention of the servants of
the Gods, though intended to relieve the general distress, for a moment
increased it. The shepherds anticipated the fatal decree; they knew that
at times like this the blood of a human victim was accustomed to be shed
upon the altars of heaven. Every swain trembled for himself or his
friend; every parent feared to be bereaved of the staff of his age. And
now the holy priest had cast the lots in the mysterious urn; and the lot
fell upon the generous Arthur. Arthur was beloved by all the shepherds
that dwelt upon the margin of the main; the praise of Arthur sat upon
the lips of all that knew him. But what served principally to enhance
the distress, was the attachment there existed between him and the
beauteous Evelina. Mild was the breast of Evelina, unused to encounter
the harshness of opposition, or the chilly hand and forbidding
countenance of adversity. From twenty shepherds she had chosen the
gallant Arthur, to reward his pure and constant love. Long had they been
decreed to make each other happy. No parent opposed himself to their
virtuous desires; the blessing of heaven awaited them from the hand of
the sacred Druid. But in the general calamity of their country they had
no heart to rejoice; they could not insult over the misery of all around
them. "Soon, oh soon," cried the impatient shepherd, "may the wrath of
heaven be overpast! Extend, all-merciful divinity, thy benign influence
to the shores of Arvon! Once more may the rustling of the shower refresh
our longing ears! Once more may our eyes be gladdened with the pearly,
orient dew! May the fields be clothed afresh in cheerful green! May the
flowers enamel the verdant mead! May the brooks again brawl along their
pebbly bed! And may man and beast rejoice together!" Ah, short-sighted,
unapprehensive shepherd! thou dost not know the misfortune that is
reserved for thyself; thou dost not know, that thou shalt not live to
behold those smiling scenes which thy imagination forestallest; thou
dost not see the dart of immature and relentless death that is suspended
over thee. Think, O ye swains, what was the universal astonishment and
pity, when the awful voice of the Druid proclaimed the decree of heaven!
Terror sat upon every other countenance, tears started into every other
eye; but the mien of Arthur was placid and serene. He came forward from
the throng; his eyes glistened with the fire of patriotism. "Hear me, my
countrymen," cried he, "for you I am willing to die. What is my
insignificant life, when weighed against the happiness of Arvon? Be
grateful to the Gods, that, for so poor a boon, they are willing to
spread wide the hand of bounty, and to exhaust upon your favoured heads
the horn of plenty." While he spoke he turned his head to the spot from
which he had advanced, and beheld, a melting object, Evelina, pale and
breathless, supported in the arms of the maidens. For a moment he forgot
his elevated sentiments and his heroism, and flew to raise her.
"Evelina, mistress of my heart, awake. Lift up thine eyes and bless thy
Arthur. Be not too much subdued by my catastrophe. Live to comfort the
grey hairs, and to succour the infirmities of your aged parent." While
the breast of Arthur was animated with such sentiments, and dictated a
conduct like this, the priests were employed in the mournful
preparations. The altar was made ready; the lambent fire ascended from
its surface; the air was perfumed with the smoke of the incense; the
fillets were brought forth; and the sacred knife glittered in the hand
of the chief of the Druids. The bards had strung their harps, and began
the song of death. The sounds were lofty and animating, they were fitted
to inspire gallantry and enterprise into the trembling coward; they were
fitted to breathe a soul into the clay-cold corse. The spirit of Arthur
was roused; his eye gleamed with immortal fire. The aged oak, that
strikes its root beneath the soil, so defies the blast, and so rears its
head in the midst of the whirlwind. But oh, who can paint the distress
of Evelina? Now she dropped her head, like the tender lily whose stalk,
by some vulgar and careless hand has been broken; and now she was wild
and ungovernable, like the wild beast that has been robbed of its young.
For an instant the venerable name of religion awed her into mute
submission. But when the fatal moment approached, not the Gods, if the
Gods had descended in all their radiant brightness, could have
restrained her any longer. The air was rent with her piercing cries. She
spoke not. Her eyes, in silence turned towards heaven, distilled a
plenteous shower. At length, swifter than the winged hawk, she flew
towards the spot, and seized the sacred and inviolable arm of the holy
Druid, which was lifted up to strike the final blow. "Barbarous and
inhuman priest," she cried, "cease your vile and impious mummery! No
longer insult us with the name of Gods. If there be Gods, they are
merciful; but thou art a savage and unrelenting monster. Or if some
victim must expire, strike here, and I will thank thee. Strike, and my
bosom shall heave to meet the welcome blow. Do any thing. But oh, spare
me the killing, killing spectacle!" During this action the maidens
approached and hurried her from the plain. "Go," cried Arthur, "and let
not the heart of Evelina be sad. My Death has nothing in it that
deserves to be deplored. It is glorious and enviable. It shall be
remembered when this frame is crumbled into dust. The song of the bards
shall preserve it to never dying fame." The inconsolable fair one had
now been forced away. The intrepid shepherd bared his breast to the
sacred knife. His nerves trembled not. His bosom panted not. And now
behold the lovely youth, worthy to have lived through revolving years,
sunk on the ground, and weltering in his blood. Yes, gallant Arthur,
thou shalt possess that immortality which was the first wish of thy
heart! My song shall embalm thy precious memory, thy generous, spotless
fame! But, ah, it is not in the song of the bards to sooth the rooted
sorrow of Evelina. Every morning serves only to renew it. Every night
she bathes her couch in tears. Those objects, which carry pleasure to
the sense of every other fair, serve only to renew thy unexhausted
grief. The rustling shower, the pearly dew, the brawling brook, the
cheerful green, the flower-enameled mead, all join to tell of the
barbarous and untimely fate of Arthur. Smile no more, O ye meads; mock
not the grief of Evelina. Let the trees again be leafless; let the
rivers flow no longer in their empty beds. A scene like this suits best
the settled temper of Evelina.

He ceased. And his pathetic strain had awakened the sympathy of the
universal throng. Every shepherd hung his mournful head, when the
untimely fate of Arthur was related; every maiden dropped a generous
tear over the sorrows of Evelina. They listened to the song, and forgot
the poet. Their souls were rapt with alternate passions, and they
perceived not the matchless skill by which they were excited. The lofty
bard hurried them along with the rapidity of his conceptions, and left
them no time for hesitation, and left them no time for reflection. He
ceased, and the melodious sounds still hung upon their ear, and they
still sat in the posture of eager attention. At length they recollected
themselves; and it was no longer the low and increasing murmur of
applause: it was the exclamation of rapture; it was the unpremeditated
shout of astonishment.

In the mean time, the reverend Llewelyn, upon whose sacred head ninety
winters had scattered their snow, grasped the lyre, which had so often
confessed the master's hand. Though far advanced in the vale of years,
there was a strength and vigour in his age, of which the degeneracy of
modern times can have little conception. The fire was not extinguished
in his flaming eye; it had only attained that degree of chasteness and
solemnity, which had in it by so much the more, all that is majestic,
and all that is celestial. His looks held commerce with his native
skies. No vulgar passion ever visited his heaven-born mind. No vulgar
emotion ever deformed the godlike tranquility of his soul. He had but
one passion; it was the love of harmony. He was conscious only to one
emotion; it was reverence for the immortal Gods. He sat like the
anchorite upon the summit of Snowdon. The tempests raise the foaming
ocean into one scene of horror, but he beholds it unmoved. The rains
descend, the thunder roars, and the lightnings play beneath his feet.

Llewelyn struck the lyre, and the innumerable croud was noiseless and
silent as the chambers of death. They did not now wait for the pleasing
tale of a luxuriant imagination, or the pathetic and melting strain of
the mourner. They composed their spirits into the serenity of devotion.
They called together their innocent thoughts for the worship of heaven.
By anticipation their bosoms swelled with gratitude, and their hearts
dilated into praise.

The pious Llewelyn began his song from the rude and shapeless chaos. He
magnified the almighty word that spoke it into form. He sung of the
loose and fenny soil which gradually acquired firmness and density. The
immeasurable, eternal caverns of the ocean were scooped. The waters
rushed along, and fell with resounding, foamy violence to the depth
below. The sun shone forth from his chamber in the east, and the earth
wondered at the object, and smiled beneath his beams. Suddenly the
whole face of it was adorned with a verdant, undulating robe. The purple
violet and the yellow crocus bestrewed the ground. The stately oak
reared its branchy head, and the trees and shrubs burst from the surface
of the earth. Impregnated by power divine, the soil was prolific in
other fruits than these. The clods appeared to be informed with a
conscious spirit, and gradually assumed a thousand various forms. The
animated earth seemed to paw the verdant mead, and to despise the mould
from which it came. A disdainful horse, it shook its flowing mane, and
snuffed the enlivening breeze, and stretched along the plain. The
red-eyed wolf and the unwieldy ox burst like the mole the concealing
continent, and threw the earth in hillocs. The stag upreared his
branching head. The thinly scattered animals wandered among the
unfrequented hills, and cropped the untasted herb. Meantime the birds,
with many coloured plumage, skimmed along the unploughed air, and taught
the silent woods and hills to echo with their song.

Creatures, hymn the praises of your creator! Thou sun, prolific parent
of a thousand various productions, by whose genial heat they are
nurtured, and whose radiant beams give chearfulness and beauty to the
face of nature, first of all the existences of this material universe
acknowledge him thy superior, and while thou dispensest a thousand
benefits to the inferior creation, ascribe thine excellencies solely to
the great source of beauty and perfection! And when the sun has ceased
his wondrous course, do thou, O moon, in milder lustre show to people of
a thousand names the honours of thy maker! Thou loud and wintery north
wind, in majestic and tremendous tone declare his lofty praise! Ye
gentle zephyrs, whisper them to the modest, and softly breathe them in
the ears of the lowly! Ye towering pines, and humble shrubs, ye fragrant
flowers, and, more than all, ye broad and stately oaks, bind your heads,
and wave your branches, and adore! Ye warbling fountains, warbling tune
his praise! Praise him, ye beasts, in different strains! And let the
birds, that soar on lofty wings, and scale the path of heaven, bear, in
their various melody, the notes of adoration to the skies! Mortals, ye
favoured sons of the eternal father, be it yours in articulate
expressions of gratitude to interpret for the mute creation, and to
speak a sublimer and more rational homage.

Heard ye not the music of the spheres? Know ye not the melody of
celestial voices? On yonder silver-skirted cloud I see them come. It
turns its brilliant lining on the setting day. And these are the accents
of their worship. "Ye sons of women, such as ye are now, such once were
we. Through many scenes of trial, through heroic constancy, and
ever-during patience, have we attained to this bright eminence. Large
and mysterious are the paths of heaven, just and immaculate his ways. If
ye listen to the siren voice of pleasure, if upon the neck of heedless
youth you throw the reins, that base and earth-born clay which now you
wear, shall assume despotic empire. And when you quit the present narrow
scene, ye shall wear a form congenial to your vices. The fierce and
lawless shall assume the figure of the unrelenting wolf. The
unreflecting tyrant, that raised a mistaken fame from scenes of
devastation and war, shall spurn the ground, a haughty and indignant
horse; and in that form, shall learn, by dear experience, what were the
sufferings and what the scourge that he inflicted on mankind. The
sensual shall wear the shaggy vesture of the goat, or foam and whet his
horrid tusks, a wild and untame'd boar. But virtue prepares its
possessor for the skies. Upon the upright and the good, attendant angels
wait. With heavenly spirits they converse. On them the dark machinations
of witchcraft, and the sullen spirits of darkness have no power. Even
the outward form is impressed with a beam of celestial lustre. By slow,
but never ceasing steps, they tread the path of immortality and honour.
Then, mortals, love, support, and cherish each other. Fear the Gods, and
reverence their holy, white-robed servants. Let the sacred oak be your
care. Worship the holy and everlasting mistletoe. And when all the
objects that you now behold shall be involved in universal
conflagration, and time shall be no more; ye shall mix with Gods, ye
shall partake their thrones, and be crowned like them with never-fading
laurel."

[Illustration]






BOOK THE SECOND

THUNDER STORM.--THE RAPE OF IMOGEN.--EDWIN ARRIVES AT THE GROTTO OF
ELWY.--CHARACTER OF THE MAGICIAN.--THE END OF THE FIRST DAY.


The song of Llewelyn was heard by the shepherds with reverence and mute
attention. Their blameless hearts were lifted to the skies with the
sentiment of gratitude; their honest bosoms overflowed with the fervour
of devotion. They proved their sympathy with the feelings of the bard,
not by licentious shouts and wild huzzas, but by the composure of their
spirits, the serenity of their countenances, and the deep and
unutterable silence which universally prevailed. And now the hoary
minstrel rose from the little eminence, beneath the aged oak, from whose
branches depended the ivy and the honeysuckle, on which the veneration
of the multitude had placed him. He came into the midst of the plain,
and the sons and the daughters of the fertile Clwyd pressed around him.
Fervently they kissed the hem of his garment; eagerly with their eyes
they sought to encounter the benign rays of his countenance. With the
dignity of a magistrate, and the tenderness of a father, he lifted his
aged arms, and poured upon them his mild benediction. "Children, I have
met your fathers, and your fathers fathers, beneath the hills of Ruthyn.
Such as they were, such are ye, and such ever may ye remain. The lily is
not more spotless, the rose and the violet do not boast a more fragrant
odour, than the incense of your prayers when it ascends to the footstool
of the Gods. Guileless and undesigning are you as the yearling lamb;
gentle and affectionate as the cooing dove. Qualities like these the
Gods behold with approbation; to qualities like these the Gods assign
their choicest blessings. My sons, there is a splendour that dazzles,
rather than enlightens; there is a heat that burns rather than
fructifies. Let not characters like these excite your ambition. Be yours
the unfrequented sylvan scene. Be yours the shadowy and unnoticed vale
of obscurity. Here are the mild and unruffled affections. Here are
virtue, peace and happiness. _Here also are_ GODS."

Having thus said, he dismissed the assembly, and the shepherds prepared
to return to their respective homes. Edwin and Imogen, as they had come,
so they returned together. The parents of the maiden had confided her to
the care of the gallant shepherds. "She is our only child," said they,
"our only treasure, and our life is wrapt up in her safety. Watch over
her like her guardian genius. Bring her again to our arms adorned with
the cheerfulness of tranquility and innocence." The breast of Edwin was
dilated with the charge; he felt a gentle undulation of pride and
conscious importance about his heart, at the honour conferred upon him.

The setting sun now gilded the western hills. His beams played upon
their summits, and were reflected in an irregular semi-circle of
splendour, spotless and radiant as the robes of the fairies. The heat of
the day was over, the atmosphere was mild, and all the objects round
them quiet and serene. A gentle zephyr fanned the leaves; and the
shadows of the trees, projecting to their utmost length, gave an
additional coolness and a soberer tint to the fields through which they
passed.

The conversation of these innocent and guileless lovers was, as it were,
in unison with the placidness of the evening. The sports, in which they
had been engaged, had inspired them with gaiety, and the songs they had
heard, had raised their thoughts to a sublimer pitch than was usual to
them. They praised the miracles of the tale of Modred; they sympathised
with the affliction of Evelina; and they spoke with the most unfeigned
reverence of the pious and venerable Llewelyn.

But the harmless chearfulness of their conversation did not last long.
The serenity that was around them was soon interrupted, and their
attention was diverted to external objects. Suddenly you might have
perceived a cloud, small and dark, that rose from the bosom of the sea.
By swift advances it became thicker and broader, till the whole heavens
were enveloped in its dismal shade. The gentle zephyr, that anon played
among the trees, was changed into a wind hollow and tumultuous. Its
course was irregular. Now all was still and silent as the caverns of
death; and again it burst forth in momentary blasts, or whirled the
straws and fallen leaves in circling eddies. The light of day was
shrouded and invisible. The slow and sober progress of evening was
forestalled. The woods and the hills were embosomed in darkness. Their
summits were no longer gilded. One by one the beams of the sun were
withdrawn from each; and at length Snowdon itself could not be
perceived.

Our shepherd and his charge had at this moment reached the most
extensive and unprotected part of the plain. No friendly cot was near to
shield them from the coming storm. And now a solemn peal of thunder
seemed to roll along over their heads. They had begun to fly, but the
tender Imogen was terrified at the unexpected crash, and sunk, almost
breathless, into the arms of Edwin. In the mean time, the lightnings
seemed to fill the heavens with their shining flame. The claps of
thunder grew louder and more frequent. They reverberated from rock to
rock, and from hill to hill. If at any time, for a transitory interval,
the tremendous echoes died away upon the ear, it was filled with the
hollow roaring of the winds, and the boisterous dashing of the distant
waves. At length the pealing rain descended. It seemed as if all the
waters of heaven were exhausted upon their naked heads. The anxious and
afflicted Edwin took his beauteous and insensible companion in his arms,
and flew across the plain.

But at this instant, a more extraordinary and terrifying object
engrossed his attention. An oak, the monarch of the plain, towards which
he bent his rapid course, was suddenly struck with the bolt of heaven,
and blasted in his sight. Its large and spreading branches were
withered; its leaves shrunk up and faded. In the very trunk a gaping and
tremendous rift appeared. At the same moment two huge and craggy cliffs
burst from the surrounding rocks, to which they had grown for ages, and
tumbling with a hideous noise, trundled along the plain.

At length a third spectacle, more horrible than the rest, presented
itself to the affrighted eyes of Edwin. He saw a figure, larger than the
human, that walked among the clouds, and piloted the storm. Its
appearance was dreadful, and its shape, loose and undistinguishable,
seemed to be blended with the encircling darkness. From its coutenance
gleamed a barbarous smile, ten times more terrific than the frown of any
other being. Triumph, inhuman triumph, glistened in its eye, and, with
relentless delight, it brewed the tempest, and hurled the destructive
lightning. Edwin gazed upon this astonishing apparition, and knew it for
a goblin of darkness. The heart of Edwin, which no human terror could
appal, sunk within him; his nerves trembled, and the objects that
surrounded him, swam in confusion before his eyes. But it is not for
virtue to tremble; it is not for conscious innocence to fear the power
of elves and goblins. Edwin presently recollected himself, and a gloomy
kind of tranquility assumed the empire of his heart. He was more
watchful than ever for his beloved Imogen; he gazed with threefold
earnestness upon the fearful spectre.

A sound now invaded his ear, from the shapeless rocks behind him. They
repeated it with all their echoes. It was hollow as the raging wind; and
yet it was not the raging wind. It was loud as the roaring thunder; and
yet it was not the voice of thunder. But he did not remain long in
suspense, from whence the voice proceeded. A wolf, whom hunger had made
superior to fear, leaped from the rock, upon the plain below. Edwin
turned his eyes upon the horrid monster; he grasped his boarspear in his
hand. The unconscious Imogen glided from his arms, and he advanced
before her. He met the savage in his fury, and plunged his weapon in his
side. He overturned the monster; he drew forth his lance reeking with
his blood; his enemy lay convulsed in the agonies of death. But ere he
could return, he heard the sound of a car rattling along the plain. The
reins were of silk, and the chariot shone with burnished gold. Upon the
top of it sat a man, tall, lusty, and youthful. His hair flowed about
his shoulders, his eyes sparkled with untamed fierceness, and his brow
was marked with the haughty insolence of pride. It was Roderic, lord of
a hundred hills; but Edwin knew him not. The goblin descended from its
eminence, and directed the course of Roderic. In a moment, he seized the
breathless and insensible Imogen, and lifted her to his car. Edwin
beheld the scene with grief and astonishment; his senses were in a
manner overwhelmed with so many successive prodigies. But he did not
long remain inactive; grief and astonishment soon gave way to revenge.
He took his javelin, still red with the blood of the mountain wolf, and
whirled it from his hand. Edwin was skilled to toss the dart; from his
hand it flew unerring to its aim. Forceful it sung along the air; but
the goblin advanced with hasty steps among the clouds. It touched it
with its hand, and it fell harmless and pointless to the ground. During
this action the car of Roderic disappeared. The goblin immediately
vanished; and Edwin was left in solitude.

The storm however had not yet ceased. The rain descended with all its
former fury. The thunder roared with a strong and deafening sound. The
lightnings flamed from pole to pole. But the lightnings flamed, and the
thunder roared unregarded. The storm beat in vain upon the unsheltered
head of Edwin. "Where," cried he, with the voice of anguish and despair,
"is my Imogen, my mistress, my wife, the charmer of my soul, the solace
of my heart?" Saying this, he sprung away like the roe upon the
mountains. His pace was swifter than that of the zephyr when it sweeps
along over the unbending corn. He soon reached the avenue by which the
chariot had disappeared from his sight. He leaped from rock to rock; he
ascended to the summit of the cliff. His eye glanced the swift-flying
car of Roderic; he knew him by his gilded carriage, and his spangled
vest. But he saw him only for a moment. His aching eye pursued the
triumphant flight in vain. "Stay, stay, base ravisher, inglorious
coward!" he exclaimed. "If thou art a man, return and meet me. I will
encounter thee hand to hand. I will not fear the strength of thy
shoulders, and the haughtiness of thy crest. If in such a cause, with
the pride of virtue on my side, with all the Gods to combat for me, I am
yet vanquished, then be Imogen thine: then let her be submitted to thy
despotic power, to thy brutal outrage, and I will not murmur."

But his words were given to the winds of heaven. Roderic fled far, far
away. The heart of Edwin was wrung with anguish. "Ye kind and merciful
Gods!" exclaimed he, "grant but this one prayer, and the voice of Edwin
shall no more importune you with presumptuous vows. Blot from the book
of fate the tedious interval. Give me to find the potent villain. Though
he be hemmed in with guards behind guards; though his impious mansion
strike its foundations deep to the centre, and rear its head above the
clouds; though all the powers of hell combine on his side, I will search
him out, I will penetrate into his most hidden recess. I can but die.
Oh, if I am to be deprived of Imogen, how sweet, how solacing is the
thought of death! Let me die in her cause. That were some comfort yet.
Let me die in her presence, let her eyes witness the fervour of my
attachment, and I will die without a groan."

Having thus poured forth the anguish of his bosom, he resumed the
pursuit. But how could Edwin, alone, on foot, and wearied with the
journey of the day, hope to overtake the winged steeds of Roderic? And
indeed had his speed been tenfold greater than it was, it had been
exerted to no purpose. As the ravisher arrived at the edge of the
mountain, he struck into a narrow and devious path that led directly to
his mansion. But Edwin, who had for some time lost sight of the chariot,
took no notice of a way, covered with moss and overgrown with bushes;
and pursued the more beaten road. Swift was his course; but the swifter
he flew, the farther still he wandered from the object of his search. A
rapid brook flowed across his path, which the descending rains had
swelled into a river. Without a moment's hesitation, accoutered as he
was, he plunged in. Instantly he gained the opposite bank, and divided
the air before him, like an arrow in its flight.

In the mean time, the storm had ceased, the darkness was dispersed, and
only a few thin and fleecy clouds were scattered over the blue expanse.
The sun had for some time sunk beneath the western hills. The heavens,
clear and serene, had assumed a deeper tint, and were spangled over with
stars. The moon, in calm and silver lustre, lent her friendly light to
the weary traveller. Edwin was fatigued and faint. He tried to give vent
to his complaints; but his tongue cleaved to the roof of his mouth: his
spirits sunk within him. No sound now reached his ears but the baying of
the shepherds dogs, and the _drowsy tinklings_ of the _distant
folds_. The owl, the solemn bird of night, sat buried among the
branches of the aged oak, and with her melancholy hootings gave an
additional serenity to the scene. At a small distance, on his right
hand, he perceived a contiguous object that reflected the rays of the
moon, through the willows and the hazels, and chequered the view with a
clear and settled lustre. He approached it. It was the lake of Elwy; and
near it he discovered that huge pile of stones, so well known to him,
which had been reared ages since, by the holy Druids. It was upon this
spot that they worshipped the Gods. But they had no habitation near it.
They repaired thither at stated intervals from the woods of Mona, and
the shores of Arvon. One only Druid lived by the banks of the silver
flood, and watched the temple day and night, that no rude hand might do
violence to the sanctity of the place, and no profaner mortal, with
sacrilegious foot might enter the mysterious edifice. It was surrounded
with a wall of oaks. The humbler shrubs filled up their interstices, and
there was no avenue to the sacred shade, except by two narrow paths on
either side the lake.

The solemn stilness of the scene for a moment hushed the sorrows of
Edwin into oblivion. Ah, short oblivion! scarcely had he gazed around
him, and drank of the quietness and peace of the scene, ere those recent
sorrows impressed his bosom with more anguish than before. Recollecting
himself however, he trod the mead with nimble feet, and approached,
trembling and with hesitation, to the eastern avenue. "Hear me, sage and
generous Madoc," cried the shepherd, with a voice that glided along the
peaceful lake, "hear the sorrows of the most forlorn of all the sons of
Clwyd!" The hermit, who sat at the door of his grotto, perceived the
sound, and approached to the place from which it proceeded. The accent
was gentle; and he feared no boisterous intrusion. The accent was tender
and pathetic; and never was the breast of Madoc steeled against the
voice of anguish. "Approach, my son," he cried. "What disastrous event
has brought thee hither, so far from thy peaceful home, and at this
still and silent hour of night? Has any lamb wandered from thy fold, and
art thou come hither in pursuit of it?" Edwin was silent. His heart
seemed full almost to bursting, and he could not utter a word. "Hast
thou wandered from thy companions and missed the path that led to the
well-known hamlet?" "Alas," said Edwin, "I had a companion once!" and he
lifted up his eyes to heaven in speechless despair. "Has thy mistress
deserted thee, or have her parents bestowed her on some happier swain?"
"Yes," said Edwin, "I have lost her, who was dear to me as the _ruddy
drops that visit my sad heart._ But she was constant. Her parents
approved of my passion, and consigned her to my arms." "Has sickness
then overtaken her, or has untimely death put a period to thy prospects,
just as they began to bloom?" "Oh, no," said the disconsolate shepherd,
"I have encountered a disaster more comfortless and wasteful than
sickness. I had a thousand times rather have received her last sigh, and
closed her eyes in darkness!"

During this conversation, they advanced along the banks of Elwy, and
drew towards the grotto of the hermit. The hospitable Madoc brought some
dried fruits and a few roots from his cell, and spread them before his
guest. He took a bowl of seasoned wood, and hastening to the fountain,
that fell with a murmuring noise down the neighing [sic] rock, he
presented the limpid beverage. "Such," said he, "is my humble fare;
partake it with a contented heart, and it shall be more grateful to thy
taste, than the high flavoured viands of a monarch." In the mean time,
Madoc, pleased with the benevolent pursuit, gathered some bits of dry
wood, and setting them on fire, besought the swain to refresh himself
from the weariness of his travel, and the inclemency of the storm. But
the heart of Edwin was too full to partake of the provisions that his
attentive host had prepared. The chearfulness however of the blazing
hearth and the generous officiousness of the hermit, seemed by degrees
to recover him from the insensibility and lethargy, that for a time had
swallowed up all his faculties.

Madoc had hitherto contemplated his guest in silence. He permitted him
to refresh his wearied frame and to resume his dissipated spirits
uninterrupted; he suppressed the curiosity by which he was actuated, to
learn the story of the woes of Edwin. In the midst of his dejection, he
perceived the symptoms of a nobility of spirit that interested him; and
the anguish of the shepherd's mind had not totally destroyed the traces
of that mild affability, and that manly frankness for which he was
esteemed.

Edwin had no sooner appeared to shake off a small part of his
melancholy, his eye no sooner sparkled with returning fire, than Madoc
embraced the favourable omen. "My son," said he, "you seem to be full of
dejection and grief. Grief is not an inmate of the plain; the hours of
the shepherd are sped in gaiety and mirth. Suspicion and design are
stranger to his bosom. With him the voice of discord is not heard. The
scourge of war never blasted his smiling fields; the terror of invasion
never banished him from the peaceful cot. You too are young and uninured
even to the misfortunes of the shepherd. No contagion has destroyed your
flock; no wolf has broken its slender barriers: you have felt the
anguish of no wound, and been witness to the death of no friend. Say
then, my son, why art thou thus dejected and forlorn?"

"Alas," replied Edwin, "our equal lot undoubtedly removes us from the
stroke of many misfortunes; but even to us adversity extends its rod. I
have been exposed to the ravages of an invader, more fearful than the
wolf, more detested than the conqueror. From an affliction like mine, no
occupation, no rank, no age can exempt. Sawest thou not the descending
storm? Did not the rain beat upon thy cavern, and the thunder roar among
the hills?" "It did," cried Madoc, "and I was struck with reverence, and
worshipped the God who grasps the thunder in his mighty hand. Wast thou,
my son, exposed to its fury?" "I was upon the bleak and wide extended
heath. With Imogen, the fairest and most constant of the daughters of
Clwyd, I returned from the feast of Ruthyn. But alas," added the
shepherd, "the storm had no terrors, when compared with the scenes that
accompanied it. I beheld, Madoc, nor are the words I utter the words of
shameless imposition, or coward credulity; I beheld a phantom, that
glided along the air, and rode among the clouds. At his command, a wolf
from the forest, with horrid tusks, and eyes of fire, burst upon me. I
advanced towards it, that I might defend the fairest of her sex from its
fury, and plunged my javelin in its heart. But, oh! while I was thus
engaged, a chariot advanced on the opposite side! Its course was
directed by the spectre. The rider descended on the plain, and seized
the spotless, helpless Imogen; and never, never shall these eyes behold
her more! Such, O thou servant of the Gods, has been my adversity. The
powers of darkness have arrayed themselves against me. For me the storm
has been brewed; all the arrows of heaven have been directed against my
weak, defenceless head. For me the elements have mixed in tremendous
confusion; portents and prodigies have been accumulated for my
destruction. Oh, then, generous and hospitable Druid, what path is
there, that is left for my deliverance? What chance remains for me, now
that a host of invisible beings combats against me? Teach me, my friend,
my father, what it is that I must do. Tell me, is there any happiness in
store for Edwin, or must I sink, unresisting, into the arms of
comfortless despair?"

"My son," cried the venerable hermit, "hope is at all times our duty,
and despair our crime. It is not in the power of events to undermine the
felicity of the virtuous. Goblins, and spirits of darkness, are
permitted a certain scope in this terrestrial scene; but their power is
bounded; beyond a certain line they cannot wander. In vain do they
threaten innocence and truth. Innocence is a wall of brass upon which
they can make no impression. Virtue is an adamant that is sacred and
secure from all their efforts. He whose thoughts are full of rectitude
and heaven, who knows no guile, may wander in safety through
uncultivated forests, or sandy plains, that have never known the trace
of human feet. Before him the robber is just, and the satyr tame; for
him the monsters of the desert are disarmed of their terrors, and he
shall lead the wild boar and the wolf in his hand. Such is the sanctity
that heaven has bestowed on unblemished truth."

"Alas, my father," cried Edwin, "this is the lesson that was first
communicated to my childhood; and my infant heart bounded with the
sacred confidence it inspired. But excuse the presumption of a
distracted heart. This lesson, to which at another time I could have
listened with rapture and enthusiasm, seems now too loose and general
for a medicine to my woes. Innocence the Gods have made superior and
invulnerable. And, oh, in what have I transgressed? Yet, my father, I am
wounded in the tenderest part. Shall I ever recover my Imogen? Is she
not torn from me irreversibly? How shall I engage with powers invisible,
and supernatural? How shall I discover my unknown, human enemy? No,
Madoc, I am lost in impenetrable darkness. For me there is no hope, no
shadow of approaching ease."

"Be calm, my son," rejoined the anchorite. "Arrogance and impatience
become not the weak and uninformed children of the earth. Be calm, and I
will administer a remedy more appropriate to your wrongs. But remember
this is your hour of trial. If now you forget the principles of your
youth, and the instructions of the sacred Druids, you shall fall from
happiness, never to regain it more. But if you come forth pure and
unblemished from the fierce assay, your Imogen shall be yours, the Gods
shall take you into their resistless protection, and in all future ages,
when men would cite an example of distinguished felicity, they shall
say, as fortunate as Edwin of the vale." Edwin bended his knee in mute
submission.

"Listen, my son," continued the Druid. "I know your enemy, and can point
out to you his obscure retreat." The shepherd lifted up his eyes, lately
so languid, that now flashed with fire. He eagerly grasped the hand of
Madoc. "Alas," continued the hermit, "to know him would little answer
the purpose of thy bold and enterprising spirit. They adversary, as thou
mayest have conjectured, is in league with the powers of darkness.
Against them what can courage, what can adventure avail? They can
unthread thy joints, and crumble all thy sinews. They can chain up thy
limbs in marble. For how many perils, how many unforseen disasters ought
he to be prepared, who dares to encounter them?"

"The name of him who has ravished from thee the dearest treasure of thy
heart, is Roderic. His mother--attend, oh Edwin, for whatever the
incredulous may pretend, the tales related by the bards in their
immortal songs, of ghosts, and fairies, and dire enchantment, are not
vain and fabulous.--You have heard of the inauspicious fame and the bad
eminence of Rodogune. She withdrew from the fields of Clwyd within the
memory of the elder of shepherds. Various were the conjectures
occasioned by her disappearance. Some imagined, that for the haughtiness
of her humour, and the malignity of her disposition, characters that
were wholly unexampled in the pastoral life, she had been carried away
before the period limited by nature to the place of torment by the
goblins of the abyss. Others believed that she concealed herself in the
top of the highest mountain that was near them, and by a commerce with
invisible, malignant beings, still exercised the same gloomy temper in
more potent, and therefore more inauspicious harm. The blight that
overspread the meadows, the destructive contagion that diffused itself
among the flocks, the raging tempest that rooted up the oak, when the
thunder roared among the hills, and the lightning flashed from pole to
pole, they ascribed to the machinations and the sorcery of Rodogune.
Their conjectures indeed were blind, but their notions were not wholly
mistaken.

"Rodogune was the mother of Roderic. She was deeply skilled in those
dark and flagitious arts, which have cast a gloom upon this mortal
scene. The intellectual powers bestowed upon her by the Gods were great
and eminent, and were given for a far different purpose than to be
employed in these sinister pursuits. But all conspicuous talents are
liable, my son, to base perversion; and such was the fate of those of
Rodogune. She delighted in the actions which her dark and criminal
alliance with invisible powers enabled her to perform. It was her's to
mislead the benighted shepherd. It was Sher's to part the happy lovers.
For this purpose she would swell the waves, and toss the feeble bark.
She dispensed, according to the dictates of her caprice, the mildew
among the tender herb, and the pestilence among the folds of the
shepherds. By the stupendous powers of enchantment, she raised from the
bosom of a hill a wondrous edifice. The apartments were magnificent and
stately; unlike the shepherd's cot, and not to be conceived by the
imagination of the rustic. Here she accumulated a thousand various
gratifications; here she wantoned in all the secret and licentious
desires of her heart. But her castle was not merely a scene of
thoughtless pleasure. Within its circle she held crouds of degenerate
shepherds, groveling through the omnipotence of her incantations in
every brutal form. Even the spectres and the elves that disobeyed her
authority, she held in the severest durance. She compressed their tender
forms in the narrowest prison, or gave them to the stormy winds, to be
whirled, _with restless violence, round about_ the ample globe. In
a word, her mansion was one uninterrupted scene of ingenious cruelty and
miserable despair. To be surrounded with the face of disappointment and
agony was the happiness of Rodogune.

"When first by her art she raised that edifice which is now inhabited by
her son, she had been desirous to conceal it from the prying eyes of the
wanderer. In order to this, though it stood upon an eminence, she chose
an eminence that was surrounded by higher hills, and hills which,
according to the neighbouring shepherds, were impassable. No adventurous
step had ever since the day they were created pierced beyond them. It
was imagined that the space they surrounded was the haunt of elves, and
the resort of those who held commerce with evil spirits. The curling
smoke, which of late has frequently been seen to ascend from their
bosom, has confirmed this tradition. And in order to render her
habitation still more impervious, Rodogune surrounded it with a deep
grove of oaks, whose thick branches entwined together, permitted no
passage so much as to the light of day.

"Roderic was her only child, the darling of her age, and the central
object of all her cares. At his birth the elves and the fairies were
summoned together. They bestowed upon him every beauty of person and
every subtlety of wit. To every weapon they made him invulnerable. And,
without demanding from him that care and persevering study, that had
planted wrinkles on his mother's brow, they gave him to enjoy his wishes
instantly and uncontroled. One only goblin was daring enough to
pronounce a curse upon him. 'WHEN RODERIC,' cried he, 'SHALL BE
OVERREACHED IN ALL HIS SPELLS BY A SIMPLE SWAIN, UNVERSED IN THE VARIOUS
ARTS OF SORCERY AND MAGIC: WHEN RODERIC SHALL SUE TO A SIMPLE MAID, WHO
BY HIS CHARMS SHALL BE MADE TO HATE THE SWAIN THAT ONCE SHE LOVED, AND
WHO YET SHALL RESIST ALL HIS PERSONAL ATTRACTIONS AND ALL HIS POWER;
THEN SHALL HIS POWER BE AT AN END. HIS PALACES SHALL BE DISSOLVED, HIS
RICHES SCATTERED, AND HE HIMSELF SHALL BECOME AN UNFITTED, NECESSITOUS,
MISERABLE VAGABOND.' Such was the mysterious threat; and dearly did the
threatner abide it. In the mean time, an elf more generous, more
attached to Rodogune, and more potent than the rest, bestowed upon the
infant a mysterious ring. By means of this he is empowered to assume
what form he pleases. By means of this it was hoped he would be able to
subdue the most prepossessed, and melt the most obdurate female heart.
By means of this it was hoped, he might evade not only the simple swain,
but all the wiles of the most experienced and subtle adversary.

"Roderic now increased in age, and began to exhibit the promises of that
manly and graceful beauty that was destined for him. He inherited his
mother's haughtiness, and his wishes and his passions were never
subjected to contradiction. A few years since that mother died, and the
youth has been too much engaged in voluptuousness and luxury to embark
in the malicious pursuits of Rodogune, Sensuality has been his aim, and
pleasure has been his God. To gratify his passions has been the sole
object of his attentions; and he has remitted no exertion that could
enhance to him the joys of the feast and the fruition of beauty. One
low-minded gratification has succeeded to another; pleasures of an
elevated and intellectual kind have been strangers to his heart; and
were it not that the subtlety of wit was a gift bestowed upon him by
supernatural existencies, he must long ere this have sunk his mind to
the lowest savageness and the most contemptible imbecility."

Edwin heard the tale of the Druid with the deepest attention. He was
interested in the information it contained; he was astonished at the
unfathomable witcheries of Rodogune; and he could not avoid the being
apprehensive of the unexpanded powers of Roderic. But the daring and
adventurous spirit of youth, and the anxiety that he felt for the
critical situation of Imogen, soon overpowered and obliterated these
impressions. The Druid finished; and he started from his seat. "Point
me, kind and generous Madoc, to the harbour of the usurper. I will
invade his palace. I will enter fearlessly the lime-twigs of his spells.
I will trust in the omnipotency of innocence. Though the magician should
be encircled with all the horrid forms that ingenious fear ever created,
though all the grizly legions of the infernal realm should hem in, I
will find him out, and force him to relinquish his prize, or drag him by
his shining hair to a death, ignominious and accursed, as has been the
conduct of his life."

The Druid assumed a sterner and a severer aspect. "How long, son of the
valley," cried he, "wilt thou be deaf to the voice of instruction? When
wilt thou temper thy heedless and inconsiderate courage with the
coolness of wisdom and the moderation of docility? But go," added he, "I
am to blame to endeavour to govern thy headlong spirit, or stem the
torrent of youthful folly. Go, and endure the punishment of thy
rashness. Encounter the magician in the midst of his spells. Expose thy
naked and unprotected head to glut his vengeance. Over thy life indeed,
he has no power. Deliberate guilt, not unreflecting folly, can deprive
thee of thy right to that. But, oh, shepherd, what avails it to live in
hopeless misery? With ease he shall shut thee up for revolving years in
darkness tangible; he shall plunge thee deep beneath the surface of the
mantled pool, the viscous spume shall draw over thy miserable head its
dank and dismal shroud; or perhaps, more ingenious in mischief, he shall
chain thee up in inactivity, a conscious statue, the silent and passive
witness of the usurped joys that once thou fondly fanciedst thy own."

"Oh, pardon me, sage and venerable Madoc," replied the shepherd. "Edwin
did not come from the hands of nature obstinate and untractable. But
grief agitates my spirits; anxiety and apprehension conjure up a
thousand horrid phantoms before my distracted imagination, and I am no
longer myself. I will however subdue my impatient resentments. I will
listen with coolness to the voice of native sagacity and hoary
experience. Tell me then, my father, and I will hearken with mute
attention, nor think the lesson long,--instruct me how I shall escape
those tremendous dangers thou hast described. Say, is there any remedy,
canst thou communicate any potent and unconquerable amulet, that shall
shield me from the arts of sorcery? Teach me, and my honest heart shall
thank thee. Communicate it, and the benefit shall be consecrated in my
memory to everlasting gratitude."

"My son," replied Madoc, "I am indeed interested for thee. Thy heart is
ingenuous and sincere; thy misfortune is poignant and affecting. Listen
then to my directions. Receive and treasure up this small and sordid
root. In its external appearance, it is worthless and despicable; but,
Edwin, we must not judge by appearances; that which is most valuable
often delights to shroud itself under a coarse and unattractive outside.
In a richer climate, and under a more genial sun, it bears a beauteous
flower, whose broad leaves expand themselves to the day, and are clothed
with a deep and splendid purple, glossy as velvet, and bedropped with
gold. This root is a sovereign antidote against all blasts,
enchantments, witchcrafts, and magic. With this about thee, thou mayest
safely enter the haunts of Roderic; thou mayest hear his incantations
unappalled; thou mayest boldly dash from his hand his magic glass, and
shed the envenomed beverage on the ground. Then, when he stands
astonished at the unexpected phenomenon, wrest from him his potent wand.
Invoke not the unhallowed spirits of the abyss; invoke the spotless
synod of the Gods. Strike with his rod the walls of his palace, and they
shall turn to viewless air; the monster shall be deprived of all his
riches, and all his accumulated pleasures; and thou and thy Imogen,
delivered from the powers of enchantment, shall be, for one long,
uninterrupted day, happy in the enjoyment of each other.

"Attend, my son, yet attend, to one more advice, upon which all thy
advantage and all thy success in this moment of crisis hang. Engage not
in so arduous and important an enterprise immaturely. Thou hast yet no
reason for despair. Thou art yet beheld with favour by propitious
heaven. But thou mayest have reason for despair. One false step may ruin
thee. One moment of heedless inconsideration may plunge thee in years of
calamity. One moment of complying guilt may shut upon thee the door of
enjoyment and happiness for ever."

Such was the sorrow, and such were the consolations of Edwin. But far
different was the situation, and far other scenes were prepared for his
faithful shepherdess. For some time after she had been seized by
Roderic, she had remained unconscious and supine. The terrors that had
preceded the fatal capture, had overpowered her delicate frame, and sunk
her into an alarming and obstinate fit of insensibility. They had now
almost reached the palace of the magician, when she discovered the first
symptoms of returning life. The colour gradually remounted into her
bloodless cheeks; her hands were raised with a feeble and involuntary
motion, and at length she lifted up her head, and opened her languid,
unobserving eyes. "Edwin," she cried, "my friend, my companion, where
art thou? Where have we been? Oh, it is a long and tedious evening!"
Saying this, she looked upon the objects around her. The sky was now
become clear and smiling; the lowring clouds were dissipated, and the
blue expanse was stretched without limits over their head. The sources
of her former terror were indeed removed, but the objects that presented
themselves were equally alarming. All was unexpected and all was
unaccountable. Imogen had remained without consciousness from the very
beginning of the storm, and it was during her insensibility that the
goblin had been visible, and the magician descended to the plains. She
found herself mounted upon a car, and hurried along by rapid steeds. She
saw beside her a man whose face, whose garb, and whose whole appearance
were perfectly unknown to her.

"Ah," exclaimed the maiden, in a voice of amazement apprehension, "where
am I? What is become of my Edwin? And what art thou? What means all
this? These are not the well-known fields; this is not the brook of
Towey, nor these hills of Clwyd. Oh, whither, whither do we fly? This
track leads not to the cottage of my parents, and the groves of
Rhyddlan." "Be not uneasy, my fair one," answered Roderic. "We go,
though not by the usual path, to where your friends reside. I am not
your enemy, but a swain who esteems it his happiness to have come
between you and your distress, and to have rescued you from the pelting
of the storm. Suspend, my love, for a few moments your suspicions and
your anxiety, and we shall arrive where all your doubts will be removed,
and all I hope will be pleasure and felicitation." While he thus spoke
the chariot hastened to the conclusion of their journey, and entered the
area in the front of the mansion of Roderic.

The suspicions of Imogen were indeed removed, but in a manner too cruel
for her tender frame. The terror and fatigue she had previously
undergone had wasted her spirits, and the surprise she now experienced,
was more than she could sustain. As the chariot entered the court, she
cried out with a voice of horror and anguish, and sunk breathless into
the arms of her ravisher. Though the passion he had already conceived
for her, made this a circumstance of affliction, he yet in another view
rejoiced, that he was able, by its intervention, to conduct his prize in
a manner by stealth into his palace, and thus to prevent that struggle
and those painful sensations, which she must otherwise have known. For
could she have borne, without emotion, to see herself conveyed into a
wretched imprisonment? Could she have submitted, without opposition, to
be shut up, as it were, from the hope of revisiting those scenes, where
once her careless childhood played, and those friends whom she valued
more than life?

The leading pursuit of Roderic, as it had been stated by the Druid of
Elwy, was the love of pleasure, an attachment to sensuality, luxury and
lust. He often spent whole days in the bosom of voluptuousness, reposing
upon couches of down, under ceilings of gold. His senses were at
intervals awakened, by the most exquisite music, to a variety of
delight. He often recreated his view with beholding, from a posture of
supineness and indolence, the frolic games, and the mazy dance.
Sometimes, in order to diversify the scene, he would mix in the sports,
and, by the graceful activity of his limbs, and the subtle keenness of
his wit, would communicate relish and novelty to that which before had
palled upon the performers. When he moved, every eye was fixed in
admiration. When he spoke all was tranquility of attention, and every
mouth was open to applaud. Then were set forth the luxuries of the
feast. Every artifice was employed to provoke the appetite. The viands
were savoury, and the fruits were blushing; the decorations were
sumptuous, and the halls shone with a profusion of tapers, whose rays
were reflected in a thousand directions by an innumerable multitude of
mirrors and lustres. And now the intoxicating beverage went swiftly
round the board. The conversation became more open and unrestrained.
Quick were the repartees and loud the mirth. Loose, meaning glances were
interchanged between the master of the feast and the mingled beauties
that adorned his board. With artful inadvertence the gauze seemed to
withdraw from their panting bosoms, and new and still newer charms
discovered themselves to enchant the eyes and inflame the heart. The bed
of enjoyment succeeded to the board of intemperance. Such was the
history of the life of Roderic.

But man was not born for the indolence of pleasure and the uniformity of
fruition. No gratifications, but especially not those that address
themselves only to the senses, and pamper this brittle, worthless
mansion of the immortal mind, are calculated to entertain us for any
long duration. We need something to awaken our attention, to whet our
appetite, and to contrast our joys. Happiness in this sublunary state
can scarcely be felt, but by a comparison with misery. It is he only
that has escaped from sickness, that is conscious of health; it is he
only that has shaken off the chains of misfortune, that truly rejoices.
The wisdom of these maxims was felt by Roderic. Full of pleasures,
surrounded with objects of delight, he was not happy. Their uniformity
cloyed him. He had received, by supernatural endowment, an activity and
a venturousness of spirit, that were little formed for such scenes as
these. He was devoured with spleen. He sighed he knew not why; he was
peevish and ill-humoured in the midst of the most assiduous attention
and the most wakeful service. And the command he possessed over the
elements of nature was no remedy for sensations like these.

Oppressed with these feelings, Roderic was accustomed to withdraw
himself from the pomps and luxuries that surrounded him, to fly from the
gilded palace and the fretted roofs, and to mix in the simple and
undebauched scenes of artless innocence that descended on every side
from the hills he inhabited. The name of Roderic was unknown to all the
shepherds of the vallies, and he was received by them with that
officiousness and hospitality which they were accustomed to exercise to
the stranger. It was his delight to give scope to his imagination by
inventing a thousand artful tales of misfortune, by which he awakened
the compassion, and engaged the attachment of the simple hinds. In order
the more effectually to evade that curiosity which would have been fatal
to his ease, he assumed every different time that he came among them a
different form. By this contrivance, he passed unobserved, he partook
freely of their pastimes, he made his observations unmolested, and was
perfectly at leisure for the reflections, not always of the most
pleasant description, that these scenes, of simple virtue and honest
poverty, were calculated to excite. "Oh, impotence of power," exclaimed
he, wrapt up and secure in the disguise he assumed, "to what purpose art
thou desired? Ambition is surely the most foolish and misjudging of all
terrestrial passions. My condition appears attractive. I am surrounded
with riches and splendour; no man approaches me but with homage and
flattery; every object of gratification solicits my acceptance. I am not
only endowed with a capacity of obtaining all that I can wish, and that
by supernatural means, but I am almost constantly forestalled in my
wishes. Who would not say, that I am blessed? Who that heard but a
description of my state, would not envy me? O ye shepherds, happy,
thrice happy, in the confinedness of your prospects, ye would then envy
me! Instructed as I am, instructed by too fatal experience, with reason
I envy you. Hark to that swain who is now leading his flock from the
durance in which they were held till the morning peeped over the eastern
hills! The little lambs frisk about him, thankful for the liberty they
have regained, and he stretches out his hand for them to lick. Now he
drives them along the extended green, and in a wild and thoughtless note
carols a lively lay. He sings perhaps of the kind, but bashful
shepherdess. His hat is bound about with ribbon; the memorial of her coy
compliance and much-prized favour. How light is his heart, how chearful
his gait, and how gay his countenance! He leads in a string a little
frolic goat with curving horns: I suppose the prize that he bore off in
singing, which is not yet tamed to his hand, and familiarised to his
flock. What though his coat be frieze? What though his labour constantly
return with the returning day? I wear the attire of kings; far from
labouring myself, thousands labour for my convenience. And yet he is
happier than I. Envied simplicity; venerable ignorance; plenteous
poverty! How gladly would I quit my sumptuous palace, and my magic arts,
for the careless, airy, and unreflecting joys of rural simplicity!"

It was in a late excursion of this kind that he had beheld the beauteous
Imogen. His eye was struck with the charms of her person, and the
amiableness of her manners. Never had he seen a complexion so
transparent, or an eye so expressive. Her vermeil-tinctured lips were
new-blown roses that engrossed the sight, and seemed to solicit to be
plucked. His heart was caught in the tangles of her hair. Such an
unaffected bashfulness, and so modest a blush; such an harmonious and
meaning tone of voice, that expressed in the softest accents, the most
delicate sense and the most winning simplicity, could not but engage the
attention of a swain so versed in the science of the fair as Roderic.
From that distinguished moment, though he still felt uneasiness, it was
no longer vacuity, it was no longer an uneasiness irrational and
unaccountable. He had now an object to pursue. He was not now subjected
to the fatigue of forming wishes for the sake of having them instantly
gratified. When he reflected upon the present object of his desires, new
obstacles continually started in his mind. Unused to encounter
difficulty, he for a time imagined them insurmountable. Had his desires
been less pressing, had his passion been less ardent, he would have
given up the pursuit in despair. But urged along by an unintermitted
impulse, he could think of nothing else, he could not abstract his
attention to a foreign subject. He determined at least once again to
behold the peerless maiden. He descended to the feast of Ruthyn; and
though the interval had been but short, from the time in which he had
first observed her, in the eye of love she seemed improved. The charms
that erst had budded, were now full blown. Her beauties were ripened,
and her attractions spread themselves in the face of day. Nor was this
all. He beheld with a watchful glance her slight and silent intercourse
with the gallant Edwin; an intercourse which no eye but that of a lover
could have penetrated. Hence his mind became pregnant with all the
hateful brood of dark suspicions; he was agitated with the fury of
jealousy. Jealousy evermore blows the flame it seems formed to
extinguish. The passion of Roderic was more violent than ever. His
impatient spirit could not now brook the absence of a moment. Luxury
charmed no longer; the couch of down was to him a bed of torture, and
the solicitations of beauty, the taunts and sarcasms of infernal furies.
He invoked the spirit of his mother; he brought together an assembly of
elves and goblins. By their direction he formed his plan; by their
instrumentality the tempest was immediately raised; and under the
guidance of the chief of all the throng he descended upon his prey, like
the eagle from his eminence in the sky.

The success of his exploit has already been related. The scheme had
indeed been too deeply laid, and too artfully digested, to admit almost
the possibility of a miscarriage. Who but would have stood appalled,
when the storm descended upon our lovers in the midst of the plain, and
the thunders seemed to rock the whole circle of the neighbouring hills?
Who could have conducted himself at once with greater prudence and
gallantry than the youthful shepherd? Did he not display the highest
degree of heroism and address, when he laid the gaunt and haughty wolf
prostrate at his feet? But it was not for human skill to cope with the
opposition of infernal spirits. Accordingly Roderic had been victorious.
He had borne the tender maiden unresisted from the field; he had
outstripped the ardent pursuit of Edwin with a speed swifter than the
winds. In fine, he had conducted his lovely prize in safety to his
enchanted castle, and had introduced her within those walls, where every
thing human and supernatural obeyed his nod, in a state of unresisting
passivity.

Roderic, immediately upon his entrance into the castle, had committed
the fair Imogen to the care of the attendant damsels. He charged them by
every means to endeavour to restore her to sense and tranquility, and
not to utter any thing in her hearing, which should have the smallest
tendency to discompose her spirits. In obedience to orders, which they
had never known what it was to dispute, they were so unwearied in their
assiduities to their amiable charge, that it was not long before she
began once again to exhibit the tokens of renewed perception. She raised
by degrees a leaden and inexpressive eye, to the objects that were about
her, without having as yet spirit and recollectedness enough to
distinguish them. "My mother," cried she, "my venerable Edith, I am not
well. My head is quite confused and giddy. Do press it with your
friendly hand." A female attendant, as she uttered these words, drew
near to obey them. "Go, go," exclaimed Imogen, with a feeble tone, and
at the same time putting by the officious hand, "you naughty girl. You
are not my mother. Do not think to make me believe you are."

While she spoke this she began gradually to gain a more entire
sedateness and self-command. She seemed to examine, with an eager and
inquisitive eye, first one object, and then another by turns. The
novelty of the whole scene appeared for an instant to engross her
attention. Every part of the furniture was unlike that of a shepherd's
cot; and completely singular and unprecedented by any thing that her
memory could suggest. But this self-deception, this abstraction from her
feelings and her situation was of a continuance the shortest that can be
conceived. All seemed changed with her in a moment. Her eye, which, from
a state of languor and unexpressiveness, had assumed an air of intent
and restless curiosity, was now full of comfortless sorrow and
unprotected distress. "Powers that defend the innocent, support, guard
me! Where am I? What have I been doing? What is become of me? Oh, Edwin,
Edwin!" and she reclined her head upon the shoulder of the female who
was nearest her.

Recovering however, in a moment, the dignity that was congenial to her,
she raised herself from this remiss and inactive posture, and seemed to
be immersed in reflection and thought. "Yes, yes," exclaimed she, "I
know well enough how it is. You cannot imagine what a furious storm it
was: and so I sunk upon the ground terrified to death: and so Edwin left
me, and ran some where, I cannot tell where, for shelter. But sure it
could not be so neither. He could not be so barbarous. Well but however
somebody came and took me up, and so I am here. But what am I here for,
and what place is this? Tell me, ye kind shepherdesses, (if
shepherdesses you are) for indeed I am sick at heart."

The broken interrogatories of Imogen were heard with a profound silence.
"What," said the lovely and apprehensive maiden, "will you not answer
me? No, not one word. Ah, then it must be bad indeed. But I have done
nothing that should make me be afraid. I am as harmless and as chearly
as the little red-breast that pecks out of my hand? So you will not hurt
me, will you? No, I dare swear. You do not frown upon me. Your looks are
quite sweet and good-natured. But then it was not kind not to answer me,
and tell me what I asked you." "Fair stranger," replied one of the
throng, "we would willingly do any thing to oblige you. But you are weak
and ill; and it is necessary that you should not exert yourself, but try
to sleep."

"Sleep," replied the shepherdess, "what here in this strange place? No,
that I shall not, I can tell you. I never slept from under the thatch of
my father's cottage in my life, but once, and that was at the wedding of
my dear, obliging Rovena. But perhaps," added she, "my father and mother
will come to me here. So I will even try and be compilable, for I never
was obstinate. But indeed my head is strangely confused; you must excuse
me."

Such was the language, and such the affecting simplicity of the innocent
and uncultivated Imogen. She, who had been used to one narrow round of
chearful, rustic scenes, was too much perplexed to be able to judge of
her situation. Her repeated faintings had weakened her spirits, and for
a time disordered her understanding. She had always lived among the
simple; she had scarcely ever been witness to any thing but sincerity
and innocence. Suspicion therefore was the farthest in the world from
being an inmate of her breast. Suspicion is the latest and most
difficult lesson of the honest and uncrooked mind. Imogen therefore
willingly retired to rest, in compliance with the soliciation of her
attendants. She beheld no longer her ravisher, whose eye beamed with
ungovernable desires, and whose crest swelled with pride. Every
countenance was marked with apparent carefulness and sympathy. She was
even pleased with their officious and friendly-seeming demeanour.

Tell me, ye vain cavillers, ye haughty adversaries of the omnipotence of
virtue, where could artful vice, where could invisible and hell-born
seduction, have found a fitter object for their triumph? Imogen was not
armed with the lessons of experience: Imogen was not accoutered with the
cautiousness of cultivation and refinement. She was all open to every
one that approached her. She carried her heart in her hand. Ye, I doubt
not, have already reckoned upon the triumph, and counted the advantages.
But, if I do not much mistake the divine lessons I am commissioned to
deliver, the muse shall tell a very different story.

[Illustration]






BOOK THE THIRD

PURPOSES OF RODERIC.--THE CARRIAGE OF IMOGEN.--HER CONTEMPT OF RICHES.


The fatigue which Imogen had undergone in the preceding day, prepared
her to rest during the night with more tranquility than could otherwise
have been expected. The scenes to which she had successively been
witness, and the objects that now surrounded her, were too novel and
extraordinary in their character, to allow much room for the severity of
reflection, and the coolness of meditation. Her frame was tired with the
various exercises in which she had engaged; her mind was hurried and
perplexed without knowing upon what to fix, or in what manner to account
for the events that had befallen her: she therefore sunk presently into
a sweet and profound sleep; and while every thing seemed preparing for
her destruction, while a thousand enchantments were essayed, and a
thousand schemes revolved in the busy mind of Roderic, she remained
composed and unapprehensive. Innocence was the sevenfold shield that
protected her from harm; her eyes were closed in darkness, and a smile
of placid benignity played upon the lovely features of her countenance.

Roderic in the mean time had retired to his chamber. His mind was turbid
and unquiet. So restless are the waves of the ocean before the coming
tempest. They assume a darker hue, and reflect a more cloudy heaven.
They roll this way and that in a continual motion, and yet without any
direction, till the loud and hoarse-echoing wind determines their course
and carries them in mountains to the sounding shore. The mind of the
victim was all quiet and unruffled; such is the kindly influence of
conscious truth. The mind of the ravisher exhibited nothing but
uneasiness and confusion; such are the boons which vice bestows upon her
misjudging votaries.

The conqueror, doubly misled by fierce and unruly passions and by his
inauspicious commerce with the goblins of the abyss, retired not
immediately to his couch, but walked up and down his apartments, with a
hasty and irregular step. "Thanks to my favourable stars," exclaimed he,
"I am triumphant! What power can resist me? Where is the being that
shall dare to say, that one wish of my heart shall go unfulfilled? Well
then, I have got the fair the charming she into my power. She is shut up
in a palace, unseen by every human eye, to which no human foot ever
found its way but at my bidding. She is closed round with spells and
enchantment. I can by a word deprive her every limb of motion. If I but
wave this wand, the leaden God of sleep shall sink her in a moment in
the arms of forgetfulness, whatever were before her anxieties and her
wakeful terrors. In what manner then shall I, thus absolute and
uncontroled in all I bid exist, proceed? Shall I press the unwilling
beauty to my bosom, and riot in her hoard of charms, without waiting
like meaner mortals to sue for the consent of her will? There is
something noble, royal, and independent, in the thought. Beauty never
appears so attractive as from behind a veil of tears. Oh, how I enjoy
infancy [sic] the anger that shall flush her lovely cheek! Perhaps she
will even kneel to me to deprecate that which an education of prejudices
has taught her to consider as the worst of evils. Yes, my lovely maid, I
will raise thee. Do not turn from me those scornful indignant eyes. I
will be thy best friend. I will not hurt a hair of thy head. Oh, when
her spotless bosom pants with disdain, how sweet to beat the little
chiders, and by a friendly violence, which true and comprehensive wisdom
cannot stigmatize, to teach her what is the true value of beauty, and
for what purpose such enchanting forms as her's were sent to dwell
below!"

Thus spoke the ravisher, and as he spoke he assumed, although alone, a
firmer stride and a more haughty crest. Upon the instant however his
ears were saluted with a low and continual sound, that became, by just
degrees, stronger and more strong. The walls of his palace shook; a
sudden and supernatural light gleamed along his apartment, and a spectre
stood before him. Roderic lifted up his eyes, and immediately recognised
the features of that goblin, who from the hour of his birth, had
declared himself his adversary. He had been repeatedly used to the
visits of this malicious spirit, who delighted to subvert all his
schemes, and to baffle his deepest projects. This was the only
misfortune, the sovereign of the hills had ever known; this was the only
instance in which he had at any time been taught what it was to have his
power controled and his nod unobeyed. He had often sought, by means of
the confederacy he held with other spirits of the infernal regions, to
restrain his enemy, or by punishment and suffering to make him rue his
opposition. But the goblin he had to encounter, though not the most
potent, was of all the rest the most crafty in his wiles, and the most
abundant in expedients. As many times as his fellows had by the
instigation of Roderic undertaken to encounter him, so often had they in
the end been eluded and defeated. The contest was now given up, and the
goblin was at liberty to haunt and threaten his impotant adversary as
much as he pleased.

"Roderic," cried he, with a harsh and unpleasant accent, "I am come to
humble the haughtiness of thy triumph, and to pull down thy aspiring
thoughts. Impotent and rancorous mortal! Know, that innocence is
defended with too strong a shield for thee to pierce! Boast not thyself
of the immensity of thy walls, and put no confidence in the subtlety of
thy enchantments. Before the mightiness that waits on innocence, they
are not less impotent than the liquid wax, or the crumbling ruin. Learn,
oh presumptuous mortal, that sacred and unyielding chastity is
invulnerable to all the violence of men, and all the stratagems of
goblins. I would not name to thee so salutary an advice as to dismiss
thy innocent and unsuspicious prize, did not I know thee too obstinate
and headstrong to listen to the voice of wisdom. Essay then thy base and
low-minded temptations, thy corrupt and sophistical reasonings, to
tarnish the unsullied purity of her mind, and it is well. If by such a
wretch as thee she can be seduced from the obedience of virtue and the
Gods, then let her fall. She were then a victim worthy of thee. But if
thou essayest the means of tyranny and force, the attempt will be fatal
to thee. I will in that case enjoy my vengeance; I will triumph in thy
desolation. In the hour then of action and enterprise, remember me!"

With these words the spectre vanished from his sight. Roderic was
inflamed with anger and disgust; but he had none, upon whom to wreak his
revenge. His heart boiled with the impotence of malice. "What," cried
he, "am I to be bounded and hedged in, in all my exploits? Am I to be
curbed and thwarted in every wish of my heart? This, this was nearest to
me. This was the first pursuit of my life in which my whole heart was
engaged; the first time I ever felt a passion that deserved the name of
love. But be it so: I was born with wild and impetuous passions only to
have them frustrated; I was endowed with supernatural powers, and
inherited all my mother's skill, only to be the more signally
disappointed. Still however I will not shrink, I will not yield an inch
to my adversary. I am bid, it seems, to tempt her, and endeavour to
stain the purity of her mind. Yes, I will tempt her. It is not for an
artless and uninstructed shepherdess to defeat my wiles and baffle all
my incitements. I will dazzle her senses with all the attractions that
the globe of earth has to boast. I will wind me into her secret heart.
Thou damned, unpropitious goblin, who seekest to oppose thyself to my
happiness, I will but, by thy warning, gain a completer triumph! I will
subdue her will. She shall crown my wishes with ripe, consenting beauty.
Long shall she remain the empress of my heart, and partner of my bed. In
her I will hope to find those simple, artless, and engaging charms,
which in vain I have often sought in the band of females, that reside
beneath my roof, and wait upon my nod."

Imogen, though considerably indisposed by the fatigue and terrors of the
preceding day, shook off however that placid and refreshing sleep which
had weighed down her eyelids, long before Roderic deserted the couch of
luxury. Two of the female attendants belonging to the castle had slept
in the same apartment with her, and soon, perceiving her in motion,
followed her example, and officiously pressed around her. One of them
took up a part of the garb of the fair shepherdess, and offered to
assist her in adjusting it. "I thank you," cried Imogen, with the utmost
simplicity, "for your good-nature; but I am pretty well now; and every
body dresses herself that is not sick." The inartificial decorations of
her person were quickly adjusted. The delicate proportion of her limbs
was hid beneath a russet mantle; her fair and flowing tresses were
disposed in a braid round her head, and she took her straw hat in her
hand. "Well," said she, "I am obliged to you for your favours. I dare
say it was best for me, though at the time I thought otherwise. For my
head ached very much, and I was so weak--It was wrong for me to think of
going any farther.--Ah, but then, what have my poor father and mother
done all the while? Have not they missed their Imogen, and wondered what
was become of her, and been quite sad and forlorn for fear she should
have come to any harm? Well, I do not know whether I was not right too.
For their ease was of more consequence than mine. I cannot tell. However
I will not now keep them in pain. So good morning to you, my dear kind
friends!" And saying this she was tripping away.

But as she drew towards the door, one of the attendants, with a gentle
force, took hold of her hand. "Do not go yet, sweet Imogen," cried she.
"We want a little more of your company. We have done you all the service
in our power, and you have not paid us for it. We will not ask any thing
hard and unreasonable of you. Only comply with us in this one thing, to
stay with us a few hours, and let us know a little better the worth of
that amiable female we have endeavoured to oblige." "Indeed, indeed,"
replied Imogen, "I cannot. I am not used to be obstinate; and you are so
kind and fair spoken, that it goes to my heart to refuse you. But I
would not for the world keep my dear, good Edith in a moment's suspense.
But since you are so desirous of being acquainted with me, repair as
soon and as often as you please to my father's cot, that lies on the
right hand side of the valley, about a mile from the sea, and just
beside the pretty brawling brook of Towey. There I will treat you with
the nicest apples and the richest cream. And I would treat you with
better, if I knew of any thing better, that I might thank you for your
goodness. Farewel!" added she, and affectionately pressed the hand that
was still untwined with her's.

"No, Imogen, no, you must not leave us thus. Though we would have done a
thousand times more than we have for your own sake, who are so simple
and so good, it is yet fit that you should know, that we are not
mistresses here, and that all we have done has been by the orders of the
lord of this rich mansion. He will not therefore forgive us, if we
suffer you to depart before he has seen you, and expressed for you that
kindness which induced him to take you under his protection." "Heavens!"
replied the shepherdess "this is all ceremony and folly, and therefore
cannot be of so much consequence as the peace of my father, and the
consolation of my mother. Tell him, that I thank him, and that my father
shall thank him too, if he will come to our hut. Tell him that I am
sorry for my foolish weakness, that gave him so much trouble, and made
me be so needlessly frightened, when we came to a place where I have met
with nothing but kindness; but I could not help it. And so that is
enough; for if my Edwin had been in his place, and had seen a stranger
shepherdess in the distress that I was, he would surely have done as
much.

"Say so to your lord, as you call him, for I would not seem ungrateful.
But yet I will thank you a great deal more than I do him. For what did
he do for me? He took me, and hurried me away, and paid no attention to
my tears and expostulations. Well, but I need not have been alarmed. So
it seems. But I did not like his looks; they were not kind and
good-natured, but fierce and frightful. And so as soon as he had brought
me here, much against my will, he went away and left me. So much the
better. And then you came and took care of me, and he desired you to do
so. That was well enough. But I am more obliged to you for your kindness
and assiduity, than I am to him only for thinking of it. And then to
tell you the truth, but I ought not to say so to you who are his
friends, there is something about him, I cannot tell what, that does not
please me at all. He looks discontented, and fierce, as if there was no
such thing as soothing and managing him. But why do I say all this? Pray
now let me go, let me go to my dear, dear mother."

"Sweet Imogen," replied the attendant, who seemed to take the lead in
the circle, "how lovely and amiable are you even in your resentments!
They are not with you a morose and gloomy sullenness brooding over
imaginary wrongs, and collecting venom and malice from every corner to
the heart. In your breast anger itself takes a milder form, and is
gentle, generous and gay. Yet why, my Imogen, should you harbour any
anger against your protector?"

Such was the honest and artless dialogue of Imogen. The attendants
rather endeavoured to beguile the time, by dexterously starting new
topics of conversation, upon which Imogen delivered her plain and
natural sentiments with the utmost sincerity, than to detain her by open
force. At length one of them slipped out, and hastened to acquaint
Roderic with the impatience of his prize, and to communicate to him the
substance of those artless hints, which, in the hands of so skilful and
potent an impostor, might be of the greatest service. Roderic
immediately rose. But as he was desirous to decorate his person with the
nicest skill, in order to make the most favourable impression upon his
mistress, he ordered the attendant, with some of her companions, to wait
upon Imogen. He commissioned them, if it were necessary, to inform her
of the absolute impossibility of her quitting the castle, and to
persuade her to walk in the meadows adjoining, that she might observe
the riches of their possessor; how fertile were the soil, and how fair
and numerous the flocks.

The patience of Imogen, in the mean time, was nearly exhausted. Her
simplicity could no longer be duped. Though unused to art, it was
impossible for her not at length to perceive the art by which the
conversation was lengthened, and her ardent desire to set out for the
cottage of her father, eluded. She was just beginning to expostulate
upon this ungenerous stratagem, when three or four of those females,
whom Roderic had dispatched entered the apartment. "Well," cried Imogen,
"you have borne my message to my deliverer, now then let me go." "Our
lord," replied the attendant, "is just risen. He will but adjust his
apparel, and will immediately pay you those respects in person which he
can by no means think of omitting." "Alas, alas," cried the shepherdess,
half distressed, "what is the meaning of all this? What is intended by a
language so foreign to the homeliness of the shepherd's cot, and the
admirable simplicity of pastoral life? I know not what title I have, a
poor, unpretending virgin, to the respects of this lord; but surely if
they meaned me well, they would be less hollow and absurd. Would there
not be much more respect, much more civility, in permitting me to follow
my own inclinations, without this arbitrary and ungrateful restraint?"
"Shepherdess," replied the attendant, "we are not used to dispute the
orders of our master. We would oblige you if it were in our power.
Impute not therefore to us any thing unfriendly; and as for Roderic, he
is too good, and too amiable, not to be able to satisfy you about his
conduct the moment he appears." "Your master! and your lord!" replied
Imogen, with a tone of displeasure, "I understand not these words. The
Gods have made all their rational creatures equal. If they have made one
strong and another weak, it is for the purpose of mutual benevolence and
assistance, and not for that of despotism and oppression. Of all the
shepherds of the valley, there is not one that claims dominion and
command over another. There is indeed an obedience due from children to
their parents, and from a wife to her husband. But ye cannot be his
children; for he is young and blooming. And but one of you can be his
wife; so that that cannot be the source of his authority. What a
numerous family has this Roderic? Does that I wonder, make him happier
than his fellows?"

"Imogen," said one of the train, "will you walk with us along the
meadow, by the side of that hazel copse? The morning is delightful, the
sun shines with a mild and cheering heat, the lambs frisk along the
level green, and the birds, with their little throats, warble each a
different strain." The mind of Imogen was highly susceptible to the
impression of rural beauties. She had that placid innocence, that sweet
serenity of heart, which best prepares us to relish them. Seeing
therefore, that she was a prisoner, and that it was in vain to struggle
and beat her wings against the wiry inclosure, she submitted. "Ah!
unjust, unkind associates!" exclaimed Imogen, "ye can obey the dictates
of a man, who has no right to your obedience, and ye can turn a deaf ear
to the voice of benevolence and justice! Set me at liberty. This man has
no right to see me, and I will not see him. I, that have been used to
wander as free as the inmates of the wood, or the winged inhabitants of
air, shall I be cooped up in a petty cage, have all my motions dictated,
and all my walks circumscribed? Indeed, indeed, I will not. Imogen can
never submit to so ignominious a restraint. She will sooner die."

"Why, my lovely maiden," replied the other, "will you think so harshly
of our lord? He does not deserve these uncandid constructions; he is all
gentleness and goodness. Suspend therefore your impatience for a moment.
By and by you may represent to him your uneasiness, and he will grant
you all the wishes of your heart. Till then, amiable girl, compose your
spirits, and give us cause to believe, that you place that confidence in
us, which for the world we would not deserve to forfeit."

During this conversation, they passed along a gallery, and, descending
by a flight of stairs, proceeded through one corner of a spacious garden
into the meadow. The mansion, as we have already said, stood upon a
rising ground, which was inclosed on every side by a circle of hills,
whose summits seemed to touch the clouds, and were covered with eternal
snow. Within this wider circumference was a second formed by an
impervious grove of oaks, which, though of no long standing, yet, having
been produced by magical art, had appeared from the first in full
maturity. Their vast trunks, which three men hand in hand could scarcely
span, were marked with many a scar, and their broad branches, waving to
the winds, inspired into the pious and the virtuous that religious awe,
which is one of the principal lessons of the Druidical religion.

At no great distance, and close on one side to the majestic grove, was a
terrace, raised by the hand of art, so elevated, as to overlook the tops
of the trees as well as the turrets of the castle, and to afford a
complete prospect of all the grounds on this side the precipices. To
this terrace the attendants of Imogen led their charge, and from it she
surveyed the farms and granges of their lord. The view was diversified
by a number of little rills, that flowed down from the mountains, and
gave fertility and cheerfulness to the fields through which they passed.
The inclosures were some of them covered with a fine and rich herbage,
whose appearance was bright and verdant, and its surface besprinkled
with cowslips, king-cups, and daisies. Others of them were interspersed
with sheep that exhibited the face of sleekness and ease, their fleeces
large and ponderous, and their wool of the finest and most admirable
texture. Elsewhere you might see the cattle grazing. The ox dappled with
a thousand spots, which nature seemed to have applied with a wanton and
playful hand; the cow, whose udders were distended with milk, that
appeared to call for the interposition of the maidens to lighten them of
their store; and the lordly and majestic bull. With them was
intermingled the horse, whose limbs seemed to be formed for speed and
beauty. At a small distance were the stag with branching horns, the
timid deer, and the sportive, frisking fawn. Even from the rugged
precipices, that seemed intended by nature to lie waste and useless,
depended the shaggy goat and the tender kid. Beside all this, Roderic
had had communicated to him, by a supernatural afflatus, that wondrous
art, as yet unknown in the plains of Albion, of turning up the soil with
a share of iron, and scattering it with a small quantity of those grains
which are most useful to man, to expect to gather, after a short
interval, a forty-fold increase.

Every thing conspired to communicate to the prospect lustre and
attraction. The birds, with their various song, gave an air of
populousness and animation to the grove. By the side of the rivulets
were scattered here and there the huts of the shepherd and husbandman.
And though these swains were not, like the happy dwellers in the valley,
enlivened with freedom, and made careless and gay by conscious
innocence; yet were they skilful to give clearness and melody to the
slender reed; and the ploughman whistled as he drove afield. But that in
the landscape which most engrossed the attention and awakened the
curiosity of the tender Imogen, was the appearance of the fields of
corn. It was in her eye novel, agreeable, and interesting. The harvest
was near, and the effect of the object was at its greatest height. The
tall and unbending stalk overtopped by far the native herbage of the
meadow, and seemed to emulate the hawthorn and the hazel, which, planted
in even rows, secured the precious crop from the invasion of the cattle.
The ears were embrowned with the continual beams of the sun, and,
oppressed with the weight of their grain, bended from the stalk. In a
word, the whole presented to the astonished view a rich scene of
vegetable gold. Upon this delightful object the shepherdess gazed with
an unwearied regard. Respecting it she asked innumerable questions, and
made a thousand enquiries; and it almost seemed as if her curiosity
would never be satisfied. Such is the power of novelty over the young
and inexperienced, and such the influence of the beautiful and
transcendent beauties of nature upon the ingenuous and uncorrupted mind.
But it was not possible for the shepherdess, interested as she was in
the uneasiness, to which she knew that her parents must be a prey, long
to banish from her mind the affecting consideration, or to divert her
attention to another object, however agreeable, or however fascinating.

She had just begun to renew her representations upon this head, when
Roderic approached. While he was yet at a distance, he appeared graceful
and gay, as the messenger of the God that grasps the lightning in his
hand. His stature was above the common size. His limbs were formed with
perfect symmetry; the fall of his shoulders was graceful, and the whole
contour of his body was regular and pleasing. Such was the general
effect of his shape, that though his advance was hesitating and
respectful, it was impossible to contemplate his person without the
ideas being suggested of velocity and swiftness. His presence and air
had the appearance of frankness, ingenuousness, and manly confidence.
The natural fire and haughtiness of his eye were carefully subdued, and
he seemed, at least to a superficial view, the very model of good-nature
and disinterested complaisance. His bright and flowing hair parted on
his brow, and formed into a thousand ringlets, waved to the zephyrs as
he passed along. There was something so delicate and enchanting in his
whole figure, as to tempt you to compare it to the unspotted beauty of
the hyacinth; at the same time that you rejoiced, that it was not a
beauty, frail and transient, as the tender flower, but which promised a
manly ripeness and a protracted duration.

Observing that the attention of those around her was suddenly diverted
from the intreaties she employed, Imogen turned her eye, in order to
discover the object that now engaged them. It was immediately met by the
graceful and amiable figure we have described. But to Imogen that figure
presented no such comeliness and beauty. For a moment indeed, nature
prevailed, and she could not avoid gazing, with a degree of complacence,
upon an object, to which the Goddess seemed to have lavished all her
treasures. But this sensation vanished, almost before it was formed. The
mind of the shepherdess was too deeply read in the lessons of virtue, to
acknowledge any beauty in that form, which was not animated with truth,
and in those features, which were not illuminated with integrity and
innocence. Notwithstanding her native simplicity, and the unsuspecting
confidence she was inclined to repose in every individual of the human
race, yet had the conduct of Roderic, as she had already confessed,
displeased her too deeply for her immediately to assume towards him an
unembarrassed and soothing carriage. He had seized upon her by violence
in a moment of insensibility. He had carried her away without her
consent. When she recovered strength enough to expostulate upon this, he
endeavoured, by ambiguous expressions, to deceive her into an opinion,
that he was conducting her to the cottage of her father. Supposing that,
for reasons good and wise, he had introduced her into a strange place,
she could not be persuaded that those reasons subsisted for detaining
her contrary to her inclination. And independently of any individual
circumstances, there is a native and inexplicable antipathy between
virtue and vice. It is not in the nature of things, it is not within the
range of possibility, that they should coalesce and unite where both of
them exist in a decided manner, or an eminent degree. It was not the
babble of ignorance, it was by an unalterable law of her nature, that
Imogen had been displeased with the looks of him, who meaned her
destruction. The animation that dwells in the features of virtue, is
mild and friendly and lambent; but the sparkles that flash from the eye
of enterprising guilt, are momentary, and unrelenting, and impetuous.
The gentle and the inoffensive instantly feel how uncongenial they are
to their dispositions, and start back from them with aversion and
horror. Such were in some measure the sensations of Imogen, upon the
re-appearance of her betrayer. She turned from him with unfeigned
dislike, and was reluctantly kept in the same situation till he ascended
the terrace. As he drew nearer, Roderic seized the hand of the lovely
captive. In a tone of blandishment he expostulated with her upon her
unkind behaviour and unreasonable aversion. With all that sophistry,
that ingenious vice knows so well how to employ, he endeavoured to
evince that his conduct had been regulated by kindness, rectitude and
humanity. In the mean time the retinue withdrew to a small distance.
Imogen insisted upon not being left wholly alone with her ravisher.

Able to perplex but not to subvert the understanding of his prize,
Roderic addressed her with the language of love. Naturally eloquent, all
that he now said was accompanied with that ineffable sweetness, and that
soft insinuation, that must have shaken the integrity of Imogen, had her
heart been less constant, and her bosom less glowed with the enthusiasm
of virtue. Her betrayer was conscious to a real, though a degenerate
flame, and was not reduced to feign an ardour he did not feel.
Recollecting however the pure manners, and the delicate and ingenuous
language to which Imogen had been inured among the inhabitants of Clwyd,
the subtle sorcerer did not permit an expression to escape him, that
could offend the chastest ear, or alarm the most suspicious virtue. His
love, ardent as it appeared, seemed to be entirely under the government
of the strictest propriety, and the most unfeigned rectitude. He knew
that the inspirations of integrity and the lessons of education were not
to be eradicated at once; and he attempted not to gain the acquiescence
of his captive by gross and unsuitable allurements, unconcealed with the
gilding of dexterity and speciousness.

But his eloquence and his address were equally vain. In spite of the
beauty of his person and the urbanity of his manners, the shepherdess
received his declarations with coldness and aversion. She assured him of
the impossibility of his success, that she felt for him emotions very
different from those of partiality, and that her heart was prepossessed
for a more amiable swain. With that sweet simplicity, that accompanied
all she did, she endeavoured to dissuade him from the pursuit of a
hopeless and unreasonable passion; she enumerated to him all the sources
of enjoyment with which he was surrounded; she intreated him not in the
wantonness of opulence to disturb her humble and narrow felicity; and
she besought him in the most pathetic and earnest language to dismiss
her to freedom, contentment and her parents.

The more she exerted herself to bend his resolution, and the more scope
she gave to the unstudied expression of her artless sentiments, the more
inextricably was the magician caught, and the more firm and inexorable
was his purpose. Perceiving however that he had little to hope from the
most skilful detail of the pleas of passion, he turned the attention of
the shepherdess to a different topic. "Behold Imogen," cried he, "the
richness of the landscape on our right hand! The spot in my eye is
farthest from the castle, and divided from the rest of the prospect with
a tall hedge of poplars and alders. It is full of the finest grass, and
its soil is rich and luxuriant. It is scattered with fleckered cows and
dappled fawns. In the hither part of it is a field of the choicest
wheat, whose stalks are so rank and pregnant, that the timid hare and
the untamed fox can scarcely force themselves a path among them. Beside
it is an inclosure of barley with strong and pointed spikes; and another
of oats, whose grain, uneared, spreads broader to the eye. How beautiful
the scene! I will not ask you, fairest of your sex, to give your
confidence to unauthorised words. I will afford the most unquestionable
demonstration of the veracity of my declarations. All these, lovely
Imogen, shall be yours: yours exclusively, to be disposed of at your
pleasure, without the interference or control of any. All my other
possessions shall not belong to myself more than to you. You shall be
the mistress of my heart, and the associate of my counsels. All my
business shall be your gratification, all my pleasure your happiness.
Forget then, dearest maiden, the poverty of your former condition, and
the connections you formed in an hour of ignorance and obscurity. From
this moment let a new era and better prospects commence. Enjoy that
wealth, which can no where so well be bestowed; and those
gratifications, which so obviously belong to that delicate and
enchanting form."

The proposal of Roderic called forth more than ever the spirit and the
resentment of Imogen. She did not feel herself in the slightest degree
attracted by the magnificence of his offers. She knew of no use for
superfluous riches. She felt no wants unsupplied, and no wishes
ungratified. What motive is there in the whole region of human
perceptions, that can excite the contented mind to the pursuit of
affluence? "And dost thou think," said the fair one, with a gesture of
disdain that made her look ten times more amiable, "to seduce me with
baits like these? Know, mistaken man, that I am happy. I spin the finest
wool of our flocks, and drain the distended udders of our cows. I
superintend the dairies; the butter and the cheese are the produce of my
industry. In these employments my time is spent in chearfulness and
pleasure. Surrounded with our little possessions, I am conscious to no
deficiency; in the midst of my parents and friends, I desire not to look
beyond the narrow circle of the neighbouring hills. If you feel those
wants, which I do not so much as understand, enjoy your fond mistake.
Possess those riches which I will not envy you. Wander from luxury to
luxury unquestioned; I shall be sufficiently happy in the narrow
gratifications that nature has placed within my reach. The gifts you
offer me have no splendour in my eye, and I could not thank you for them
though offered with ever so much disinterestedness. The only gift it is
in your power to make is liberty. Allow me to partake of that bounty,
which nature has bestowed upon the choristers of the grove, to wander
where I will. Under a thousand of those privations that would render the
child of luxury inconsolable, I would support myself; freedom and
independence are the only boons which the whole course of my life has
taught me to cherish."

"Your ignorance," rejoined Roderic, "is amiable, though unfortunate. But
your merit is too great not to deserve to be informed. Knowledge, my
lovely maiden, is always regarded as a desirable acquisition by the
prudent and the judicious. To what purpose was a mind so capacious,
competent to the greatest improvements, and formed to comprehend
subjects of the most extensive compass, or the sublimest reach, bestowed
upon us, if it be not employed in the pursuits of science and
experience? Your abilities, my Imogen, appear to be of the very first
description. How much then will you be to be blamed, if you do not
embrace this opportunity of improvement and instruction? Beauty, though
unseen, is not less excellent; and prudence, though unpossessed, is of
value inestimable. The poor man may be contented, because he knows not
the use of riches; but, in spite of this contentment, it were wise to
enlarge our sphere of sensation, and to extend the sources of happiness.

"If however you still maintain that lovely perverseness, decide if you
please upon your own fate, but let filial piety hinder you from
determining too hastily respecting that of your parents and your
friends. Consider what a new and unbounded scope will be afforded you,
by the participation of my riches, for the exercise of benevolent and
generous propensities. Your parents are now declining fast under the
weight of years and infirmity. It is in your power to make their bed of
down, and to enliven the ground they have yet to traverse with flowers.
It is yours to wrest the sheers from the hand of the weary and
over-laboured ancient, and to remove the distaff from the knees of your
venerable mother. Think, gentle shepherdess, before it be too late, of
the heart-felt pleasures that await the power to do good, when attended
with a virtuous inclination. When you wipe away the tear from the cheek
of distress, when you light up a smile in the eye of misery, think you,
that none of the comfort you administer will flow back in generous and
refreshing streams to your own heart? Are these exertions that Imogen
ought to contemplate with indifference? Is this a power that Imogen can
reject without deliberation?"

Imogen stood for a moment in a sweet and ingenuous state of suspense.
She had a native and indefeasible reverence for every thing that had the
remotest analogy to virtue, and she could not answer a proposal that
came recommended to her by that name with unhesitating promptitude. She
was too good and modest to assume an air of decision where she did not
feel it; she was too simple and unaffected, to disguise that hesitation
to which she was really conscious. "How false and treacherous,"
exclaimed she, "are your reasonings! Among the virtuous inhabitants of
the plain, every one seeks to influence another by motives which are of
weight with himself, and utters the sentiments of his own heart. Where
have you learned the disingenuous and faithless arts you employ? To what
purpose have you cultivated them, and whose good opinion do you flatter
yourself they will obtain for you? False, perfidious Roderic! the more I
see of you, the more I fear and despise you.

"You would recommend to me your temptations under the colour of
knowlege. Has knowlege any charms for the debauched and luxurious? You
tell me we ought to enlarge our sphere of sensation, and to extend the
sources of happiness. Wisdom indeed, and mental improvements are
desirable. But the sage Druids have always taught me, that the mind is
the nobler part, that the body is to be kept in subjection, and that it
is not our business to seek its gratification beyond the bounds of
necessity and temperance. If I allowed myself to think that I wanted
more than I have, might not the possession of that more extend my
desires, till, from humble and bounded, they became insatiable? Were I
to dismiss those industrious pursuits by means of which my time now
glides so pleasantly, how am I sure that indolence and vacancy would
make me happier?

"To succour indeed the necessitous, and particularly my parents and
relations, is a consideration of more value. But ah, Roderic! though you
talk it so well, I am afraid it is a consideration foreign to your
character. For my parents, they are as yet healthful and active; and
while they continue so, they wish, no more than myself for repose and
indolence. If ever they become incapable of industry, their little flock
will still contribute to their support. They are too much respected, for
the neighbouring shepherds not to watch over it in turn out of pure
love. And, I hope, as I will then exert myself with double vigour, that
the Gods will bless us, and we shall do very well. As to general
distress, heaven is too propitious to us, to permit the inhabitants of
the valley to be overwhelmed by it. And I shall always have milk from my
flocks, and a cheese from my store, to set before the hungry and
necessitous.

"But were these advantages more valuable than they are, it would not be
my duty to purchase them so dear. What, shall I desert all the
connections it has been the business of my life to form, and that happy
state of simplicity I love so much? Shall I shake off the mutual vows I
have exchanged with the most amiable and generous of the swains, and
join myself to one, whose person I cannot love, and whose character I
cannot approve? No, Roderic, enjoy that happiness, if it deserve the
name of happiness, that is congenial to your inclination. Forget the
worthless and unreasonable passion, you pretend to have conceived, in
the multitude of gratifications that are within your reach. Envy not me
my straw-defended roof, my little flock, and my faithful shepherd. I
will never exchange them for all the temptations that the world can
furnish."






BOOK THE FOURTH

SONG IN HONOUR OF THE FAIR SEX.--HYPOCRISY OF THE MAGICIAN.--THE TRIUMPH
OF IMOGEN.--DESPAIR AND CONSOLATION OF RODERIC.


So much was Roderic discouraged by the apparent spirit and firmness of
these declarations, that at the conclusion of them he abruptly quitted
his captive, and released her for a moment from his unjust persecutions.
His pride however was too strongly piqued, and his passions too much
alarmed to permit her a real respite. "Where ever," cried he, as he trod
with hasty and irregular steps the level green,--"where ever were found
such simplicity, and so much strength of judgment, and gaiety of wit in
union? Is it possible for the extreme of simplicity and the perfection
of intellect to meet together? These surely are paradoxes, that not all
the goblins of the abyss can solve, and which, had they been related
instead of seen, must have appeared to constitute an absurd and
impossible fiction.

"Well then it is in vain to attack the inexorable fair one with
allurements that address themselves only to the understanding. She is
too well fortified with the prejudices of education, and the principles
of an imaginary virtue, to be reduced by an assault like this. The pride
of her virtue is alarmed, the little train of her sophistries are
awakened, and with that artless rhetoric, of the value of which she is
doubtless sensible, she set[s] all her enemies at defiance. My future
enticements shall therefore address themselves to her senses. Thus
approaching her, it is impossible that success should not follow my
undertaking. Even the most wary, circumspect, and suspicious, might thus
be overcome. But she is innocence itself. She apprehends no danger, she
suspects no ambuscade. Young and unexperienced, and the little
experience she has attained, derived only from scenes of pastoral
simplicity, she knows not the meaning of insincerity and treachery; she
dreads not the serpent that lurks beneath the flower."

Having determined the plan of his machinations, and given the necessary
orders, he privately signified to the attendants, that they should
propose to their lovely charge to direct her course once again to the
mansion; and as she perceived that Roderic still continued upon a
distant part of the lawn; and as she saw no means of present escape from
her confinement, she consented to do as they desired.

They now entered the mansion, and passing through several splendid
apartments, at length reached a large and magnificent saloon. It was
hung with tapestry, upon which were represented the figures of Sappho
sweeping the lyre; of the Spartan mother bending over the body, and
counting the wounds of her son; of Penelope in the midst of her maidens,
carefully unravelling the funeral web of her husband; of Lucretia
inflicting upon herself a glorious and voluntary death; and of Arria
teaching her husband in what manner a Roman should expire. These stories
had been miraculously communicated to Roderic, and were now explained by
the attendants to the wondering Imogen. At the same time a band of
music, that was placed at the lower end of the hall, struck at once
their various instruments, and, without any previous preparation, began
the lofty chorus. At the upper end of the saloon stood a throne of
ivory, hung round with trappings of gold, and placed upon a floor of
marble, of which a numerous flight of steps, also of marble, composed
the ascent. The hangings were of crimson velvet, and the canopy of the
richest purple. With the musicians were intermingled a number of
supernatural beings under the command of Roderic. Their voices were
melodious beyond all example of human power; they were by turns lofty
and majestic, and by turns tender and melting; and the strain was
divine.

"Such are the honours of the tender sex; and who can speak their praise?
The lily is not so fair, the rose is not so attractive, the violet and
the jessamine have not so elegant a simplicity. By their charms, by
their eloquence, and by their merit, they have assumed an empire over
the bolder sex. How auspicious is the empire! They hold them in silken
chains. They govern, not by harsh decrees, and rigorous penalties; but
by smiles and soft compliances, and winning, irresistible persuasion.
The rewards they bestow are sweet, and ravishing, and indescribable.

"What were man without the fair? A wild beast of the forest; a rough and
untamed savage; a hungry lion bursting from his den. Without them, they
are gloomy, morose, unfeeling, and unsociable. To them they owe every
civilization, and every improvement. Did Amphion, from the rude and
shapeless stones, raise by his power a regular edifice, houses, palaces,
and cities? Did Orpheus by his lay humanize the rugged beasts and teach
the forests to listen? No, these are wild, unmeaning fables. It was
woman, charming woman, that led unpolished man forth from the forests
and the dens, and taught him to bend before thy shrine, humanity! See
how the face of nature changes! Where late the slough mantled, or the
serpent hissed among the briars and the reeds, all is pasture and
fertility. The cottages arise. The shepherds assume the guise of
gentleness and simplicity. They attire themselves with care, they braid
the garland, and they tune the pipe. Wherefore do they braid the
garland? Why are their manners soft and blandishing? And why do the
hills re-echo the notes of the slender reed? It is to win thy graces,
woman, charming woman!

"When nature formed a man, she formed a creature rational, and erect;
ten times more noble than the birds of the air, and the beasts of the
field. But when she formed a woman--it was then first, that she outdid
herself, and improved her own design. What are the broad and nervous
shoulders, what the compacted figure, and the vigorous step, when
contrasted with the well-turned limbs, the slender waist, the graceful
shoulders, and the soft and panting bosom? What are the manly front, the
stern, commanding eye, and the down-clad cheek, if we compare them with
the smooth, transparent complexion, the soft, faint blushes, and the
pretty, dimpled mouth? What are the strong, slow reason, the deep,
unfathomed science, and the grave and solemn wisdom, if they are brought
into competition with the sprightly sense, the penetrating wit, and the
inexhaustible invention? Does the stronger sex boast of its learning,
its deep researches, its sagacious discoveries? and have they a
coolness, a self-command, a never baffled prudence like that which woman
has exhibited? Do they pique themselves upon their courage, their
gallantry, and their adventure? Where shall we find among them a
patience, a mildness, a fortitude, a heroism, equal to that of the fair?

"Virtue has dwelt beneath the sun. Themis has left her throne on the
right hand of Jove, and descended to the globe of earth. We have seen
examples of disinterested rectitude, of inviolable truth, of sublime and
heaven-born benevolence. They are written in the roll of fame; they are
handed down from age to age. They are the song of the poet, and the
favourite theme of the servants of the Gods. By whom were they
exhibited, or with whom did they originate? With woman, charming woman?
Well have justice and rectitude been represented under a female form,
for without the softer sex, all had been anarchy and confusion; every
man had preyed upon his neighbour; men, like beasts, had devoured each
other, and virtue fled affrighted to her native skies. This is the
source of all that is good and all that is excellent; of all that is
beautiful and all that is sublime: woman, charming woman!"

At this place the chorus ceased for a moment, and the attendants
observing, that Imogen was standing, intreated her to seat herself. She
was rendered weak and languid by the unexperienced anxieties and terrors
she had undergone, and she did not refuse their request. There was no
seat in the centre of the hall, or nearer than the sumptuous throne that
was placed at the upper end. Thither therefore they led her. Imogen had
been unused to the distinctions of rank and precedence. Among the
shepherds of the valley, every one, except the bards and the priests,
seated himself promiscuously; none sought to take the upper hand of his
neighbour; age was not distinguished by priority of place; and youth
thought not of ceding the _pas_. The shepherdess, as she advanced
towards the chair, paused for an instant, impressed with that blaze of
magnificence which is equally formed to strike every human eye. She
looked round her with an air of timidity and suspense, and then going
forward, ascended the steps and placed herself in the throne. At this
action, as at a signal, the song recommenced.

"Simplicity, child of nature, daughter of the plains, with thee alone
the queen of beauty dwells! What is it that adorns and enhances all the
wild and uncultivated scenes of nature? It is plainness and artless
simplicity. What is it that renders lovely and amiable her most
favourite productions in the animal creation: the tender lamb, the
cooing dove, and the vocal nightingale? It is simplicity; it is, that
all their gestures wear the guise, and their voice speaks the artless,
and unaffected language of nature. What is is that renders venerable the
characters of mankind; that ennobles the song of the bards; that gives
lustre and attraction to immortal, never-fading virtue? It is
simplicity, unaffected simplicity. Of the last and crowning work of
nature, woman, the form is grace; the visage is beauty; the eye sparkles
with intelligence, and smiles with soft and winning graces; the tongue
is clothed with persuasion and eloquence. But what are these? A body
without a soul, a combination of soft and harmonious names without a
meaning; a multitude of rich inestimable gifts, heaped together in rude
and inartificial confusion without the powers of enchantment and
attraction. What is it that can animate the mass, that can give force
and value to the whole, and reduce the shapeless chaos into form? It is
simplicity, unaffected simplicity. Without thee, child of nature,
daughter of the plains, beauty were no more. With thee she dwells, and
in thy mansion can she only dwell. Then be the palm reserved for thee,
and given to thee alone, simplicity, unaffected simplicity!"

At these words, two supernatural figures appeared below the canopy of
the throne. They had the form of children; their figures appeared so
soft and waxen, that you would imagine they might be indented by the
smallest touch; upon their countenances sat the lively and unexpressive
smile, the sports, and the graces; and their shoulders were furnished
with wings of the softest plumage, variegated with all the colours of
the bow of heaven. In their hands they bore a coronet, at once rich with
jewels, and light and inconsiderable in its weight. The circle was of
gold, and studded with diamonds. With the diamonds were intermingled
every precious gem, the topaz, the jasper, the emerald, the chrysolite,
and the sapphire. The head was of Persian silk, and dyed with Tyrian
purple. This coronet they placed upon the head of Imogen, and then
descending to the footstool of the throne, bowed upon her feet. The song
immediately recommenced.

"Imogen is under the guardianship of simplicity, her favourite pupil.
Pollute not the ear of Imogen with the praises of beauty. What though
her eye be full of amiableness and eloquence; what though her cheeks
rival the peach, and her lips the coral; what though her bosom be soft
as wax and fairer than the face of honour; what though her tresses are
brighter than the shooting star? These are the bounties of nature; these
are the gifts of heaven, in which she claims no merit; these are not the
praises of Imogen. But this is her praise, that the graces dwell upon
her lips; that her words are attired with the garb of sense and fancy;
and that all her conduct is governed by the largest prudence and the
nicest discretion. Heard you the sound of merriment and applause? They
were the gay and unlaboured sallies of the wit of Imogen that called
them forth. Saw you the look of wonder and astonishment, and the gaze of
involuntary approbation and reverence? They were excited by the modesty,
the circumspection, and the virtue of Imogen. And yet Imogen is artless,
unaffected and innocent; her wit is unconscious of itself, and her
virtue the unstudied dictate of nature. Imogen is under the guardianship
of simplicity, her favourite pupil. Be hers then the crown that
simplicity alone can deserve. Simplicity descends not in person to the
surface of the earth; her abode is among the Gods. But Imogen is her
representative, her perfect resemblance. Should simplicity descend upon
the earth, she would not know herself; she would be astonished to behold
another divinity, equally beautiful, equally excellent. The divinity is
Imogen. Be hers then the crown, that simplicity alone can deserve."

This was a trying moment to the lovely and generous Imogen. Praise is
congenial to every human sense; the voice of praise is ever grateful to
the ear of virtue. The glory of the shepherd indeed lies within a narrow
compass. But let immortality be named, and the heart of man is naturally
attracted: it is impossible that the good and generous bosom should not
long for such a prize. Nor was this all. Imogen, though loved and
honoured by the borderers of Towey, had been little used to studied
commendation and laboured applause. Pastoral simplicity does not deal in
these; and though it seek to oblige, its endeavours are unostentatious
and silent. Beside, her reverence for song was radical and deep. It had
been instilled into her from her earliest infancy; from earliest infancy
she had considered poetry as the vehicle of divine and eternal truth.
How strange and tremendous an advantage must he gain over the ear of
simplicity, who can present his fascinations under the garb of all that
is sacred and all that is honourable?

The song had begun with celebrating a theme, that must for ever be
congenial to every female breast. The heart of the shepherdess had
instinctively vibrated to the praises of simplicity. Even the
commendations bestowed upon herself were not improper, or
indiscriminate; they had distinguished between the inanity of personal
charms, and the value of prudence, the beauty of innocence and the merit
of virtue. Even the honours she had received were attributed to these,
and not to the other. Were they not therefore such as virtue would
aspire to, and discretion accept?

Alas, Imogen, be not deceived with airy shadows! The reasoning may be
plausible, but it is no better than sophistry. Thou must be taught, fair
and unsuspecting virgin, under a beautiful outside to apprehend deceit;
and to guard against the thorn which closely environs the flower. Thou
must learn, loveliest of thy sex, to dread the poison of flattery. It is
more venemous than the adder, it is more destructive than hebenon or
madragora. It annihilates every respectable quality in the very act of
extolling it; it undermines all that adorns and elevates the human
character. Even now that thou listenest to it, and drinkest in, without
apprehension, its opiate sounds, thou art too near to the sacrifice of
those very excellencies it pretends to admire. For the head of Imogen
was made giddy by the applauses she heard; drunk with admiration, she
was no longer conscious of the things around her, or of herself; she
sunk vanquished and supine, and was supported by one of the attendants.

At this moment Roderic came forth from an adjoining apartment, and
caught in his arms the vanquished beauty. In the mean time the
attendants, the musicians, and the supernatural beings disappeared, and
she was left alone with her betrayer.

Roderic surveyed his victim with an eye of avidity and triumph. His
eager curiosity wandered over her hoard of charms; and his brutal
passion was soothed with the contemplation of her disorder. Already in
imagination, he had possessed himself of a decisive advantage over so
apparent a weakness; and his breast was steeled against the emotions of
pity.

Imogen cast around her a languid and passive regard, and was in a moment
roused from her supineness by the sight of Roderic. Her subtle adversary
did not however allow her time for complete recollection, before he
discovered an apparent revolution in his sentiments and language. He had
heard, he said, the supernatural and celestial chorus, and been caught
in the extremest degree by the praises of innocence and the triumph of
virtue. He now felt the vanity and folly of those pursuits in which he
had been so deeply immersed, and was determined to abjure the littleness
of pride, and the emptiness of sensual gratification. He did not now
address his destined prize with the commendations of beauty. He bestowed
upon her with profusion the epithets of discretion, integrity, and
heroism; and poured into her ear the insidious flattery, that was most
soothing to her temper. Full, as he pretended, of the infant purposes of
virtue, he besought his captive in the most importunate manner, to
remain with him for a time, to confirm his wavering rectitude, to
instruct him in duty, and thus to gain one human being to the standard
of integrity, and to render so extensive possessions subservient to the
happiness of mankind. All this he expressed with that ardour, which is
congenial to the simplicity of truth; and with that enthusiasm, which in
all instances accompanies recent conviction.

Imogen was totally uninured to the contemplation of hypocrisy, and
immediately yielded the most unreserved credit to these professions. Her
joy was extreme at the change in the dispositions of Roderic, and her
admiration of the irresistible charms of rectitude pious and profound.
The praises bestowed upon her seemed distinguishing and sincere, and she
drank them in with the most visible complacency. She expressed however
an ingenuous diffidence of her capacity for the task of an instructor,
and she intreated at any rate to be permitted to withdraw for a short
time to dry up the tears of her disconsolate parents.

These difficulties were too obvious to create any embarrassment to so
consummate a deceiver. He described the danger of that vicious mistrust
of our powers, that is the enemy of all generous and heroic action. He
reminded his captive how recent were his purposes, and how many
unforeseen incidents might be crowded into so eventful a moment. There
were goblins, he said, ever ready to seduce the wanderer from his wished
return; and he had been too much their prey not to have every thing to
dread from the subtlety of their machinations. On the other hand, no
character was suspended on the longer or shorter duration of the
uneasiness of the parents of Imogen; and the joyful surprise they would
ere long experience, might abundantly compensate for any temporary
anxiety and solicitude. He told her of the worship and reverence that
were due to the immortal Gods. Could she imagine that the scene that had
just passed was produced for the mere honour and gratification of a
virtuous character, than for the instruction of the ignorant, and the
restoration of the wandering? Shall she be thus honoured, and shall this
be her gratitude?

Though the web of the sophistry woven by her betrayer might seem
inextricable, though Imogen had no sentiments more predominant than the
love of virtue, and the fear of the Gods, yet her heart involuntarily
resisted his persuasions, and she felt the yearnings of affection still
active in her bosom towards those, to whom she owed her existence.

"And cannot you," cried the lovely maiden, "attend me in the short
absense I demand? That would prevent every danger, and supersede every
objection." "Ah, shepherdess," replied the magician, "this reluctance,
these studied expedients imply diffidence and disobedience. But
diffidence is much unworthy of the heart of Imogen. Your life has been
marked with one tenour of piety. Do not then begin to disobey. Do not
sully the unspotted whiteness of your character."

"This," rejoined Imogen, "is too much. This is mere savageness of
virtue. Why in the act of persuading me do you bestow upon me those
laboured commendations, which the very persuasions you employ are
intended to prove that I little deserve? Is it necessary, Roderic, that
your manners should be so strange and unaccountable, as to supply food
for eternal jealousy and suspicion? And what must be that conduct, that
inspires jealousy into a heart unguarded as mine? I talk of suspicion,
but I scarcely know the meaning of the term. And yet there is in your
carriage something precise, plausible and composed, that I have seldom
observed in any other man. Oh, shepherd! you know not what you do, when
you awake all these ideas in a maiden's breast, when you thus confound
things that heaven and earth put asunder."

"Ungenerous Imogen," replied the magician, "wherefore this? Do I claim
any thing more of you than rectitude demands, and your own bosom will
another day approve? Am I not your better genius to guard you against
the errors that might be prompted by too tender a heart? Beside, does
the conduct of beings of a higher order depend upon my nod? Can I
control the spheres, and call down celestial essences from their bright
abodes? And will they be rendered subservient to the purposes of
treachery and guilt?"

"Roderic here break we off our conference. Sure I am that your conduct
is not dictated by a regard for my ease or my welfare. How unworthy
then, as well as how unjust is the pretence? With respect to the
supernatural scenes I have beheld, the question is more difficult. Of
such I have heard from the mouth of the consecrated priests, but never
till this day did I see them. At present however my mind is too much
distracted, to be able to decide. I have already gone far enough; as far
as my heart will permit me. I must now retire.'

"One thing however I will add. From the resolutions you at first
professed, and the impressions you appeared to feel, I had conceived the
most sanguine hopes, and the sincerest pleasure. These are all now
vanished. I cannot account for this. But your conduct is now as
mysterious to my comprehension, as it was before disgusting to my
judgment. I am bewildered in a maze of uncertainty. I am lost in
unwelcome obscurity. May your resolutions and designs be better than my
hopes! But ah, Roderic, for how much have you to answer, how deep must
be your guilt, if all this be mummery, dissimulation, and hypocrisy!"

The magician perceived that it was in vain to urge the stratagem any
further, and he retired from the presence of the shepherdess in silence.
If he had been able to distract her ingenuous mind between contending
duties, he had not however succeeded in his principal object, that of
undermining her virtue, and lessening her attachment to her parents and
her lover. If Imogen were perplexed and confounded, Roderic was scarcely
more happy. He looked back upon the scene with mortification and
astonishment. It was difficult for him to determine where it had
digressed from the auspicious appearances it had at first exhibited, and
yet he found himself in the conclusion of it wide, very wide indeed, of
the success of which he had aimed.

"To what purpose," exclaimed he, with a voice of anguish and rage, "have
I inherited the most inexhaustible riches? To what purpose is the
command which I boast over the goblins of the abyss, if one weak,
simple, and uninstructed woman shall thus defy my arts? I call the hills
my own. I mount upon the turrets of my castle, and as far as my eye can
survey, the bending corn and the grazing herds belong to me. My palace
is adorned with all that can sooth the wearied frame, or gratify the
luxurious desire. Couches of purple, and services of gold, the most
exquisite viands, and the blandishments of enticing beauty, charms of
which the ruggedness of pastoral life has not so much as the idea, all
these are circled within my walls. Beyond all this, I command myriads of
spirits, invisible, and reputedly omnipotent. If I but stamp my foot, if
I but wave this wand, they fly swifter than the wings of thought to my
presence. One look of favour inspires them with tranquility and
exultation; one frown of displeasure terrifies them into despair. I
dispatch them far as the corners of the moon. At my bidding they engage
in the most toilsome enterprises, and undertake the labour of revolving
years. Oh impotence of power! oh mockery of state! what end can ye now
serve but to teach me to be miserable? Power, the hands of which are
chained and fettered in links of iron; state, which is bestowed only
like a paper crown to adorn the brows of a baby, are the most cruel
aggravations of disappointment, the most fearful insults upon the weak.
But shall I always obey the imperious mandate?"

"Yes, Roderic, thou shalt obey," exclaimed the inimical goblin, who at
this moment burst through a condensed cloud, that had arisen unperceived
in one corner of the apartment, and appeared before him. "In vain dost
thou struggle with the links of destiny. In vain dost thou exert thyself
to escape from the fillets that on every side surround thee. The greater
and the more obstinate are thy efforts, the more closely art thou bound,
and the more inextricably engaged. This is the situation in which I
wished to see thee. Every pang it wrings from thy heart, every
exclamation it forces from thy tongue, is solace to my thoughts, and
music to my ears. And wert thou vain and weak enough to imagine, that
riches would purchase thee every pleasure, that riches would furnish an
inexhaustible source of enjoyment? Of all mortal possessions they are
the most useless, mischievous, and baleful. The Gods, when the Gods are
willing to perfect a character of depravity, in order to make vice
consummately detestable, or to administer an exemplary punishment to
distinguished wickedness, bestow upon that man, as the last of curses,
and the most refined of tortures, extensive possessions and unbounded
riches. Indulge to the mistaken pride which these inspire, and wrap
thyself up in the littleness of thy heart.--But no, rise above them.
Suffer thy desires to wander into a larger and more dangerous field. Run
with open eyes into the mouth of that destruction that gapes to devour
thee! Why shouldst thou attend to the voice of destiny, to the immutable
laws of the Gods, and the curse that is suspended over thee? Be a man.
Bravely defy all that is most venerable, and all that is most
unchangeable. Oh how I long for thy ruin! How my heart pants for the
illustrious hour in which thy _palaces shall be crumbled down to the
dust of the balance, thy riches scattered, and thyself become an
unpitied, necessitous, miserable vagabond_! In the mean time,
remember, that riches like thine are not bestowed with u[n]reserving
hand, that commerce is not permitted with the shadows of darkness,
without some trifling fall to ill amid this immensity of uniform
happiness. For this end I am commissioned from time to time to appear
before thee in the midst of thy triumph, and to mingle with thy
exultations the boding voice of prophetic woe."

Roderic did not listen to these bitter sarcasms without exhibiting every
mark of fury and impatience. At length he commanded the spectre to
depart, with a voice so fierce and stern as to terrify him into
submission. For though the authority of the magician was not formidable
enough to make him desist from persecuting him, yet the penalties he had
frequently been able to inflict, inspired the goblin in spite of
himself, with the fear of so potent an adversary. Still choaked however
with agony and resentment, Roderic waved his wand, and summoned his
favourite instrument and the prime minister of his pleasures, the goblin
Medoro, to his presence. The moment he appeared the magician was
relieved from that violent gust of passion, which had held him
motionless, a statue of horror, and throwing himself upon his couch, he
burst into a flood of tears.

Medoro was the goblin that had appeared to Edwin in his return from the
feast of the bards, and had brewed the fatal storm that had preceded the
rape of Imogen. The figure of the spectre was uncouth, and his
countenance was full of savage and shapeless deformity. Nor did his
appearance bely his character. To all other beings, whether of the
terrestrial or the invisible world, his temper was hard, impracticable
and remorseless. To Rodogune alone, a similitude of minds, and a
congenial ferocity of heart had attached him; and the attachment had
descended to her son; though not equally destitute of every agreeable
and every plausible quality. He therefore beheld the affliction of
Roderic with sympathy and compassion.

"Wherefore," cried Medoro, modulating a voice, that nature had made up
of dissonance and horror, into the most gentle and soothing accent of
which it was capable, and hanging over his couch, "wherefore this
sorrow? What is it that has seemed to mar a happiness so enviable? Art
thou not possessed"--"Talk not to me of possessions," exclaimed Roderic,
with a tone of frenzy, and starting from his posture, "I give them to
the winds. I banish them from my thoughts for ever. Oh that the earth
would open and swallow them up! Oh that unburdened from them all, I were
free as the children of the vallies, and careless as the shepherd that
carols to the rising day. I had not then been thus entangled in
misfortune, thus every way closed in to remediless despair. I had not
then been a monument of impotence and misery for the world to gaze at.
Ye are all combined against me! Under a specious, smiling countenance
you all conceal a heart of gall. But your hypocrisy and your mummery
shall serve you to little purpose. Point me, this instant point me, to a
path for the gratification of my wishes, or dearly shall you rue the
shallowness of your invention and the treachery of your professions."

Medoro was astonished at the vehemence of the passion of Roderic,
unusual even in a youth who had never been refused demands the most
unreasonable, and who had been inured to see all the powers of nature
bend to his will. "Is this," cried he, "a return for services so
unwearied and sincere as mine? Foolish and ungrateful youth! Rut I will
point you to a remedy. Had you not been blinded with fury and
impatience, you would have seen that your situation was not yet
irremediable, by means the most obviously in your power. Did I not at
your birth bestow upon you a ring, that communicates to the wearer the
power of assuming what form he please? I gave it, in order to elude the
curse of the malignant goblin, to subdue the most obdurate female, and
to evade the most subtle adversary. The uses in which thou hast hitherto
employed it have been idle and capricious, governed by whim, and
dictated by the sallies of a sportive fancy. It is now first that an
opportunity is offered to turn it to those purposes for which it was
more immediately destined. Dost thou not now address an obdurate maid?
Is she not full of constancy and attachment for another? What avails it
then to a heart, simple and unvitiated as hers, to offer the bribe of
riches, and to lavish the incense of flattery and adulation. Attack her
in her love. Appear to her in the form of him to whom she is most
ardently attached. If Imogen is vulnerable, this is the quarter from
which she must be approached. Thus far Roderic thou mayest try thy
power; but if by this avenue thou canst not surprise her heart and
overpower her virtue, be then wise. Recollect thy courage, strengthen
thy resolution, and shake off for ever a capricious inclination, which
interrupts the tenour of a life that might otherwise wear the uniform
colour of happiness."

The information of a new measure for the furthering his darling pursuit,
was a communication of the most reviving kind to the heart of Roderic.
The gloom and petulance that had collected upon his countenance were
dissipated in a moment. His cheek caught anew the flush of expectation;
his eye sparkled anew with the insolence of victory. His gratitude to
the propitious Medoro was now as immoderate as his displeasure had
lately been unreasonable. He walked along the apartments with the stride
of exultation and triumph. He forgot the pathetic exclamations he had
lately uttered upon the impotence of power, and he was full of
congratulation in the possession of that which he had treated with
contempt. The moral lessons which it was his destiny to have from time
to time poured into an unwilling ear were erased for ever. He exclaimed
upon his own stupidity and want of invention, and he remembered not that
vehemence of passion, which had distracted his understanding, and drawn
a cloud over all his ideas. It was not instantly that he could assume a
sufficient degree of collectedness and composure to put into execution
the scheme with which he was so highly delighted. Presently however the
ebriety of unexpected hope dissipated, and he prepared for that scene
which was to be regarded as the summit of his power, and the irrevocable
crisis of his fate.

[Illustration]






BOOK THE FIFTH

THE GARDEN OF RODOGUNE DESCRIBED.--THE HOPES AND DANGER OF IMOGEN.--HER
INCONSOLABLE DISTRESS.


Imogen, immediately after the interview that had so deeply perplexed
her, returning to her apartment, had shut herself up in solitude. Her
reflections were gloomy and unpleasing; the new obscurity that hung
about them had not contributed to lighten their pressure. But though she
was melancholy, her melancholy was of a different hue from that of her
ravisher. If virtue can ever be deprived of those glorious distinctions
that exclusively belong to her, it must be when she is precluded from
the illuminations of duty, and is no longer able to discern the path in
which she ought to tread. But even here, where distinction seems most
annihilated, it yet remains. The cruel sensations of Imogen were not
aggravated by despair, but heightened by hope. Through them all she was
sustained by the consciousness of her rectitude. The chearfulness of
innocence supported her under every calamity.

She had not long remained alone before she was summoned to partake of
that plainer repast, which in the economy of Roderic usually occupied
the middle of the day, and preceded the sumptuous and splendid
entertainment of the evening, by which the soul was instigated to
prolong the indulgence of the table, and to throw the reins upon the
neck of enjoyment. But Imogen, whose thoughts were dark, and whose mind
brooded over a thousand sad ideas, was desirous of that solitude, which
in the simplicity of pastoral life is ever at hand. She could not away
with the freedom of society, and the levity of mirth. It was painful to
her to have any witnesses of her new sensations, and she wished to
remove herself for ever from the inspection of the officious and the
inquisitive. In compliance with her humour a few viands were served to
her in her own apartment. She was induced by the entreaties of her
attendant, to call up a momentary smile upon her countenance, and to
endeavour to partake of the refreshment that was offered her. But the
effort was vain. It was the sunshine of an April day; her repast in
spite of her was bedewed with tears, and she ate the bread of sorrow.

As soon as it was concluded, she was invited to a short excursion in the
garden of the mansion. Unused to refusal, the natural mildness of her
temper inclined to comply. She saw the necessity of not yielding herself
up to passive and unresisting melancholy. The natural serenity of
innocence did not yet permit her to be insensible to the attractions of
enjoyment; and the transient view she had had of the garden, as she
passed to the terrace, led her to expect from it, something that might
sooth her pensive thoughts, and something that might divert her
affliction.

The garden of Rodogune was an inclosure in a bottom glade, at the
entrance of which, though nigh to the castle, and upon a lower ground,
you wholly lost sight of the mansion, and every external object. But
though these were excluded, the sorceress by her art had also excluded
the appearance of limits and boundaries. The scene was not terminated by
walls and espaliers, but by the entrance on either side of a wild,
meandring wood. The side by which you were introduced was protected by
trees of the thickest foliage; and the gate was masqued with a clump of
hazels and alders, which permitted only two narrow passages on either
side. The eye was shut in, but the imagination was permitted to range in
perfect freedom. Nor was this seeming confinement calculated to disgust;
on the contrary you willingly believed that every charm and every grace
was shut up in the circle, and you trembled lest the smallest outlet
should take off from the richness of the scene. In entering you were
struck with a sensation of coolness, that impervious shades, a bright
and animated verdure, flowers scattered here and there in agreeable
disorder, the prattling of the stream, and the song of a thousand birds,
impressed as strongly upon the imagination, as the senses. But this did
not appear the result of art. Every thing had the face of uncultivated
luxuriance, and impenetrable solitude. You could not believe that you
were not the first mortal that had ever found his way into the
enchanting desert.

The scene however had been solely produced by the skill of Rodogune.
Erewhile the grass had appeared dry and parched; a few solitary and
leafless trees had been scattered up and down; there was no gaiety of
colours to relieve the eye; and not one drop of water to give freshness
to the prospect. But with the operations of magic Rodogune had delighted
to supersede the parsimony of nature. She caused the tree and the shrub
to spring forth in the richest abundance; the sturdiness of whose
trunks, or the deepness of their verdure, cheated the eye with the
semblance of the ripening hand of time. She sprinkled the turf, short,
fine, and vivid, with flowers both native and exotic. She called forth a
thousand fountains to enrich the scene. Sometimes they crept beneath the
turf in almost imperceptible threads; sometimes they ran beside the
alleys, or crossed them in sportive wantonness; and sometimes you might
see them in broader and more limpid currents rolling over a smooth and
spotted bed. Now they rose from the soil in foamy violence, and fell
upon the chalk and pebbly ground beneath; and anon they formed
themselves into the deeper bason [sic], whose calm and even surface
reflected back the reeds and shrubs that were planted round. There was
nothing strait and nothing level; the rule and the line had never
entered the delicious spot; the irregularities of the soil, and the
fantastic, gradual windings of the alleys, were calculated to give
length to the passage, and immensity to the scene.

From time to time you encountered tufts of trees closely planted, and
that cast as brown a shade as the thickest forest. These were partly
composed of wood of the most pliant texture, the extremities of whose
branches, bending to the earth, took root a second time in her bosom.
Elsewhere the rasberry [sic], the rose, the lilac, and a thousand
flowering shrubs, appeared in thickets without either regularity or
symmetry, and contributed at once to adorn, and to give an air of
rudeness and wildness to the prospect. Round the body of the trees,
planted some at their root, and some upon the different parts of the
trunk, crept the withy, the snakeweed, the ivy, and the hop, and
intermingled with them the jessamine and the honeysuckle, in the most
unbounded profusion. Their tendrils hung from the branches, and waved to
the wind; and suggested to you the appearance of garlands scattered from
tree to tree by the nymphs of the grove. All was inexpressible
luxuriance, and a thousand different shades of verdure were placed, one
upon another, in regular confusion, and attractive disorder. An
exuberance of this sort was calculated in a vulgar scene to have checked
the fertility of the plants, and to have given a sickly and withered
appearance to their productions; but it was not so in the garden of
Rodogune. There the cherry and the grape, the downy peach and the purple
plum were half discovered amid the foliage of the hop, and the clusters
of the woodbine. Beneath the delicious shade you wandered over beds of
moss, undeformed with barren sands and intrusive weeds, and smooth as
the level face of ocean when all the winds of heaven sleep.

Nor was this all. Inanimate and vegetable nature (and the observation
had not escaped the penetration of Rodogune) adorn and arrange it as you
will, infallibly suggests an idea of solitude, that communicates sadness
to the mind. Accordingly your path was here beguiled with the warbling
of a thousand birds, the full-toned blackbird, the mellow thrush, and
the pensive nightingale. The sorceress had invited them to her retreat,
by innumerable assiduities and innumerable conveniences of food and
residence, and had suffered no rude intrusion to disturb the sacredness
of their haunts. Unused to molestation in all their pursuits, they now
showed no terror of human approach, but flew, and hopped, and sung, and
played among the branches and along the ground, in thoughtless security
and wanton defiance.

For a few moments Imogen was immersed in the contemplation of the
beauties of the place, and its delightful coolness and mingled fragrance
were balm and softness to her wounded soul. The domestic who accompanied
her, perceived her propensity to reflection and fell back to a small
distance. The shepherdess, as soon as she found herself disengaged and
alone, revolved with the utmost displeasure her present situation. "How
happy," cried she, "are the virgins of the vale! To them every hour is
winged with tranquility and pleasure. They laugh at sorrow; they trill
the wild, unfettered lay, or wander, chearful and happy, with the
faithful swain beneath the woodland shade. They fear no coming mischief;
they know not the very meaning of an enemy. Innocent themselves, they
apprehend not guilt and treachery in those around them. Nor have they
reason. Simplicity and frankness are the unvaried character of the
natives of the plain. Liberty, immortal, unvalued liberty, is the
daughter of the mountains. We suspected not that deceit, insidiousness,
and slavery were to be found beneath the sun. Ah, why was I selected
from the rest to learn the fatal lesson! Unwished, unfortunate
distinction! Was I, who am simple and undisguised as the light of day,
who know not how to conceal one sentiment of my heart, or arm myself
with the shield of vigilance and incredulity, was I fitted by nature for
a scene like this? In the mean time have not the Gods encouraged me by
the most splendid appearance, and the most animating praises? I would
not impeach their venerable counsels. But was this a time for applauses
so seducing? How greatly have they perplexed, and how deeply distressed
me! In what manner, alas! are they to be obeyed, and what am I to think
of the professions of my ravisher? But, no; I dare not permit my purpose
to be thus suspended. My danger here is too imminent. The deliverance of
my own honour and the felicity of my parents are motives too sacred, not
to annihilate every ambiguity and every doubt. Oh, that I could escape
at once! Oh, that like the tender bird, that hops before me in my path,
I could flit away along the trackless air! Why should the little birds
that carol among the trees be the only beings in the domains of Roderic,
that know the sweets of liberty? But it will not be. Still, still I am
under the eye and guardianship of heaven. Wise are the ways of heaven,
and I submit myself with reverence. Only do ye, propitious Gods,
support, sustain, deliver me! Never was frail and trembling mortal less
prepared to encounter with machination, and to brave unheard of dangers.
How fearful are those I have already encountered; and how much have I to
apprehend from what may yet remain! But if I am weak, the omnipotent
support to which I look is strong. I will not give way to impious
despondence. It has delivered, and it may yet deliver me."

By such virtuous and ingenuous reflections the shepherdess endeavoured
to solace her distress, and to fortify her courage. Now by revolving her
dangers she sought to prepare for their encounter; and now she dismissed
the recollection as too depressing and too melancholy. The confinedness
of the prospect, though rich infinitely beyond any thing she had yet
seen, and though not naturally calculated to fatigue and disgust, was
destructive of all its beauty in the eyes of Imogen. It presented to her
too just an image of the thraldom, which was the subject of all her
complaints. She desired to fling her eye through a wider prospect; and
though unable even from the loftiest ground to discover the happy
valley, she coveted the slender gratification of beholding the utmost
boundaries of the magic circle, and extending her view as near as
possible to her beloved home. She therefore advanced farther in the
garden, and presently arrived at a clear and open brow, where a
beautiful alcove was erected to catch the point of view, from which the
surrounding objects appeared in the greatest variety, and with the
happiest effect. She entered; and the domestic that attended her
remained in a distant part of the garden.

Scarcely had Imogen seated herself, before she discovered, by a casual
glance over the prospect, and at some distance, a youth, who seemed to
advance with hasty steps towards the castle. At first she was tempted to
turn away her eye with carelessness and inattention. There was however
something in his figure, that led her, by a kind of fascination for
which she could not account, to cast upon him a second glance and a
third. He drew nearer. He leaped with an active bound over the fence
that separated him from the garden. It was the form of Edwin. His hair
hung carelessly about his shoulders. His shepherd's pipe was slung in
his belt. His clear and manly cheeks glowed with the warmth of the day,
and the anxiety of love. He entered the alcove.

Had a ghost risen before Imogen, surrounded with all the horrors of the
abyss, she could not have been struck with greater astonishment. As he
advanced, she gazed in silence. She could not utter a word. Her very
breath seemed suppressed. At length he entered, and for a moment she had
voice enough to utter her surprise. "Gracious powers!" exclaimed
she--"is it possible?--what is it that I see?--Edwin, beloved
Edwin!"--and she sunk breathless upon her seat. The fictitious shepherd
approached her, folded her in his arms, and with repeated, burning
kisses, which he had never before ventured to ravish from his disdainful
captive, restored her to life and perception. The confusion of Imogen
did not allow her to animadvert upon his freedoms. She had the utmost
confidence in the person whose form he wore, and the guileless
simplicity of pastoral life is accustomed to permit many undesigning
liberties, and is slow to take the alarm, or to suspect a sinister
purpose.

Roderic, anxious and timid respecting the success of his adventure, was
backward to enter into conversation. Imogen, on the other hand, charmed
with so unexpected an appearance, and presaging from it the most auspicious
consequences, full of her situation and sufferings, and having a thousand
things that pressed at once to be told, was eager and impatient to
communicate them to her faithful shepherd. She was also desirous of
learning by what undiscoverable means, by what happy fortune, he had been
conducted to this impervious retreat, and at so critical a juncture.
"Edwin,--my gallant Edwin,--how came you hither?--Sure it was some
propitious power,--some unseen angel,--that conducted you.--Oh, my
friend,--I have been miserable,--perplexed--tortured--but it is now
no more--I will not think of it--Thanks to the immortal Gods, I have no
occasion--no room--but for gratitude.--Edwin--what have you done--and
how did you escape the tempest?--Was it not a fearful storm?--But I
ask you a thousand questions--and you do not answer me.--You seem
abashed--uncertain--what is the meaning of this?--Did you not come
to succour my distress?--Was it not pity for your poor--forlorn--desolate
Imogen--that directed your steps?"

"Yes, loveliest of thy sex," replied her betrayer. "I flew upon the
wings of love. I was brought along by a celestial, impulsive guidance,
which I followed I knew not why. Oh how gracious the condescension, how
happy the obedience, how grateful the interview! Yes, Imogen, I was in
despair. I was terrified at the concurring prodigies by which we were
separated, and I feared never, never to behold that beauteous form
again. Come then and let me clasp thee to my bosom. Oh, thou art sweeter
than the incense-breathing rose, and brighter than the lily of the
vale!"

For a moment, the affectionate and unsuspicious shepherdess received his
caresses with complacence and pleasure. Suddenly however she recollected
herself; instinctively and without reflection she repulsed the undue
warmth of his attentions. "This," cried she, "is no time for fond
indulgence, and careless dalliance--Fate is on the wing.--Our situation
is arduous--and we are in the midst of enemies.--Every thing that
surrounds us is full of danger--all is deceit and treachery--appearances
are insidious--all is frightful suspense and headlong precipice.--The
plotter of my ruin is as potent as he is--Ah! every hour is big with
calamity and destruction--every moment that we stay here is in the last
degree hazardous and decisive.--My keepers may be alarmed--Those eyes
that never close may be summoned to attention--we may be hemmed
in--prevented--Oh, Edwin, how fearful is this place--and how
unhoped--how joyful to me--must be an escape.--I thought this hated seat
had been impervious and impassable--Hark!--Did you not hear the sound of
feet?--No--every thing is still--Let us go this way--Say, by what path
did you come--Let us hasten our flight--let us make no delay--not look
behind."

"Yes, Imogen," replied Roderic, detaining her, "we will escape--But
this, my lovely maiden, is not the time--I am not yet prepared--We may
remain here in security--already the shades of evening begin to draw.
Every thing is now busy and active. We cannot pass from hence without
observation. In the silence of the night the attempt will be more
practicable. And you, Imogen, are a heroine. The Gods will watch over
us. Silence and darkness have nothing in them at which innocence should
be terrified. Till then let us reconcile ourselves to our situation. Let
us endeavour, by secrecy and stilness, not to attract to us the
attention of the enemies with which we are surrounded. Let us banish
from them curiosity and suspicion. And let us trust in the Gods,
propitious to rectitude, that they will look down with favour upon a
design prompted by virtue and urged by oppression."

"Alas, Edwin," replied the shepherdess "it is with regret that I consent
to remain one moment longer in this fatal spot. But I will submit to
your direction, I will confide in your prudence; I will trust in your
fidelity, and your zeal, for the deliverance I so ardently desire. Here
however we cannot long remain undiscovered.--My absence will be
suspicious.--I will return once again to the hated mansion.--You, my
swain, must conceal yourself in the mazes of this friendly wilderness.
It shall not be long ere I come to you again.--With motives like mine to
inspire ingenuity, I shall easily find a way to elude the strictest
guard, and escape from the closest thraldom.--Say, my Edwin!--this
stratagem shall suffice,--and you shall lead me in safety under the
friendly cover of the night to liberty and innocence!"

"Yes," exclaimed Roderic, suddenly recollecting himself, "you may be
assured that by me nothing shall be omitted, that can further your
escape from this detested prison. The perils I have already incurred may
well convince you of this. It has been through the most fearful dangers,
ready every moment to be overwhelmed with omnipotent mischief, that I
have reached you. I have approached by the most devious and undiscovered
paths. Though the greatest hazards are to be encountered in the cause of
innocence and honour, the conduct we should pursue is therefore
ambiguous, and our success involved in uncertainty and darkness. Oh
Imogen, I may now behold thee for the last time. The moment we sally
from this retreat, I may be discovered by that enemy from whom we have
so much to fear. I may be confined to all the wantonness of inventive
torture, and that beauteous form, and the smiles of that bewitching
countenance may be torn from these longing eyes for ever. But here, my
shepherdess, we are safe. We may here secure ourselves from sudden
intrusion, and a thousand means of concealment are here in our power.
This Imogen is the moment of our ascendancy, this little period is all
our own. In a short time the precious hours will be elapsed, the
invaluable instants will be run out. Oh, my love, fairest, most angelic
of thy sex, while they are yet ours, let us improve them."--He ceased;
and his countenance glistened with the anticipations of enjoyment, and
his eyes emitted the sparkles of lust.

But the imagination of Imogen was not sullied with the impressions of
indecency, and the baseness of looser desires. She understood not the
innuendos of Roderic, and she remarked not with an eager and inquisitive
eye the distraction of his visage. She replied therefore only to the
more obvious tendency of what he said. "And is this, Edwin, all the
consolation you bring me? Ah how poor, how heartless, and how cold! If
we accomplish not that flight upon which my hopes and wishes are
suspended, what utility and what pleasure can we derive from this
interview? It will then only be a bitter aggravation of all my trials,
and all my miseries. If a prospect so unexpected and desirable terminate
in no advantage, for what purpose was it opened before me? It will but
render my sensations more poignant, and give a new refinement to the
exquisiteness of despair.

"But no, my Edwin, let us not give way to despondence. The Gods, my
generous swain, the same Gods that give luxuriance and felicity to the
plain, and that have guided you through every hazard to this impervious
spot, will assuredly deliver us. Remember the lessons of the
heaven-taught Druids. There is an innate dignity and omnipotence in
virtue. She may be surrounded with variety of woes, but none of them
shall approach her. The darts of calamity may assail her on every side,
but she is invulnerable to them all. Before her majesty, the fierceness
of all the tenants of the wood is disarmed, and the more untamed
brutality of savage man is awed into mute obedience. She may not indeed
put on the insolence of pride, and the fool-hardiness of presumption.
But wherever her duty calls, she may proceed fearless and unhurt. She
may be attacked, but she cannot be wounded: she may be surprised, but
she cannot be enslaved: she may be obscured for a moment, but it shall
only be to burst forth again more illustrious than ever.

"But you, Edwin, are much better acquainted with these things, and more
able to instruct than I. They were ever the favourite subject of your
attention. I have seen you with rooted eye fixed for hours in listening
admiration of the sublime dictates of the hoary Llewelyn.--It is little
to learn, to understand, and to admire. A barren and ineffectual
enthusiasm for the speculations of truth, was never respectable and was
never venerable. Now, my swain, is the moment in which these sacred
lessons are to be called into action, and in which, beyond all others,
reputation is to be asserted and character fixed. Leave not then to me
the business of inciting and animating you. Be you my leader and
protector."

"Alas, my charming mistress," replied her admirer, "I would to God it
were in my power to inspire you with hope and fill you with courage. I
confess that while peril was at a distance, and I sat secure in the
tranquil vale, I received without distinction the doctrines of the
Druids, and bowed assent to their sacred lessons. But practice, my
Imogen, and the scenes of danger differ beyond conception from the ideas
we form of them in the calmness of repose. Something must be allowed to
the unruffled solitude of these sacred men, and something to the sublime
of poetry. Surely it is no part of comprehensive prudence to banish the
idea of those hazards that must be encountered, and to refuse to survey
the snares and the difficulties with which our path is surrounded.
Remember, my fair one, the malignant suspiciousness of your jailer, and
the comfortless darkness of the night."--

"Oh Edwin, and is this the strain in which you were wont to talk? Why
are you thus altered, and what means this inauspicious quick-sightedness
and alarm? We should indeed survey and prepare for danger, but we should
never suffer it to overwhelm us. The cause of integrity should never be
despaired of. What avails the suspicions of my keeper? The ever wakeful
eye of heaven can make them slumber. Why should we reck the gloom and
loneliness of the night? Virtue is the ever-burning lamp of the sacred
groves. No darkness can cast a shadow on her beams. Though the sun and
moon were hurled below the bosom of the circling ocean, virtue could see
to perform her purposes, and execute her great designs. Alas, my swain,
my voice is weak, and broken, and powerless. But willingly would I
breathe a soul to animate your timidity. Oh Edwin," and she folded him
in her alabaster arms to her heaving, anxious bosom, "let me not exhort
you in vain! It is but for a little while, it is but for one short
effort, and if the powers above smile propitious on our purpose, we are
happy for ever! Think how great and beautiful is our adventure.
Comfortless and desponding as I am now, ready to sink without life and
animation at your feet, I may be in a few hours happier than ever.--Oh
Edwin, lead on!--Can you hesitate?--Would it were in my power to reward
the virtue I would excite as it deserves to be rewarded. But the Gods
will reward you, Edwin."--

As she uttered these words, her action was unspeakably graceful, her
countenance was full of persuasion, and her voice was soft, and
eloquent, and fascinating. Roderic gazed upon her with insatiate
curiosity, and drank her accents with a greedy ear. For a moment,
charmed with the loftiness of her discourse and the heroism of her soul,
he was half persuaded to relent, and abjure his diabolical purpose. It
was only by summoning up all the fierceness of his temper, all the
impatience of his passions, and all the mistaken haughtiness and
inflexibility of his purpose, that he could resist the artless
enchantment. During the internal struggle, his countenance by no means
answered to the simplicity of pastoral sentiments. It was now fierce,
and now unprotected and despairing. Anon it was pale with envy, and anon
it was flushed with the triumph of brutal passion. Transitions like
these could not pass unobserved. Imogen beheld them with anxiety and
astonishment, but suspicion was too foreign in her breast, to be thus
excited.

"Imogen," cried the traitor, "it is in your power to reward the noblest
acts of heroism that human courage can perform. Who in the midst of all
the exultation and applause that triumphant rectitude can inspire, could
look to a nobler prize than the condescension of your smiles and the
heaven of your embraces? No, too amiable shepherdess, it is not for
myself I fear; witness every action of my life; witness all those
dangers that I have this moment unhesitatingly encountered, that I might
fly to your arms. But, oh, when your safety is brought to hazard, I feel
that I am indeed a coward. Think, my fair one, of the dangers that
surround us. Let us calmly revolve, before we immediately meet them. No
sooner shall we set our foot beyond this threshold, than they will
commence. Tyranny is ever full of apprehensions and environed with
guards. Along the gallery, and through the protracted hall, centinels
are placed with every setting sun. Could you escape their observations,
an hundred bolts, and an hundred massive chains secure the hinges of the
impious mansion. Beyond it all will be dark, and the solitude inviolate.
But suppose we meet again,--by what path to cross the wide extended
glade, and to reach the only avenue that can lead us safely through this
horrid cincture, will then be undiscoverable. Amid the untamed forest
and untrod precipices that lie beyond, all the beasts most inimical to
man reside. There the hills re-echo the tremendous roarings of the boar;
the serpents hiss among the thickets; and the gaunt and hungry wolf
roams for prey. Oh, Imogen, how fearful is the picture! And can your
tender frame, and your timid spirits support the reality?"

Imogen had now preserved the character of heroism and fortitude for a
considerable time. All the energies of her soul had been exerted to
encounter the trials and surmount the difficulties which she felt to be
unavoidable. When the beloved form of Edwin had appeared before her, she
relaxed in some degree from the caution and vigilance she had hitherto
preserved. It is the very nature of joyful surprize to unbend as it were
the strings of the mind, and to throw wide the doors of unguarded
confidence. Before, she had felt herself alone; she saw no resource but
in her own virtue, and could lean upon no pillar but her own resolution.
Now she had trusted to meet with an external support; she had poured out
her heart into the bosom of him in whom she confided, and she looked to
him for prudence, for suggestion and courage. But, instead of support,
she had found debility, and instead of assistance the resources of her
own mind were dried up, and her native fortitude was overwhelmed and
depressed. She turned pale at the recital of Roderic, her knees
trembled, her eyes forgot their wonted lustre, and she was immersed in
the supineness and imbecility of despair.

"Edwin!"--she cried, with a tone of perturbation; but her utterance
failed her. Her voice was low, hoarse, and inaudible. The fictitious
shepherd supported her in his arms. Her distress was a new gratification
and stimulus to her betrayer. "Edwin, ah, wherefore this fearful
recital? Did you come here for no other purpose than to sink me ten
times deeper in despair? Alas, I had conceived far other expectations,
and far other hopes fluttered in my anxious bosom, when I first beheld
your well known form. I said I have been hitherto constant and
determined, though unsupported and melancholy. I shall now be
triumphant. I shall experience that heaven-descended favour, which ever
attends the upright. Edwin, my firm, heroic Edwin, will perform what I
wished, and finish what I began. And, oh, generous and amiable shepherd,
is it thus that my presages are fulfilled? No, I cannot, will not bear
it. If the courage of Edwin fail, I will show him what he ought to be.
If you dare not lead, think whether you dare follow whither I guide. You
shall see what an injured and oppressed woman can do. Feeble and tender
as we are formed by nature, you shall see that we are capable of some
fortitude and some exertion." As she said this she had risen, and was
advancing towards the door. But recollecting herself with a sudden pang,
"Alas," cried she, "whither do I go?--What am I doing?--What shall I
do?--Oh, Edwin!" and, falling at his feet, she embraced his knees, "do
not, do no [sic] not desert me in this sad, tremendous moment!"

"I will not, my Imogen, I will never desert you. One fate shall attend
us both. And if you are called to calamity, to torture, and to death,
Edwin will not be supine and inactive." "Oh, now," cried she, her eyes
moistened with rapture, "I recognize my noble and gallant swain. Come
then, and let us fly. If we must encounter peril and disaster, what
avails it to suspend the trial for a few niggard hours? This, my friend,
my guardian,--this is the time--Now the master dragon sleeps--Roderic is
now unconscious and distant--and I fear him too much to apprehend any
thing from a meaner adversary--Let us fly--let us escape--let our speed
outstrip the rapid winds!"

During their conversation, the heavens had been covered with clouds, and
the rain descended with violence. But the change had not been noticed by
Imogen. "Well then, my fair one, we will depart. What though the wind
whistles along the heath, and the rain patters among the elms? We will
defy their fury. Let us go! But, ah, my Imogen, look there! The hinds
are flying across the plain for shelter; and see! two of them approach
to the clump of trees directly before us on the outside of the garden.
No, shepherdess, it is in vain that we resolve, and in vain that we
struggle: we cannot escape."

The mind of Imogen was now wrought up to the extremest distress. Her
heart was wrung with anguish. She was ready to charge the immortals with
conspiring against her, had not her piety forbad it. She saw the reality
of what Roderic stated, and yet she was ready to charge him with raising
eternal obstacles. She cast upon him a look of despair and agony. But
she did not read in the countenance of the imaginary shepherd congenial
sentiments. "Methinks," said she, with a voice full of reproachful
blandishment, and inimitable sweetness, "methinks it is not with the
tenderness of sympathy, that you tell me we must desist. Sure it is only
the mist of tears through which I behold you, that makes me see the
suppressed emotion of pleasure in your countenance. No, it is not in the
heart of Edwin to harbour for a moment the sentiments of barbarity and
insult--But if we cannot now escape--if the dangers to which we must
submit may be diminished by delay--indeed, Edwin, something must be
attempted--at least let us now fix upon a plan, and determine what to
do. Let not delay relax the spirit of enterprise, or shake the firmness
of our purpose."

"And what plan," cried the pretended shepherd, "can we form? I have
already trod the intricate and dangerous road, and there is nothing
better for us than to tread my footsteps back again. The day is
particularly unfavourable, as it is accompanied with activity and
business. We must therefore wait for the night. Then we must watch our
opportunities, and embrace the favourable interval. Imogen, I feel not
for myself. I do not throw away a thought upon my own safety, and I am
ready to submit to every evil for your service and your defence. But
yet, my gentle, noble-minded shepherdess, I cannot promise any very
flattering probability of success. Indeed my hopes are not sanguine. The
difficulties that are before us appear to me insurmountable. One
mountain peeps through the breaches of another, and they are like a wall
built by the hand of nature, and reaching to the skies. Penmaenmawr is
heaped upon Snowdon, and Plinlimmon nods upon the summit of Penmaenmawr.
It is only by the intervention of a miracle that we can ever revisit the
dear, lamented fields of Clwyd. Let us then, my Imogen, compose
ourselves to the sedateness of despair. Let us surrender the success of
our future efforts to fate. And let us endeavor to solace the short and
only certain interval that we yet can call our own, by the recollection
of our virtuous loves."

"Alas," cried Imogen, "I understand not in what the sedateness of
despair consists. In the prospect of every horrid mischief, mischief
that threatens not merely my personal happiness or mortal existence, but
which bears a malignant aspect upon the dignity of honour and the peace
of integrity, I cannot calmly recollect our virtuous loves, or derive
from that recollection sedateness and composure. Edwin, your language is
dissonant, and the thoughts you seek to inspire, jarring and
incompatible. If you must tell me to despair, at least point me to some
nobler source of consolation, than the coldness of memory; at least let
us prepare for the fate that awaits us in a manner decent, manly, and
heroic."

"Yes, too amiable shepherdess, if I were worthy to advise, I would
recommend a more generous source of consolation, and teach you to
prepare for futurity in a manner worthy of the simplicity of your heart;
and worthy of that disinterested affection we have ever borne to each
other. Think of those sacred ties that have united us. Think of the soft
and gentle commerce of mutual glances; the chaste and innocent
communication with which we have so often beguiled the noontide hour;
the intercourse of pleasures, of sentiments, of feelings that we have
held; the mingling of the soul. Did not heaven design us for each other?
Is not, by a long probation of simplicity and innocence, the possession
of each other become a mutual purchase? An impious and arbitrary tyrant
has torn us asunder. But do the Gods smile upon his hated purpose? Does
he not rather act in opposition to their decrees, and in defiance of
their authority?"

The magician paused. "Alas," replied the shepherdess, "what is it you
mean? Whither would you lead me? I understand you not. These indeed were
motives for fortitude and exertion, but what consolation can they impart
to the desponding heart?" "I will tell you," replied her seducer,
folding her slender waist with one of his arms as he spoke. "Since the
Gods are on our side, since heaven and earth approve our honest
attachment, let us sit here and laugh at the tyrant. While he doubles
his guards, and employs all his vigilance, let us mock his impotent
efforts."

"Ah," replied the shepherdess, her eye moistened with despair, and
beaming with unapprehensiveness, "how strange and impracticable an
advice do you suggest! Full of terror, full of despair, you bid me laugh
at fear. Threatened by a tyrant whose power is irresistible, and whose
arts you yourself assure me are not to be evaded, you would have me mock
at those arts, and this dreaded power. Is not his power triumphant? Is
not all his vigilance crowned with a fatal success? Are we not his
miserable, trembling, death-expecting victims? Can we leave this
apartment, can we almost move our hand, or utter our voice, for
solicitude and terror? Oh Edwin, in what mould must that heart have been
cast, what must be its hard and unsusceptible texture, that can laugh at
sorrow, and be full of the sensations of joy, though surrounded with all
the engines of wretchedness?"

"Imogen, your fears are too great, your anxieties exaggerate the
indigence of our condition. Though we are prisoners, yet even the
misfortunes of a prison have their compensations. The activity of the
immaterial mind, will not indeed submit long without reluctance to
confinement and restraint. But we have not yet experienced lassitude and
disgust." "Alas, Edwin, how strange and foreign are thoughts like these!
Whither do they tend? What would you infer from them?"

"This my love I would infer. That within one little cincture we are yet
absolute. No prying eye can penetrate here. Of our words, of our
actions, during a few remaining hours, we can dispose without controul."

"Ah," exclaimed the shepherdess, struck with a sudden suspicion of the
treacherous purpose, and starting from her betrayer, "ah, Edwin, yet,
yet explain yourself! A thousand horrid thoughts--a thousand dire and
shapeless phantoms--But Edwin,--sure--is plain, and artless, and
innocent.--What boots it that we can dispose of our words and actions
within this cincture?--Will that enable us to escape?--No, no, no,
no.--Escape you say is hopeless--What is it you mean?--Say--explain
yourself--Oh, Edwin!"--

"Be not alarmed," cried the remorseless villain. "Listen, yet listen
with calmness to the suggestions of my deliberate mind. Imogen, you are
too beautiful--I have beheld you too long--I have admired you with too
fierce an ardour. The Gods--the Gods have joined us. It is guilt and
malignity alone that oppose their purpose.--Let us beat them
down--trample them under our feet--employ worthily the moment that yet
remains."--

As the magician pronounced these words, he advanced towards his captive,
and endeavoured to seize her in his arms. But she thrust him from her
with the warmest indignation; and contemplating him with an eye of
infinite disdain, "Base unworthy swain!"--she cried--"Insidious
traitor!--abhorred destroyer!--And is it thus that you would approach
me?--Is it thus that you would creep into the weakness of my heart?--But
fly--I know you not--One mark of compassion I will yet exhibit, which
you little deserve--Fly--I will not deliver you into the hands of your
rival, whom yet my soul does not so much loath and abhor--Fly--Live to
be pointed at as an example of degeneracy--Live to blush for and repent
of that crime, which, Edwin!--cannot be expiated."

Roderic had advanced too far to be thus deterred. He did not wish to
manage the character under which he appeared. His passions by this
interview, more private, and in which his captive had beheld him with an
eye of greater complacency than ever, were inflamed to the extremest
degree. The charms of Imogen had been in turn heightened with joy, and
mellowed with distress. Even the conscious dignity, and haughty air she
now assumed, gave new attractions to her form, and new grace to her
manner. Her muscles trembled with horror and disdain. Her eloquent blood
wrought distinctly in her veins, and spoke in a tone, not more dignified
than enchanting. Her whole figure had a life, an expression, a
loveliness, that it is impossible to conceive.

Roderic rushed forward unappalled, and unsubdued. He had already seized
his unwilling victim. In vain she resisted his violence; in vain she
strove to escape from her betrayer. "For pity's sake--for mercy's
sake--for the sake of all our past endearments--spare me!--relent--and
spare me--spare me!--" For a time she struggled; but her tender frame
was soon overcome by the strength of her destroyer. She became cold and
insensible in his arms.

At this moment a flood of splendid lightning filled the apartment. The
air was rent with the hoarse and deafening roar of the thunder, the door
flew open, and the form of that spectre that he most abhorred stood
before Roderic. "Go on," cried the phantom, "complete thy heroic
purpose. Scorn the tremendous sounds that now appal thee. They are but
the prelude of that scene that shall shortly feast my eyes. Perceivest
thou not the earth to tremble beneath thy feet? Hearest thou not the
walls of thy hated mansion cracking to their ruin? Confusion is at hand.
_Chaos is come again._ Go on then, Roderic. Complete thy heroic
purpose." The spectre vanished, and all was uninterrupted silence.

The whole mind of Roderic was transformed from what it was. For the
impotence of lust, and the cruelty of inexorable triumph, he felt the
terrors of annihilation, and all the cold, damp tremblings of despair.
But the victory of innocence was not yet complete.

Imogen had sunk for a moment under the horrors that threatened her, but
she had not been so far impercipient as not to hear the murmuring of the
thunder, and to see the gleam of the lightning. The form however that
terrified Roderic, and the voice that addressed him, were perceived by
him alone.

The shepherdess opened her eyes, and beheld the degenerate ravisher
pale, aghast, and trembling. "It is well, Edwin. The Gods have declared
themselves. The Gods have suspended their thunder over the head of the
apostate. Rut, oh Edwin, could I have imagined it! Desolate and
oppressed as I have been, could I have supposed, that that form was
destined to fill up the measure of my woes! I once beheld it as the
harbinger of happiness, as the temple of integrity and innocence. Oh,
how wretched you have made me! How you have shaken all my most rooted
opinions of the residence of virtue among mankind! Am I alone, and
unsupported in her cause? How forlorn and solitary do I seem to myself!
I suffered--once I suffered the thought of Edwin to mix with the love of
rectitude, and the obedience of heaven. They all together confirmed me
in the path I had chalked out for myself. Mistake not these reproaches
for the weakness of returning passion. And yet, Edwin, though I loath, I
pity you! Go, and repent! Go, and blot from the records of your memory
the cold insinuation, the aggravated guilt that you have this day
practised! Go, and let me never, never see you more!"

As she uttered these words, congratulation, reproach, wretchedness,
abhorrence and pity succeeded each other in her countenance. Rut they
were all accompanied with an ineffable dignity, and an angelic purity.
The savage and the satyr might have beheld, and been awed into
reverence. Roderic slunk away, guilty, mortified, and confounded. And
such was the success of this other attempt upon the virtue of Imogen.

[Illustration]






BOOK THE SIXTH

IMOGEN ENDEAVOURS TO SUBDUE THE ATTENDANTS OF RODERIC.--THE SUPPER OF
THE HALL.--JOURNEY AND ARRIVAL OF EDWIN.--SUBTLETY OF THE MAGICIAN.--HE
IS DEFEATED.--END OF THE SECOND DAY.


The magician, overwhelmed and confounded with uninterrupted
disappointment, was now ready to give himself up to despair. "I have
approached the inflexible fair one," cried he, "by every avenue that
leads to the female heart. And what is the amount of the advantages I
have gained? I tempted her with riches. But riches she considered with
disdain; they had nothing analogous to the temper of her mind, and her
uncultivated simplicity regarded them as superfluous and cumbersome. I
taught her to listen to the voice of flattery; I clothed it in all that
is plausible and insinuating; but to no purpose. She was still upon her
guard; all her suspicions were awake; and her integrity and her
innocence were as vigilant as ever. Incapable of effecting any thing
under that form she had learned to detest, I laid it aside. I assumed a
form most prepossessing and most amiable in her eyes. Surely if her
breast had not been as cold as the snow that clothes the summit of
Snowdon; if her virtue had not been impregnable as the groves of Mona, a
stratagem, omnipotent and impenetrable as this, must have succeeded. She
beheld the figure of him she loved, and this was calculated in a moment
of distress to draw forth all her softness. She beheld the person of him
in whom she had been wont to find all integrity, and place all
confidence, and this might have induced her to apprehend no danger. And
yet with how much tender passion, with how distressful an indignation,
with what tumultuous sorrow did she witness his supposed crime? What
then must I do? What yet remains? I love her with a more frantic and
irresistible passion than ever. I cannot abstain from her.--I cannot
dismiss her.--I cannot forget her. Oh Imogen, too lovely, all-attractive
Imogen, for you I stand upon the very brink of fate! Nor is this all.
Soon should I leap the gulph, soon should forget every prudent and
colder prospect in the tumult of my soul, did not that cursed spectre
ever shoot across my path to dash my transports, and to mar my
enjoyments. Which way shall I turn? To leave her, that is impossible. To
possess her by open force and manly violence, that my fate forbids. My
understanding is bewildered, and my invention is lost.--Medoro!"--

Medoro received the well known signal, and stood before Roderic. He
waited not to be addressed, he read the purposes of the heart of the
magician. "Roderic," cried he, "this moment is the crisis of you[r]
destiny. The occasion, to which the curse pronounced upon you by the
inimical spectre refers, has already in part taken place. YOU HAVE SUED
TO A SIMPLE MAID, WHO BY YOUR CHARMS HAS BEEN TAUGHT TO HATE THE SWAIN
THAT ONCE SHE LOVED. It only remains that she should persevere in the
resistance she has hitherto made, and that A SIMPLE SWAIN, perhaps her
favoured Edwin, should defy your enchantments. Think then of the
precipice on which you stand. Yet, yet return, while it is in your
power. One step in advance beyond those you have already taken may be
irretrievable. Alas, Roderic, it is thus that I advise! but I foresee
that my advice will be neglected. The Gods permit to the invisible
inhabitants of air, when strongly invoked by a mortal voice, to assist
their vices and teach adroitness to their passions; but they do not
permit an invocation like this to receive for its reward the lesson of
moderation, and the attainment of happiness.

"Go on then, Roderic, in the path upon which you are inflexibly
determined. You succeeded not in the stratagem of flattery; but it
served to take off the keenness of the aversion of Imogen. She
contemplates you now with somewhat less of horror, and with a virtuous
and ingenuous fear of uncandidness and injustice upon your account.
Neither have you succeeded in that deeper stratagem and less penetrable
deceit, the assumption of the form of him she loved. It has however
served to weaken her prepossessions, and relax the chains of her
attachment. She is now the better prepared to receive openly and
impartially the addresses of a stranger swain. Thus even your
miscarriages have furthered your design. Thus may a wise general convert
his defeats into the means of victory. Think not however again to
approach her in the coolness of reason, and the sobriety of the
judgment. Hope not by temptation, by flattery, by prejudice, to shake
the immutable character of her mind. There is yet one way unessayed. You
must advance, if you would form the slightest expectations of victory,
by secret and invisible steps. Her virtue must be surrounded, entangled
and enmeshed, or ever her suspicions be awakened, or her integrity
alarmed. This can be effected only by the instrumentality of pleasure.
Pleasure has risen triumphant over many a heart that riches could not
conquer, and that ambition could not subdue. What though she has
resisted temptation under the most alluring form, when her thoughts were
collected and all around was silence?--Let the board of luxury be
spread. Let the choicest dainties be heaped together in unbounded
profusion. Let the most skilful musicians awake the softest instruments.
Let neatness, and elegance, and beauty exhibit their proudest charms.
Let every path that leads to delight, let every gratification that
inebriates the soul be discovered. If at that moment temptation
approach, even a meaner and less potent temptation may then succeed. The
night advances with hasty feet. Night is the season of dissipation and
luxury. Be this the hour of experiment, and let the apprehensive mind of
Imogen be first assiduously lulled to repose. Here, Roderic, you must
rest your remaining hopes. There is not another instrument can be
discovered, to disarm and vanquish the human mind. If here you fail, the
Gods have decreed it--they will be obeyed--Imogen must be dismissed from
the enchanted halls of Rodogune."

With these words the goblin disappeared. The warning he had uttered
passed unheeded, but the magician immediately prepared to employ this
last of stratagems. Summoning the train of attendants of either sex that
resided in the castle, he directed them some to make ready the intended
feast, and some to repair to the apartment of Imogen. The preparations
of the enchanted castle were not like those of a vulgar entertainment.
Every thing was accelerated by invisible agents. The intervention of the
retinue of Roderic was scarcely admitted. The most savoury viands, the
most high flavoured ragouts, and the most delicious wines presented
themselves spontaneously to the expecting attendant. The hall was
illuminated with a thousand lustres that depended like stars from the
concave roof, and were multiplied by the reflection of innumerable
mirrors. The whole was arranged with inconceivable expedition.

In the mean time a few of the more distinguished attendants of her own
sex repaired to the presence of Imogen. They found her feeble,
spiritless and disconsolate. "Come," exclaimed their leader, in an
accent of persuasion; "comply, my lovely girl, let not us alone have
reason to complain of your unfriendliness and inflexibility."

Imogen was fatigued and she wished not for repose. Grief and persecution
had in a former instance inspired her with the love of solitude. But her
feelings were now of another kind. The disgrace and ingratitude of Edwin
had wounded her in the tenderest point, and she could not think of it
but with inexpressible anguish. She was for the first time afraid of her
own reflections, and desirous to fly from herself. "Yes," exclaimed she,
"and I would go, if you will promise me that it shall not be to the
presence of Roderic. The castle and the fields, the freshness of the
morning air and the gloom of a dungeon, are equal to me, provided I must
be kept back from the arms of my beloved parents, and their anxious and
tender spirits must still be held in suspence. But indeed I must not, I
will not, be continually dragged to the presence of the man I hate. It
is ungenerous, unreasonable, and indecent. What is the meaning of all
this compulsion? Why am I kept here so much against my will? Why am I
dragged from place to place, and from object to object? Surely all this
cannot be mere caprice and tyranny. There must be in it some dark and
guilty meaning that I cannot comprehend. Oh shepherdesses! if ye had any
friendship, if any pity dwelt within your bosoms, ye would surely assist
me to escape this hated confinement. Point but the way, show me but the
smallest hole, by which I might get away to ease and liberty, and I
would thank you a thousand times. You, who appear the leader of the
throng, your brow is smooth, your eyes are gentle and serene, and the
bloom of youth still dwells upon your face. Oh," added the apprehensive
Imogen, and she threw herself upon her knees--"do not bely the stamp of
benevolence and clemency that nature has planted there. Think if you had
parents as I have, whose happiness, whose existence, are suspended upon
mine, if you abbhorred, and detested, and feared your jailor as I do,
what would be your feelings then, and how you would wish to be treated
by a person in your situation. Grant me only the poor and scanty boon,
that you would then conceive your right. Dismiss me, I intreat you. I
cannot bear my situation. My former days have all been sunshine, my
former companions have all been kindness. I have not been educated to
encounter persecution, and misfortunes, and horrors. I cannot encounter
them. I cannot survive it."

As she pronounced these words, she sunk, feeble, languid, and
breathless, upon the knees of the attendant. They hastened to raise her.
They soothed her ingenuous affliction, and assured her that she should
not be intruded upon by him of whom she had formed so groundless
apprehensions. Since then she was invited to partake of a slight
refreshment accompanied only by persons of her own sex, she did not long
hesitate, and was easily persuaded to acquiesce. The unostentatious
kindness of the invitation, and the modesty of the entertainment she
expected, dissipated her fears. It was from solitude that she now wished
to escape; and it was to that simple and temperate relaxation that she
had experienced among the inhabitants of Clwyd, to which she was
desirous to repair.

She was conducted towards a saloon, which had less indeed of a sumptuous
and royal appearance, but was more beautiful, more gay, more voluptuous,
and more extatic than that which had been the scene of the temptation of
the morning. The profuseness of the illuminations outdid the brightness
of the meridian sun. The table was spread in a manner to engage the eye
and allure the appetite. Every vessel that was placed upon it was of
massive silver. And in different corners of the apartment heaps of the
most fragrant incense were burning in urns of gold. The viands were of a
nature the most stimulating and delicious; and the wines were bright and
sparkling and gay. As Imogen approached, a stream of music burst upon
her ear of a kind which hitherto she had never witnessed. It was not the
sonorous and swelling notes of praise; it was not the enthusiastic
rapture of the younger bards; it was not the elevated and celestial
sounds that she had been used to hear from the lyre of Llewelyn. But if
it was not so swelling and sublime, it was soft, and melodious, and
insinuating, and overpowering beyond all conception. You could not
listen to it without feeling all the strings of your frame relaxed, and
the nobler powers of your soul lulled into a pleasing slumber. It was
madness all. The ear that heard it could not cease to attend. The mind
that listened to it was no longer master of itself.

Imogen entered the hall, and was received by a train of nymphs, some of
them more beautiful than any she had yet seen, and all attired with
every refinement of elegance and grace. Their hair was in part braided
round their bright and polished foreheads, and in part it hung in wavy
and careless ringlets about their slender necks, and heaving bosoms.
Their forms were veiled in loose and flowing folds of silk of the finest
texture, and whiter than the driven snow. The robes were not embroidered
with gold and silver; they were not studded with emeralds and diamonds;
but were adorned on every side with chaplets of the fairest and freshest
flowers. Their heads were crowned with garlands of amaranth and roses.
Though their conduct were tainted with lasciviousness, and their minds
were full of looser thoughts, yet, awed by the virtuous dignity of
Imogen, they suppressed the air of dissolute frolic, and taught by the
guileful lessons of their lord, endeavoured to assume the manners of
chaste and harmless joy.

The shepherdess, struck with the objects which so unexpectedly presented
themselves to her eyes and her ears, started back with involuntary
astonishment. "Is this," cried she, "the artless feast, and this the
simple fare of which you invited me to partake?" "Imogen," replied the
principal nymph, "we were willing to do you honour, and the preparation
we have made is slight compared with that which the roof can afford. We
considered your fatigue and your extraordinary abstinence, and we were
willing to compensate them by pleasant food, and a grateful
refreshment."

"And is such the grateful refreshment, and such the simple and
unaffected relaxation that your minds suggested? Alas, were I to
approach this board, it would be to me a business and not an amusement,
an exertion and not a relief. A feast like this is an object foreign and
unpleasing to my eyes. The feasts of the valley are chesnuts, and
cheeses, and apples. Our drink is the water of the limpid brook, or the
fair and foaming beverage that our flocks afford. Such are the
enjoyments of sobriety; such are the gratifications of innocence.
Virgins, I am not weary of the simplicity of the pastoral life. I hug it
to my bosom closer, more fondly than ever."

"Amiable, spotless maiden! we admire your opinions, and we love your
person. But virtue is not allied to rigour and austerity. Its boundaries
are unconstrained, and graceful, and sweeping. It is a robe which sits
easily on those who are formed to wear it. It gives no awkwardness to
their manner, and puts no force upon their actions. Partake then, my
Imogen, in those refreshments we have prepared for your gratification.
If this be not duty, it is not crime. It is a venial and a harmless
indulgence. Do not then mortify friends that have sought to please you,
and refuse your attention to the assiduities we have demonstrated."

"No, my gentle shepherdess, it is in vain you plead. I would willingly
qualify my refusal; but I must withdraw. The more you press me, the
farther it is necessary for me to recede. In the morning of this very
day, I was simple, and incautious, and complying. But now I have
experienced so many wiles and escaped so many snares, that this heart,
formerly so gentle and susceptible, is cased in triple steel. I can shut
my eyes upon the most splendid attractions. I can turn a deaf ear to
enticements the most alluring, and sounds the most insinuating. This is
the lesson--I thank him for it--that your lord has taught me. You must
not then detain me. I must be permitted to retire." And saying this she
withdrew with trembling speed. In vain they insisted, in vain they
pursued. Imogen escaped like a bird from the fowler, nor looked behind.
Imogen was deaf to their expostulations, and indurate and callous as
adamant to their persuasions.

The disappointment of Roderic, when he learned of this miscarriage of
his great and final attempt was extreme. He coursed up and down the
saloon with all the impatience of a wild boar pierced by the spear of
the hunter, or a wolf from whom they have torn away her young. He vented
his fury upon things inanimate. He tore his hair, and beat his breast,
with tumultuous agony. He imprecated with a hoarse and furious voice a
thousand curses upon those attendants who had permitted his captive to
escape. Through the spacious hall, where every thing a moment before had
worn the face of laboured gaiety and studied smiles, all was now
desolation, and disquiet, and uproar. And urged as the magician had been
by successive provocations, he was ready to overstep every limit he
might once have respected, and to proceed to the most fatal extremities.

In this situation, and as Roderic was hastening with a determined
resolution to follow to the apartment of Imogen, information was
suddenly brought to him, that a young stranger, tall and graceful in his
form, and of a frank and noble countenance, had by some unknown means
penetrated beyond the precipices with which the enchanted castle was
surrounded, and in spite of the resistance of the retinue of the
magician had entered the mansion. The dark and guilty heart of Roderic
immediately whispered him--"It is Edwin.--It is well.--I thank the Gods
that they do not hold this aspiring soul in a long and dreary suspence!
Let the destinies overtake me. I am prepared to receive them. Death, or
any of the thousand ills that fortune stores for them she hates, could
not come in a more welcome hour.--Oh Imogen, lovely, adorable Imogen,
how vain has been my authority, how vain the space of my command! Let
then my palaces tumble into ruin--Let that wand which once I boasted,
shivered in a thousand fragments, be cast to all the winds of heaven! I
will glory in desolation and forlornness. I will wrap myself in my
poverty. I will retire to some horrid cave in the midst of the untamed
desart, and shagged with horrid shades, that outgloom the blackness of
the infernal regions. There I will ruminate upon my past felicity. There
I will tell over enjoyments never to return. I will make myself a little
universe, and a new and unheard of satisfaction in the darkness of my
reflections, and the depth of my despair.

"And yet surely, surely the Gods have treated me severely, and measured
out to me a hard and merciless fate. What are all the felicities I talk
of, and have prized so much? Oh, they were seasoned, each of them, with
a bitter infusion! Little, little indeed have I tasted of a pure and
unmixed happiness. In my choicest delights, I have felt a vacancy. They
have become irksome and tedious. I have fled from myself; I have fled
from the magnificence of my retinue, to find variety. And yet how dearly
am I to pay for a few gratifications which were in fact no better than
specious allurements to destruction, and flowers that slightly covered
the pit of ruin! In the bloom of manhood, in the full career of youth to
be cast forth an UNPITIED, NECESSITOUS, MISERABLE VAGABOND! All but this
I could have borne without a sigh. Were I threatened with death, in this
opening scene of life, I could submit with cheerfulness. But to drag
along a protracted misery, to be shut out from hope, and yet ever awake
to every cruel reflection and every bitter remorse--This is too much!"

From this dream of unmanly lamentations Roderic was with difficulty
recovered by the assiduities of the attendants. At length incited by
their expostulations to the collectedness of reflection and the
fortitude of exertion, he determined, with that quickness of invention
with which he had been endowed at his birth, upon a plan to elude, if
possible, the perseverance of Edwin, and the menaces of his fate.
Recollecting that his person was not unknown to the swain, he
communicated his instructions to those who were about him, and withdrew
himself into a private apartment.

It was Edwin. The instructions of the Druid of Elwy had relieved him
from the insupportable burden that had begun to oppress his mind.
Persuaded by him he had submitted to seek the refreshment of sleep. But
sleep shed not her poppies upon his busy, anxious head. His mind was
crouded with a thousand fearful phantoms. A child of the valley, he was
a stranger to misfortune and misery. Upon the favoured sons of nature
calamity makes her deepest impression, and an impression least capable
of being erased. And yet Edwin was full of courage and adventure; he
asked no larger boon than to be permitted to face his rival. But his
inquietude was the offspring of love; and his wariness and caution
originated in the docility of his mind, and his anxious attachment to
innocence and spotless rectitude.

Having passed the watches of the night in uneasy and inexhaustible
reflections, he sprung from his couch as soon as the first dawn of day
proclaimed the approaching sun, and took a hasty leave of the hospitable
hermit. Issuing from the grotto, he bent his steps, in obedience to the
direction of Madoc, to that secret path, which had never before been
discovered by any mortal unassisted by the goblins of the abyss. Before
he reached it the golden sun had begun to decline from his meridian
height. He passed along the winding way beneath the impending
precipices, which formed a dark and sullen vault over his head. Ever and
anon large pieces of stone, broken from their native mass, and tumbling
among the craggy caverns, saluted his ear. Now and then he heard a
bubbling fountain bursting from the rock, which presently fell with a
loud and dashing noise along the declivity, and was lost in the pebbles
below. The only light by which his steps were guided, was that which
fell in partial and scanty streams through the fissures of the mountain,
and served to discover little more than the shapelessness of the rocks,
and the uncultivated horrors of the scene.

Through these Edwin passed unappalled. His heart was naturally firm and
intrepid, and he now cased himself round with the armour of untainted
innocence and unsullied truth. It was not long before he came forth from
this scene of desolation to that beautiful and cultivated prospect which
had already enchanted the heart of Imogen. To him it had advantages
which in the former case it could not boast. He could contrast its
gaiety and brightness with the obscure and dismal scene from which he
had escaped. Nor was he struck only by the verdure of the prospect, and
the vividness of its colours, he also beheld the inclosure, not, as his
amiable mistress had done, from a terrace adjoining to the mansion; but
from the last point of the rock from which he was ready to descend. The
mansion therefore was his principal point of view from this situation.
It stood upon a bold and upright brow that beetled over the plain below.
The ascent was by a large and spacious flight of marble steps. Its
architecture was grand, and simple, and commanding. It was supported by
pillars of the Ionic order. They were constructed of ivory and jet, and
their capitals were overlaid with the purest gold. An object like this
to one who had never before seen any nobler edifice than a shepherd's
cot, or the throne of turf upon which the bards were elevated at the
feast of the Gods, was surprising, and admirable, and sublime in the
highest degree.

"And this," exclaimed the gallant shepherd, "is the residence prepared
for infamy and lust. The sun pours upon it his light with as large a
hand, the herbage, the flowers and the fruits as fully partake of the
bounteous care of nature, as the vales of simplicity and the fields of
innocence. How venerable and alluring is the edifice I behold! Does not
peace dwell within, and are not the hours of its possessor winged with
happiness? Had my youth been spent among the beasts of the forests, had
not my ears drank in the sacred instructions of the godlike Druids, I
might have thought so. But, no. In vain in the extensive empire that the
arts of sorcery and magic afford, shall felicity be sought. What avails
all this splendour? and to what purpose this mighty profusion? All the
possessions that I can boast, are my little flock, my wattled cottage,
and my slender pipe. And yet I carol as jocound a lay, my heart is as
light and frolic, and the tranquility of self-acquittal spreads her
wings as wide over my bosom, as they could were I lord of a hundred
hills, and called all the streamlets of the valley my own. The magician
possesses a large hoard of beauty, and he can wander from fair to fair
with unlimited and fearless licence. All merciful and benign beings, who
dwell above this azure concave, give me my Imogen! Restore her safe and
unhurt to these longing, faithful arms! Let not this arbitrary and
imperious tyrant, who grasps wide the fairest productions of thy
creation with a hundred hands,--let him not wrest from me my solitary
lamb,--let him not seize for ever upon that companion, in whom the most
expansive and romantic wishes of my heart had learned to be satisfied."

Such were the beautiful and virtuous sentiments of Edwin, as he beheld
the empire of his rival from the head of the rock, and as he crossed the
glade that still divided him from the object of all his exertions. From
the eminence upon which he had paused for a few contemplative moments,
the distance had appeared narrow and trifling. But the equal height of
the ground upon which he stood, and of that which afforded a situation
for the palaces of Roderic, had deceived him. When he looked towards the
scene that was to form the termination of his journey, the glade below
escaped from his sight. But when he descended to the plain, it was
otherwise. One swell of the surface he had to traverse succeeded
another; and the irregularity of the ground caused him sometimes to be
lost, in a manner, in the length of the way, and took from him the
consolation of being able so much as to perceive the object of his
destination. As he passed the hills, and climbed each successive ascent,
a murmur rose in his bosom; his impatience grew more and more
ungovernable, and the eagerness of his pursuit taught him to imagine,
that his little labour would never be done.

Every performance however of human exertion has its period; and Edwin
had at length surmounted the greater part of the distance, and now
gained a larger and more distinct view of the castle. But by this time
the sun was ready to hide himself in the ocean, and his last rays now
gleamed along the valley, and played in the party-coloured clouds.
Meanwhile a dark spot, which had for some time blotted the brightness of
the surrounding azure, expanded itself. The shades gathered, the light
of the sun was hid, and the blackness of the night forestaled. The wind
roared among the mountains, and its terrors were increased by the hollow
bellowings of the beasts they harboured. The shower began; it descended
with fury, and Edwin had scarcely time to gain the protection of an
impervious thicket that crowned the lawn. Here he stood and ruminated.
The solemnity of the scene accorded with the importance of his
undertaking. The pause was friendly. He composed his understanding, and
recollected the lessons of the hospitable hermit. He fortified himself
in the habits of virtue; and, with a manly and conscious humility,
recommended this crisis of his innocence to the protection of heaven.

The shower ceased, but the darkness continued. He had too well marked
however the bent of his journey during the continuance of the day, to
permit this to be any considerable obstacle. In the mean time it doubled
and rendered more affecting the stilness of the night. Nothing was to be
heard but the low whispers of the falling breeze, and the murmurs of the
prowling wolf that now languished and died away upon the ear. This was
the moment in which magic lords it supreme, in which the goblin breaks
forth from his confinement, and ranges unlimited in the nether globe;
and in which all that is regular and all that is beautiful give place to
the hunger of the savage brute, and the witcheries of the sorcerer. But
Roderic was otherwise engaged. His heart was employed in inventing
guile, and was lulled into unapprehensive security. But Edwin was
heroic. His bosom swelled with the most generous purposes; and he
trusted unwaveringly in that guardianship that is every where present,
and that eye that never slumbers.

He entered the walls of the enchanted castle. The novelty of the
appearance of a stranger within the circle of those mountains, which no
vulgar mortal had yet penetrated, the dignity of his appearance, and the
boldness of his manner, at first distracted the attendants from the
performance of that, which might have seemed most natural in their
situation, and awed them into passiveness. He still wore that flowing
and graceful garb, which was appropriated by the inhabitants of Clwyd to
the celebration of public solemnities. He had passed through the midst
of the shower, and yet one thread of his garment was not moistened with
the impetuousness of its descent. His face wore a more beautiful and
roseat glow than was native to its complexion. His eye was full of
animation and expressiveness. Expectation, and hope, and dignity, and
resolution had their entire effect in his appearance. "It is a celestial
spirit!" cried they. "It is a messenger from the unseen regions!" and
they sought in his person for the insignia that might confirm and
establish their conjecture.

But such was not the imagination of Roderic. The master-guilt to which
he was conscious, was ever ready to take the alarm upon any unexpected
event; and he had immediately conjectured, by a kind of instinctive
impression, who was this new and unwelcome guest. However unguarded and
unprepared had been his retinue, they had recollected themselves
sufficiently to detain Edwin in the avenue of the mansion, till they had
received the orders of their lord. These were immediately communicated;
and the magician withdrew himself till the proper period should arrive
for his appearance to the swain.

Edwin, when he had entered the palace of Roderic, had been desirous, if
it were possible, to push forward to the presence of his rival, without
making any previous enquiries, or admitting of a moment's pause. The
frequency however of the domestics had disappointed his purpose, and he
was detained by them in spite of his efforts. "What means," cried he,
"this violence? I must enter here. I will not be delayed. My purpose
admits not of trifling and parley. To me every moment is big with fate."
He said. For Edwin disdained the employment of falsehood and disguise.
He lifted the javelin in his hand, but his heart was too full of
gentleness and humanity rashly to employ the instrument of death. His
tone however was resolute, and his gesture commanding, and the
astonished attendants were uncertain in what manner to conduct
themselves.

At this instant a domestic, who had received the instructions of his
lord, entered the court. He had the appearance of superior dignity; and
removing the attendants who pressed with rudeness upon the shepherd, he
enquired of him the cause of his intrusion. "Lead me," cried Edwin, "to
the lord of your mansion. My business is important and pressing, and
will not admit of being communicated to any other ear. Whence this
difficulty? Innocence does not withdraw from the observation of those
who are desirous to approach it; and a manly courage is not apprehensive
of an enemy."

"Young stranger," replied the domestic, "you are misinformed. This
mansion knows not a lord. It belongs solely to proprietors of the softer
sex, whom fortune has indulged as you perceive with every thing that is
calculated to give new relish to the pursuits of life, and beguile the
lazy foot of time. It is our boast and our honour to serve these
damsels. And could my report add one ray to their lustre, I would tell
you, that they are fair as the peep of the morning, and more fragrant
than beds of violets and roses. It is their command, that humanity
should be extended by all around them, not only to man, but to the
humblest and weakest animals. Though you have entered their residence by
mistake, we shall but fulfil the service they expect in furnishing you
with every assistance and every accommodation in our power. If you are
hungry, come in and partake of the liberal plenty the castle affords. If
you thirst, we will cheerfully offer you the capacious goblet and the
richest wines. If you are fatigued with the travel of the day, or have
wandered from your path and are benighted in your journey, enter their
mansion. The accommodations are large, and they are all free for the use
of the poor, the necessitous, the unfortunate and the miserable."

Edwin listened with astonishment to the narration. He was not used to
the address of falshood; and strongly warned as he had previously been
of the iniquity of the train, the ingenuousness of his mind induced him
at first without reflection to yield an easy credit to the story that
was told him. It was related with fluency, plausibility, and gravity;
and it was accompanied with a manner seemingly artless and humane, which
it was scarcely possible for one unhackneyed in the stratagems of deceit
to distrust and contradict.

"Surely," replied Edwin, "I cannot be wholly mistaken. At least has
there not a young shepherdess just arrived here, tall, tender and
beautiful, and whose flaxen tresses are more bright than gold, and more
abundant than the blossoms in the spring?"

Before the officious domestic could reply to his enquiries, two of the
nymphs, who had been attired for the feast of Imogen, came into the
outer apartment in which the shepherd was, and advanced toward him.
"These are my mistresses," cried the attendant. Edwin approached them
with respect, and repeated his former enquiries. They were the most
beautiful of the train of Roderic. They were clad in garments of the
whitest silk, and profusely adorned with chaplets of flowers. Their
appearance therefore was calculated to give them, in a shepherd's eye,
an air of sweetness and simplicity that could not easily be resisted.

One of them was tall and majestic, and the other low, and of a shape and
figure the most alluring. This appeared to be like a blossom in May,
whose colours discovered to the attentive observer all their
attractions, without being expanded to the careless eye: And that might
be supposed to be a few summers farther advanced to a delicious
maturity. The majesty of the one had nothing in it of the gross, the
indelicate, and the forbidding; and the softness of the other was
attempered with inexpressible propriety and grace. Both of them were
gentle and affable. But the affability of the former took the name of
benignity and condescension, and the affability of the latter was full
of harmless gaiety, and a cheerful and unpretending spirit of society.

"We cannot," replied the elder, "attend to your enquiries here. The
apartment is comfortless and inhospitable. You appear fatigued. And we
pretend not, young stranger, merely to contribute what is in our power
to relieve the uneasiness of your mind, we would also refresh your
wearied frame. Come in then, and we will afford you every satisfaction
we are able. Enter the mansion, and partake of the plenty the Gods have
bestowed upon us, and which we desire not to engross to ourselves."
During these words Edwin surveyed his fair entertainers with wonder and
admiration. But enchanting as they were, they found not the avenue to
his heart. There Imogen reigned alone, and could not admit of a rival.
Even though upon a slighter occasion, and at less important moment, the
purity of his mind, that virtue so much esteemed among the swains, could
have been tainted, yet now that his undertaking whispered him, "Imogen
alone is fair!" now that he feared for her safety, and hoped every
moment to arrive at the dreaded, pleasing period of his anxiety, he
could but be constant and be faithful. He recollected the sage
instructions of the Druid of Elwy: and his resolutions were unshaken as
the roots of Snowdon.

He accepted their invitation. Immediately, as upon a signal, an hundred
flambeaux lighted the area and lined the passage to the saloon of
pleasure. The nymphs placed themselves on each side of the shepherd, and
in this manner they passed along. If Imogen had been struck with the
profuseness of the illumination, the richness of the plate, the
sumptuousness of the viands and the wines, and the fragrant clouds of
incense that filled the apartment, how much more were they calculated to
astonish the soul of Edwin! He had comparatively passed through no
previous scenes; he had not been led on step by step; and the
voluptuousness of the objects that now presented themselves before him
had been unknown and unexpected. The train of the subordinate attendants
of the magician filled the apartment with beauty and with grace, and
seemed to pay the most unreserved obedience to the nymphs that at first
addressed him.

But before the shepherd had time to examine the objects that surrounded
him, the musicians awaked their instruments, and all his faculties were
engrossed with soft melody and enchanting sounds. The instrumental
performance was illustrated and completed with a multitude of harmonious
voices, and those who sang were each of them of the softer sex.

"What are the possessions most eagerly courted among mankind? Which are
the divinities by mortals most assiduously adored? This goodly universe
was intended for the seat of pleasure, unmixed pleasure. But a sportive,
malicious divinity sent among men a gaudy phantom, an empty bubble, and
called the shadow Honour. In pursuit of a fancied distinction and a
sounding name, the children of the earth have deserted all that is bland
and all that is delicious. Labour, naked, deformed, and offensive, they
willingly embrace. They brave hardship and severity. They laugh at
danger. From hence they derive the virtue of resolution, the merit of
self-denial, and the excellence of mortification.

"But heaven did not open wide its hand, and scatter delight through
every corner of the universe, without intending that they should be
enjoyed. Enjoyment, indulgence, and felicity are not crimes. Abstinence,
self-denial and mortification have only a specious mien and a fictitious
merit. Did all mankind obey their fallacious dictates, the unlimited
bounties of nature would become a burden to the earth, and fill it with
pestilence and contagion. The soil would be oppressed with her own
fertility; the herds would overmultitude their lords; and the crouded
air would be darkened with the plumes of its numerous inhabitants. The
very gems that now lie buried in the bosom of the ocean, would then
bespangle its surface, and the dumb tenants of the watery tracts, inured
to their blaze, would learn to leave the caverns of the sea and gaze
upon the sun.

"Mortals, open your hearts to the divinity of pleasure! Why should he be
in love with labour, who has a capacious hoard of choice delights within
his reach? Why should we fly from a present good that we possess, to a
future that we do not comprehend? Is this the praise we owe the
bounteous Gods? Can neglect and indifference to their gifts be
gratitude? This were to serve them like a timorous and trembling slave
beneath the eye of an austere and capricious tyrant; and not with that
generosity, that enthusiasm, that liberal self-confidence, which are
worthy of a father, a patron and a friend.

"Ye that are wise, ye that are favoured of propitious heaven, drink deep
of the cup of pleasure. The sun has now withdrawn his splendid lustre,
and his flaring beams. The period of exercise is past, and the lids of
prying curiosity is [are] closed. Night is the season of feast and the
season of gaiety. In the graver hours of activity and industry, sobriety
may be proper. It may then be fit to listen to the dictates of prudence,
and pay some attention to the prejudices of mankind. The sternness of
age and the austerity of censoriousness are now silent. Now pleasure
wears a freer garb; and the manners of enjoyment are more frank and
unrestrained. The thinness of indiscretion and the airy forms of
inadvertence are lost and annihilated amid the shadows of the night.

"Now the numerous inhabitants of the waters come forth from their oozy
beds and play and flounce in the beams of the moon. Round the luminary
of the night the stars lead up the mystic dance, and compose the music
of the spheres. The deities of the woods and the deities of the rivers
come out from their secret haunts, and keep their pastimes
unapprehensive of human intrusion. The elves and the fairies repair to
their sports, and trip along the velvet green with many-twinkling feet.
Let us imitate their amiable alacrity and their cheerful amusements.

"What has sleep to do with the secrecy and silence of the night? It is
the hour of pleasure unrestrained and free. It is the hour in which the
empire of beauty is complete, and those mysteries are disclosed which
the profaner eye of day must never behold. Ye that are wise, ye that are
favoured of propitious heaven, drink deep of the cup of pleasure! The
festive board is spread before you; the flowing bowl is proffered for
your acceptance. Beauty, the crown of enjoyment, the last perfection of
society, is within your reach. Be wise and taste. Partake of the
munificence the Gods vouchsafe."

As the song proceeded the two nymphs, who had first appeared to Edwin,
and since attended him with the extremest officiousness, endeavoured by
every artful blandishment to engage his attention, and rivet his
partiality. They exerted themselves to suppress the grossness,
inelegance and sensuality to which they had commonly been habituated,
and to cover the looseness of the passions with the veil of simplicity,
delicacy, and softness. As the music ceased, the master of the spectacle
came forth from his retreat. But his figure was no longer that which
bespoke the magician, and which Edwin had already seen. He appeared in
the form of a youth of that age in which the frolic insignificance of
childhood gives place to the eagerness, the enthusiasm and the engaging
manners of blooming manhood. His habit was that of a cupbearer. His
robes were of azure silk, and floated in graceful folds as he passed
along. The beauty of his person was worthy of the synod of the Gods. His
features had all the softness of woman without effeminacy; and in his
eye there sat a lambent fire which bespoke the man, without roughness,
and without ferocity. In one hand he bore a crystal goblet full of every
potent enchantment, and which rendered him who drank for ever a slave to
the most menial offices and the most wanton caprices of his seducer. In
the other hand he held loosely, and as if it had been intended merely to
give a completeness to his figure and a gracefulness to his step, that
irresistible wand by which the majesty of man had often been degraded,
and the reluctant spirit had been conjured up from the caverns of the
abyss. The goblet he delivered to the elder nymph, who presented it,
with inimitable grace and a bewitching condescension, to the gallant
shepherd.

Edwin had the fortitude of a hero, but he had also the feelings of a
man. He could not but be struck with the beauty of the nymphs, he could
not but be surprised with the profuseness of the entertainment, and the
richness of the preparations. The soul of Edwin was full of harmony. It
had been one of his earliest and most ruling passions. No shepherd
excelled him in the skill of the pipe, no shepherd with a sweeter or
more sonorous voice could carol the rustic lay. Even the figure assumed
by Roderic, his garb, his step, his gesture had something in them of
angelic and celestial without the blaze of divinity, and without the
awfulness that surrounds the godlike existencies, that sometimes
condescend to visit this sublunary scene. The shepherd took into his
hand the fatal bowl.

In the midst however of all that was attractive, and all that was
unknown, Edwin had not forgotten the business that had brought him
hither and the lessons of Madoc. The visage of Imogen, ever present to
his soul, suggested these salutary reflections. By her assistance he
strengthened all his resolutions, and gave vigour to the heroism of his
mind. Through the memory of Imogen he derived a body, and communicated a
visible form to the precepts of rectitude; and virtue wore all those
charms that had the most uncontroled empire in his bosom. Half way to
his lips he raised the cup of vice, and inexorable fate sat smiling on
the brim. He paused; he hesitated. By an irresistible impulse of
goodness he withdrew the fatal draught. He shed the noxious composition
upon the ground, and hurled from him with indignation the vessel in
which it had been contained.

Roderic beheld the scene with deep emotion, and was agitated by turns
with a thousand passions. He saw the issue with confusion, despondence
and fury. The roseat smiles of the cupbearer vanished; and, without the
notice and consent of his mind, his limbs resumed their wonted form, and
his features confirmed the suspicions of the shepherd, that he was now
confronted with his mortal enemy. Thrice the magician invoked the spirit
of his mother, and thrice he conjured the goblins, the most potent that
ever mix in the mortal scene. He lifted the wand in his hand. It was the
fiery ordeal that summons human character to the severest trial. It was
the _judgment of God_ in which the lots are devoutly committed to
the disposal of heaven, and the enthroned Divinity, guided by his
omniscience of the innocence of the brave, or the guilt of the
presumptuous, points the barbed spear, and gives a triple edge to the
shining steel. If the shepherd had one base and earth-born particle in
his frame, if his soul confessed one sordid and sensual desire, now was
the time in which for his prospects to be annihilated and his reputation
blotted for ever, and the state and empire of his rival to be fixed
beyond the power of human machinations to shake or subvert it.
"Presumptuous swain!" cried the sorcerer, "what folly, what unmeaning
rashness has brought you within the circle of my incantations? Know that
from them no mortal has escaped; that by them every swain, whom
adventurousness, ignorance, or stratagem has introduced within these
limits, has been impelled to assume the savage form, and to herd with
the most detestable of brutes. Let then thy foolhardiness pay the
penalty which my voice has ever annexed to it. Hence to thy fellows! Go,
and let their hated form bely the reason thou shalt still retain, and
thy own voice affright thee, when thou shalt groan under irremediable
misery!"

The incantation that had never yet failed of its hated purpose was
pronounced in vain. Edwin had heard it unappalled. He wore the amulet of
Madoc. He opposed to it the unconquered shield of spotless innocence.
Even in the midst of the lordly despotism and the imperious haughtiness
of his rival, he had been conscious to the triumph which nothing but the
calmness of fortitude and the serenity of virtue can inspire. He was
mindful of the precepts of the Druid. While Roderic was overwhelmed with
disappointment and despair, he seized the wand of the magician, and with
irresistible vigour wrenched it from his hand. He struck it with
violence upon the ground, and it burst into a thousand shivers. The
castle rocked over his head. Those caverns, which for revolving years
had served to hide the iniquity and the cruelty of their possessor,
disclosed their secret horrors. The whole stupendous pile seemed rushing
to the ground. A flood of lightning streamed across the scene. A peal of
thunder, deafening and tremendous, followed it. All now was vacancy. Not
a trace of those costly scenes and that magnificent architecture
remained. The heaven over-canopied the head of Edwin. The clouds were
dissipated. The light of innumerable stars gave grandeur to the scene.
And the silver moon communicated a milder lustre, and created a softer
shade. Roderic and his train, full of pusillanimity and consternation,
had fled from the direful scene, and vanished like shadows at the rising
of the sun.

No mortal, but our lovers, had ever entered the enchanted mansion
without having their characters disgraced, and their hearts thronged
with all those hateful and dissolute passions, which distinguished the
band of Roderic. No mortal was there, but our lovers, of the numerous
inhabitants of this bad edifice, who had not shrunk from the earthquake
and the solemnities that accompanied its sub-version. Edwin and Imogen
were alone. The shepherdess had listened to all the horrors of the scene
with a gloomy kind of satisfaction. "What new wonders," cried she, "are
now to be disclosed? What purpose are they intended to answer! The
amendment, or the destruction of my betrayer? But it is well. Though the
elements mix in inextricable confusion, though the earth be destroyed,
yet has innocence no cause to fear. Alas, though I myself should be
buried in the ruin, why should I apprehend, or why lament it? I was
happy; untaintedly, uninterruptedly happy. But I am miserable. I am
confined here in a loathsome, detested prison. Even my conduct is shut
up with difficulties, and my bosom disquieted with the conflict of
seeming duties. Even Edwin, the swain to whom my heart was united, and
from whose memory my integrity derived new strength is corrupted,
depraved and base. Let then destruction come. I will not lament the
being cut off in the bloom of youth. I will not shed one tear, or feel
one fond regret, but for the calamity and disappointment of my parents."

But however the despair of Imogen armed her courage against the
concussions of nature, she yet felt that delicacy of constitution which
characterises the most lovely of her sex, and that amiable timidity
which often accompanies the most invincible fortitude. When the thunder
roared with so fearful violence, when the mansion burst in ruins over
her head, she stood, trembling and breathless, at the tumult around her.
Her safety was the first object of the attention of Edwin; and when she
recovered her recollection she found herself in the arms of her lover.
"_My fair one, my Imogen_," cried he, "have I recovered you through
so many obstacles, and in the midst of so numerous dangers? Oh, how must
our affection, the purest, brightest, that ever lighted a human breast,
be endeared by our mutual calamities! But virtue is ever triumphant,
virtue is never deserted of the watchful care of heaven. My trials, my
lovely shepherdess, have been feeble indeed, when compared with yours.
Your integrity is unrivalled, and your innocence has surpassed all that
the bards have sung in their immortal lays. Come then, oh, dearer, far
dearer than ever to this constant heart, come to my arms! Let delay be
banished. Let the veil of virgin bashfulness be laid aside. And let us
repair together to the presence of your parents to ask an united
blessing."

While Edwin thus poured forth the raptures of his heart, Imogen turned
towards him a languid eye, full of soft and silent reproach. She retired
from him with involuntary horror. "No, shepherd," cried she, and waved
her hand with graceful indignation. "Like you I approve the justice of
the Gods in the banishment of Roderic. But I think that justice would
have been more complete, had it included in its vindictive appearance
the punishment of the base, degenerate Edwin. Unworthy Edwin, to how
vile and earth born sentiments has your heart been conscious! But go.
Hence from my sight! The very spectacle of that form which I had learned
to love is mildew and contagion to my eyes. Oh, Edwin, for your sake I
will distrust every attractive form and every ingenuous appearance. The
separation, my swain, is hard. The arts of Roderic came not near my
soul, but your baseness has fixed an indelible wound. But think
not--cherish not the fond mistake--that I will ever forget your
ungenerousness in the hour of my distress and forlornness, or receive
that serpent to my heart again."

As she pronounced these words, she hastened to fly from her imaginary
enemy. Edwin detained her by a gentle violence. With much intreaty and a
thousand soft blandishments, he wrung from her the story of her
indignation. He related to her the tale of Madoc, and told her of the
magic arts of his rival. He fully explained the scene of the pretended
repentance of Roderic, and the seduction he had attempted to practise
under the form of Edwin. As she listened to the wondrous story, Imogen
trembled at the unknown dangers with which she had been environed, and
admired more than ever the omnipotence of that virtue which had been
able to lead her safely through them all. The conviction she received of
the rectitude and fidelity of Edwin was to her, like the calm breath of
zephyr, which succeeds the tremendous storm upon the surface of the
ocean; and like that sovereign balm, which the sage Druids pour into the
wounds of the shepherd, and restore him at once to salubrity and vigour.
The amiable pair repaired with speed, and arrived with the dawn of the
sun to the cottage of Imogen. At the sight of them the venerable Edith
reared her drooping, desponding head, and the cheeks of the hoary father
were bedewed with the tears of transport. Such were the trials of our
lovers, and of correspondent worth was the reward they received. Long
did they dwell together in the vale of Clwyd, with that simplicity and
attachment which no scenes but those of pastoral life can know. Their
happiness was more sensible than that of the swains around them in that
they had known a reverse of fortune. And their virtue was the purer and
the more benevolent, in that they had passed through the fields of
trial; and that only through the ordeal of temptation, and an approved
fortitude, they had arrived to the unmixed felicity, and the
uninterrupted enjoyment they at length possessed.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Imogen, by William Godwin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IMOGEN ***

***** This file should be named 9152.txt or 9152.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/1/5/9152/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, David Garcia and Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
