Project Gutenberg's A Day with the Poet Burns, by Anonymous and Robert Burns

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Day with the Poet Burns

Author: Anonymous
        Robert Burns

Release Date: February 15, 2011 [EBook #35293]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAY WITH THE POET BURNS ***




Produced by Delphine Lettau and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 [Illustration: Rose Emblem]

 A Day with Burns.




_Painting by W. J. Neatby._

MY LUVE IS LIKE A RED, RED ROSE.

 My Luve is like a red, red rose
     That's newly sprung in June:
 My Luve is like the melodie
     That's sweetly played in tune

 As fair thou art, my bonnie lass,
     So deep in luve am I:
 And I will love thee still, my dear,
     Till a' the seas gang dry.


[Illustration: Lady with Rose]




 A DAY WITH THE POET BURNS




 LONDON
 HODDER & STOUGHTON




 _In the same Series._

 _Longfellow._
 _Tennyson._
 _Keats._
 _Browning._
 _Wordsworth._




A DAY WITH BURNS.

There are few figures which appeal more picturesquely to the imagination
than that of the ploughman-poet--swarthy, stalwart, black-eyed,--striding
along the furrow in the grey of a dreary dawn. Yet Burns was far from
being a mere uncultured peasant, nor did he come of peasant stock. His
forefathers were small yeoman farmers, who had risked themselves in the
cause of the Young Pretender: they had a certain amount of family pride
and family tradition. Robert Burns had been educated in small schools,
by various tutors, and by his father, a man of considerable attainments.
He had acquired some French and Latin, studied mensuration, and
acquainted himself with a good deal of poetry and many theological and
philosophical books.


_Painting by E. W. Haslehust._

    THE HOME OF BURNS.

    The man in hodden grey and rough top boots who
    might be seen going out on dusky mornings from
    his little farmstead of Ellisland near Dumfries.

[Illustration: Man on Horseback Leaving Farm]


So that the man who may be seen going out this dusky morning from his
little farmstead of Ellisland near Dumfries--the dark and taciturn man
in hodden grey and rough top boots--is not precisely a son of the soil.
He is a hard worker in the field by dint of necessity, but his strenuous
and impetuous mind is set upon other thoughts than the plough, as he
drives his share along the Nithsdale uplands. It is exactly the season
of the year that he delights in. "There is scarcely any earthly object,"
he has written, "which gives me more--I do not know if I should call
it pleasure, but something that exalts me, something that enraptures
me--than to walk in the sheltered side of a wood or high plantation on a
cloudy winter's day, and hear the stormy wind howling among the trees,
or raving over the plains.... I take a peculiar pleasure in the season
of winter, more than the rest of the year.... There is something that
raises the mind to a serious sublimity, favourable to everything great
and noble." And there is also something secretly akin to the poet's wild
and passionate soul. For this is not a happy man, but an embittered one,
and ready to "rail on Lady Fortune in good set terms." He takes the
storm-wind for an interpreter:


  'The sweeping blast, the sky o'ercast,'
      The joyless winter day,
  Let others fear, to me more dear
      Than all the pride of May:
  The tempest's howl, it soothes my soul,
      My griefs it seems to join;
  The leafless trees my fancy please,
      Their fate resembles mine!

  Thou Power Supreme, whose mighty scheme
      These woes of mine fulfil,
  Here firm I rest; they must be best,
      Because they are _Thy_ will!
  Then all I want--O do Thou grant
      This one request of mine!--
  Since to _enjoy_ Thou dost deny,
      Assist me to _resign_.


His brief meteoric reign of popularity in Edinburgh is now at an end:
from being a popular idol of society, caressed and fêted, he has been
let to sink back into his native obscurity. And, being poignantly proud,
he suffers accordingly. The consciousness of genius burns within him,
a flame that devours rather than illumines: and he finds vent for his
bitterness, as he treads the clogging fallow, in the immortal lines:
_A Man's a Man for a' that._


  Is there for honest poverty
      That hings his head, an' a' that;
  The coward-slave--we pass him by,
      We dare be poor for a' that!
          For a' that, an' a' that,
              Our toils obscure an' a' that,
          The rank is but the guinea's stamp,
              The Man's the gowd for a' that.

  What though on hamely fare we dine,
      Wear hoddin grey, an' a' that;
  Gie fools their silks, and knaves their wine,
      A Man's a Man for a' that,
          For a' that, an' a' that,
              Their tinsel show an' a' that;
          The honest man, tho' e'er sae poor,
              Is king o' men for a' that;

         *       *       *       *       *

  A prince can mak a belted knight,
      A marquis, duke, an' a' that;
  But an honest man's aboon his might,
      Gude faith, he mauna fa' that!
          For a' that, an' a' that,
              Their dignities an' a' that;
          The pith o' sense, an' pride o' worth,
              Are higher rank than a' that.

  Then let us pray that come it may
      (As come it will for a' that),
  That Sense and Worth, o'er a' the earth,
      Shall bear the gree an' a' that,
          For a' that, an' a' that;
              It's coming yet for a' that,
          That man to man, the world o'er,
              Shall brothers be for a' that.


Presently, however, the sweet influences of the clear air, the pleasant
smell of upturned earth, the wholesome sight and sounds of morning, soothe
the poet's rugged spirit: he becomes attuned to the calmer present, and
forgetful of the feverish past. Burns has never been given to depicting
the shows and forms of nature for their own sake: he only uses them as a
stage for the setting of a central human interest. In short, he "cares
little," it has been said, "for the natural picturesqueness in itself:
the moral picturesqueness touches him more nearly." And all sentient
life is dear to him--not human life alone. Hence, one sees him wince and
shrink, as his ploughshare destroys the daisy.


_Painting by Dudley Hardy._

THE MOUNTAIN DAISY.

  Wee, modest, crimson-tipped flower,
  Thou's met me in an evil hour,
  For I maun crush amang the stoure
      Thy slender stem:
  To spare thee now is past my power,
      Thou bonnie gem.

[Illustration: Evening Ploughing Scene]


  Wee, modest crimson-tipped flow'r,
  Thou'st met me in an evil hour;
  For I maun crush amang the stoure
      Thy slender stem:
  To spare thee now is past my pow'r,
      Thou bonie gem.

  Alas! it's no thy neibor sweet,
  The bonie lark, companion meet,
  Bending thee 'mang the dewy weet,
      Wi' spreckl'd breast!
  When upward-springing, blithe, to greet
      The purpling east.

  Cauld blew the bitter-biting north
  Upon thy early humble birth;
  Yet cheerfully thou glinted forth
      Amid the storm,
  Scarce rear'd above the parent-earth
      Thy tender form.

         *       *       *       *       *

  There, in thy scanty mantle clad,
  Thy snawie bosom sun-ward spread,
  Thou lifts thy unassuming head
      In humble guise;
  But now the share uptears thy bed,
      And low thou lies!

         *       *       *       *       *

  Ev'n thou who mourn'st the Daisy's fate,
  That fate is thine--no distant date;
  Stern Ruin's ploughshare drives elate,
      Full on thy bloom,
  Till crush'd beneath the furrow's weight
      Shall be thy doom!

                        (_To a Mountain Daisy._)


Or he becomes thoughtful and abstracted beyond his wont, after turning
up a mouse's nest with the plough; and sternly recalls his "gaudsman" or
ploughboy, who would kill the little creature out of pure thoughtlessness.
He muses upon the irony of fate: and the world is the richer for his
musings.


  Wee, sleeket, cowrin, tim'rous beastie,
  O, what a panic's in thy breastie!
  Thou need na start awa sae hasty,
      Wi' bickerin brattle!
  I wad be laith to run an' chase thee,
      Wi' murderin' pattle!

  Thou saw the fields laid bare and waste,
  An' weary winter coming fast,
  An' cozie here, beneath the blast,
      Thou thought to dwell--
  Till crash! the cruel coulter past
      Out thro' thy cell.

         *       *       *       *       *

  But, Mousie, thou art no thy lane,
  In proving foresight may be vain;
  The best-laid schemes o' mice an' men
      Gang aft agley,
  An' lea'e us nought but grief an' pain,
      For promised joy!

                         (_Lines to a Mouse._)


But nothing is too trivial to evade this large and universal sympathy
of his. "Not long ago, one morning, as I was out in the fields sowing
some grass seeds, I heard the burst of a shot from a neighbouring
plantation, and presently a poor little wounded hare came crippling by
me. You will guess my indignation at the inhuman fellow who could shoot
a hare at this season, when they all of them have young ones." It is on
record that he threatened to throw the culprit--a neighbouring farmer's
son--into the Nith to reward his inhumanity.


The ploughing is finished for the day, but the poet must now needs
betake himself to those official duties as an exciseman, which are
perhaps even less congenial to him than agricultural pursuits. He has
to cover some two hundred miles' riding every week; he is forced to
earn a scanty living for himself and his family, by incessant physical
and mental work. The iron has entered into his soul--here and there it
crops up in hard metallic outbursts: though for the most part, he is
unrivalled in spontaneous gaiety of song. And old sorrows come upon him
as he rides alone.... He considers the present time to be the happiest
of his life. He has an excellent wife, and bonnie bairns: friends many
and faithful: comparative immunity from financial troubles: a popularity
such as no other Scottish poet has attained; yet memories of the past
remain, which are never to be obliterated in oblivion. And chief among
these is the greatest sorrow that has befallen him--the loss of his one
true love, his cherished Highland Mary.


  Ye banks and braes and streams around
      The castle o' Montgomery!
  Green be your woods, and fair your flowers,
      Your waters never drumlie:
  There Simmer first unfald her robes,
      And there the langest tarry;
  For there I took the last Farewell
      O' my sweet Highland Mary.

  How sweetly bloom'd the gay, green birk,
      How rich the hawthorn's blossom,
  As underneath their fragrant shade
      I clasp'd her to my bosom!
  The golden Hours on angel wings,
      Flew o'er me and my Dearie;
  For dear to me, as light and life,
      Was my sweet Highland Mary.

         *       *       *       *       *

  O pale, pale now, those rosy lips,
      I aft hae kiss'd sae fondly!
  And clos'd for ay, the sparkling glance
      That dwalt on me sae kindly!
  And mouldering now in silent dust,
      That heart that lo'ed me dearly!
  But still within my bosom's core
      Shall live my Highland Mary.


Burns has been an easy and inconstant lover all his days: devoted,
for the nonce, to every girl he met. But Mary was on a pinnacle
apart--unequalled, irreplaceable; and still he is continually dreaming
of her--dreaming in tender and melodious verse.


_Painting by Dudley Hardy._

HIGHLAND MARY.

  The golden Hours, on angel wings,
      Flew o'er me and my Dearie,
  For dear to me as light and life
      Was my sweet Highland Mary.

[Illustration: Woman in Red]


  Thou ling'ring star, with less'ning ray,
      That lov'st to greet the early morn,
  Again thou usher'st in the day
      My Mary from my soul was torn.
  O Mary! dear departed shade!
      Where is thy place of blissful rest?
  See'st thou thy lover lowly laid?
      Hear'st thou the groans that rend his breast?

  That sacred hour can I forget,
      Can I forget the hallow'd grove,
  Where by the winding Ayr we met,
      To live one day of parting love!
  Eternity will not efface
      Those records dear of transports past,
  Thy image at our last embrace,
      Ah! little thought we 'twas our last!

                          (_To Mary in Heaven._)


But now, hard upon the scent of smugglers across the Nithsdale moors,
exchanging cheery greetings with cottagers here and there, the tramp of
his horse's hoofs inspires him to a gayer measure. The clouds, which
have overhung his mind all the forenoon, roll away: and his mercurial
spirit seizes any pleasure that the moment may afford. The nearest to
hand is the ready ripple of rhythm in light short songs that fairly
bubble over with gaiety. For there is nothing of the midnight oil about
Robert Burns--his poems come swiftly and spontaneously to him, as
naturally as music to a blackbird: they have indeed the same quality as
the carols of birds--careless, happy, tuneful. Any casual impression
sets our poet singing: the mere glance of a merry blue eye at a window,
and he is away on the praises of one immediately present lassie, or of
innumerable others absent.


  _Chorus_:--Green grow the rashes, O;
                Green grow the rashes, O;
             The sweetest hours that e'er I spend,
                Are spent among the lasses, O.

  There's nought but care on ev'ry han',
      In every hour that passes, O:
  What signifies the life o' man,
      An' 'twere na for the lasses, O.
                          Green grow, etc.

  The war'ly race may riches chase,
      And riches still may fly them, O;
  An' tho' at last they catch them fast,
      Their hearts can ne'er enjoy them, O.
                          Green grow, etc.

  But gie me a cannie hour at e'en
      My arms about my dearie, O;
  An' war'ly cares, and war'ly men,
      May a' gae tapsalteerie, O!
                          Green grow, etc.

  For you sae douce, ye sneer at this;
      Ye're nought but senseless asses, O:
  The wisest man the warl' e'er saw,
      He dearly lov'd the lasses, O.
                          Green grow, etc.

  Auld Nature swears, the lovely dears
      Her noblest work she classes, O:
  Her prentice han' she try'd on man,
      An' then she made the lasses, O.
                          Green grow, etc.


Sometimes a flower in the hedgerow opens out to him a new and exquisite
signification.


  My Luve is like a red red rose
      That's newly sprung in June;
  My Luve is like the melodie
      That's sweetly play'd in tune.

  As fair art thou, my bonie lass,
      So deep in luve am I;
  And I will luve thee still, my Dear,
      Till a' the seas gang dry.

  Till a' the seas gang dry, my Dear,
      An' the rocks melt wi' the sun;
  And I will luve thee still, my Dear,
      While the sands o' life shall run.

  And fare-thee-weel, my only Luve!
      And fare-thee-weel awhile!
  And I will come again, my Luve,
      Tho' 'twere ten thousand mile!


_Painting by Dudley Hardy._

O WERT THOU IN THE CAULD BLAST.

  O wert thou in the cauld blast,
      On yonder lea, on yonder lea;
  My plaidie to the angry airt,
      I'd shelter thee, I'd shelter thee;
  Or did misfortune's bitter storms
      Around thee blaw, around thee blaw,
  Thy bield should be my bosom,
      To share it a', to share it a'.

[Illustration: Man Protectively Embracing Woman]


Or, as he meets the wind--still bleak, though now it is midday,--a cold
wind charged with latent snow,--its chilly breaths are crystallized into
a very jewel of song.


  O wert thou in the cauld blast,
      On yonder lea, on yonder lea,
  My plaidie to the angry airt,
      I'd shelter thee, I'd shelter thee;
  Or did Misfortune's bitter storms
      Around thee blaw, around thee blaw,
  Thy bield should be my bosom,
      To share it a', to share it a'.

  Or were I in the wildest waste,
      Sae black and bare, sae black and bare,
  The desert were a Paradise,
      If thou wert there, if thou wert there;
  Or were I Monarch o' the globe,
      Wi' thee to reign, wi' thee to reign,
  The brightest jewel in my crown
      Wad be my Queen, wad be my Queen.


Presently he turns his horse's head towards Dumfries. It is market-day
in the town, and a score of friends give him clamorous welcome. They may
not fully appreciate Rob's mental equipments, but they greet him as the
best of good companions: and in a little while he forms the leading
spirit of some excited group, discussing matters social and political.
For Burns takes the keenest interest in current events: and, though most
of his poems may be of a more ephemeral interest, he is capable, when
deeply stirred, of expressing himself with a stern and lofty patriotism.
It may be inspired by the events of the present: it often is evoked by
glories of the past.


  Scots, wha hae wi' Wallace bled,
  Scots, wham Bruce has aften led,
  Welcome to your gory bed,
      Or to Victorie!
  Now's the day, and now's the hour;
  See the front o' battle lour;
  See approach proud Edward's power--
      Chains and Slaverie!

  Wha will be a traitor knave?
  Wha can fill a coward's grave?
  Wha sae base as be a Slave?
      Let him turn and flee!

         *       *       *       *       *

  Lay the proud Usurpers low!
  Tyrants fall in every foe!
  Liberty's in every blow!--
      Let us Do--or Die!!!


Seated in the inn among his cronies, "as market-days are wearing late,"
the dour and bitter looks of the poet are exchanged for glowing eyes and
laughing lips, while he recites some of the lines which he has wedded to
old and familiar melodies. As Moore, a little later, secured for the
Irish airs a world-wide reputation, by supplying them with words of a
more popular character than their own--so Burns re-wrote the songs of
his country. Thousands of people who never heard of "The Highland
Watch's Farewell" have carolled that melody to his delightful verses,


  My heart is sair--I dare na tell,
      My heart is sair for Somebody;
  I could wake a winter night
      For the sake o' Somebody:
          Oh-hon! for Somebody!
          Oh-hey! for Somebody!
  I could range the world around,
  For the sake o' Somebody.

  Ye Powers that smile on virtuous love,
      O, sweetly smile on Somebody!
  Frae ilka danger keep him free,
      And send me safe my Somebody!
          Oh-hon! for Somebody!
          Oh-hey! for Somebody!
  I wad do--what would I not?
  For the sake o' Somebody.


As time wears by, Burns pulls out a manuscript from his pocket, and
reads his latest poem to a hilarious audience: a very masterpiece, they
acclaim it. The legend and the scenery are awhile familiar to them: but
they have never heard the tale told thus before, as Burns has immortalized
it in "Tam o' Shanter."


  ... As bees flee hame wi' lades o' treasure,
  The minutes wing'd their way wi' pleasure:
  Kings may be blest, but Tam was glorious,
  O'er a' the ills o' life victorious!

      But pleasures are like poppies spread,
  You seize the flow'r, its bloom is shed;
  Or like the snow falls in the river,
  A moment white--then melts for ever;
  Or like the Borealis race,
  That flit ere you can point their place;
  Or like the Rainbow's lovely form
  Evanishing amid the storm.
  Nae man can tether Time nor Tide,
  The hour approaches Tam maun ride--
  That hour, o' night's black arch the key-stane,
  That dreary hour he mounts his beast in;
  And sic a night he takes the road in,
  As ne'er poor sinner was abroad in.

         *       *       *       *       *

      Weel mounted on his grey meare Meg
  (A better never lifted leg),
  Tam skelpit on thro' dub and mire,
  Despising wind, and rain, and fire;
  Whiles holding fast his guid blue bonnet,
  Whiles crooning o'er an auld Scots sonnet,
  Whiles glow'ring round wi' prudent cares,
  Lest bogles catch him unawares;
  Kirk-Alloway was drawing nigh,
  Whare ghaists and howlets nightly cry.

         *       *       *       *       *

  ... The lightnings flash from pole to pole,
  Near and more near the thunders roll,
  When glimmering thro' the groaning trees,
  Kirk-Alloway seemed in a bleeze,
  Thro' ilka bore the beams were glancing,
  And loud resounded mirth and dancing.

         *       *       *       *       *

  ... And, wow! Tam saw an unco sight!
      Warlocks and witches in a dance:
  Nae cotillion, brent-new frae France,
  But hornpipes, jigs, strathspeys, and reels,
  Put life and mettle in their heels.

                               (_Tam o' Shanter._)


But now it is time that Burns, like his hero, should take the homeward
road. He calls for his horse, parts from his boisterous comrades, and
rides out into the wintry evening. Nithsdale is a land of lovely sunsets:
and against the rose and gold of heaven, the poet sees the homely
cottage-smoke of earth, thin spirals of blue vapour, speaking of happy
hearths and labour ended. It is several years since Burns, standing with
Douglas Stewart upon the Braid Hills, declared that to him the worthiest
object in the whole bright morning landscape was the cluster of smoking
cottages. But still he regards them with affection and enjoyment: and
chiefly his eyes are bent towards that quiet homestead which holds his
own dear folk. All the peace which that stormy heart can find is set and
centred there: despite all previous fugitive fancies for Jessie, and
Peggie, and Phemie, and the rest, he has found calm happiness with his
Jean, the most devoted of wives.


  Of a' the airts the wind can blaw,
      I dearly like the west,
  For there the bonie lassie lives,
      The lassie I lo'e best:
  There's wild-woods grow, and rivers row,
      And mony a hill between:
  But day and night my fancy's flight
      Is ever wi' my Jean.

  I see her in the dewy flowers,
      I see her sweet and fair,
  I hear her in the tunefu' birds,
      I hear her charm the air:
  There's not a bonie flower that springs,
      By fountain, shaw, or green;
  There's not a bonie bird that sings,
      But minds me o' my Jean.


She comes out into the twilight to meet him, and his emotion shapes
itself, on the instant, into song.


  This is no my ain lassie,
      Fair tho' the lassie be;
  Weel ken I my ain lassie,
  Kind love is in her e'e.

  I see a form, I see a face,
  Ye weel may wi' the fairest place;
  It wants, to me, the witching grace,
      The kind love that's in her e'e.

  She's bonnie, blooming, straight, and tall,
  And lang has had my heart in thrall;
  And aye it charms my very saul,
      The kind love that's in her e'e.

  A thief sae pawkie is my Jean,
  To steal a blink, by a' unseen;
  But gleg as light are lovers' een,
      When kind love is in the e'e.

  It may escape the courtly sparks,
  It may escape the learnèd clerks;
  But weel the watching lover marks
      The kind love that's in her e'e.


The servants, sitting at the same table, according to Scottish farm
custom, share his simple evening meal: and subsequently, before the
children's bedtime, the master speaks with seriousness to his household,
and reads aloud some passages from the Holy Book.


  Their master's and their mistress's command,
    The younkers a' are warned to obey;
  And mind their labours wi' an eydent hand,
    An' ne'er, tho' out o' sight, to jauk or play;
  "And O! be sure to fear the Lord alway,
    "And mind your duty, duly, morn and night;
  "Lest in temptation's path ye gang astray,
    "Implore His counsel and assisting might:
  "They never sought in vain that sought the Lord aright."

         *       *       *       *       *

  Then homeward all take off their several way,
      The youngling cottagers retire to rest:
  The parent-pair their secret homage pay,
      And proffer up to Heaven the warm request,
  That He who stills the raven's clam'rous nest,
      And decks the lily fair in flow'ry pride,
  Would in the way His wisdom sees the best,
      For them and for their little ones provide;
  But chiefly, in their hearts with grace divine preside.

                             (_The Cotter's Saturday Night._)


_Painting by Dudley Hardy_.

JOHN ANDERSON, MY JO.

  John Anderson, my jo, John,
      We clamb the hill thegither;
  And monie a canty day, John,
      We've had wi' ane anither:
  Now we maun totter down, John,
      But hand in hand we'll go,
  And sleep thegither at the foot,
      John Anderson, my jo.

[Illustration: Two Old Men Chatting Happily]


Now, in the quiet house, the man at last is free to take up his pen.
He is writing hard, daily, or rather nightly: every week sees a parcel
of manuscript despatched to his publisher. The thoughts which have
crowded tumultuously upon him all day long, may at last be set down and
conserved: for poetry, as Wordsworth says, "is emotion remembered in
tranquillity." The grave and swarthy face bends above the paper in the
candlelight--varying expressions chase each other across the mobile
mouth and eyes. Sometimes the theme is one of poignant pathos.


  Ae fond kiss and then we sever;
  Ae fareweel, and then forever!
  Deep in heart-wrung tears I'll pledge thee,
  Warring sighs and groans I'll wage thee.
  Who shall say that Fortune grieves him,
  While the star of hope she leaves him?
  Me, nae cheerful twinkle lights me;
  Dark despair around benights me.

  I'll ne'er blame my partial fancy,
  Naething could resist my Nancy.
  But to see her was to love her;
  Love but her, and love for ever.
  Had we never lov'd sae kindly,
  Had we never lov'd sae blindly,
  Never met--or never parted,
  We had ne'er been broken-hearted!

  Fare-thee-weel, thou first and fairest!
  Fare-thee-weel, thou best and dearest!
  Thine be ilka joy and treasure,
  Peace, Enjoyment, Love, and Pleasure!
  Ae fond kiss, and then we sever!
  Ae fareweel, alas! for ever!
  Deep in heart-wrung tears I'll pledge thee,
  Warring sighs and groans I'll wage thee.

                       (_Parting Song to Clarinda._)


Again the music changes to the sprightliest vivaciousness, to tell how
"last May a braw wooer came down the lang glen," or to sing the "dainty
distress" of the maiden enamoured of _Tam Glen_.


  My heart is a-breaking, dear Tittie,
      Some counsel unto me come len',
  To anger them a' is a pity,
      But what will I do wi' Tam Glen?

  I'm thinking, wi' sic a braw fellow,
      In poortith I might mak a fen';
  What care I in riches to wallow,
      If I mauna marry Tam Glen!

  There's Lowrie the Laird o' Dumeller--
      "Gude-day to you"--brute! he comes ben:
  He brags and he braws o' his siller,
      But when will he dance like Tam Glen!

  My Minnie does constantly deave me,
      And bids me beware o' young men;
  They flatter, she says, to deceive me,
      But wha can think sae o' Tam Glen!

  My daddie says, gin I'll forsake him,
      He'll gie me gude hunder marks ten;
  But, if it's ordain'd I maun take him,
      O wha will I get but Tam Glen!

  Yestreen at the Valentine's dealing,
      My heart to my mou gied a sten;
  For thrice I drew ane without failing,
      And thrice it was written "Tam Glen!"

  The last Halloween I was waukin
      My droukit sark-sleeve, as ye ken,
  His likeness came up the house staukin,
      And the very grey breeks o' Tam Glen!

  Come, counsel, dear Tittie! don't tarry;
      I'll gie ye my bonnie black hen,
  Gif ye will advise me to marry
      The lad I lo'e dearly, Tam Glen!


But here comes a knock at the door, to stop the flow of inspiration: it
is not an unwelcome visitor, but an old friend, who, returning after
many years from foreign parts, has learned of "Rob's" amazing leap into
fame. Strangers, drawn by curiosity and admiration, are not infrequent
visitors: "It was something to have dined or supped in the company of
Burns." But this is a different matter: and the warm impulsive heart
responds to it, in words which have never been forgotten.


  Should auld acquaintance be forgot,
      And never brought to mind?
  Should auld acquaintance be forgot,
      And auld lang syne!

           For auld lang syne, my dear,
               For auld lang syne,
           We'll tak a cup o' kindness yet,
               For auld lang syne.

  And surely ye'll be your pint-stowp!
      And surely I'll be mine!
  And we'll tak a cup o' kindness yet,
      For auld lang syne.

  We twa hae run about the braes,
      And pou'd the gowans fine;
  But we've wander'd mony a weary fitt,
      Sin' auld lang syne.

  We twa hae paidl'd i' the burn,
      Frae morning sun till dine;
  But seas between us braid hae roar'd
      Sin' auld lang syne.


It is late, very late, when the visitor departs: the stars are frosty,
the ground hard. The spell of newly-roused remembrances lies heavy still
upon Burns's heart: and as he turns to rest, and sees the peaceful
sleeping forms of his wife and little children, tender and calm desires
well up within him. He can conceive no higher happiness than comes of a
serene old age, in the company of those dear ones: and a picture rises
before him of old folk gently descending to a longer rest, side by side
together.


  John Anderson, my jo, John,
      When we were first acquent;
  Your locks were like the raven,
      Your bonie brow was brent;
  But now your brow is beld, John,
      Your locks are like the snaw;
  But blessings on your frosty pow,
      John Anderson, my jo.

  John Anderson, my jo, John,
      We clamb the hill thegither;
  And mony a cantie day, John,
      We've had wi' ane anither:
  Now we maun totter down, John,
      And hand in hand we'll go,
  And sleep thegither at the foot,
      John Anderson, my jo.

[Illustration: Rose Emblem]


  _Printed by Percy Lund, Humphries & Co., Ltd.,
  Bradford and London._




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE


 The words belore and bedtine were changed to before and bedtime in the
 phrase:

   before the children's bedtime

 The word divnie was corrected to divine in the line:

   But chiefly, in their hearts with grace divine preside.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Day with the Poet Burns, by 
Anonymous and Robert Burns

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A DAY WITH THE POET BURNS ***

***** This file should be named 35293-8.txt or 35293-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/2/9/35293/

Produced by Delphine Lettau and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
