The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Journal of Lieut. John L. Hardenbergh of
the Second New York Continental Regiment from May 1 to October 3, 1779, in
General Sullivan's Campaign Against the Western Indians, by John Leonard
Hardenbergh, et al, Edited by John S. Clark


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Journal of Lieut. John L. Hardenbergh of the Second New York Continental Regiment from May 1 to October 3, 1779, in General Sullivan's Campaign Against the Western Indians
       With an Introduction, Copious Historical Notes, and Maps of the Battle-field of Newtown and Groveland Ambuscade


Author: John Leonard Hardenbergh

Editor: John S. Clark

Release Date: June 7, 2010  [eBook #32733]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JOURNAL OF LIEUT. JOHN L.
HARDENBERGH OF THE SECOND NEW YORK CONTINENTAL REGIMENT FROM MAY 1 TO
OCTOBER 3, 1779, IN GENERAL SULLIVAN'S CAMPAIGN AGAINST THE WESTERN
INDIANS***


E-text prepared by Jeannie Howse and Friend and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page
images generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original maps.
      See 32733-h.htm or 32733-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/32733/32733-h/32733-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/32733/32733-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/journaloflieutjo00hardrich


Transcriber's Note:

      Inconsistent hyphenation and archaic spellings in the
      original document have been preserved.

      Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. For
      a complete list, please see the end of this document.

      This work includes parts of journals of Maj. Erkuries
      Beatty, Thomas Grant, George Grant, and Col. Henry
      Dearborn.





COLLECTIONS

OF

CAYUGA COUNTY

HISTORICAL SOCIETY.


NUMBER ONE.

1879.




THE JOURNAL

OF

LIEUT. JOHN L. HARDENBERGH

OF THE

SECOND NEW YORK CONTINENTAL REGIMENT

FROM MAY 1 TO OCTOBER 3, 1779,

IN GENERAL SULLIVAN'S CAMPAIGN

AGAINST THE

Western Indians

With an introduction, copious Historical Notes, and Maps of the
Battle-field of Newtown and Groveland Ambuscade

BY GEN'L JOHN S. CLARK

And parts of other Journals never before published.

ALSO A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

BY REV. CHARLES HAWLEY, D.D.

President of the Society.






Auburn, N.Y.
1879.

TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY COPIES.

Number 7




KNAPP & PECK,
Book, Job and Commercial Printers,
AUBURN, N.Y.




CONTENTS.


                                                           Pages.

BIOGRAPHICAL,                                             7 to 19

INTRODUCTION TO JOURNALS,                                20 to 22

BATTLE OF NEWTOWN, MAP,                                  44 to --

HARDENBERGH'S JOURNAL AND NOTES,                         23 to 59

GENERAL JAMES CLINTON'S MARCH,                           60 to --

BEATTY'S JOURNAL AND NOTES,                              61 to 68

GROVELAND AMBUSCADE, MAP,                                50 to --

EXPEDITION AGAINST THE CAYUGAS,                          69 to 70

THOMAS GRANT'S JOURNAL AND NOTES,                        70 to 73

GEORGE GRANT'S JOURNAL AND NOTES,                        73 to 75

COLONEL DEARBORN'S MARCH,                                76 to 77

DEARBORN'S JOURNAL AND NOTES,                            77 to 81

INDIAN TOWNS DESTROYED,                                  82 to 87

LIST OF JOURNALS AND NARRATIVES,                         88 to 94




BIOGRAPHICAL.


John Leonard Hardenbergh, the author of the following Journal, was a
native of Rosendale, Ulster County, in the Province of New York, born
in the year 1748. He was the son of Leonard and Rachel Hardenbergh,
and the youngest of seven children. The family name is one of the
oldest in the State, and is prominent both in its colonial and
revolutionary annals. As early as 1644, Arnoldus van Hardenbergh a
"free merchant" emigrated from Holland to New Amsterdam "with a cargo
of wares for sale in the colony." He was soon after selected as one of
the original Nine Men of New Netherland, and served in this board from
1647 to 1650.[1] He was followed in, or about, the year 1652, by his
brother Johannes van Hardenbergh, also a merchant from Amsterdam, who
at this date was purchaser of "a house, lot and garden" on Manhattan
Island. (Calendar, Hist. MSS. in office of the Secretary of State,
Albany, Part I, vol. iii).

The branch of the family that was subsequently settled at Rosendale,
is traced to the year 1706, when Johannes Hardenbergh, with six
others, obtained from the crown of Great Britain a grant of land which
comprised, as computed at the time, 1,500,000 acres, located in
Northern Ulster, then including a portion of the present county of
Sullivan,--the western boundary extending to, or near the head of, the
Delaware river. The terminal syllable of the name, _bergh_, indicates
that the earlier ancestors in Holland were from the hills; and it was
quite natural that their descendants should have found permanent
location in the hilly districts of Shendaken and Shawangunk,
stretching westward from the valley of the Hudson; neither is it
surprising that they should have loved freedom and have given their
best efforts for its establishment in their adopted land.

At the outbreak of the Revolution, Col. Johannes Hardenbergh, Jr. was
placed at the head of the Committee of Safety for Ulster
County--Kingston, its chief town, being at the time the seat of the
New York Provincial Congress of which he was also a member. He had
ranked as Colonel in the English colonial service, and been active in
military affairs as early as 1748, when Sir William Johnson was in
command of the New York troops for the defence of the frontier against
the French and Indians. He was also given command by the Provincial
Congress of one of the earliest regiments raised for the immediate
defence of the Hudson above the Highlands, at the opening of the war
of Independence, and from his experience and position was enabled to
render distinguished service at that critical period. In 1786, three
years after the return of peace, he removed from his farm in Rosendale
to New Brunswick, N.J., to spend the remnant of his days with his son,
Rev. Dr. Jacob R. Hardenbergh, the first President of Rutger's
College.

Leonard Hardenbergh, a younger brother of Col. Johannes, Jr., and the
father of the subject of this sketch, died July 7, 1776, only three
days after the adoption of the Declaration of Independence, and as his
neighbors of the hardy yeomanry of Ulster, were leaving their harvests
ungathered and marching to the defence of Fort Montgomery, one of the
principal fortifications guarding the passes of the Hudson. In the
official returns for the same month (July) the name of John L.
Hardenbergh appears as First Lieutenant in the Second New York Militia
under command of Col. Morris Graham, and assigned to the Brigade of
Gen. George Clinton, who had remained in the Continental Congress to
vote for the Declaration, when he hastened home to his command. Having
served several months in this regiment raised under special call,
Hardenbergh was commissioned Nov. 21, 1776, First Lieutenant in the
Second New York Continental Regiment, under Col. Rudolphus Ritzema,[2]
who was superseded Nov. 30, 1776, by the appointment of Col. Philip
Van Courtlandt, a gallant officer and a personal friend of Washington
whose confidence he shared to an unusual degree.[3] The regiment had
the previous month been in the battle of White Plains, under
Lieutenant-Col. Weissenfels, where it did some hard fighting; and was
ordered by Washington to Fishkill for the winter, to be recruited and
disciplined, and thus ready for active service in the Spring. But few
enlistments, however, were obtained, though several recruiting parties
were sent out for the purpose; and in the Spring of 1777, it was
ordered to Peekskill, a point for the collection of military stores,
and where at this time large quantities had been gathered under
protection of General McDougall's brigade. Soon after, a fleet of ten
British ships or transports appeared in Peekskill Bay, and landed a
force of five hundred men with four pieces of artillery, which
compelled Gen. McDougall, who had scarcely half that number of troops,
to retreat to Gallows Hill, about ten miles in the rear, leaving what
stores could not be removed, in the hands of the enemy, who remained
in possession of the town until McDougall was reinforced, when they
retired to their ships and returned to New York.

After several weeks of hard and perilous service, Col. Van Courtlandt
with his regiment, was ordered to Albany and thence to the relief of
Fort Stanwix, then besieged by Colonel St. Leger with a party of
Indians; but on information that the enemy had retired, he joined
General Poor, then on the advance to Stillwater, to whose brigade the
regiment became attached, and thus made a part of General Arnold's
command, forming a portion of the left wing in the first battle of
Stillwater, which was fought on the 19th of September. The loss of
killed and wounded of the Second New York was two out of eleven, which
was a larger proportion than of any other regiment engaged, the next
largest being that of Col. Cilley's First New Hampshire, which was one
out of seven, all of General Poor's Brigade.[4] At the second battle,
which occurred on the 7th of October, the regiment sustained its
reputation for determined bravery and hard fighting, and thus bore an
honorable part in the most important engagement, thus far, of the war,
the results of which changed the whole aspect of the American cause.

After the battle of Stillwater, which compelled the surrender of
Burgoyne, and rendered fruitless the previous successes of the enemy
along the Hudson, the regiment returned to Fishkill, and soon joined
the army under Washington, then confronted by the British forces under
General Howe, in the vicinity of Philadelphia. It shared the
privations and sufferings of the terrible winter encampment at Valley
Forge, (1777-8) the march to which of the half naked, half-starved,
shoeless army might be tracked in blood through the December snows. It
appears from an orderly book[5] found among the papers of Colonel,
afterwards Gen. Henry Dearborn, also in the Sullivan expedition, that
at Valley Forge, Hardenbergh was Lieutenant and Adjutant of his
regiment and often served as Adjutant of the Day at Head Quarters. The
whole encampment consisted of about eleven thousand troops; and when
it was broken up the following Spring, upwards of three thousand men
unfit for duty were left behind, under charge of Colonel Van
Courtlandt, while his regiment proceeded with the main army, and
participated in the battle of Monmouth, June 28, 1778, winning
commendation for bravery and good behavior in that hotly contested
engagement.

While at camp with the main army at White Plains the same season, the
Second New York Regiment was sent to guard the frontiers in Ulster
County against the depredations of the Indians under Brant, who had
already destroyed several houses and murdered men, women and children.
It remained in the neighborhood of Laghawack, on this duty, during the
winter of 1778-79; and in the Spring while on the march to surprise
Brant stationed on the Delaware with about one hundred and fifty
Indians, an express from General Washington overtook the regiment with
orders to proceed to Fort Penn, there to await orders from General
Sullivan. It is at this point that the Journal of Lieutenant
Hardenbergh, herewith published, dates.

On its return from the Expedition, the regiment proceeded to Easton,
Pennsylvania, and from thence to Morristown, N.J., where it was hutted
for the winter. In the spring of 1780 it was sent to Fort Edward for
temporary service, and in June proceeded to West Point, and in
expectation of an attack from the enemy, was posted on the mountain
west of Fort Putnam. This proved, however, to be a feint to cover an
invasion of the Jerseys. During the treason of Arnold the regiment was
at Tappan, whither Andre was taken after his capture, and where he was
tried and executed.

From the autumn of 1776 to the winter of 1780, Lieutenant Hardenbergh
was identified with the Second New York, sharing its fortunes, and
participating in the important battles in which it was engaged, when
the five New York regiments were consolidated into two, in which
arrangement he fell into that class of officers who were retained in
service but not attached to any battalion. But in July 1782 he was
made Captain of Levies under Lieut. Col. Weissenfels, in which
capacity he continued for the remainder of the war.

In the summer of 1781, he is accredited in the chronicles of the time,
with a daring exploit, which indicates the kind of service in which he
was engaged after he ceased to be attached to the Second New York. A
body of three hundred Indians and ninety Tories under Captain
Cauldwell, an officer in Butler's Rangers, appeared on the frontier of
Ulster County, in the neighborhood of Warwasing, having passed
unobserved the stockade forts at the north of Lackawaxen and
Neversink, expecting to surprise the settlements and repeat the scenes
of massacre which had desolated other regions in the vicinity. Captain
Hardenbergh, at the time, was stationed with a guard of nine[6] men,
near the house of J.G. Hardenbergh,[7] and at a point some three
miles distant from a small fortress at Warwasing. As the enemy passed
the fort just before the break of day they were fired upon by the
sentinel. The report alarmed Captain Hardenbergh, who with his little
band proceeded immediately in direction of the sound, and on his way
met the enemy directing their course toward the settlement, which is
now called Rochester. Nothing daunted he gave them battle; but being
closely pressed he soon discovered that his retreat was cut off by a
party of Indians who had gained his rear. In this dilemma the Captain
resorted to stratagem which admirably answered the purpose. It was as
yet barely light, and turning aside in the woods with the little
company, to conceal the smallness of his force, he took off his hat
and huzzaed with all his might, at the same time advancing toward a
small stone house near by, and in face of the Indians, who supposing
that the troops were coming up from Pinebush, took the alarm and
skulked off in every direction. But no sooner had Hardenbergh and his
company reached the house, when the Indians discovering the ruse,
poured a shower of bullets after them just as they were safely within
the door. Here they found six militia men besides, making sixteen in
all, and being well armed, made all preparations to hold their
position against the invaders. With an ax they broke a series of
loop-holes in the rear of the house and through the sides of the steep
roof, thus commanding its approaches on all sides. The enemy advanced
several times to carry the house by assault, but as some of their
number were doomed to fall at every onset, they as often gave way, and
at length were compelled to relinquish the attack, leaving thirteen
dead upon the field. In the meanwhile the firing had aroused the
neighborhood, and Col. Henry Pawling with a detachment of State
Levies, stationed about six miles from the scene of action, hastened
forward, but arrived too late to have a brush with the enemy, and only
in season to capture a straggler, who had lingered for fruit, near an
apple orchard. Cauldwell was in full retreat, and though pursued by
Colonel Pawling with his regiment of Levies and Colonel Cantine with a
regiment of State Militia, for some days, finally escaped. The enemy,
however, suffered severely and besides losing a number of men, were so
near starvation that they were obliged to eat their dogs before they
reached Niagara, the point from which they had started on their errand
of pillage and murder. This was the last attempt of the kind made upon
the frontier settlements, which had suffered so severely from repeated
invasions of Indians and Tories during the Revolution. It was designed
to be a finishing blow upon that region, and as we have seen, it was
largely due to the bravery and military tact of Captain Hardenbergh
that the stroke was averted.[8]

At the close of the war, during the entire period of which he had been
in active service, he returned to his native place, to share the
fruits of Independence with peace, which he had done so much to
secure. He had justly acquired the reputation of a brave and skillful
officer, and his name still appears on the Roll of Honor in the
cabinet of Revolutionary memorials kept at Washington's Head-Quarters
at Newburgh. He was for a time on Washington's staff; and his whole
record is that of a devoted patriot and a faithful soldier, at a time
when the country needed every heart and hand for its defence.

In 1789, the Indian titles to most of the lands in the State of New
York, having been extinguished, the Legislature provided for the
survey of a certain portion of these lands, already set apart for the
soldiers of the State, who had served in the war of the Revolution.
This tract embracing 1,680,000 acres, and denominated the Military
Tract, included the present counties of Onondaga, Cayuga, Seneca and
Cortland, also the larger part of Tompkins with portions of Oswego and
Wayne. It was surveyed into twenty-eight townships, containing each
one hundred lots of six hundred acres. Each private soldier and
non-commissioned officer had one lot assigned him. The officers
received larger shares in proportion to their rank. Colonel
Hardenbergh was appointed on this survey, in immediate association
with Moses Dewitt, brother of Simeon Dewitt, at the time
Surveyor-General of the State, and was occupied in this work during
the years 1789-90. His field books, neatly kept and carefully
preserved, are now in possession of the Cayuga County Historical
Society, one of several valuable donations from the family to the
Society's archives. The lands which fell to him on the assignment of
military bounties, were located in Onondaga, disposing of which, he
purchased lot Forty-Seven, within the present limits of Auburn, from
Ogden and Josiah Hoffman, and originally patented to Captain Thomas
Doughty also of the Second New York. The deed bears date Feb. 16,
1792, and the consideration was one hundred and eighty pounds N.Y.
currency. Colonel Hardenbergh was familiar as a surveyor with its
comparative advantages, for a settlement, and especially with its
superior water power, and had already indicated the lot on his map of
survey as a "good mill site." He came on to his lands the same year
(1792) bringing with him several negro slaves, and built a bark
shelter near the site of the present Hardenbergh mansion, and on the
spot where the City Hall now stands. He made a visit in the fall or
winter of that year, to Rosendale and was united in marriage to Mary
Bevier, also of one of the most substantial and prominent families of
that part of the State, and soon after returned to make further
preparations for a permanent home. This year also he received a
commission as Major in the Battalion of Herkimer County, having
previously been appointed a Captain in a Battalion for Montgomery,
which until 1791 included the counties of Herkimer and Tioga. He was
also appointed, in 1793, by Governor George Clinton, his old Brigade
commander on the Hudson in the beginning of the war, an Associate
Justice for Herkimer County, and designated the same year as one of
the three Commissioners to lay out and construct the Genesee Turnpike.
His last military promotion was that of Lieutenant Colonel of a
regiment of Militia in Onondaga County, in April, 1796, by Governor
John Jay, and gave him the title of Colonel, by which he is most
commonly known in the early annals of Auburn.

In 1794 he had completed a saw and grist mill, on the Owasco Outlet,
near where the Stone Mill now stands, opposite the junction of Genesee
and Market Streets, thus forming the nucleus of a settlement known as
Hardenbergh's Corners until 1805, when it took the name of Auburn.

The death of his wife occurred in the Spring, a little more than a
year after their marriage, leaving an infant daughter, and before his
arrangements were complete for bringing them to their new home in the
wilderness.

In 1795 a colony of ten families from Gettysburgh, Pa., made a
settlement about three miles up the Owasco Lake, and at once organized
a Reformed Protestant Dutch Church, which subsequently took corporate
form and title, Sept. 23, 1796, at a meeting held at the house of
Colonel Hardenbergh, who identified himself with this society in the
faith and order of which he had been educated. His copy of the New
Testament with the Psalms in a single volume, and in the Dutch
language, is still preserved; and bearing on the fly-leaf, under his
own signature, the same date with that of his first army commission,
it shows the signs of ordinary use not only, but the unmistakable
marks of the exposure and hardships incident to a soldier's life.

His second marriage, in 1796, was with Martina, daughter of Roeliff
Brinkerhoff, one of the first deacons of the Owasco church, and the
names of his two children by this marriage, Maria and John Herring,
appear on the baptismal register of that church for the years 1798 and
1800. The only son, John H. Hardenbergh, was in subsequent years one
of Auburn's most prominent and public spirited citizens. As the heir
to the landed estate of his father, originally covering a large
section of the territory now occupied by the city, his wise and
generous policy toward purchasers of lots and tenants, contributed
much to its growth and prosperity. The lot, in the centre of the city,
on which stands the First Presbyterian church, one of the most
substantial and elegant structures of the kind in the State, if not in
the country, was his gift, before he had become of age; as were also
eight acres of land comprised in the spacious grounds occupied by the
Auburn Theological Seminary. These and similar deeds of generous
foresight, together with an amiable character and a blameless
Christian life, preserve in esteem and honor the name so closely
identified with the origin of our favored city.

Colonel Hardenbergh died after a brief illness, on the 25th of April,
1806, in the 59th year of his age, and was buried with military honors
in the North Street Cemetery. The Rev. David Higgins, then pastor of
the Congregational Church of Aurelius, and the founder of the First
Presbyterian Church of Auburn, preached the funeral sermon from the
Epistle to the Philippians, iii; 20, 21: _For our conversation is in
heaven; from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious body according to the working whereby he is able
even to subdue all things unto himself._ The horse bearing the sword
and uniform of the deceased officer, was led by Harry Freeman, one of
the Colonel's slaves to whom he had given his freedom. A long
procession of military and citizens followed the remains to the grave.
The whole scene was imposing, as a sincere tribute of the respect and
esteem cherished for the man who had braved the perils of the then
recent struggle for national independence, and with generous hand had
laid the foundations, in the wilderness, of a well-ordered community.
He had passed thirty years of his life as a soldier, a surveyor, and a
pioneer settler, and had occupied the most responsible trusts in the
rising settlement which owed to him its origin. He was moreover a
great favorite with his fellow pioneers, and with all who were seeking
new homes in the immediate vicinity, ambitious rather for the thrift
of the place than for personal gains, or the promotion of selfish
ends--forward and generous in all plans to establish religion,
education, justice and good order, with whatever tended to the
permanent prosperity and true character of the infant settlement. He
was not always careful of his own interests, and was sometimes imposed
upon by those in whom he confided as if they were as trustworthy as
himself. If a neighbor wanted a bushel or two of grain, he might be
trusted to measure it himself and render his own account. In this way
and in others characteristic of him, he doubtless now and then lost
pecuniarily, but they gave him a strong hold upon the better and
larger class of his co-pioneers, and a leading influence at this
forming period in our history. Indeed, Auburn owes very much to the
spirit, foresight and enterprise of its founder.

In person, Colonel Hardenbergh was tall, of swarthy complexion, robust
frame, and is said to have been a most commanding figure on horseback,
in his regimentals, on military occasions. He took an active part in
the politics of the day, and was decided and open in the expression of
his opinions. He was a warm friend and ardent supporter of Governor
George Clinton, under whom he had served in the first year of the war,
and whose confidence he largely shared in the distribution of military
promotions and civil appointments. A sturdy patriot, a brave soldier,
a civilian, honored and trusted in public station and in private life,
he has fairly won the gratitude with which communities are wont to
remember their founders.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] The original NINE MEN were selected by the Director-General from
eighteen delegates chosen by the people, and composed of merchants,
burghers and farmers. Six of the nine retired annually and their
places were filled by appointment from twelve of the "most notable
citizens." Their powers were advisory and limited, as they were only
to give advice on such propositions as the Director or his council
might submit to them. The object of establishing such a Board, and as
rehearsed in the colonial charter, was: "That the colony, and
principally New Amsterdam, our capital, might continue to increase in
good order, justice, police, population, prosperity and mutual
harmony; and be provided with strong fortifications, a church, a
school, trading places, harbor, and similar highly necessary public
edifices and improvements; that the honor of God and the welfare of
our dear Fatherland to the best advantage of the Company and the
prosperity of our good citizens be promoted; and that the pure
reformed religion as it is here in the churches of the Netherlands may
be inculcated and preserved." For further account of the NINE MEN and
the part taken by Arnoldus van Hardenbergh in the affairs of the
colony, see Col. Hist. N.Y.I, 258, 261, 270, 305, 310, 318, 324.

[2] Col. Ritzema was a Hollander by birth, and educated as a soldier
in the Prussian army. Being refused the advancement to which he deemed
himself entitled, he left the American service, but not before he was
suspected of disaffection, if not of treachery. During the battle of
White Plains, where his regiment was engaged, he was some four or five
miles away, and was shortly after displaced from his command. He
subsequently joined the British army.

[3] Col. Van Courtlandt gives the following account of the manner of
his appointment: "This commission was sent by General Washington, by
express, and was of his own direction, having been furnished with
blanks from Congress signed by John Hancock, President, for him to
fill up as he thought proper, appointing me Colonel of the Second New
York Regiment, dated November 30, 1776." _Autobiography, &c. The
Magazine of American History for May, 1878._

[4] Autobiography of General Van Courtlandt.

[5] Mss. in possession of Mr. John H. Osborne, of Auburn, N.Y.

[6] Some accounts make the number even less.

[7] This house was pillaged about the same time, and large quantities
of clothing and vegetables taken by the Indians. One Indian, a chief,
emerged from the scene of plunder, mounted on a horse taken from the
stable, profusely arrayed in stolen apparel, with silver bands about
his arms and a bunch of some forty silver broaches hanging about his
person. He was discovered by some soldiers who were on the alert to
get a shot at the invaders as they were leaving the place, when one
levelled his rifle at him and fired. He was seen to lay over on his
horse, but turning into the woods, disappeared. Some time after, his
body was found near the place where he was shot with his plunder still
about him. _Narrative of Massacres and Depredations in Wawarsing, &c.,
&c., Rondout, 1846._

[8] _Stone's Life of Brant. Narrative of Massacres and Depredations
in Wawarsing, &c., &c._, _Rondout_, 1846.




INTRODUCTION TO JOURNALS.


The following is printed from the original manuscript, in possession
of the family, in the hand-writing of Lieutenant Hardenbergh,
undoubtedly an original journal made by him during the campaign of
General Sullivan against the Indians.

The route covered by the Journal, begins at Wawarsing, in Ulster
County, New York, passing south-westerly along the Mine road and
Delaware river to Stroudsburg, Penn.; thence westerly over the
mountains, by the Sullivan road to Wilkesbarre; thence up the
Susquehanna river to Tioga Point near present Athens, where General
Clinton's brigade on August 22d, joined the main army; thence up the
Chemung river to present Elmira, and northerly to Havana; thence along
the east shore of Seneca lake to present Geneva, and by way of
Canandaigua, Honeoye, and Conesus to the Genesee river near present
Cuylerville, in Livingston county, where was found the great Seneca
town of Chenandoanes, or Genesee Castle, the most westerly point
reached by the expedition.

The return was over nearly the same route to Easton, and thence up the
Delaware to Morristown, N.J., where the regiment went into winter
quarters.

In addition to Lieutenant Hardenbergh's journal, will be found that
part of the journal of Major Erkuries Beatty, which relates to the
march of General Clinton's brigade from the valley of the Mohawk,
down the Susquehanna river to join General Sullivan at Tioga Point.

On the return march, Sept. 20th, when the army reached Kanadasega, an
Indian town near present Geneva, Lieutenant Colonel William Butler
commanding the Fourth Pennsylvania regiment, was detached with six
hundred men, with orders to proceed around the north end of Cayuga
lake, and devastate the Indian settlements on the east side. Thomas
Grant accompanied this detachment; that portion of his journal which
relates to the operations of this force, is also presented.

On the next day, September 21st, Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Dearborn
commanding the third New Hampshire regiment, with two hundred and
fifty men, was detached to proceed along the west shore of Cayuga lake
to complete the destruction in that quarter. That part of Colonel
Dearborn's journal describing his operations on this march, also
appears. The journals of Lieutenant Hardenbergh, Major Beatty and
Colonel Dearborn, have not hitherto appeared in print.

Notes have been added mostly from cotemporary writers illustrating the
text, and giving descriptions of events and places mentioned, also
introducing, at the proper place, descriptions of important matters
referred to and described in other journals, but not appearing in any
of the preceding.

Especial attention has been given to the descriptions of Indian towns,
and it is confidently believed, that here for the first time, can be
found, at least, an approximation to a complete list, and the exact
location of the entire number destroyed. The descriptions in nearly
all cases are from personal knowledge obtained by actual survey; the
evidences of aboriginal occupation being plainly apparent.

The maps and descriptions of the battle field of Newtown, and of the
Groveland ambuscade, it is believed will be an important addition to
the literature of the campaign, and a valuable aid to those engaged
in its study; and will present a more correct description of these
important matters than has hitherto appeared in print. The conclusions
reached, are the result of a most patient examination of all
authorities accessible, and will be likely to stand the test of the
most intelligent and critical scrutiny. The list of journals and
narratives relating to this campaign, though not as perfect as might
be desired, will be found useful to those who wish to obtain authentic
sources of information, and undoubtedly, many will be surprised to
learn that so much original material is in existence and accessible.

The text of the several journals, has been followed literally, from
the original manuscript when possible. Proper names, especially those
of Indian towns, even in the same manuscript, are often found with
material variations in spelling, and in many instances, different
authors give entirely different names for the same place; in other
cases wrong names are applied, and frequently are transposed. The
great Seneca town, on the Genesee river, is honored with several
distinct names, one of which has seventy variations in spelling; and
Appletown has three distinct locations, several miles distant from
each other. Care has been taken, to avoid confusion as much as
possible, by explanations in the notes, and in the use of names most
in accord with those in modern use.




JOURNAL OF THE CAMPAIGN OF THE YEAR 1779, COMMENCING MAY 1ST.


Saturday, May ye first.--Drew out of our Winter Quarters at
Wawasink[9] and encamped in a field near Jacobus Brown's at that
place.

Sunday, May 2nd.--Laid still in camp.

Monday 3d.--Drew provisions and prepared for a march.

Tuesday, 4th.--Struck our tents. Loaded our baggage in order to
proceed on our march for Weyoming, but being alarmed by an express
that the savages were murdering the inhabitants at Fantine Kille,[10]
about five miles in our front, Coll. Cortlandt marched to their
assistance, but before we arrived at the place they were gone. At 4 in
the afternoon returned to Wawasink and remained in houses.[11]

Wednesday, 5th.--Remained in the Quarters of yesterday.

Thursday, 6th.[12]--At 7 in the morning loaded baggage, marched to
Lurenkill[13] and halted at Broadhead's[14] for refreshment about two
hours, and marched for Mamacotting,[15] where we arrived at 7 o'clock
at night.

Friday, 7th.--At 4 struck tents, marched at 5, halted at
Bashesland[16] for refreshment for about two hours, proceeded on our
march. Crossed Denanasink[17] Creek at Dewitt's[18] and arrived at
Major Decker's, crossed the creek with wagons and encamped in the
field near Decker's house.

Saturday, May 8th.--Drew provisions; marched at about 11 o'clock and
encamped at Haurnanack.[19]

Sunday, 9th.--Discharged four wagons which we had taken from Wawasink;
loaded our provisions on board the canoes, sent them down the
Delaware. At 8 o'clock in the morning began our march; marched to
Esquire Vancamp's;[20] the weather very hot, we rested ourselves and
marched for Decker's Ferry[21] on Delaware, where we arrived at
sundown and encamped.

Monday, 10th.--Laid still for refreshment and washing.

Tuesday, 11th.--Struck tents and marched at 7 in the morning; got over
the ferry, proceeded on our march; rested for refreshments, at
Smithfield at or near Depew's,[22] at 5 P.M.; marched for Fort Penn
where we arrived at dusk of the evening.

May 12th and 13th.--Laid still at Fort Penn[23] on account of rainy
weather.

Friday, May 14th, 1779.--The weather clear, we received orders to
march at 1 o'clock in the afternoon. Struck tents, marched for
Learn's;[24] marched about five miles and encamped in the wood.

Saturday, 15th.--About 7 in the morning struck tents and marched to
Learn's; pitched camp, and proceeded with a party to mend the road to
Weyoming.[25]

Sunday, 16th.--Our camp remained, and were joined by Coll.
Spencer's[26] regiment; we continued making the road. At night seven
men deserted from our regiment.[27]

Monday, 17th.--Decamped from Learn's about 7 in the morning, and
encamped at about 7 o'clock in the afternoon, just on the west side of
a small creek called White Oak Run.[28]

Tuesday, 18th.--Our camp remained; we continued working on the road; I
was ordered to remain in camp with the guard.

Wednesday, 19th.--Last night about 11 o'clock, an alarm happened by
the firing of one of the sentinels, but soon found it to be false
alarm.[29] The weather being wet, we remained in camp all day.

Thursday, 20th.--Rainy weather with some thunder; we remained in camp.

Friday, 21st.--Foggy, rainy weather with thunder and lightning;
remained in camp. This day Ensign Swartwout[30] arrived in camp from
the State of New York, brought news that the Indians were lurking
about Rochester and Wawasink; and the inhabitants chiefly moved off
their families.

Saturday, 22nd.--The weather continued rainy. Remained in camp. At
sunset the weather cleared off.

Sunday, 23d.--The morning fair and clear. Received orders to march. At
8 o'clock the General beat; struck tents, proceeded on our march till
over a creek in the Great Swamp[31] called Tackhanack, the road very
bad, the baggage could not come up; went back and mended the road and
encamped where the baggage was. In the evening, Sergeant Jonas
Brown[32] with five men, was sent off to Weyoming with letters from
General Sullivan to General Hand.[33]

Monday, 24th.--About 9 o'clock in the morning struck camp, marched
across the Tackhanack[34] and encamped on a hight, about half a mile
from the creek, but continued making the road which was very bad about
that place.

Tuesday, 25th.--Left our camp standing, and continued making the road;
built a bridge and causeway at Tobehanna[35] of one hundred and
fifteen paces in length. The creek is considerable large and abounds
with trout.[36] Some good land along the creek; the road very
difficult to make.

Wednesday, 26th.--Laid still in camp on purpose to refresh the men,
and washing. Sergeant Brown returned from Weyoming.

Thursday, 27th.--Went out to work.

Friday, 28th.--Finished the bridge across the Tobehanna and returned
to camp.

Saturday, 29th.--John Curry and Michael Sellers were tried at the
drum-head, for stealing rum from the commissary,[37] found guilty, and
sentenced to receive, Curry seventy-five lashes, and Sellers fifty,
which was directly put in execution. Our camp remained; we continued
work on the road. After we returned from fatigue, Gen. Sullivan and
Col. Hoopes[38] arrived in our camp.

Sunday, 30th.--In the morning Gen. Sullivan and Col. Hoopes returned
to Easton. At 7 o'clock in the morning struck tents, the regiment
marched to Locust Hill and encamped there;[39] myself was ordered to
remain with the Commissary stores which could not move with the
baggage for want of teams.

Monday, 31st.--The Coll. sent the wagons back to fetch the stores. We
loaded them on the wagons and proceeded to Camp and arrived there at 2
o'clock in the afternoon. The troops worked on the road.

Tuesday, June 1st.--Worked on the road. The Camp remained on Locust
Hill.

Wednesday, June 2d.--Lt. Weissenfels[40] of our regiment was sent to
Weyoming as an escort to guard a number of pack horses. The troops
continued working the road. I was ordered on court martial, of which
Captain Graham was President.

Thursday, June 3d.--The troops did not work for want of provision.

Friday, June 4th.--The camp remained on Locust Hill. Captain Graham,
myself, and two other officers were ordered to inspect pork which was
chiefly Condemned on account of its being Spoiled.[41] On the 3d of
June, John Ten Eyck, soldier in Captain French's company of light
infantry was drowned in the Lehi by accident.

Saturday, 5th.--The regiment was ordered on fatigue with three days
provisions, that night lay out in the woods.

Sunday 6th.--I was relieved by Lt. Fairlie[42] and went to Camp, this
day we worked through the great Swamp.

Monday, 7th June.--At about 8 in the morning decamped from Locust
Hill, crossed the Lehi and encamped on the side of a Swamp called the
Shades of Death,[43] about six miles from Locust Hill.

Tuesday, 8th June.--About 2 o'clock in the afternoon, struck our
tents, marched through the Shades of Death, and encamped at night
about one mile from the Shades.

Wednesday, 9th.--The Camp remained.

Thursday 10th.--The Camp remained. The troops worked on the road.

Friday, 11th.--The regiment decamped and marched within seven miles
from Weyoming. Capt. Wright and I remained behind to guard the
Commissary Stores.

Saturday, 12th.--The guard and Commissary Stores came up to Camp.

Sunday, 13th.--Laid still.

Monday, 14th.--At six o'clock the General beat, struck tents and
marched to Weyoming[44] and arrived there at about 12, and pitched
Camp.

June 15th and 16th.--Laid still.

Thursday, 17th.--Moved the camp about four miles up the River, to a
placed called Jacob's Plains.[45]

18th and 19th.--Laid still.

Sunday, June 20th.--I was ordered to go down the River Sisquehannah
with a party in boats[46] under the command of Captain Graham. Left
Weyoming about 7 o'clock in the morning and arrived with the boats at
Fort Jenkins[47] at sunset and stayed that night.

Monday, 21st.--Left Fort Jenkins in the morning, proceeded down the
River and arrived at Northumberland town,[48] dined there, and
proceeded to Sunbury and arrived there at 7 o'clock at night.

Tuesday, 22nd.--Laid still at Sunbury and loaded the boats with flour
and beef.

Wednesday, 23d.--At 9 o'clock in the morning left Sunbury, proceeded
up the River about eight miles.

Thursday, 24th.--Proceeded up the River till night and lodged on board
the boat. In the night lost my hat.

Friday, 25th.--Proceeded up the River as far as Fort Jenkins and
lodged there.[49]

Saturday, 26th.--Left Fort Jenkins and arrived at the falls.[50] Got
half the boats up the falls, which were drawn up by ropes.

Sunday, 27th.--Got up the rest of the boats, and proceeded up the
River and halted along shore over night. Coll. Ogden's regiment from
Jersey was sent down as a guard to us from Weyoming.

Monday, 28th.--At Revelle beat proceeded up the River to the upper
falls. Got all the boats up, (one of which overset in going up) and
arrived at Shawny flats about 4 miles from Weyoming.

Tuesday, 29th.--Left Shawny flats in the morning and arrived at
Weyoming[51] about 7 o'clock in the morning, unloaded the boats and
went up to camp in the afternoon to Jacob's Plains.

Wednesday, 30th June.--The regiment was mustered in camp at Jacob's
Plains. While I was out on my voyage down the river, Gen. Sullivan
arrived at Weyoming with troops to be employed on the expedition.[52]

Thursday, July 1.--Laid still.

Friday, July 2d; Saturday, July 3d.--Remained at Jacob's Plains.

Sunday, July ye 4th.--Decamped from Jacob's Plains, crossed the river
Sisquehannah and encamped on the west side the River, near forty
fort[53] on a fine plain called Abraham's Plains.

Monday, 5th July.--Went out on a scouting party in order to hunt. Went
up the River as far as Laghawanny Creek and returned at sunset. Met
with no success.

During our stay at Weyoming we had nothing to do but to keep guard,
and disciplining our troops; only a few that were employed in boating
to carry provisions[54] up the River from Sunbury to Weyoming.

(From July 5th to July 31st no entry was made in the Journal).

Saturday, the 31st of July.--About 3 o'clock in the afternoon we left
Weyoming on our expedition. Our baggage being carried on pack horses,
the provisions and artillery in boats, we marched as far as
Lackawannick,[55] ten miles from Weyoming, and encamped.[56]

Sunday, Aug. first.--At 1 o'clock in the afternoon struck our tents
and marched 7 miles to a place called Quialutimack.[57] The road was
very difficult, the baggage did not arrive till towards day.

Monday, August ye 2d.--Laid still at Quialutimack.

Tuesday, Aug. 3d.--At 7 o'clock in the morning struck our camp, loaded
our baggage, proceeded on our march and encamped at night in the wood.

Wednesday, Aug. 4th.--At 7 o'clock in the morning the General beat,
struck our tents, proceeded on our march and encamped at night at
Venderlips[58] Plantation. This day's march was very fatiguing. Our
regiment was on the Rear Guard, the road very mountainous and
difficult. We had the care of all the pack horses and cattle, which
was very troublesome.

Thursday, Aug. 5th.--About 10 o'clock decamped, proceeded on our march
and arrived at Wyalusing[59] and encamped there.

Friday, Aug. 6th.--Laid still at Wyalusing for refreshment.

Saturday, Aug. 7th.--Laid still on account of rainy weather.

Sunday, August 8th.[60]--At six o'clock in the morning struck camp,
moved from Wyalusing and encamped at evening at a place called
Standing Stone.[61]

Monday, Aug. 9th.--At six o'clock in the morning struck our tents,
proceeded on our march and arrived at Sheshehung flats[62] and
encamped there.

Tuesday, Aug. 10th.--Laid still at the Flats.

Wednesday, Aug. 11th.--At 6 o'clock in the morning struck tent,
marched at 7 o'clock for Tyuga.[63] Our regiment and the 2d New
Jersey regiment was ordered to cross the River at our encampment and
proceed up the River on the opposite side, to take possession of the
ground at Tyuga to cover the fording place for the army and horses to
cross the River, arrived at Tyuga about 11 o'clock in the morning.[64]
At night Gen. Sullivan sent off a small scout[65] to discover
Shemung[66] (of one Captain and seven men,) which lay about twelve
miles up the Tiyuga branch.

Aug. 12.--The scout returned with news that the enemy seemed to be in
great confusion and seemed to be moving off. The Gen'l left a guard
at Tiyuga sufficient to guard the camp and marched with the rest of
the army under cover of the night for Shemung, marched all night, the
weather very dark, and nothing but an Indian path through the wood
made it difficult.[67]

Friday, Aug. 13th.--About six o'clock in the morning we arrived at
Shemung and found the enemy had left the town. On our approach we
burnt the town, destroyed the corn, &c., and returned to Tiyuga. A
small party of the Indians who had concealed themselves in the wood,
fired on a small party of Gen'll Hand's Brigade, killed six men and
wounded two without loss on their side.[68] A party of Gen'l Poor's
Brigade was destroying corn, were fired upon by the enemy, killed one
and wounded one.

Saturday, Aug. 14th.--Laid at Tiyuga waiting for the arrival of Gen'l
Clinton's Brigade, who came down the Susquehanna from the Mohawk
River. A large detachment from the army was ordered up to join
him.[69] The remainder of the army were employed in building a
garrison at Tiyuga.[70] On the 22nd day of Aug't we were joined by
Gen'l Clinton's Brigade.

Monday, Aug't 23d.--Laid still. Capt. Kimble of Col. Cilley's
Regiment, Gen'l Poor's Brigade, was killed in his tent by accident
with a gun being snapped by a soldier.

Tuesday, 24th Aug't.--The disposition was made and everything got in
readiness for marching. The army encamped that evening agreeable to
the order of march,[71] myself being drafted on the right flank, which
was commanded by Col. Dubois.

Wednesday, 25th.--Laid still not being able to get ready to march on
account of our pack horses.

Thursday, 26th.--Struck tents at 1 o'clock and marched about 3 miles
up the Tiyuga Branch and encamped.

Friday, Aug't 27.--At 8 o'clock in the morning the Gen'l beat, struck
tents at 9 o'clock marched off and encamped that night about 3 miles
below Shemung by a large cornfield.[72]

Saturday, Aug't 28th.--At 3 o'clock in the afternoon marched as far as
Shemung and encamped.[73]

Sunday, 29th Aug't.--At 8 o'clock in the morning the signal for march
was given. We marched about 4 miles when our Light corps fell in with
the enemy on the opposite side of a defile with some slight works
thrown up in their front. The light troops exchanged some shots with
them and amused them whilst Gen's Clinton's and Poor's Brigades with
the right flank were ordered to file off by the right and gain the
enemy's rear, which to effect, we had to ascend a very steep hill
which the enemy had possessed themselves of. Whilst we were gaining
the rear, Col. Proctor with the artillery kept up a brisk fire on
their works. On our ascending the hill they began to attack us. Our
men undauntedly pushed on and gained the hill. The enemy went off in
confusion, left their dead on the ground.[74]--About sunset we
encamped on the enemy's ground.[75] We had one major, one Capt. and
one Lt. wounded. The Capt. and Lieut. died of their wounds, also a few
men wounded.[76]

Aug't 30.--Remained on the ground of yesterday. The greatest part of
the army were employed in destroying corn which was in great
abundance.

    [Illustration: Map _SHOWING THE ROUTE OF SULLIVAN'S ARMY_ and
    _BATTLE FIELD OF NEWTOWN_ FOUGHT AUGUST 29TH 1779. ALSO THE
    LOCATION OF THE INDIAN TOWNS IN THE VICINITY, AND _CHEMUNG
    AMBUSCADE_. _FROM ACTUAL SURVEY_ BY GENL., JOHN S. CLARK AUBURN,
    N.Y. 1879.
    THE HELIOTYPE PRINTING CO. 220 DEVONSHIRE ST. BOSTON.]

Tuesday, 31st Aug't.[77]--At 9 o'clock in the morning marched off;
marched ten miles above Newtown and encamped on a large pine plain,
forming a square with our camp to secure our pack horses and cattle.

Wednesday, Sept. 1st.--The signal gun fired at 8 o'clock in the
morning. We marched at half past nine, marched about 6 miles through a
flat level road at the end of which we entered a dark pine swamp,
which continued four miles with almost impassable hills and valleys
and arrived at 11 o'clock at night at Catharine's town.[78]

Thursday, 2d.--Laid still. Our line of march being confused by the
badness of the road the day before.

Friday, Sept 3d.--The signal gun fired at 7 o'clock, the army marched
off at 8 o'clock, marched about twelve miles and encamped in the wood
on the east side of the Seneca Lake.[79] The land good and well
timbered.

Saturday, ye 4th Sept.--The Gen'l beat at 9 o'clock in the morning.
The army marched at 10 o'clock, marched 4 miles and halted.[80]

Sunday ye 5th.--The Gen'l beat at half past 9 o'clock, the army
marched at 10 o'clock and encamped in a town called Candaya,[81] or
Appletown.

Monday, Sept 6th.--At two o'clock in the afternoon left Appletown and
marched about three miles and encamped in the wood.[82]

Tuesday ye 7th.--At 8 o'clock in the morning struck tents, marched off
and crossed the outlet of the Ceneca Lake, where we expected to meet
some opposition, but the enemy had left the town. We entered it, found
a white child[83] in the town, supposed to be about 4 years old, it
was supposed they had taken away from the frontiers, where they had
destroyed and burnt. The Ceneca Lake is supposed to be thirty-six
miles in length from south to north. The land along the east side
appears to be a rich soil and well timbered. At the north end is the
outlet which is a continual stream and considerable large. About three
miles and a half from the outlet is the town Cannadasago or Ceneca
Castle.[84]

Wednesday ye 8th Sept.--Laid still at Cannadasago.

Thursday ye 9th.--Marched from Cannadasago about 8 miles and encamped
in the wood.[85]

Friday 10th.--At 7 o'clock marched off about 7 miles and crossed the
outlet of a small lake, a few miles from which stood a Town called
Canandagui,[86] about 15-½ miles from Ceneca Castle, which we
entered, and encamped at 3 o'clock, about a mile north of the town in
a large cornfield.

Saturday ye 11th Sept.--Struck our tents at 9 o'clock and marched
about 9 miles through an open country, halted at 11 o'clock for
refreshment, moved at one o'clock, and arrived at a small town called
Honyuga.[87] At this town we left a small garrison of one Capt., one
Lieut. and fifty men, exclusive of invalids, with some flour, horses
and cattle.

Sunday 12th.--Left Haunyuga at 12 o'clock, marched about 11 miles and
encamped in the wood.[88]

    [Illustration: Map _Showing the route of_ SULLIVAN'S ARMY AND
    _GROVELAND AMBUSCADE_, September 13th, 1779.
    THE HELIOTYPE PRINTING CO. 220 DEVONSHIRE ST. BOSTON.]

Monday, 13th.--At five o'clock in the morning marched about two miles
to a small town called Adjutoa,[89] from this place the Gen'l sent
out a scout of one Sub. and 19 men to reconnoitre a town that was in
front. On his return he was attacked by about 100 Indians and were all
killed but 2 men who had the good fortune to make their escape.[90]
The army remained in town till about 12 o'clock. Some were
employed in destroying corn and some in building a bridge (across a
mirey swamp and creek) for the artillery to pass. While we were so
employed the surveyor[91] had advanced a little in front of the
advanced guard, was fired upon by the Indians and had one of his party
wounded.[92] At 12 o'clock we left the town, and arrived at a town
called Cassawauloughly[93] 7 miles from Adjutoa, which we entered at
sunset.[94]

Tuesday, 14th Sept.--At one o'clock left the town crossed the Chenesee
flats and forded the River which was about four feet deep and about
thirty yards wide and arrived at the capital town of the Chinisees,
called the Chinisee Castle.[95] We entered the town about 6 o'clock,
found Lieut. Boyd and one soldier[96] whom they had murdered in an
inhuman manner. Said Boyd was one of the party that was sent to
reconnoitre a town as is mentioned before. The Chinisee Castle
consisted of about one hundred commodius dwelling houses compactly
built and pleasantly situated.

Wednesday, 15th Sept.--The whole army[97] (except the guards to which
I belonged) were employed in destroying corn from 6 o'clock in the
morning till two in the afternoon. In the meantime a white woman[98]
with a small child came to us who had been taken prisoner at Weyoming.
At about 3 o'clock in the afternoon, we set the town on fire, marched
off, re-crossed the River and encamped after sunset on the Chinicee
flats.

Thursday, 16th Sept.--Decamped at 11 o'clock, marched six miles and
encamped at the town of Adjutoa at half past five P.M.

Friday 17th.--Decamped at 6 o'clock, marched off and arrived at the
town of Haunyuga at one o'clock P.M.

Saturday, 18th Sept.--At 5 o'clock in the morning marched, at 7
o'clock crossed the outlet of a Lake at Cannandagui,[99] and encamped
at sunset on the east side of the outlet.

Sunday 19.--At seven o'clock in the morning struck tents, marched at 8
o'clock and arrived at sunset at Canadasago.[100]

Monday, 20th Sept.--At two P.M. struck tents, marched off at 3 o'clock
from Canadasago, crossed the outlet of Ceneca Lake and encamped at
sunset near the lake.[101] Previous to our march from Canadasago Col.
Butler of the 4th Pennsylvania Regiment was sent with a detachment to
the Kiyuga[102] Lake to destroy some Indian settlements that were
there. Col. Gansevort sent with one hundred men to fort Stanwix[103]
in order to send down some baggage which was left on the Mohawk River
by troops that had been stationed there the preceding year.

Tuesday, 28th.--Struck tents at 8 o'clock, marched at 9, left
Candaya[104] or Appletown about two miles in the rear, and encamped in
the wood, along the east side of the Ceneca Lake, about 4 o'clock in
the afternoon.

Wednesday 22d.--At 6 o'clock the Gen'l beat; marched at 8, halted at
one o'clock, about one hour for refreshments, and encamped at sunset
along the east side Ceneca Lake.

Thursday, 23d Sept.--Marched at 8 o'clock, left French Catharine about
3 miles in the rear, and encamped at sunset.[105]

Friday, 24th.--About 6 o'clock in the morning the Gen'l beat, marched
at 8 o'clock and arrived at the forks of the Tiyuga or Newton. At this
place there was a post established by order of General Sullivan, and
provision for the army at their return.[106]

Saturday, 25th Sept.--Laid still. An ox and 5 gallons of rum was given
to the officers of each Brigade.[107] A fu-de-joy was held in
consequence of the arrival of the news of Spain declaring us
Independent[108] with 13 rounds of cannon was discharged, followed by
two round of musketry interspersed with cannon. The evening was
celebrated in our camp with much joy and gladness.[109]

Sunday 26th.--Laid still.

Monday, 27th Sept.--A detachment under the command * * * was sent out
and returned at night.[110]

Tuesday 28th.--A detachment under the command of Col. Cortlandt was
sent up the Tiyuga[111] branch on purpose to destroy some corn. Col.
Butler with his detachment joined us. The invalids were sent to Tiyuga
in boats.

Wednesday, 29th Sept.--The Gen'l beat at 8 o'clock in the morning,
marched at 9 o'clock and encamped in the afternoon three miles below
Shemung.

Thursday 30th.--At nine o'clock in the morning marched off and arrived
at Tiyuga at 5 o'clock in the afternoon. At our arrival we were
saluted with a discharge of 13 cannon from the Garrison, and an
elegant dinner was prepared for the officers.

Friday, Oct. 1, 1779.--Laid still at Tiyuga.[112]

Saturday 2d.--Laid still. Orders were given to load the boat with
stores, artillery, &c., and to demolish the fort[113] the next day.

Sunday, ye 3d Oct.--Agreeable to the orders of the preceding day the
boats were loaded, the fort demolished and every thing got in
readiness to march the next morning.

Monday, 4th Oct.--At 7 o'clock in the morning the Gen'l beat, struck
our tents, the army marched at nine from Tiyuga. The boats with the
stores, artillery and sick set off at the same time, and encamped at
evening at Wysaukin creek.

Tuesday, the 5th Oct.--The main part of the army embarked on board the
boats, the best were mounted on horses, left Wysaukin about 7 o'clock
in the morning and arrived at Vanderlips'[114] farm, and stayed at
night.

Wednesday ye 6th Oct.--At 6 o'clock in the morning set off and arrived
at sunset at Lechawauny[115] about 10 miles from Weyoming.

Thursday, 7th Oct.--At 9 o'clock in the morning left Lechawauny and
arrived at Weyoming[116] about 1 o'clock in the afternoon.

Friday, Oct. ye 8th.--Laid still.

Saturday, ye 9th.--Remained at Weyoming, but received orders to march
at 6 o'clock the next morning.

Sunday, Oct. 10th.--At 6 o'clock next morning were ordered to march,
but on account of our pack horses being strayed we did not march till
2 o'clock in the morning, when we left Weyoming and arrived at
Bullock's[117] at dark.

Monday, 11th Oct.--At 9 o'clock in the morning decamped from Bullock's
and encamped about two miles through the Shades of Death.[118]

Tuesday, 12th Oct.--At 7 in the morning proceeded on our march. The
after part of the day rainy and windy weather, we arrived at White Oak
Run[119] at evening and encamped.

Wednesday 13th.--Decamped from White Oak Run at 8 o'clock in the
morning and arrived at Brinker's Mills[120] and encamped.

Thursday 14th.--Decamped from Brinker's Mills, marched from thence,
and arrived within 11 miles from Easton and encamped[121] on the side
of the road in a wood.

Friday, 15th Oct.--Decamped at 7 o'clock, marched for Easton[122] and
arrived there about 2 o'clock in the afternoon.

Saturday 16th.--Laid still.

Sunday 17th.--Laid still.

Monday, 18th Oct.--Capt. Bevier and myself set out from Easton at 11
o'clock for Marbletown,[123] traveled about twenty miles and put up at
the Widow Sweezer's.

Tuesday, 19th Oct.--At half past 7 o'clock in the morning, traveled
about 27 miles and put up at Cary's Tavern.

Wednesday 20th.--At 7 o'clock A.M., left Cary's, dined at Bard's in
Warick,[124] set out from thence and put up at Bruster's Tavern about
11 miles from New Windsor.[125]

Thursday, 21st.--Left Bruster's at 8 o'clock in the morning and
arrived at Newburgh, at 2 o'clock in the afternoon.

Friday 22nd.--Set out from Newburgh at 8 o'clock in the morning and
arrived at the Poltz[126] and staid that night.

Saturday, 23d Oct.--At three o'clock in the afternoon set out and
arrived home the same night.

From the 23d Oct., 1779, I remained home till the 9th of Dec., when I
set out to join the Reg't, which I did on the 15th, and found them
employed in building huts for winter quarters, about 3 miles from
Morristown.


     (The Hardenbergh Journal here closes. The Nukerck Journal
     continues the history of the regiment for the year 1780 and
     until the five regiments were consolidated near the close of
     that year.)


FOOTNOTES:

[9] WAWARSING--An Indian word, said to signify "a black bird's nest,"
the name of a town and village in south-west part of Ulster County,
N.Y., containing a post village of same name, located on Rondout Creek
on the line of the Delaware and Hudson Canal. The surface of the town
is mostly mountainous uplands, intersected by deep valleys. The
Shawangunk Mountains extend along the east border, and spurs of the
Catskills occupy the central and west parts, the highest peaks being
from 2,000 to 3,000 feet above tide. The eastern and north-western
parts are rocky and precipitous, and unfit for cultivation. There was
a stone fort in the village on the site of B.C. Hornbeck's house. On
Aug. 12, 1781, a large party of tories and Indians under one Caldwell,
appeared in the town with a design of falling upon Napanock, but being
informed that the place was defended by cannon they came to Wawarsing
before the inhabitants were up in the morning. Two men and a young
woman discovered the enemy before they reached the fort, and the young
woman succeeded in closing the door just in time to prevent it from
being burst open by the savages. Finding further attack to be
dangerous they dispersed and burned and plundered the out settlements,
and next day withdrew laden with spoils. Several lives were lost on
both sides and much property destroyed.--The Indians--or Narratives of
Massacres and Depredations on the frontiers of Wawarsink and Vicinity,
p. 21.

[10] FANTINE KILL, a settlement, on a stream of that name, about a
mile from the present village of Ellenville, in the town of Wawarsing,
Ulster County. The attack was made at day-break by a party of thirty
or forty Indians under Brant, who came by the way of the Indian trail
to Grahamsville, and from thence through the woods to the settlement.
Widow Isaac Bevier and two sons were killed, also the entire family of
Michael Socks, consisting of the father, mother, two sons who were
young men, two children, and one or two others. They attacked the
house of Jesse Bevier, but the inmates being good marksmen and having
plenty of ammunition succeeded in defending themselves until Col. Van
Cortlandt came to their relief.

"As I was about marching from my encampment, having called in my
guard, I discovered smokes rising from the village about six miles
south, and a lad sent from its vicinity informed me that the Indians
were there burning and destroying. It was occasioned by two of my men
deserting in the mountains, when I received the order to return; for
they went to Brant and informed him that I was ordered away, and he
expected that I was gone. * * * On my approach Brant ran off. He had
about one hundred and fifty Indians, and as I approached him, he being
on a hill, and seeing me leaning against a pine tree waiting for the
closing up of my men, ordered a rifle Indian to kill me, but he
overshot me, the ball passing three inches over my head."--Col. Van
Cortlandt's manuscript statement, 1825.

"General, while you were standing by a large tree during that battle,
how near to your head did a bullet come, which struck a little above
you?"

The General paused for a moment, and replied--"About two inches above
my hat."

Brant then related the circumstances. "I had remarked your activity in
the battle," said he, "and calling one of my best marksmen, pointed
you out and directed him to bring you down. He fired and I saw you
dodge your head at the instant I supposed the ball would strike. But
as you did not fall, I told my warrior that he had just missed you,
and lodged the ball in the tree." Conversation between Brant and
General Van Cortlandt--Stone's life of Brant, II., 460, incorrectly
located at the battle of Newtown.

[11] "Col. Cantine commanding a regiment of militia arrived during the
day. I then pursued but could not overtake him, as he ran through a
large swamp beyond the hill; and Col. Cantine being also in pursuit, I
returned, not having any prospect of overtaking him."--Col. Van
Cortlandt's statement, 1825.

[12] "The second day after, pursued my march to Fort Penn as ordered
by the commander-in-chief, and there received General Sullivan's
orders to make a road through the wilderness."--Col. Van Cortlandt's
statement, 1825.

[13] The present name of a stream flowing south-easterly two miles
south of Ellenville.

[14] On the Lurenkill two miles south of Ellenville.

[15] Present WURTZBORO in town of Mamacating on Sauthier's Map of
1779, said to have been named in honor of an Indian chief, is about
fourteen miles south-west of Wawarsing. A block house was here
occupied during the revolution.

[16] WEST BROOKVILLE, formerly called Bashusville, near the southern
line of town of Mamakating in Sullivan County. So called from a squaw
named Bashe, who lived on the bank of the creek. The first house built
was of stone and used as a fort.

[17] MAHACKAMACK or Neversink River, the crossing appears to have been
near Cuddebackville in the town of Deer Park.

[18] DEWITT--A brother of Mrs. James Clinton, the mother of DeWitt
Clinton; where he is said to have been born, March 2, 1769, while Mrs.
Clinton was on a visit with her brother. General James Clinton in 1763
raised and commanded a corps of two hundred men, called the Guards of
the Frontier. This position called Fort De Witt was one of the posts
occupied. Other accounts say he was born at the homestead of the
Clinton family at Little Britain.

[19] NOW PORT JERVIS, formerly called MOHOCKAMACK FORK, at the
junction of the Neversink and Delaware Rivers. The route taken appears
to have been over the "_old mine road_" as it was called, constructed
by the early Dutch settlers of Esopus to reach a copper mine in
Walpack Township, Warren Co., N.J. It follows the Mamakating Valley,
the first north of the Shawangunk mountains, and continues in that of
the Mahackamack branch of the Delaware river, and penetrates the
Minnisinks east of that river. The mine was about three miles
north-west from Nicholas Depew's house.

[20] John Adams, while attending Congress during its session at
Philadelphia, as late as 1800, passed over this same "Mine Road" as
the most eligible route from Boston to that city. He was accustomed to
lodge at Squire Van Campen's in the Jersey Minnisinks.

[21] DECKER'S FERRY at Flatbrookville, about thirteen miles from Fort
Penn at Stroudsburg.

[22] SAMUEL DEPEW'S, in the town of Smithfield, Monroe Co., Pa., on
the west side of the Delaware, three miles above the Water Gap, where
he settled prior to 1730. He was one of the Walloons who came to New
York about 1697. Rev. H.M. Muhlenberg, who lodged at his house in
1750, states he had been Justice of the Peace, was a prominent man in
Smithfield, and at that time advanced in life. The river is fordable
at the head of Depew's Island, a little above the house. The old
homestead is still in the Depew family; Nicholas, one of Samuel's
sons, is well known in provincial history between 1750 and 1770. On
the Pennsylvania side of the river on Depew's land, stood the
_Smithfield_ or old _Shawne_ church, removed about 1854.

[23] Ft. Penn, at Stroudsburg, Monroe County, Pa., built in 1763, on
the site previously occupied by Ft. Hamilton, built in 1755.

[24] LARNED'S log tavern, north-west of Stroudsburg, twenty-eight
miles from Easton. The main army encamped here June 19th, at camp
called Pocono Point. This was the last house on the road between
Easton and Wyoming. On the 3d of July, 1781, Mr. Larned was shot and
scalped near his house, as also was his son George. Another son, John,
shot one of the Indians who was left on the spot where he fell. The
Indians carried off George Larned's wife, and an infant four months
old, but not wishing to be encumbered with the child, dashed out its
brains.

[25] The 2d New York Regiment, Col. Van Cortlandt, and Col. Spencer's
N.J. Regiment were ordered to precede the army and construct a road
over the mountains to Wyoming. They followed the well known Indian
trails mainly, one of which led from Easton by way of the Wind Gap,
directly north, along the high lands between the Delaware and
Susquehanna rivers, to New York State line near Oghquaga; the other
leaving Fort Penn at Stroudsburg, passed through the townships of
Pocono, Tunkhanna, Tobyhanna, Buck, Bear Creek, to Wyoming. Much of
this road is still in use and is known as the "old Sullivan road." At
Easton Gen. Sullivan published the following order:

                             HEAD-QUARTERS, Easton, May 31, 1779.

* * * The commander-in-chief returns his most sincere thanks to
Colonels Cortlandt and Spencer, and to the officers and soldiers under
their command for their unparalleled exertions in clearing and
repairing the road to Wyoming. He cannot help promising himself
success in an expedition, in which he is to be honored with the
command of troops who give such pleasing evidence of their zeal for
the service, and manifest so strong a desire to advance with
expedition against the inhuman murderers of their friends and
countrymen. * * * *

       Order Book Lieu.-Col. GEORGE C. BARBER, of 3d N.J. Regt.,
                                 Adjutant Gen'l of the Western Army.


[26] COL. OLIVER SPENCER, Commanding the Independent regiment, 5th
Continental of New Jersey.

[27] General Sullivan reached Wyoming with the main body of the army
June 23d; the following appeared in orders on the 25th:

                           HEAD-QUARTERS, WYOMING, June 25, 1779.

* * * At a general court martial held on the eighth instant, whereof
Major Fish was president, Oliver Arnold of the 2nd New York regiment,
was tried for desertion, found guilty, and sentenced to be shot to
death; the General approves the sentence and orders it to be executed
at the head of the regiment to-morrow afternoon at six o'clock. Edward
Tyler of the same regiment tried by the same court for desertion,
found guilty and sentenced to run the guantelope through Cortlandt's,
Spencer's and Cilley's regiments, with a centinel at his breast to
regulate his pace; the General approves the sentence and orders it
executed to-morrow afternoon at five o'clock. John Stevens of the same
regiment, tried for desertion, found guilty and sentenced to receive
one hundred lashes; the General approves the sentence and orders it
executed at the head of the regiment, to-morrow afternoon at six
o'clock. * * *

                         Order Book, Lieu.-Col. GEORGE C. BARBER,
                                 Adjutant Gen'l of the Western Army.


[28] Near the west line of Pocono Township, also called Rum bridge.

[29] There were three paths leading eastward from Wyoming; the
southern, called the "warriors' path," by way of Fort Allen and along
the Lehigh to the Delaware Water Gap at Easton; the northern, by way
of the Lackawana at Capouse Meadows, through Cobb's Gap and the
Lackawaxen, to the Delaware and Hudson; the middle one, along which
this military road was constructed, led through the Wind Gap to
Easton. The massacre of Wyoming in 1778 had filled the forests along
this central trail with hundreds of helpless fugitives; some estimate
the number about two thousand, mostly women and children; many sunk
under the tomahawk, others died of excitement, fatigue, hunger and
exposure; many were lost and perished in the woods, while hundreds
were never seen or heard of after their precipitate flight. At this
time small parties of Indians still hovered around Wyoming. They
watched the passes, and occasionally exhibited extraordinary instances
of courage and audacity. Major Powell, with two hundred men of a
regiment that had suffered severely at the battle of Germantown,
having been ordered to Wyoming, arrived at Bear Creek about ten miles
from that point, on the 19th of April. Deeming themselves out of
danger from a surprise by the Indians, officers and men arrayed
themselves in their best apparel, burnished their arms and put
everything in shape for a respectable appearance on entering the
Valley. According to the fashion of the day the officers donned their
ruffles, powdered their hair, and with enlivening strains of music,
advanced toward their destination. The advance guard reported having
seen some deer, and Captain Davis, Lieutenant Jones and others,
started in pursuit; near the summit of the second mountain by the
Laurel Run, and about four miles from the fort, a fire was opened upon
them by the Indians in ambush. Davis, Jones, Corporal Butler and three
soldiers were killed and scalped. Chaplain Rogers says: "Scalped,
tomahawked and speared by the savages, fifteen or twenty in number;
two boards are fixed at the spot where Davis and Jones fell, with
their names on each. Jones's being besmeared with his own blood. In
passing this melancholy vale, an unusual gloom appeared on the
countenances of both officers and men without distinction, and from
the eyes of many, as by a sudden impulse, drops the sympathizing tear.
Colonel Proctor, out of respect to the deceased, ordered the music to
play the tune of Roslin Castle, the soft and moving notes of which,
together with what so forcibly struck the eye, tended greatly to fill
our breasts with pity, and to renew our grief for our worthy departed
friends and brethren." The bodies of the two officers were exhumed a
few weeks after this and re-interred at Wilkesbarre, with military and
masonic honors by the officers of Sullivan's army.

[30] Barnardus Swartwout, an Ensign in first company of Col. Van
Cortlandt's regiment.

[31] "Monday, June 21, 1779.--This day we marched through the Great
Swamp, and Bear Swamp. The Great Swamp, which is eleven or twelve
miles through, contains what is called on our maps "shades of death,"
by reason of its darkness; both swamps contain trees of amazing
height, viz., hemlock, birch, pine, sugar maple, ash, locust, etc. The
roads in some places are tolerable, but in other places exceeding bad,
by reason of which, and a long though necessary march, three of our
wagons and the carriages of two field pieces were broken down. This
day we proceeded twenty miles and encamped late in the evening at a
spot which the commander named Camp Fatigue. The troops were tired and
hungry. The road through the Swamps is entirely new, being fitted for
the passage of our wagons by Colonels Cortlandt and Spencer at the
instance of the commander-in-chief; the way to Wyoming, being before
only a blind, narrow path. The new road does its projectors great
credit, and must in a future day be of essential service to the
inhabitants of Wyoming and Easton. In the Great Swamp is Locust Hill,
where we discovered evident marks of a destroyed Indian village.
Tobyhanna and Middle creeks empty into the Tunkhanunk; the Tunkhanunk
empties into the head branch of the Lehigh, which at Easton, empties
into the Delaware. The Moosick mountain, through a gap of which we
passed in the Great Swamp, is the dividing ridge which separates the
Delaware from the Susquehanna."--[_Rev. William Rogers' Journal._]

[32] Sergeant Jonas Brown, of Captain Charles Graham's Co., Second New
York, returned as dead by Lieut. Conolly, in 1785, drew lot
twenty-three, of the military tract in Homer, containing six hundred
acres.

[33] BRIGADIER GENERAL EDWARD HAND, the youngest brigadier of the
expedition. Born in Ireland the last day of 1744, was an ensign in the
British army, served two years with his regiment in America, then
resigned and settled in Pennsylvania. At the beginning of the
Revolution he entered the continental service as Lieutenant-Colonel,
was made Colonel of a rifle corps in 1776, was in the battles of Long
Island and Trenton, and in the summer of 1777 was in command at
Pittsburg. Washington placed great confidence in his judgment and
consulted him freely as to the feasibility of this campaign. In 1780
he succeeded Scammel as Adjutant General of the army and held the
position until the close of the war. He was a lover of fine horses and
an excellent horseman. He died in Lancaster, Pa., Sept. 3, 1802.

[34] TUNKHANNA, from _Tankhanne_, i.e., _the small stream_, is a
tributary of the Tobyhanna, which it enters at the west corner of
Tunkhanna township. The smallest of two confluents or sources of a
river is always called _Tankhanne_ by the Delawares.

[35] TOBYHANNA, corrupted from _Topi-hanne_, signifying _alder
stream_, i.e., a stream whose banks are fringed with alders; is a
tributary of the Lehigh, which it enters from the south-east at
Stoddartsville.

[36] The camp of the two regiments on White Oak Run, or Rum Bridge
as called in some journals, was the same place where the main
army encamped June, 19th, and "called CHOWDER CAMP from the
commander-in-chief dining this day on chowder made of trout."

[37] "One quart of whiskey to be issued this evening to each officer,
and a half pint to each non-commissioned officer and soldier on the
detachment command by General Poor. * * * The officers are to see
respectively _that water be immediately mixed with the soldier's
whiskey_," General orders, Aug. 15, at Tioga.

[38] Major Adam Hoops, third A.D.C. to General Sullivan. He was in the
army throughout the Revolution, and at one period belonged to the
staff of Washington. He was connected with the earliest surveys of
Western New York. In 1804, he in company with Ebenezer F. Norton,
purchased most of the township of Olean and laid out the village of
Hamilton, the original name of present village of Olean. He was a
bachelor and died in Westchester, Pa.

[39] Dr. Jabez Campfield of Col. Spencer's Regiment, joined his
regiment while they were in camp at Tunkhanna on the 26th of May,
where he says they continued until the 30th, "when we marched to
Locust Hill. All this way the land very indifferent and rough, the
timber mostly pitch pine and hemlock, some white pine, also birch,
mirtle, and some beach, elm and spruce. This hill is covered with
small locust trees. While the detachment remained at Locust Hill, the
First New Hampshire Regiment joined us, but at the same time a
detachment under Colonel Smith were sent to Wyoming so that we gained
very little by the Hampshire men coming up."

William Barton's Journal under date of June 11th says: * * * "Locust
Hill so called, on account of being entirely timbered with it for
twenty-three miles. We all proceeded on our journey again until we
fell in with a detachment composed of several regiments which had been
cutting a road through from Larnard's to Wyoming, as there never was
any before only an old Indian path."

[40] Lieutenant Charles F. Weissenfels of 3d company, 2nd regiment,
served during the war.

[41] On the 21st of July, General Sullivan writes to Congress from
Easton, after complaining of the delays of the quarter-master and
commissary departments in forwarding supplies, he speaks as follows in
regard to the quality: * * * "My duty to the public, and regard to my
own reputation, compel me to state the reasons why this army has been
so long delayed here, without advancing into the enemy's country. * *
* The inspector is now on the ground, by order of the Board of War,
inspecting the provisions; and his regard to the truth must oblige him
on his return to report that, of the salted meat on hand, there is not
a single pound fit to be eaten, even at this day, though every measure
has been taken to preserve it that possibly could be devised. * * *
About one hundred and fifty cattle sent to Sunbury were left there,
being too poor to walk, and many of them unable to stand."

[42] LIEUT. JAMES FAIRLIE, of Capt. Fowler's company, 2nd regiment,
after the consolidation of the five New York regiments in 1780. He
drew military lots Nos. seventy-three Cato, and sixty-five Brutus.

[43] SHADES OF DEATH, supposed by many to have derived the name from
the sufferings of those who escaped from the massacre of Wyoming, but
this is evidently an error, as the name was attached to the locality
and appeared on the maps, long previous to 1778.

[44] WYOMING.

    "_On Susquehanna's side, fair Wyoming!
    Delightful Wyoming!_"--CAMPBELL.

The Delaware name given to a valley on the Susquehanna river, of three
to four miles in width, by about sixteen in length, extending from the
mountain range above the Lackawana, where the river wends its way
through a gorge a thousand feet deep, south-westerly to where the
river again finds its way through a range equally lofty and
precipitous. This was the SCHAHENTOA or SCHAHEN-DOWANE of the
Iroquois, signifying _great plains_, as does also the Delaware name of
Wyoming. From its earliest known history, this valley has been a
favorite place of Indian residence, and was the probable seat of an
Iroquois tribe, called SCHAHENTOAR-RONONS by Brebeuf in 1635, whom he
describes as allies of the Hurons, and speaking their language. In
1614, three Dutchmen in the employ of the Directors of New Netherland,
accompanied a party of Mahican Indians from near Fort Orange, in a war
expedition against the CARANTOUANNAIS, a powerful Iroquois tribe,
whose main village containing more than eight hundred warriors, was
located on the so-called "Spanish Hill" near Waverly, N.Y. These
Dutchmen were captured by the Carantouannais, and were the first white
men these Indians had ever seen; believing them to be French, who were
allies of their friends the Hurons, they treated them kindly, and
conducted them down the Susquehanna to this point, and thence by way
of the Lehigh river, to the Delaware, where they were ransomed by
Capt. Hendricksen, "giving for them kittles, beads and merchandise."
In the map made by the Captain from information furnished by these
Dutchmen, he indicated four towns on the west side of the river, at
this point, and designated the tribe as MINQUAS, this being the
general name applied by the Dutch to all the Iroquois tribes south of
the Five Nations, and west of New Netherland, several of which are
known to have been in existence at that early date, but which appear
to have been entirely overlooked by the scholars of the country.

[45] JACOB'S PLAINS.--A plateau on the east side of the river, above
present Wilkesbarre in the town of Plains. Abraham's Plains are on
the west side of the river. "June 17.--Decamped at 10 o'clock. The
three regiments marched up to Jacob's Plains, encamped near the
bank of the river on the east shore, about four miles above the
garrison."--_Nathaniel Webb's Journal._

[46] "July 20.--Three hundred boats arrived with provisions from
Sunbury.

July 21.--Eight hundred head of cattle, five hundred horses, five
hundred wagons arrived.

July 24.--Two hundred boats arrived, with stores, at which time thirty
cannon were fired from the park."--_Nathaniel Webb's Journal._

[47] FORT JENKINS,--near Centreville, Columbia County, half way
between Wyoming and Sunbury, built in 1777. There was another Fort
Jenkins on the west side of the river a mile above Fort Wintermoot,
built in 1776 under the supervision of the Jenkins and Harding
families. This was captured and destroyed in 1778 in the Wyoming
massacre.

[48] NORTHUMBERLAND,--at the junction of the west, and main branches
of the Susquehanna, above Sunbury, sixty-five miles from Wilkesbarre.

[49] During the absence of Lieut. Hardenbergh down the river a party
visited the battleground. "The place where the battle was fought may
with propriety be called 'a place of skulls,' as the bodies of the
slain were not buried, their bones were scattered in every direction
all around; a great number of which for a few days past having been
picked up, were decently interred by our people. We passed a grave
where seventy-five skeletons were buried; also a spot where fourteen
wretched creatures, who, having surrendered upon being promised mercy,
were nevertheless made immediately to sit down in a ring, and after
the savages had worked themselves up to the extreme of fury in their
usual manner, by dancing, singing, halloaing, &c., they proceeded
deliberately to tomahawk the poor fellows one after another. Fifteen
surrendered and composed the ring; upon the Indians beginning their
work of cruelty, one of them providentially escaped, who reported the
matter to Col. Butler, who upon his return to Wyoming, went to the
spot and found the bones of the fourteen lying as human bodies in an
exact circle."--_Rev. William Rogers' Journal._

[50] NESCOPEC FALLS--at present Nescopec in County of Luzerne.

[51] "WYOMING is situated on the east side of the east branch of the
Susquehanna, the town consisting of about seventy houses, chiefly log
buildings; besides these buildings there are sundry larger ones which
were erected by the army for the purpose of receiving stores, &c., a
large bake and smoke houses. There is likewise a small fort erected in
the town, with a strong abbata around it, and a small redoubt to
shelter the inhabitants in case of an alarm. This fort is garrisoned
by 100 men, draughted from the western army, and put under the command
of Col. Zebulon Butler. I cannot omit taking notice of the poor
inhabitants of the town; two thirds of them are widows and orphans,
who, by the vile hands of the savages, have not only deprived them of
tender husbands, some indulgent parents, and others of affectionate
friends and acquaintances, besides robbed and plundered of all their
furniture and clothing. In short, they are left totally dependent on
the public, and are become absolute objects of charity."--_Hubley's
Journal._

[52] The army when concentrated at Wyoming was organized as follows:

     New Jersey Brigade, Brig. Gen'l William Maxwell com'd.
     1st N.J., Col. Matthias Ogden.
     2d, N.J., Col. Israel Shreve.
     3d, N.J., Col. Elias Dayton.
     5th, N.J., Col. Oliver Spencer's Independent Regiment, also
       fragments of Forsman's and Sheldon's regiments merged into
       Spencer's.
     New Hampshire Brigade--Brig. Gen'l Enoch Poor, com'd.
     1st N.H., Col. Joseph Cilley.
     2d N.H., Lieut. Col. George Reid.
     3d N.H., Lieut. Col. Henry Dearborn.
     2d N.Y., Col. Philip Van Cortlandt.
     Brigade of Light Troops, Gen'l Edward Hand, com'd.
     11th Pa., Lieut. Col. Adam Hubley.
     German Regiment, Maj. Daniel Burkhardt.
     Independent Wyoming Company, Capt. Simon Spalding.
     Wyoming Militia, Capt. John Franklin.
     Schott's Rifle Corps, under Capt. Selin.


[53] FORTY FORT--On the right bank of the Susquehanna between Pittston
and Wilkesbarre, built in 1770 by the company of emigrants from
Connecticut, forty in number.

[54] GEN. HAND, and other officers were engaged for six weeks in
collecting supplies, which General Sullivan expected would be in
Wyoming on his arrival. Four hundred and fifty boatmen were enlisted
and large parties of soldiers were detailed for this service.

[55] LACKAWANNA RIVER, flowing into the Susquehanna from the
north-east, called by the Delawares, _Lechau-Hanneck_, signifying the
forks of a river or stream, and by the Iroquois _Hazirok_; an Indian
town called Adjouquay existed at an early date on the east side, on
present site of Pittston.

[56] FALLING SPRINGS.--A short distance above Campbell's ledge, a
beautiful cascade comes rushing down from the mountain called Falling
Springs. It proceeds from several never-failing springs on the summit.
Hubley says, "to attempt a description of it would be almost
presumption. Let this short account thereof suffice. The first or
upper fall thereof is nearly ninety feet perpendicular, pouring from a
solid rock, ushering forth a most beautiful echo, and is received by a
cleft of rocks, considerably more projected than the former, from
whence it rolls gradually and falls into the Susquehanna."

[57] QUAILUTIMACK, seven miles from Lackawanna, signifying "_we came
unawares upon them_." A place between the steep mountain and the
river, said to have been the place of an Indian battle. The camp was
on a "spot of ground situated on the river open and clear, containing
about twelve hundred acres, soil very rich, timber fine, grass in
abundance, and contains several springs."--_Hubley's Journal._

[58] VAN DER LIPPE'S.--Now Black Walnut in the town of Meshoppen,
Wyoming County. So called from a tory of that name, who was the first
settler, above the Lackawanna, who previous to this time had abandoned
the valley, and afterward died in Canada. During this day's march the
army passed over Indian Hill, where Col. Hartley had a battle with the
Indians the previous year.

[59] WYALUSING. At present Wyalusing in Bradford County.--"Passing up
the river we came to a place called by the Indians Gohontoto. Here
they tell us was in early times an Indian town, traces of which are
still noticeable, e.g., corn pits, &c., inhabited by a distinct nation
(neither Aquinoschioni, i.e., Iroquois, nor Delawares) who spoke a
peculiar language and were called TEHOTITACHSAE; against these the
Five Nations warred, and rooted them out. The Cayugas for a time held
a number of them, but the nation and their language are now
exterminated and extinct. This war, said the Indian, fell in the time
when the Indians fought in battle with _bows and arrows_ before they
had guns and rifles."--_Cammerhoff & Zeisberger's Journal_, 1750. This
was also the seat of the Moravian mission of Friedenshtuten,
established in 1765, abandoned in 1772. This was about a mile below
Wyalusing Creek, on the farms now occupied by G.H. Wells and J.B.
Stafford. Rogers devotes several pages to a description of this town.

[60] NEWTYCHANNING.--This day Col. Proctor destroyed the first Indian
town, named Newtychanning, containing about twenty houses, located on
the west side of the Susquehanna, on the north side of Sugar Creek
near North Towanda. Sullivan says it contained twenty-two houses;
Canfield, that it was built the preceding year and contained from
fifteen to twenty houses. This was near the site of Oscalui, of a
previous date, and the same site called Ogehage, on Captain
Hendricksen's map of 1616, and was then one of the towns of the
Carantouannais, an Iroquois tribe destroyed or driven out by the Five
Nations previous to 1650.

[61] STANDING STONE.--A large and long rock, on the west side of the
river, said to have been detached from its bed on the mountain and
taking a downward course, displacing all obstacles, took a final leap
from the top of the precipice, and landed in a vertical position in
the water near the shore, and remains a standing stone. The main army
encamped directly opposite this, on Standing Stone flats; Hand's
brigade on Wysox creek three miles above.

[62] SHESHEQUIN FLATS.--On site of present Sheshequin in Bradford
County, on the opposite side of the river on site of present Ulster,
was the Indian village of Sheshequin, six miles below Tioga. Cash's
creek divided the town into two parts, the north side being heathen,
those on the south Moravian Christians. About 1772 the latter removed
six miles north and founded a new town, afterward known as Queen
Esther's Town. Sheshequin was destroyed by Col. Hartley in 1778.

[63] TIOGA, the name given by the Iroquois to the wedge of land lying
between the Chemung river and north branch of the Susquehanna; from
_Teyaogen_, an interval, or anything between two other things [Bruyas,
Agniers Racines]. _Teiohogen_, the forks of a river (Gallatin's
vocabulary 387). This has from time immemorial been one of the most
important strategical points of the country of the Five Nations.
Zeisberger passed through here in 1750 and says that "at Tioga or _the
gate_, Six Nations Indians were stationed for the purpose of
ascertaining the character of all persons who crossed over into their
country, and that whoever entered their territory by any other way
than through the gate, or by way of the Mohawk, was suspected by them
of evil purpose and treated as a spy or enemy." An Indian town of
TIOGA near the point, destroyed by Col. Hartley in 1778.

The earliest known account of the place is found in Champlain, who
sent out one of his interpreters, named Stephen Brulé, in 1615, to
arrange with the Carantouannais for a force of five hundred warriors,
to co-operate with him in an attack on the Onondaga stronghold, then
located on the town of Fenner, Madison Co., N.Y. Brulé with a small
party of Hurons passed through the country of the Five Nations, to the
great town of Carantouan, containing more than eight hundred warriors,
then located on the so-called Spanish Hill near Waverly. Brulé
returned to Carantouan after the expedition, and the next year, 1616,
went down the Susquehanna to the sea "where he found many nations that
are powerful and warlike."

The three Dutchmen mentioned in note 44 passed down the Susquehanna
Branch and were probably the first white men who ever saw that river;
Brulé, the first that ever saw the Chemung.

[64] BREAK-NECK HILL.--The army passed this day Break-Neck Hill,
nearly opposite North Towanda. "This mountain derives its name from
the great height of the difficult and narrow passage not more than a
foot wide, and remarkable precipice which is immediately
perpendicular, and not less than one hundred and eighty feet deep. One
mis-step must inevitably carry you from top to bottom without the
least hope or chance of recovery."--_Hubley's Journal._

"This day marched on the side of a mountain about three hundred feet
from the bottom in a narrow path, where if we were to step one foot to
our left we would be gone, and on our right the mountain was about
four hundred feet high. N.B.--Three cows fell down and broke every
bone in their bodies."--_Shute's Journal._

[65] Capt. Cummings of the 3d N.J., Lieut. Jenkins, Capt. Franklin and
five others.

[66] CHEMUNG--An Indian town of fifty or sixty houses, occupied in
1779, located on the left bank of the Chemung river, three miles above
the present village of Chemung, in Chemung County, destroyed by Gen.
Sullivan Aug. 13th, 1779.

OLD CHEMUNG.--an Indian town partially abandoned in 1779, located on
the left bank of the Chemung river, half a mile above the present
village of Chemung, in Chemung County. A few houses burned Aug. 13th,
1779.

[67] This night's march was very tedious. The path followed the north
bank of the Chemung, passing the first narrows, near present Waverly,
and the second along the steep hill-sides and precipices west of
present Chemung. At these points there was scarcely room for two to
walk abreast, and a single mis-step would insure a landing on the
rocks a hundred feet below. It was daylight when the troops reached
the second narrows, but a dense fog prevailed, under the cover of
which they advanced, and found the town abandoned.

[68] CHEMUNG AMBUSCADE.--On the failure to surprise the Indians in
their village, General Hand pursued them up the river. About a mile
above New Chemung, the trail passed obliquely over a hill known
locally as the Hog Back, near the present residence of Doctor Everett,
about two and a half miles below the monument on Sullivan Hill. Col.
Hubley's regiment was in front, with Capt. Bush's company of forty men
on the right acting as flankers, with the two Independent Companies in
the rear. The head of the column appears to have been somewhat in
advance of the flankers and when near the summit of the hill, received
a fire from the enemy in ambush, at short range. Six were killed and
nine wounded, among the latter Capt. Franklin, Capt. Carbury and
Adjutant Huston, all of Col. Hubley's regiment. The enemy at once
retreated to the thicket north of the hill.

[69] The following extract from the Journal of Major Norris, describes
the march of this detachment up the north side of the Susquehanna from
Tioga to Union in the town of Union, Broome County, where they met
General Clinton's brigade. For the march of Clinton down the
Susquehanna see Beatty's Journal:

"Aug. 15th.--Nine Hundred chosen men under the Command of Brig. Gen'l
Poor are ordered to march Tomorrow morning up the Susquehanna, to meet
Gen'l Clinton, who is on his march to join Sullivan's Army with his
Brigade and is in some Danger of being Attacked by the Enemy before he
can form a Junction with our Main Army; This afternoon a Small Party
of Indian's fired on some of our Men who were without the Guards after
some Horse's, and Cattle, Killd and Sculped one man and Wounded
another, a Party was sent out in pursuit of them but Could not come up
with them--

16th General Poor March'd with his Detachment at 10 o'clock A.M.
proceeded in two Collam's up the Suscuhannah River Over very rough
Ground we Incampt Near the Ruins of an old town Call'd Macktowanuck
the Land near the River is very Good--

17th We marchd Early this Morning Proceed 12 Miles to Owagea an Indian
Town which was Deserted last Spring, after Planting, About the town is
many Fruit Trees and many Plants, and Herbs, that are Common in our
part of the Country; Hear is a Learge body of clear Intivale Covered
with Grass, Our March to day Very Survear and Fatigueing Esspecelly
for the Left Collm (to which I belong) as we had to pass Several Steap
Hills, and Morasses--

18th We March'd Early this Morning proceeded 14 miles to Choconant the
Remains of a Learge Indian Town which has been likewise Abandoned this
Summer, here we found Plenty of Cucombar's, Squashes, Turnips &c. We
found About twenty Houses, Which we burnt our Days March has been More
Survear than Yesterday, as we had bad Hills and Swamps, one swamp of
about two miles so Covered with Large Pines, Standing and lying which
appeared as tho' Several Haricanes had been busy among since which a
Tremendius Groath of Bushes About twenty feet high has sprung up so
very thick as to Render the passing through them impractible by any
troops but such as Nothing but Death can stop--at sunset we were Very
agreeably alarm'd by the Report of a Cannon up the River Which was
supposed to be General Clintons Evening Gun--

19th Our Troops were put in Motion very early this Morning after
Marching about one Mile Gen'l Poor Received an Exspress from General
Clinton Informing him that the Latter exspected to be hear by 10
o'clock A.M. this day in Consiquence of which we Return'd to our Old
Incampment where General Clinton, Joined us at 10 o'Clock with two
Thousand Men--Including Officers, Boatsman &c. he has two Hundred and
Eight Beautoes with Provisions Ammunition &c. after Mutual
Congratulations and Complements the whole Proceeded down the River to
Owagea and Incampt this Evening, the town of Owegea was made a
burnfire of to Grace our Meating * * * * *"

[70] FORT SULLIVAN--near the centre of the present village of Athens,
where the two rivers approach near each other. It was about one
hundred yards square, with a strong block house at each angle, two
opposite ones resting on the banks of the rivers, and the two others
about midway between. The curtains were made by setting logs endwise
in the ground, the whole being surrounded by a ditch, making a work of
ample strength. Col. Shreve was left in command with a garrison of two
hundred and fifty men beside the invalids, with two pieces of
artillery.

[71] The order of march was arranged to form a hollow square, General
Hand's Brigade in front; General Poor's on the right; General
Maxwell's on the left; and General Clinton's in the rear. Within the
square was Col. Proctor's artillery, and eight lines of led pack
horses, and the beef cattle. On the right of General Poor was a
flanking division, and flank guard, of two hundred and fifty men under
Col. Dubois; and a like flanking division and guard, on the left of
Maxwell, under command of Col. Ogden. A strong advance guard of light
infantry covered the front.

[72] Encamped on the site of Old Chemung, burned Aug. 13th. See note
66.

[73] Encamped on the flats, near New Chemung, see note 66. The army
passed a very difficult defile, known as the "Narrows" west of present
Chemung; the artillery forded the river twice.

[74] Four towns were destroyed in the vicinity of the battle field,
viz.:

1st. NEWTOWN, an Indian village of about twenty houses, occupied in
1779, located on the left bank of the Chemung river about five miles
below Elmira, and a mile above the fortified position between
Baldwin's creek and the river. It gave the name to the battle fought
near it Aug. 29, 1779.

2d. A small village north east of the battle field of Newtown on both
sides of Baldwin's creek, of twenty to thirty houses which had never
been occupied, and were supposed to have been built for storing the
crops grown in the vicinity. This was located at the point where Gen.
Poor commenced the ascent of the hill; and was destroyed by Clinton's
brigade.

3d. A small village near the angle in the works of the enemy on
Baldwin's creek, the timbers of which were used by them in the
construction of the fortifications. One house in front of their works
was occupied by the enemy as a block house during the engagement.

4th. "Monday, Aug. 30. * * * Went up the river about two miles, then
took up a long branch of the river (which runs near S.W.) one mile,
burnt five houses and destroyed all the corn in our way."--_Beatty's
Journal._

[75] THE BATTLE OF NEWTOWN was fought on Sunday, Aug. 29, 1779, near
the Indian village of the same name, on the left bank of the Chemung
river six miles south east of Elmira. The enemy's force of British
regulars, two battalions of Royal Greens, and Tories, were led by
Colonel John Butler, with Captains Walter N. Butler and Macdonald as
subordinates; the Indians by the great Mohawk Captain Thayendanegea,
alias Joseph Brant, Butler being in chief command. The design of the
enemy appears to have been primarily, an ambuscade. They had artfully
concealed their works, and posted their forces in positions to attack
simultaneously, both flanks, front, and rear; the position naturally
strong, was admirably adapted to their purposes. From Elmira,
extending south easterly for several miles, is a mountainous ridge,
running parallel with the river, something over six hundred feet in
height near the Indian village, but gradually melting away to the
level of the plain where it terminates about a mile below; on this
south eastern slope was the battle of Newtown. To the north and east
of this ridge is a similar one, which also terminates near the battle
field, and between them is a considerable stream, which, running
nearly parallel with the river in its general course, enters the
Chemung a mile and a quarter below. The river here sweeps around in a
graceful curve, making a full semi-circle, enclosing several hundred
acres of rich bottom lands, on which were the Indian cornfields; the
Wellsburg north and south road dividing it into two nearly equal
parts. Rising abruptly from this plain is a sharp, narrow ridge, known
locally as the Hog Back, this extends from the river across the plain
nearly to the creek, a distance of about a third of a mile. The crest
of this ridge was occupied by the enemy in force, protected by rude
log breast works and rifle pits, which extended to the eastern
extremity, and from thence turning north, connected with the steep
banks of the creek above. The lines to be defended were these two
sides of a triangle, their right resting on the river, their left on
the mountain, the path of the army passing between the two lines,
along which was also the enemy's line of retreat. From the angle in
the works a thin line extended to the mountain, on which was a body of
the enemy and also another small body on the mountain to the east. The
results at Chemung a few days previous, led the enemy to hope that a
like blunder might be repeated, and that Wyoming and Minnisinks were
to be re-enacted. Presuming that the army, after crossing the creek,
would follow the Indian trail without discovering their works, they
flattered themselves that an unexpected fire on the exposed flanks
would create great confusion, which if augmented by simultaneous
attacks in front and rear by the forces in that quarter, might result
in a panic, and a possible stampede of the pack horses and cattle,
which would be quite as disastrous as the defeat of the army. But
three companies of Morgan's riflemen, the pride of Washington, were in
the advance; these veterans of a hundred battles were in no way
inferior to the enemy in Indian craft; the works and position of the
enemy were discovered when afar off, and this ingenious device of
drawing our forces into an ambuscade was frustrated. The ambuscade
failing, the alternative was presented of forcing a direct attack in
front, under great disadvantage, or of a flanking movement, over very
difficult ground, where nearly the entire force of the enemy could be
brought to bear on the attacking force at any point on interior lines,
possibly in time to repulse one division of the army before the other
could come to its relief. The attack in front was invited by repeated
sorties of a body of about four hundred of the enemy, who would
deliver their fire, and immediately retreat to their works. After
three hours of skirmishing, deliberation, and reconnoitering, General
Sullivan determined to divide his force, turn the enemy's left, and
attack simultaneously in front and flank.

The artillery was posted on a rising ground, three hundred yards from
the enemy, in position to enfilade the main line of their works, and
sweep the ground in the rear, Gen. Hand was to support the artillery,
the left flanking division to threaten the enemy's right, and Gen.
Maxwell's brigade to be held in reserve. Gen. Poor's brigade of four
regiments, the right flanking division, and the three companies of
riflemen, were to make a circuit of about two miles and turn the
enemy's left and attack in flank and rear, to be supported by General
Clinton's brigade of four regiments following as a second line. One
hour was allowed for this movement, at the expiration of which, the
artillery was to open, to be followed by a general assault of the two
divisions. Poor almost immediately after commencing his march, found
himself involved in a thicket of underbrush, almost impenetrable, but
after great difficulty reached the foot of the hill on which the enemy
was posted, just at the moment the artillery fire commenced. Forming
his line of battle with Lieut. Col. Reid's 2d N.H. on the extreme
left, next to him Lieut. Col. Dearborn's 2d N.H., then Alden's 6th
Mass., and Col. Cilley's 1st N.H. on the extreme right. To the right
of the brigade was the right flanking division of two hundred and
fifty men under Col. Dubois, the whole preceded by three companies of
riflemen under Maj. Parr. General Clinton's brigade formed line of
battle with Col. Gansevoort's 3d N.Y. on the left, next Dubois 5th
N.Y., then Livingston's 4th N.Y., with Van Courtlandt's 2d N.Y. on the
extreme right, following in the rear of the first line. Poor when
about half way up the hill encountered the enemy, but not in
sufficient force to materially check the advance of the flanking
division, or the regiments on his right; on reaching the summit of the
hill, these rapidly pushed forward to seize the defile near the river,
a short distance above Newtown, which was the only avenue of escape
for the enemy. Almost at the commencement of the cannonade, the main
force of the enemy adroitly abandoned their works without being
discovered, and precipitated themselves on Col. Reid's regiment in
greatly superior numbers. They swarmed about him in a semi-circle, and
for a few moments made the forest ring with their exultant shouts, but
for a few minutes only; for Col. Dearborn having reached the summit of
the hill, and missing Col. Reid on his left, on his own
responsibility, faced his regiment to the rear and moved to his
assistance. At the same moment the two regiments on the left of
Clinton's brigade by a left oblique movement, came up from the rear to
Reid's support, and the enemy soon found themselves dangerously
threatened. The conflict was short, sharp and decisive, and the war
whoop soon gave place to the retreat halloo. Poor with the remainder
of his brigade, followed by the two regiments on the right of Clinton,
had pushed rapidly for the defile. In the meantime Hand had advanced
in front, and the left flanking division under Col. Ogden had worked
its way along the river on the enemy's flank, when, the enemy
admirably commanded, and wisely discreet, sounded the signal for
retreat just in time to escape. A British account says: "In this
action Col. Butler and all his people was surrounded, and very near
being taken prisoners. On the same day a few miles from this he
attempted again to stop them, but in vain. The Colonel lost four
rangers killed, two taken prisoners and seven wounded." Twelve Indians
were found dead on the field, the number of wounded unknown. The enemy
were pursued for two or three miles above Newtown by the light troops,
where Salmon says they made another stand, which appears to be
confirmed by the account above quoted, but no details are given, and
the matter is not alluded to in Gen. Sullivan's official report. The
loss in killed according to the Indian official account, found four
days after, near Catharine's town is as follows: "Sept. 3d.--This day
found a tree marked 1779, Thandagana, the English of which is Brant,
12 men marked on it with arrows pierced through them, signifying the
number they had lost in the action of the 29th ultimo. A small tree
was twisted round like a rope and bent down which signified that if we
drove and distressed them, yet we would not conquer them."

[76] The loss of our army is variously given in different accounts of
the action. Major Livermore (Journal Aug. 29) says that "but four or
five" were killed and three officers and about "thirty others" were
wounded. Lieut. Barton (Journal) that two or three of ours were killed
and "thirty-four or five wounded." Gen. Sullivan, in a despatch
written the next day after the fight, makes the entire loss _three_
killed and thirty nine wounded.

[77] During the march this day two towns were burned, viz.:

MIDDLETOWN.--A small Indian town mentioned in several Journals as
lying between Newtown and Kanawlohalla, on the north side of the
river, consisting of eight houses, destroyed Aug. 31 by the army while
on the march.

KANAWLOHALLA.--Signifying _a head on a pole_, located on the present
site of Elmira, destroyed by Sullivan's army Aug. 31. In some Journals
this town is called Newtown, and the one near the battle field Lower
Newtown, but a majority designate it by its Indian name, which,
according to Mr. Maxwell should be spelled Canaweola, as pronounced by
Red Jacket, and who also gave the signification, and the legend
connected with it.

Col. Dayton with the 3d N.J. regiment and a detachment of riflemen
were detached here and sent up the river in pursuit of the enemy, whom
the advanced guard saw escaping in their canoes. He failed to overtake
them, but found an Indian village at or near present Big Flats, which
he destroyed. He encamped here for the night and rejoined the main
army the next morning, by a march north-east through the valley, where
the main body were encamped near present Horse Heads.

[78] CATHARINE'S TOWN--_She-o-qua-ga._--An Indian village located on
the high ground a little south of the present village of Havana. The
town was on both sides of the inlet and about three miles from the
head of the lake. This was the residence of the famous Catharine
Montour, by many writers incorrectly confounded with Madame Montour,
and by others with Queen Esther, of Wyoming notoriety.

MADAME MONTOUR, a noted personage in the Colonial history of
Pennsylvania, resided at one time at the present site of
Montoursville, in Pennsylvania, on the west branch of the Susquehanna,
afterwards on an island near Shamokin; and about 1749, when very aged
and blind, removed to the vicinity of Lake Erie, where she probably
died previous to 1752. She had several sons and one daughter, all
distinguished characters in Pennsylvania annals.

QUEEN ESTHER, notorious as the "fiend of Wyoming," "who followed in
the train of the victorious army, ransacking the heaps of slain, and
with arms covered with gore barbarously murdering the wounded who in
vain supplicated for their lives." She was living at Sheshequin six
miles below Tioga point in 1772, and removed about that date six miles
north, and founded a new town, afterward known as Queen Esther's town;
this was afterward destroyed by Col. Hartley in 1778, when she
probably removed to Chemung. She had a sister Mary, and one son, who
lost his life a short time previous to the massacre of Wyoming, which
was probably the exciting cause of her fury at that place. She
afterward settled on the point south of Union Springs, in Cayuga
County, and died there of old age.

CATHARINE MONTOUR was young enough to be the grand daughter of Madame
Montour. At the time of Sullivan's campaign and for some years
previous she had resided at her village near present Havana. She had
two sons, Roland and John, and a daughter Belle. Her sons were
conspicuous characters at Cherry Valley, Wyoming and in Sullivan's
campaign, where John was wounded in the battle of Newtown. Roland
married the daughter of Siangorochti, the chief sachem of the Senecas;
both sons were known as captains in the many Indian raids against the
border settlements. Catharine's reputed husband was Edward Pollard, a
sutler at Fort Niagara, who was also the father of the famous Seneca
warrior, Captain Pollard, by another Indian wife. There was at this
time another Capt. John Montour near Fort Pitt, who accompanied
Colonel Brodhead in his expedition up the Allegany, who was loyal to
the American cause throughout the war. In this expedition of Col.
Brodhead, the husband of Belle Montour was killed.

[79] PEACH ORCHARD, a small Indian town, was destroyed here, August
3d, on the point, called Apple-tree town in Nukerck's Journal. Jenkins
says "the army encamped about 4 in the afternoon near a small Indian
settlement," &c.

[80] CONDAWHAW.--An Indian town occupied in 1779, located on the east
side of Seneca Lake on the present site of North Hector, was so called
in 1778 by Luke Swetland, who passed through it while on his way to
Kendaia. It was burned by the army Sept. 4, 1779. It is called Apple
Town in William Barton's Journal.

[81] KENDAIA, a town containing about twenty houses, located on lot 79
Romulus, on the east side of Seneca lake, on land now owned by Edward
Van Vliet. It was about half a mile from the lake, on both sides of a
small stream. Luke Swetland resided here for a year as a prisoner,
until rescued by the army. Several journals give interesting accounts
of this town, and especially of the Indian tombs, which appear to have
been arranged with more than ordinary care. It was the custom on the
death of distinguished personages to paint on their monumental posts a
record of important events relating to the history of the deceased
person. The fact that these tombs were different in construction and
style of ornamentation from others, suggests the idea that they were a
remnant of some subjugated tribe, differing in mode of burial from the
Iroquois. A noted Seneca warrior named Kendaia was conspicuous at the
siege of Ft. Niagara in 1759.

[82] LIEUT. HARDENBERGH mentions the fact of being "drafted on the
right flank, which was commanded by Col. Dubois." He was probably one
of the one hundred men drafted from the line, as part of the right
flanking division, and consequently would be on the extreme right of
the army while _en route_. The centre line of the army was the regular
Indian trail, which was opened to a sufficient width for the passage
of the artillery. Along Seneca Lake, the present lake road follows
substantially on the line of the trail.

At this point, Beatty says "we encamped close along the edge of the
lake, and opposite to us on the west side of the lake, we could
perceive a small Indian town." See note 84, Gothseungquean.

[83] This child was tenderly cared for, adopted by Capt. Machin, an
officer in the artillery, and christened Thomas Machin. After the
return of the army it was placed in a family near Kingston, N.Y.,
where it died some two years after of small pox. No clue was ever
obtained as to its parentage.

[84] KANADASEAGA, the _grand village_, so called from being the
residence of the chief sachem of the Senecas, located one and a half
miles north-west of present village of Geneva on both sides of
Kanadaseaga Creek. This was the capital of the Seneca nation and
contained about sixty well built houses. A stockade fort was built
here in 1756 by Sir William Johnson, the remains of which were in
existence in 1779 Rev. Samuel Kirkland was a missionary here in
1764-6. Was destroyed Sept. 9.

BUTLER'S BUILDINGS.--A small village called Butler's Buildings was
found on the shore of the lake, near present canal bridge, in the
village of Geneva.

GOTHSEUNGQUEAN, also called _Shenanwaga_ and many other dialectical
variations, an important town, was also destroyed Sept. 8, by a
detachment of riflemen under Major Parr. The name is perpetuated in
Kershong creek, on which it was situated, on Seneca lake, seven miles
south of Geneva. It contained twenty houses.

[85] From Kanadaseaga the route was first south west for about two
miles to the line of the present turnpike, and thence nearly due west
along the line of the turnpike to Canandaigua lake. Beatty mentions an
ancient stockade fort between Kanadaseaga and Canandaigua. This was on
Flint creek on lot 92 in N.W. corner of the town of Seneca. The
encampment was on Flint creek.

[86] KANANDAIGUA, an Indian town of twenty-three large houses mostly
framed, located about a mile from the lake shore, in west part of
present village of Canandaigua. The corn fields, which were very
extensive, were located on the ridge north of the town. The usual
variety and quantity of fruit trees were found here, all of which were
destroyed. From Kanandaigua the route of the army was nearly south
west, substantially on the line of the present road through Bristol to
the foot of Honeoye Lake, a distance of sixteen miles, to the next
village of Hanneyaye.

[87] HANNEYAYE, an Indian town occupied in 1779, located at the foot
of Honeoye lake, about half a mile east of the outlet, and south of
Mill creek. It contained about twenty houses, one of which was
occupied as a fort under command of Capt. Cummings of the 2nd N.J.
regiment. Beatty gives the following description of the work which he
says was occupied by three hundred men in all: "They was encamped
round the house where we had left our stores, and the camp was
abbateed in, and round the house they had made a small Fort of kegs,
and bags of flour, and had three pieces of artillery in it, and the
house they had made full of loop holes, so as to fight out of it in
case of necessity, and upon the whole I think they was very safe."

[88] On leaving Hanneyaye the army forded the outlet near the lake,
and taking a west course, nearly on the line of the present east and
west road leading west from present village of Honeoye, to the summit
of the dividing ridge, and thence in a south west course, crossing the
outlet of Hemlock lake at its foot, and continuing over the hill on
same course to present Foot's corners, in the town of Conesus, where
the army encamped on level ground two miles north of the Indian town
Adjutoa or Kanaghsaws.

[89] KANAGHSAWS, or Adjutoa according to some Journals, an Indian town
of 18 houses, located about a mile north west of Conesus Centre, on
the north and south road that passes through the McMillen farm.
Between the town and the lake on Henderson's flats were the
cornfields. The village appears to have occupied the grounds in the
vicinity of the McMillen residence, and extended north across the
creek, and southward to the plateau now covered by an orchard which
was probably an ancient palisaded site of the town. The main body of
the army encamped on the night of the 12th nearly two miles north on
the flats, south-west of Foot's corners. A local tradition exists that
Hand with the light troops followed the road through Union Corners and
encamped on the L.B. Richardson farm, south west of Conesus Centre at
the False Faces, but nothing of the kind is found in any of the
journals, and is probably incorrect. George Grant says a fine stream
of water ran through the town, and that "Captain Sunfish, a negro,
resided here, a very bold, enterprising fellow, who commanded the
town." Several Journals mention the fact that Big Tree, a noted Indian
warrior, also made this his home. President Dwight describes him as a
man of lofty character and dignified deportment, and that he had
strenuously urged his countrymen to observe strict neutrality, but
without success. The chieftain stood on an elevated spot and saw his
own possessions destroyed. "You see how the Americans treat their
friends," said some of those around him, favorable to Great Britain.
"What I see," calmly replied the chief, "is only the common fortune of
war. It cannot be supposed that the Americans can distinguish my
property from yours, who are their enemies." The army was engaged
until near noon in destroying the crops and re-building the bridge
which had been destroyed by the enemy.

[90] GROVELAND AMBUSCADE.--This, one of the most important matters
connected with Sullivan's campaign, has, for a hundred years, remained
a stumbling block and mystery to historians. This has arisen in part
from erroneous views as to the location of Gathtsegwarohare and the
trails, but mainly from the mistaken idea that Boyd's party was the
force against which the efforts of the enemy were originally directed,
rather than that it was a formidable attempt to ambuscade the main
army.

From Kanaghsaws the trail led south westerly across the low grounds
following the line of the present road near the inlet, and crossing it
at, or very near the site of the present bridge, about three-fourths
of a mile from the head of the lake. North of the bridge, the banks of
the inlet are low and marshy, in many places impassable for infantry,
and at all points impassable for artillery and pack horses; while
south of the bridge, is a wet swamp almost impenetrable from the thick
growth of underbrush, west of the lake and Inlet is a steep hillside,
the face of which, cut up by numerous ravines, is so steep that with
considerable difficulty an army could march directly up it. The trail
after leaving the bridge probably continued south westerly up the hill
obliquely, nearly on the line of the present highway to the summit of
the bluff, and thence turning northwest followed along the heads of
the ravines for a mile and thence directly west to Gathtsegwarohare.
Directly west of the bridge, between two very deep ravines, is a space
nearly half a mile in width, which continues up the hill on very
favorable ground for the advance of the army. It appears to be the
only point where it could advance in the order of march laid down,
which would require a space of nearly a half a mile in width for the
several columns.

After the battle of Newtown, Butler and Brant with their demoralized
forces, sullenly retired, powerless to prevent the advance of the
devastating army. Butler had reached the last Indian village of
Canawaugas, located on the west side of the Genesee, twelve miles
north of the Great Genesee Castle. Here he received re-inforcements of
regulars from Niagara, and determined to make one more effort against
the invaders. Gathering all his available forces of regulars, tories,
and Indians, he left Canawaugas on the morning of the 12th of
September, and probably reached the position on the hill west of
Kanaghsaws, on the evening of the same day. Here they posted
themselves north of the trail, at the heads of the ravines about
three-fourths of a mile west of the bridge, and a mile and a half from
Kanaghsaws. This was a most admirable position for an ambuscade, and
in many essential particulars of topography and fact, bears a striking
resemblance to the fatal ground where Braddock so ingloriously
sacrificed his army; and had Sullivan advanced in the same blundering
manner, he too, might have met with an equally disastrous defeat. The
plan appears to have been, to attack a portion of the army after it
had crossed the bridge, or to ambuscade the head of the column while
ascending the hill; but whatever may have been the original design, it
was completely frustrated by the fortunate movements of the
unfortunate Boyd. It will be remembered that the army went into camp
on the flats near Foot's Corners two miles north of the village of
Kanaghsaws. Boyd and his party left camp at 11 o'clock at night,
passed through the abandoned Kanaghsaws, and from thence pursued the
direct trail which led south westerly up the hill to Gathtsegwarohare.
In the darkness of the night, he passed Butler's right flank, neither
party being conscious of the presence of the other, and reached
Gathtsegwarohare, which the inhabitants had abandoned early in the
morning, without encountering any difficulty. On the morning of the
13th Sullivan advanced to Kanaghsaws, and finding that the enemy had
destroyed the bridge over the inlet, he detailed a portion of the army
to aid the pioneers in its re-construction, and to repair the roadway
over the low grounds leading to it. All of this was directly under the
eye of Butler, who, according to a British account, "lay undiscovered
though only a musket shot from the rebels, and even within sight." On
reaching the town Boyd halted his forces at the suburbs, himself and
one of his men reconnoitered the place, then rejoined the party and
concealed themselves in the woods near the town. He sent back two of
his men to report to General Sullivan, and awaited the light of the
day whose morning was just breaking. These two men got through safely
and reported. About daybreak four Indians were seen to enter the town
by Boyd, one of whom was killed, another wounded, the rest escaped.
Boyd then immediately set out to return, expecting to meet the army on
the march, and when about half way, despatched two more men to inform
the general of his intention to remain "on the path" and await the
coming of the army. These men soon encountered five Indians, and
returned; the entire party then resumed the march, following and
firing on the retreating Indians, who lured them directly into the
lines of the enemy. Colonel Butler hearing the firing on his right and
rear imagined he was discovered, and that instead of ambuscading the
rebels, he was himself to be surprised by this unexpected attack in
the rear. No evidence whatever has appeared to confirm the conjecture,
that Boyd's presence was either known or suspected in that quarter, by
Butler, or any portion of his force, until discovered by the five
retreating Indians, and to them, only by accident; but when discovered
with true aboriginal cunning they allured their unsuspecting victims
to the fatal embrace of the enemy, who came there to surprise an army,
but were prevented by the blundering of a scout.

A few of Boyd's party who were acting as flankers escaped, five or six
fell near the trail and were found when the army advanced, the
remainder retreated a short distance north to a clump of trees, where
their bodies were found all near together, and where all the bodies
were buried on the return march of the army on the 16th. During the
construction of the bridge a guard had been established west of the
inlet, and Captain Lodge with his party engaged in making their
surveys, had advanced some distance up the hill; the bridge was about
completed when the fugitive flankers came rushing down the hill
pursued by small parties of the enemy. Hand's brigade immediately
advanced up the hill to the position occupied by the enemy in the
morning, where he found the packs of the enemy in the position they
had left a few minutes previous. He remained here in line of battle
until the army had crossed, and formed for the advance up the hill.

[91] Capt. Benjamin Lodge, with a party of assistants accompanied the
army and with chain and compass surveyed the entire route of the army
from Easton to the great Genesee town. On the return march he
accompanied Col. Butler's expedition through the Cayuga country.

[92] CORPORAL CALHAWN, a volunteer, died the next day.

[93] GATHTSEGWAROHARE, so called by Nukerck; _Gaghegwalahale_ by
Dearborn; _Cassawauloughly_ by Hardenburgh, was seven miles directly
west of Kanaghsaws, on the east side of Canaseraga creek about two
miles above its confluence with the Genesee river. Here is a beautiful
plateau of about six acres, admirably adapted for an Indian town, at
present occupied by the house and surrounding grounds of the widely
known "Hermitage," the ancestral home of the Carolls. The town
contained twenty-five houses, mostly new, and appears to have been
located on both sides of the stream north of the Caroll mansion. The
tribe residing here called Squa-tche-gas by Sullivan; by the Onondagas
Tchoueragak, signifying wild cats; by Cusic Squakihows, and by others
Kah-kwas, were the same that afterward settled at Squakie-Hill, to
whom was reserved the two square miles in the Big Tree Treaty of 1797.
They were a remnant of one of the tribes of the historic Eries, who
occupied the territory to the south and east of Lake Erie whose blood,
language, and league did not differ materially from the Iroquois Five
Nations. After a terrible conflict, and many bloody battles the Eries
were finally overthrown about the year 1655, and a remnant
incorporated with the league. They were permitted to live by
themselves, to have a separate council fire and keep up a show of
tribal rites, but were really vassals to do the bidding of their
masters. Boyd and his party reached this town about at the break of
day on the morning of the 13th, and found it abandoned. He sent two of
his men to report to Gen. Sullivan and concealed his force in the
adjacent woods. Soon after four Indians on horseback entered the town,
one of whom, Sah-nah-dah-yah, was killed and scalped by Murphy, when
Boyd set out for camp. As Sullivan approached the town about dark on
the 13th, he found the enemy, both Indians and rangers drawn up in
battle array apparently intending to dispute the further advance of
the army; but as the advancing columns assumed their positions in line
of battle, and the flanking divisions moved to the right and left,
threatening their lines of retreat, a few shots from the howitzers
caused them to abandon their position, and retreat across the
Canaseraga. The army were engaged until noon of the 14th in destroying
the cornfields which were very extensive in the vicinity of the town.

[94] CHENUSSIO.--This town, though not in existence at the time of
Sullivan's campaign, is intimately connected with its history. It was
located on the site of ancient Williamsburg, near the confluence of
the Canaseraga and the Genesee, on the east side of the latter river.
It appears on the Guy Johnson map of 1771 as Chenussio, on the Pouchot
map of 1758 as Connecchio, in both cases at the point described and
where Mary Jennison's narrative says it was in her day. In 1750 it was
visited by Cammerhoff and Zeisberger, two Moravian missionaries, who
called it Connesschio and describe it as then containing forty houses.
All of these names are dialectical and orthographical variations of
the modern word Genesee, signifying _the beautiful valley_. Gaustarax,
a celebrated Seneca Chief, was for many years a leading spirit of this
town, and during the French and Indian war, being thoroughly in the
interests of the French, it required all the diplomatic ability of Sir
William Johnson, and the influence of the other nations of the league,
to neutralize his efforts. It was in existence as early as 1750, and
as late as 1770, but in 1768 it had ceased to be the western door,
which honor was then held by the great town of Chenandoanes, on the
west side of the river. At the time of Sullivan's campaign it had
ceased to exist or had dwindled into an insignificance unworthy of
mention.

This was the town that Boyd was sent to reconnoitre, and which Major
Norris says the General expected to find on the east side of the river
and two miles north of Gathtsegwarohare. This is the town also, that
writers confound with the great town west of the river, and which so
perplexed General Sullivan in his examination of the maps.

[95] GENESEE CASTLE.--This was the great village of the Senecas, the
western door of the Long House, located between Cuylerville and the
west bank of the Genesee river, in the town of Leicester, Livingston
County. It appears on Evans' map as Chenandoanes in 1776, is mentioned
as early as 1754 as Chenandanah, and is often called Little Beard's
town. Sullivan's official report says: "The Castle consisted of 128
houses mostly large and elegant. The place was beautifully situated,
almost encircled with a cleared flat, which extended for a number of
miles, where the most extensive fields of corn were waving, and every
kind of vegetable that can be conceived."

[96] This soldier was named Parker, who with Lieut. Boyd were made
prisoners. They were carried to Little Beard's Town, where Boyd after
being tortured in a most cruel manner was beheaded. Parker was
beheaded without being tortured. The remains of Boyd and Parker were
removed to Mount Hope Cemetery in August, 1842.

[97] Several writers claim that Canawaugas, on the west side, and
Ohadi and Big Tree on the east side of Genesee river were destroyed in
this campaign. No reliable authority has been furnished in support of
the theory. Sullivan says distinctly that he went no farther than the
great town, beyond which, as he was informed, there was no settlement,
and no villages are mentioned in any account as existing on the east
side of the river, nor is mention made of any portion of the army
being on that side,--on the contrary, several mention the fact, that
_all the army_ were engaged in the destruction of the town, and
cornfields, which, when completed at 2 o'clock on the afternoon of the
15th, _the whole army_ came to an about face, and returned on the same
route and in same order in which they advanced. Butler left Canawaugas
on the morning of the 15th for Niagara.

[98] Nathan Davis in his account, before referred to, mentions the
incident with additional particulars. Her story was that at the time
she and her little boy were taken prisoners, her husband was killed by
the savages; that she had lived with the Indians some two years, and
when the army entered the town, the day before, the Indians were in
such haste to get out it that she could not follow them and finally
lost herself in the woods, and thinking it might be Butler's camp she
had ventured to show herself. She was taken to the General's Quarters
and well provided for. During the march the woman and her boy were
furnished with a horse. On the third day of the march the child was
taken sick and shortly after died. The boy was wrapped in an old
blanket and hastily buried. The scene is described as exceedingly
touching. She afterward married Roswell Franklin, the first settler of
Cayuga County.

[99] Present Canandaigua Lake in Ontario county, see note 86.

[100] See note 84 for description of this town.

[101] This encampment was on Rose Hill in the town of Fayette.

[102] Lieut. Col. William Butler. See Thomas Grant's account of the
march of this detachment.

[103] No account has been found of the exact route taken by this
detachment. It is supposed they followed the regular Indian trail, the
line of which was afterward substantially adopted for the Seneca
Turnpike, which passed through Auburn and Onondaga Hill to Fort
Stanwix on the Mohawk, on the site of present Rome in Oneida County.
On the way the party passed through the Oneida and Tuscarora towns,
where every mark of hospitality and friendship was shown the party.
They reached Fort Stanwix on the 25th.

[104] KENDAIA. See note No. 81 for description of this town.

[105] "We lost in this place more than a hundred horses, and it has
been called, I suppose, the valley of Horse Heads to this
day."--_Nathan Davis' Statement._

[106] During the absence of the army Col. Reid had constructed a
palisaded work at the junction of Newtown creek and the Chemung just
below Sullivan's Mills in Elmira, called in some accounts Fort Reid.

[107] There were five brigades.

[108] At the same time news was received of "the generous proceedings
of Congress in augmenting the subsistence of the officers and men."

[109] Thirteen appropriate toasts were drunk. The last was follows:
"May the enemies of America be metamorphosed into pack horses and sent
on a western expedition against the Indians."--_Lossing's Field Book
Rev., I, 278, note._

[110] "Sept. 27.--A large fatigue party was sent up the river nine
miles, where they loaded nine boats with corn and other vegetables and
brought them down. This evening Mr. Lodge and five men from Col.
Butler came and informed us that the Col. was about 10 miles from
camp."--_Jenkins' Journal._

[111] Col. VanCortlandt says he went above Painted Post.

[112] TIOGA POINT, below present Athens. See note 63.

[113] FORT SULLIVAN, built on the narrow isthmus between the two
rivers in present village of Athens. See note 70.

[114] VAN DER LIPPES. See note 58.

[115] LACKAWANNA. See Note 55. The site of Coxton, ten miles from
Wyoming at the upper end of the valley.

[116] _Wyoming_, fort and village on the east side of the Susquehanna
below present Wilkesbarre. See note 44.

[117] BULLOCK'S, deserted house, seven miles from Wyoming at the Great
Meadows, and fifty-eight miles from Easton,--called also Sullivan's
camp, from his encamping there June 22. Nathan Bullock resided here at
the time of the Wyoming massacre. He had two sons, Amos and Asa, one
of whom was a lawyer, both killed in the battle. The father was
captured and carried to Canada in 1780.

[118] SHADES OF DEATH, so called from being a dense forest. Several
places in Pennsylvania bore the same name. See note 31.

[119] WHITE OAK RUN, or RUM BRIDGE, 33 miles from Easton. See note 36.

[120] BRINKER'S MILLS, or Sullivan's Stores, so called "on account of
a large house built here, and a quantity of provisions being stored
therein for the use of the forces under Major General Sullivan's
command."--_Rogers' Journal._ Captain Patterson was in command; 19
miles from Easton in present town of Hamilton, Monroe county.

[121] Encamped near Heller's Tavern at the foot of Blue Mountain, at
present Hellerville in town of Plainfield, Northampton county, 12
miles from Easton.

[122] "EASTON consists of about 150 houses. There are but three
elegant buildings in it, and about as many inhabitants that are any
ways agreeable. Take them in general they are a very inhospitable
set--all High Dutch and Jews."--_Shute's Journal._

[123] MARBLETOWN, a town in Ulster Co., N.Y., west of the Hudson. They
appear to have taken the road through Warren and Sussex counties, N.J.

[124] WARWICK on Wawayanda creek in south west part of Orange county.

[125] NEW WINDSOR on the Hudson, in Orange county.

[126] NEW PALTZ, a post village, on the Wallkill in Ulster County,
N.Y.




GENERAL CLINTON'S MARCH DOWN THE SUSQUEHANNA.


General James Clinton was born in Orange County, New York, August 9th,
1736. He was third son of Colonel Charles Clinton, brother of Governor
George Clinton, and father of Governor DeWitt Clinton, of New York.
During the French and English war, in 1756, he distinguished himself
at the capture of Fort Frontenac, where he was a Captain under
Bradstreet. Seven years later he commanded the regiments raised to
protect the frontiers of Orange and Ulster counties against Indian
incursions. In 1775, with the rank of Colonel, he accompanied the
chivalric Montgomery to Quebec. He was appointed a brigadier, August
9th, 1776, and commanded Fort Clinton when it was attacked in October,
1777, by Sir Henry Clinton; his brother, George Clinton, at same time
being in command of Fort Montgomery. After a gallant defense against
superior numbers, the forts were carried by storm, Gen. Clinton being
the last man to leave the works. He was stationed at West Point during
the greater part of 1778. In 1779 he commanded the brigade of New York
troops under General Sullivan. With a force of 1600 men he ascended
the Mohawk to Canajoharie, and thence across to Otsego lake. Here he
collected a large number of batteaux, and erecting a dam at the foot
of the lake, raised the water several feet. By tearing away the dam,
an artificial flood was made, on which the batteaux floated to the
place of meeting at Tioga, the army marching alongside by land. The
Journals of Lieut. Van Hovenbergh and Major Beatty give an account of
this march.


MAJOR ERKURIES BEATTY.

Major Erkuries Beatty, was born October 9, 1759, son of Rev. Charles
Beatty, who came to America from Ireland in 1729. He was an apprentice
in Elizabethtown, N.J., at the beginning of the revolution, and served
with the Jersey troops; was at Long Island Aug. 9, 1776, under General
Sterling, and served as a sergeant at White Plains, Oct 28. He was
commissioned an Ensign in the 4th Penn. regiment, with rank from Jan.
3, 1777; was promoted to Lieutenant May 2, and was engaged in the
battle of Brandywine, Sept. 11th of same year. He was badly wounded at
Germantown, but rejoined his regiment at Valley Forge in January,
1778. He was at Monmouth June 28 of that year, and shortly after
accompanied his regiment to Schoharie, N.Y. He was with Col. Van
Schaick in his expedition against the Onondagas in June, 1779, and
with his regiment accompanied Gen. Clinton down the Susquehanna to
participate in Sullivan's campaign, during which he wrote a Journal
covering the period from June 11 to Oct. 22 of that year, of which the
following is a part, the original of which is now in the archives of
the New York Historical Society, to whose courtesy we are indebted for
permission to make a copy. He was at the surrender of Cornwallis Oct.
19, was mustered out of service Nov. 3, 1783, and died at Princeton,
N.J., Feb. 23, 1823.


PART OF BEATTY'S JOURNAL, 1779.

Monday, Aug. 9.--Agreeable to yesterday's order the Gen'l beat at 6
o'clock, the troops marched about 8, excepting 3 Men which was to
remain in each boat to take them down the River. The Infantry march in
front which I now belong to, and the Remainder of Battalions next,
marched on 16 miles within 5 miles of Yorkham's[127] where we
encamped on a small improvement called Burrows'[128] farm where there
was a great many Rattlesnakes and very large, there was one killed
with 15 rattles on.

Tuesday 10.--Rained, a little last night and this day till 10
o'clock--marched off the ground at 3 o'clock and went 5 miles to
Yorkham's where we encamped, the men in the Boats encamped on the farm
which lies on the East side of the River and the Remainder on the
other side opposite, went on guard to-night.

Wednesday 11.--Marched off this morning at Sunrise and proceeded on 14
miles down the River where we encamped on a small farm, passed several
farms to-day with very poor houses on them and some none, the Riflemen
in front saw fresh Indian tracks to-day on the Path and found a * * *
at one of their * * * To-day we crossed a large creek called Otego,
and passed several Indian encampments, where they had encamped when
they were going to destroy Cherry Valley or returning, likewise we
passed one of their encampments yesterday, we encamped to-night at
Ogden's farm and very bad encamping ground.

Thursday 12.--Marched off this morning 7 o'clock, had the advanced
Guard to-day, proceeded down the West side of the River as usual, 12
Miles came to a small Scotch settlement called Albout[129] on the
other side of the River 5 miles from Unadilla which we burnt, but the
people had gone to the Enemy this last Spring, went on to Unadilla,
crossed the River to the East side and encamped, the River was about
middle deep when we waded it. This settlement was destroyed by our
detachment last fall excepting one house which belonged to one
Glasford who went to the enemy this Spring, his house was immediately
burnt when we came on the ground to-day. We passed several old Indians
encamp'ts where they encamped when they destroyed Cherry Valley, the
road middling hilly.

Friday 13th.--This morning very foggy and a great deal of dew. Marched
off at 6 o'clock, went 2 miles, waded the River about 3 foot deep,
proceeded on to Conihunto[130] a small Indian village that was, but
was Destroyed by our Detachment last fall, its 14 miles from
Unadilla.[131] A little below this town there is 3 or 4 Islands in the
River where the Indians raised their corn. On one of those Islands our
troops encamped with the boats and cattle, the light Infantry went 2
miles from Conihunto where they encamped a little after 3 o'clock in
the woods. Middle good Road to-day.

Saturday 14th.--Marched this morning at 8 o'clock, very hilly road for
the Right flank, arrived at the fording 2 miles from Onoquaga[132]
about 2 o'clock which is 8 from where we started, the ford being too
deep to wade, crossed in our Boats to the East Side, went over a high
hill and got to Onoquaga at 3 o'clock where we encamped on very pretty
ground. This town was one of the neatest of the Indian towns on the
Susquehanna, it was built on each side of the River with good log
houses with stone chimneys and glass windows, it likewise had a church
and burying ground and a great number of apple-trees, and we likewise
saw the Ruins of an Old Fort which formerly was here many years ago.
The Indians abandoned this town last fall when they heard of our
detachment coming to destroy it, they had but just left it when we
came in it, but we did not catch any of them, but burnt their town to
ashes, and the detachment returned. This evening we fired an evening
gun.

Sunday 15th.--Very heavy dew this morning, went on Guard, the Army
Remain at Onoquago to-day quiet, no news stirring as I hear of
particular.

Monday 16th.--This morning a very heavy dew and fog, which is very
customary in this country, was relieved of my Guard and the day proved
exceedingly warm, a heavy shower of rain this afternoon, at 12 o'clock
Major Church with the 4th P. Regt. went out 5 or 6 Miles to meet 4 or
500 Militia[133] who we expected to join us here, but he returned in
the evening and saw nothing of them.

Tuesday 17th.--Marched off from Onoquaga this morning 8 o'clock,
proceeded down the river 3 miles to one of the Tuscarora towns, which
was burnt by one of our Detachments last fall, here waded the river
about 4 feet deep to the west side, went on one Mile when we came to
another of the Tuscarora towns called Shawhiangto[134] consisting of
10 or 12 houses which we burnt, then marched on over a very barren
mountainous country 10 or 12 Miles, came to a Tuscarora settlement
called Ingaren[135] consisting of 5 or 6 houses, but a good deal
scattered, encamped at the lower end of the settlement after burning
the houses, here they had planted a good deal of corn, potatoes, &c.,
which we destroyed, a few yards in front of our comp'ys encamping
ground there was a tanfat farm with several Hides at a tannery which
the soldiers got, and close by it they discovered in a little hole, a
man which was laid there and a little dirt thrown over him just to
cover him. We had his head uncovered, but he was too putrified, we
could not discover whether he was a white man or Indian but supposed
to be a white man, as there was a Scotch Bonnet found near him.
Marched to-day 15 miles.

Wednesday 18th.--Marched off from Ingaren 7 o'clock through a very
fine rich country very well timbered but poorly watered, scarce any;
arrived at Chinango River at 4 o'clock where we forded it about 4 feet
deep, and almost as wide as the Susquehanna but not so deep, as soon
as we got over we halted and Major Parr with 100 men went up the River
to destroy the Chinango town[136] which lay 4 miles up the River, but
when we came there, we found the town was burnt, which consisted of
about 20 houses. It seems when the Indians evacuated it last winter
they destroyed it, therefore we Returned and found the army encamped 2
Mile below the Chinango River. Marched to-day 22 miles, and burnt
several Indian houses on the road. This evening came up the River 2
Runners who informed us that Gen'l Poor with 1000 Men was within 9
miles of us coming to meet us and that Genl. Sullivan lay at the mouth
of the Tyoga and that he had sent part of his army up to Shamong which
they had destroyed, and had returned to Gen'l Sullivan with the loss
of 9 men killed and some more wounded, which was in small
skirmishing. The Indians had taken off all their [property] from
Shamong, except a few cattle which our people got.

Thursday 19th.--Marched this morning 7 o'clock, went 2 Miles where we
burnt 7 or 8 houses on the East side of the River, 4 miles further at
the Chuggnuts[137] we fell in with Gen'l Poor's army who was ready to
march, they had burnt this settlement which lies on the East side of
the River about 20 houses, made no halt here but went on 4 mile, Gen'l
Clinton's army in front and Gen'l Poor's in the rear. Came to a
middling large Creek where we made a halt for one hour, then marched
on 12 Miles without halting and arrived at Owego[138] about sundown
after a very fatiguing march of 22 Miles. This afternoon fell a small
shower of Rain.

Friday 20th.--Rained a little last night, and successively all this
day therefore did not move, went a party down to Owego town which lies
one mile lower down and burnt it, consisted of about 20 houses.

Saturday 21.--Clear weather this morning but a very heavy fog, marched
a little after 7 o'clock, forded Owego creek which is about * * * one
third of the Susquehanna, at this place it was about three feet deep
and about 50 yards wide--Went thro. the * * * of Owego town, crossed a
pretty large brook, went 12 miles, halted at a small brook one hour
for refreshment. Proceed on 3 Miles further when we encamped at 4
o'clock opposite Fitzgerald's farm[139] in the woods, it is a very
fine farm but no house on it, nor any body living on it. On this
ground where we encamped Mr. Sawyers a man who was made prisoner by
Indians, along with his Neighbor Mr. Cowley who both lived on the head
of the Delaware, after the Indians having them so far on their
Journey, they rose in the Night killed the Indians which was 3 or 4
and made their escape, we saw the * * * of the Indians * * * when we
came on the ground. To-day we met with a bad accident, two of our
Boats of Ammunition overset in the River and Damaged a good many boxes
of cartridges and a few casks of powder, to-night went on Guard.

Sunday 22d.--Marched off this morning 7 o'clock, proceeded on, we
crossed two middling large brooks. Arrived at Tyoga 11 o'clock, where
we found Genl. Hand's Brigade encamped one Mile above the mouth of the
Tyoga where they was building 4 Block houses, the other troops was
encamped over the point which was Gen'ls Poor's and Maxwell's
Brigades, we encamped on the Right of the whole. On our coming into
camp we was saluted by 13 Pieces of cannon which was Returned by our
two little pieces on the River. We found Gen'l Hand's Brigade under
arms with a Band of Music which played Beautiful as we passed by them,
We encamped on a very * * * pretty piece of ground and spent the
Remainder of the day in seeing our friends in the different Regiments,
likewise when we arrived here our Infantry was disbanded and ordered
to join their respective Regts. Very heavy shower of rain this
afternoon. Marched 7 miles to-day.


FOOTNOTES:

[127] JOACHIM VAN VALKENBERG, afterwards killed in battle near Lake
Utsayunthe in 1781.

[128] Van Hovenberg's Journal says Burris Farms.

[129] ALBOUT.--A Scotch, tory settlement on the east side of the
Unadilla river, five miles above Unadilla, was burned Aug. 12, 1779,
by Clinton's detachment. Most of the Scotch Settlers went to Canada at
the beginning of the difficulties; those who remained were more in
sympathy with the British than with the Americans.

[130] CONIHUNTO, called Gunnagunter by Van Hovenberg, an Indian town
14 miles below Unadilla, destroyed by Col. William Butler in 1778. It
appears to have been on the west side of the river.

[131] UNADILLA, an Indian town at the junction of the Unadilla with
the Susquehanna, destroyed by Col. William Butler in 1778. "Returning
to Unadilla, that settlement, on both sides of the river was burned,
as also a grist-mill and saw-mill, the only ones in the Susquehanna
Valley."--_Letter of Col. William Butler._

[132] ONOQUAGA, an Indian town on both sides of the Susquehanna river,
eight miles below Conihunto near present Ouaquaga in the town of
Colesville, Broome Co. When destroyed by Col. Butler in 1778 he
mentions a lower or Tuscarora town three miles below, this would be
near present Windsor. The old fort mentioned is probably one built for
the Indians by Sir William Johnson in 1756. Rev. Gideon Hawley was a
missionary here at an early date.

[133] Col. Pawling, commanding a regiment of New York levies, was to
meet Clinton at this point, but arriving after the army had passed,
they returned to Wawarsing.

[134] SHAWHIANGTO, a small Tuscarora town four miles below Onoquago,
burned by General Clinton August 17, 1779; it contained ten or twelve
houses, located on the west side of the river, near present Windsor in
Broome County.

[135] INGAREN, a small Tuscarora town, at or near Great Bend in
Susquehanna county, Penn. It was called Tuscarora by Van Hovenberg,
and described as being sixteen miles from the camp, four miles below
Chenango river; and twelve miles by land and twenty by water, from
Onoquaga, where the army encamped on the 16th. Was destroyed by
General Clinton, August 17, 1779.

[136] CHENANGO, also called Otsiningo, an important Indian town
located four miles north of Binghamton on the Chenango river, in
present town of Chenango, near the present village of the same name.
The twenty-two miles travel mentioned, evidently includes the march up
the Chenango to this town, and from thence to the camp. Van Hovenberg
estimates the day's march of the army at 16 miles. Many writers
incorrectly locate this town at Binghamton.

[137] CHOCONUT, or _Chugnutt_, an important Indian town of fifty or
sixty houses, mostly on the south side of the Susquehanna at the mouth
of Big Choconut creek, on the site of the present village of Vestal,
in town of Vestal, Broome county. Burned Aug. 19, 1779, by Gen. Poor's
detachment which encamped on the north side of the river near present
Union where the two detachments united. Gen. Clinton's camp the same
night, was six miles distant up the river.

[138] OWAGEA, an Indian town of about twenty houses. Occupied in 1779,
located on Owego creek about a mile from the Susquehanna near the
present village of Owego in Tioga County. Gen. Poor's detachment
encamped Aug. 17th on the site of present village, where was a small
Indian Hamlet. Owagea was burned Aug. 19.

[139] MANCKATAWANGUM, or Red Bank, here called Fitzgerald's Farm,
appears to have been on the south side of the Susquehanna, in the town
of Nichols, nearly opposite the village of Barton. Major Norris'
Journal, in going up, says on the 16th the detachment "encamped near
the ruins of an old town called MACKTOWANUCK" (see p. 41); Lieut.
Jenkins' Journal; says "10 miles from Tioga at a place called
MANCKATAWANGUM or _Red Bank_," and mentions encamping at same point on
the return march. A table of distances in Canfield's Journal says
"from the mouth of the Tioga (Chemung) to Mackatowando 10 miles." This
would locate the Indian town at or near present Barton. On the Tioga
county map, Mohontowonga Farm appears on the south side of the river
opposite Barton, and an island in the river named Mohontowango.

Early in the spring of 1779, two men named Sawyer and Cowley were
captured near Harpersfield, by four Schoharie Indians, named Han
Yerry, Seth's Henry, Adam and Nicholas. One of the captives was an
Irishman, the other a Scotchman. They were refugees from Harpersfield,
who had sought safety in Schoharie at the beginning of the
difficulties. The prisoners could not speak Dutch, which the Indians
understood, nor could the Indians understand English. When captured,
they claimed by signs to be friends of the King, and were not only
willing, but anxious to accompany their captors. The prisoners set off
with such apparent willingness on the journey, that the Indians did
not think it necessary to bind them, but permitted them to procure
wood and water. They had been captives eleven days without finding a
favorable opportunity for escape, but on arriving at a deserted hut at
this point, the captives were sent to cut wood a few rods distant,
using for this purpose an ax belonging to one of the prisoners. On
such occasions, usually one cut and the other carried to the camp
fire; but this time, while Cowley was chopping, and Sawyer waiting for
an armful, the latter took from his pocket a newspaper, and pretended
to read its contents to his fellow, but really proposed a plan for
regaining their liberty. After procuring a sufficient quantity of
wood, and partaking of a scanty supper, they laid down for the night
as usual, a prisoner between two Indians. When the Indians were sound
asleep, the prisoners arose, secured the guns, shaking the priming
from them, Sawyer securing the tomahawk of Han Yerry, and Cowley the
ax. At a given signal, the blows descended, and the weapons sank deep
into the brain of their victims, but unfortunately, Sawyer in
attempting to free his weapon from the skull, drew the handle from its
socket. These two Indians were killed, but the noise awoke the others,
who instantly sprung to their feet; as Seth's Henry arose, he received
a blow partially warded off by his right arm, but his shoulder was
laid open and he fell back stunned; the fourth, as he was about to
escape, received a heavy blow in the back from the ax; he fled to a
swamp near by and died. On returning to the hut and consulting as to
what course they should pursue, Seth's Henry, who had recovered, but
feigned death, again sprang to his feet, caught his rifle and snapped
it at one of the prisoners, ran out of the hut and disappeared. The
two friends primed the remaining guns and kept vigilant watch until
daylight to guard against surprise. They set out in the morning to
return, but did not dare to pursue the route they came, very properly
supposing there were more of the enemy in the vicinity, to whom the
surviving Indian would communicate the fate of his comrades. They
re-crossed the river in a bark canoe which they had used the preceding
afternoon, and then directed their course for the frontier
settlements. On the first night, Cowley, carried away by the
excitement was deranged for hours, and his companion was fearful that
his raving would betray them, but reason returned with daylight. As
they had feared, a party of Indians was soon in hot pursuit--from a
hill they saw ten or a dozen in the valley below; but they concealed
themselves beneath a sheltering rock, and remained there one night and
two days. When there an Indian dog came up to them, but after smelling
for some time, went away without barking. On the third night they saw
the enemy's fires literally all around them. They suffered much from
exposure to the weather, and still more from hunger, but finally
arrived at a frontier settlement in Pennsylvania, and afterward
returned to Schoharie, where they were welcomed as though risen from
the dead. Sawyer is said to have died many years after in Williamstown,
Mass., and Cowley in Albany.--_Symm's Schoharie_, 291, 2, 3.




EXPEDITION AGAINST THE CAYUGAS.

MARCH OF COLONEL BUTLER ALONG THE EAST SIDE OF CAYUGA LAKE.


On the return march, when the army reached Kanadaseaga on September
20, Lieutenant Colonel Butler commanding the Fourth Pennsylvania
regiment was detached with six hundred men, with orders to proceed
around the north end of Cayuga lake, and devastate the country of the
Cayugas on the east side of the lake. At the same time a force under
Lieutenant Colonel Henry Dearborn was ordered to move along the west
side, the two detachments to unite at the head of the lake and from
thence to join the main army at Catharinestown.

WILLIAM BUTLER was the second of five brothers, all of whom served
with distinction in the Revolution and the succeeding wars. Their
names were Richard, William, Thomas, Percival and Edward. Thomas, the
third brother, is said to have been born in Pennsylvania in 1754, and
Richard the elder in Ireland, so that William was either born in
America, or came here from Ireland when very young. He was
commissioned Lieutenant Colonel October 25, 1776, on the organization
of the Fourth Pennsylvania Regiment. Immediately after the battle of
Monmouth, in which he bore an important part, his regiment and six
companies of Morgan's riflemen were sent to Schoharie County, New
York, where he was actively engaged in protecting the frontier
settlements from the marauding parties of tories and Indians. After
the Wyoming massacre in 1778, as a part of the aggressive policy
determined on by Washington, he marched to the Delaware, and descended
that stream for two days, and from thence moved across the country to
the Susquehanna at Unadilla in pursuit of the enemy, who fled at his
approach. From here he moved down to Onoquaga, which was a well built
town, with many good farm houses in the vicinity belonging to the
tories, located on both sides of the river. He destroyed Onoquaga, and
a Tuscarora town lower down, Conihunto eight miles above, and
Unadilla, with the grist and saw mill there, the only ones in the
valley, and forced the enemy to remove westward to the Chemung where
they were found by Sullivan the next year. He was in garrison in the
Middle fort of Schoharie during the winter, and in August, 1779,
accompanied Clinton down the Susquehanna to Tioga point where he was
transferred to General Hand's Brigade August 23d of that year. This
was the Colonel Butler to whom General Sullivan entrusted the
responsible duties of conducting this important expedition, second
only in importance to that of the main army. Two journals give an
account of Colonel Butler's march, viz., Thomas Grant, who appears to
have been one of the surveying party under Captain Lodge, and George
Grant, Sergeant Major of the Third New Jersey regiment, the latter
evidently copied from some other journal.


PART OF THOMAS GRANT'S JOURNAL.

Sept. 20.--This day a detachment of six hundred men with a sufficiency
of officers under the command of Col. Wm. Butler were sent into the
Cayuga country, with which detachment I was ordered. They marched from
Cannadesago at 3 o'clock P.M. Marched this day 8 miles to an Indian
town by the name of Scawyace[140] where about 8 acres of corn was
destroyed.

Sept 21.--The detachment marched this morning at 7 o'clock A.M. 16-½
miles to a small Indian settlement[141] 1-½ miles short of Cayuga
Castle, where we encamped for the night. At 8-½ miles crossed the
outlet of Cayuga, which in breadth was about 70 perches, and more than
middle deep to the men. Near the outlet we destroyed two Indian
houses. The name of the place Choharo[142] and destroyed on the lake
in different places * * * houses and * * * acres of corn, but saw no
enemy. The general course since we crossed the outlet, nearly south,
the road not more than half a mile from the lake at furthest, the land
middling.

Sept. 22, 1779.--Marched this day at 6 o'clock A.M. 2 miles to the
Cayuga Castle,[143] an Indian town of that name containing in number
about 15 very large square log houses. I think the building superior
to any yet have seen. [Here] cattle were killed and three days beef
issued to the troops. The fatigue parties were sent to destroy the
corn to the amount of about 110 acres, though not all destroyed this
day. Two other towns were discovered, one 23-½ miles from the Seneca
Lake, which we called Upper Cayuga,[144] containing 14 large houses,
the other about two miles east of the Castle which we called
Cayuga,[145] containing 13 houses. The troops were all employed this
day in destroying corn till after dark. We found at this town apples,
peaches, potatoes, turnips, onions, pumpkins, squashes, and vegetables
of various kinds and great plenty.

Sept. 23, 1779.--This day the troops were employed till 3 o'clock P.M.
in finishing the destruction of the corn and burning the
aforementioned towns within. Marched 5 miles to an Indian town by the
name of Chandot[146] or Peach Town, remarkable for a large Peach
orchard containing * * * hundred fine thriving peach trees, likewise
* * * acres of corn. This town contained about 12 or 14 houses chiefly
old buildings. Part of the corn was destroyed this evening.

Sept. 24, 1779.--This morning the troops were employed in finishing
the destruction of the corn and peach trees. At 10 o'clock A.M. fire
was set to this town and the detachment went off the ground. Marched
this day 16-½ miles and encamped on a pleasant hill[147] near a fine
creek about one hour after dark. The land we passed this day well
timbered, and the soil very good, but very scarce of water. 9 miles
from Chondote we crossed a stream of water which fell over rocks 80
feet perpendicular. 3 miles from [this] we crossed a second
stream[148] which fell about 50 feet perpendicular, which empty
themselves into Cayuga lake. Saw no enemy this day. The general course
S. 30° E.

Sept. 25, 1779.--Marched this morning about 6 o'clock and encamped at
an Indian town 3-½ miles above Cayuga Lake. The town appeared to be
just consumed, supposed to be burnt by a detachment from Gen'l
Sullivan's army.[149] The town was situated on a rising ground in a
large, beautiful valley. The soil equal to or rather superior to any
in the country, through which runs several fine streams of water, the
first a creek about 4 poles wide, which falls from the mountain on the
east side of the valley about 120 feet perpendicular into which creek
three other fine streams empty, the second creek is the principal
supply of the Cayuga Lake navigable for large canoes or boats to the
town.

[The journal here ends abruptly]


PART OF GEORGE GRANT'S JOURNAL.

Sept. 20, 1779.--I return to the 20th to follow Col. Butler, who left
us at Kanadasago, and proceeded along the outlet of Seneca Lake for 8
miles and halted at Schoyerre, formerly destroyed by Col. Harper.

Sept. 21.--Early this morning a party of 200 men under the command of
Maj. Scott was despatched to destroy corn, &c., the remainder with
Col. Butler, proceeded on forward. Seven miles of the road was very
bad, the land poor and barren, and no water. They then entered on an
excellent swamp which produces fine timber, the soil exceeding rich
and fertile. This extends for 4 miles, when they reached Caiuga Lake.
This they crossed at a place wading it to their breasts in water,
where they halted waiting for Maj. Scott and his party. As soon as
they had joined, they proceeded along the side of the lake side, the
land excellent, the timber large and the country level and well
watered. Came to a habitation within one mile of Caiuga town and
encamped 18 miles from Scoyerre.

Sept. 22.--Marched to Caiuga[150] one mile distant. This town is large
and commodius, consisting of 50 houses mostly well built. The party
went immediately to destroying corn, &c., with which this place
abounds, but the water very bad and scarce. Here was found some salt
of the Indians making from the Salt Springs[151] which are in this
country. Found several muskets here, branded with the brand of the
United States; also a few Regimental coats, blue, faced with white.

Sept. 23.--The most part of the day taken up in destroying scattering
towns, corn, &c., within 2 or 3 miles all around this town. About 4
o'clock marched for another town[152] distant 4 miles but could not
learn any name for it, and here halted for the night.

Sept. 24.--This morning went to destroying corn, beans, and orchards.
Destroyed about 1500 Peach Trees, besides apple trees and other fruit
trees. This town consisted of 13 houses. Then marched for 18 miles,
the first 12 the land exceeding good, the other six not extraordinary.

Sept. 25.--Marched for 10-½ miles the road mostly bad, having to
ascend and descend extreme steep and difficult mountains, then through
thick and difficult swamps. Passed the end of Caiuga Lake and halted
at De-ho-riss-kana-dia[153] which they found burnt and the corn partly
destroyed. Here was found the Rev. Dr. Kirkland's horse, supposed to
be left here by the party who destroyed the corn, &c.

Sept. 26.--Marched for 8-½ miles through the Great Swamp.

Sept. 27.--Marched for 17 miles, 15 of which was through the above
swamp. Most part of the way, they had to steer by the sun, there not
being the least semblance of a road or path. A man of this party died
suddenly.

Sept. 28.--Marched for one mile and crossed the outlet (inlet) of
Caiuga Lake, and came upon ground occupied by the army on the night of
the 31st of August, from there to Kanawaholee,[154] where they joined
the main body of Sullivan's army.


FOOTNOTES:

[140] SCAWYACE or _Long Falls_, an important Indian town of eighteen
houses, located on the north bank of Seneca river at present site of
Waterloo, in Seneca County. It was partially destroyed on August 8,
during the advance of the army by a party of volunteers under Colonel
Harper. George Grant mentions the fact of "several fish ponds
abounding opposite the town." These were circular enclosures of stone
from thirty to forty feet in diameter, built up on the rocky bed of
the stream, where the water was neither very deep or rapid, so
constructed as to permit the water to pass through, but to retain the
fish.

[141] GEWAUGA, a small hamlet on the present site of Union Springs in
the town of Springport, on the east side of Cayuga lake.

[142] CHOHARO.--This was the Tichero or St. Stephen of the Jesuit
Relations, said to signify _the place of rushes_, located at the foot
of Cayuga lake on the east side, at the exact point where the bridge
of the Middle Turnpike left the east shore. The trail across the marsh
followed the north bank of an ancient channel of the Seneca river,
which at an early day took that course. The turnpike afterward
followed substantially the line of the trail and crossed the present
line of the Cayuga and Seneca canal three times between Mud Lock and
the old Demont tavern on the opposite side of the marsh. The salt
springs mentioned by Father Raffeix in 1672, were on the west side of
the marsh about half a mile north of the N.Y.C. Rail Road bridge, and
on the bank of the ancient river channel.

[143] CAYUGA CASTLE, an Indian town containing fifteen very large
houses of squared logs, located on the south line of the town of
Springport in Cayuga County, on the north bank of Great Gully brook,
and from one to two miles from the lake.

[144] UPPER CAYUGA, an Indian town of fourteen very large houses
located near the north line of the town of Ledyard in Cayuga County,
on the south bank of Great Gully brook, and as appears on the map,
between one and two miles from the lake.

[145] EAST CAYUGA, or _Old Town_, contained thirteen houses located in
the south-east corner of the town of Springport, as indicated on the
map, from three to four miles from the lake. A site in the south-west
corner of Fleming was a site of this town at about this date.

[146] CHONODOTE, so named on Capt. Lodge's map, an Indian town of
fourteen houses, on the site of present Aurora in Cayuga County;
according to George Grant's journal it contained fifteen hundred peach
trees.

[147] On the hill north of Ludlowville.

[148] The first of these falls was probably on Mill Creek, two and a
half miles south-west of Northville; the second near Lake Ridge in the
town of Lansing.

[149] COREORGONEL was burned by the detachment under Colonel Dearborn.
See his account September 24, and note 161.

[150] Goi-o-gouen, of the Jesuit Relations, and site of the Mission of
St. Joseph, called also Cayuga Castle, and the same described as three
towns by Thomas Grant under the names of Cayuga Castle, fifteen
houses; upper Cayuga, containing fourteen houses; and Cayuga,
containing thirteen houses. The houses were very much scattered, and
on both sides of Great Gully brook on the south line of the town of
Springport in Cayuga County. Greenhalgh, an English trader, passed
through the Cayuga country in 1677, and found them there occupying
"three towns about a mile distant from each other; they are not
stockaded. They do consist in all of about one hundred houses and
intend next Spring to build all their houses together and stockade
them. They have abundance of corn, and lie within two or three miles
of lake Tichero."

[151] These salt springs were located on the opposite side of the
river from Choharo, see note 142. Luke Swetland, a prisoner in 1778,
made salt at these springs, which he says was of excellent quality.

[152] CHONODOTE. See note 146.

[153] COREORGONEL, two miles south of Ithaca, destroyed by the
detachment under Col. Dearborn on the 24th. See note 161.

[154] KANAWLOHALLA, on the site of present Elmira. See note 77.




MARCH OF COLONEL DEARBORN ALONG THE WEST SIDE OF CAYUGA LAKE.


On the return march, after crossing the outlet of Seneca Lake east of
Kanadaseaga, the army encamped on the high ground at Rose Hill, near
the east shore of the lake. Here Lieutenant Colonel Henry Dearborn
commanding the Third New Hampshire regiment, was detached with two
hundred men and ordered to march along the west shore of Cayuga lake
to co-operate with Colonel Butler in devastating the country of the
Cayugas.

Colonel Dearborn was born in Hampton, N.H., in March, 1751. He was a
captain at Bunker Hill, and accompanied Arnold in the march through
the woods against Quebec, in which expedition he was captured. He was
exchanged in 1777, and soon after was appointed Major of Scammel's
regiment. At Saratoga he commanded a separate battalion under General
Gates, and was afterwards at Monmouth, where he distinguished himself
and the regiment by a gallant charge. In 1779 Colonel Scammel was
acting as Adjutant General of the army, leaving Lieut. Colonel
Dearborn in command of the regiment during Sullivan's campaign. He was
at the siege of Yorktown in 1781, and afterward on garrison duty at
Saratoga and West Point until 1784. He served two terms in Congress,
was for eight years secretary of war under Jefferson, and in the war
of 1812 was senior Major General of the army. In 1822 he was minister
to Portugal, from whence he returned after two years' service, and
died in Roxbury, Mass., June 6, 1829. After his death, his son, Henry
Alexander Scammel Dearborn, collected and arranged the valuable papers
of his father, transcribed the journals, which extended through the
entire period of the revolution, and added important historical
sketches, the whole making forty-five large volumes handsomely bound
in morocco, the exterior approximating in elegance to the inestimable
value of the material within. On the death of the son, all of these,
excepting seven volumes, were taken apart, and the contents, made up
of valuable autograph letters of the revolutionary period, scattered
to the four winds by a sale at public auction. The original manuscript
Journal of Sullivan's campaign fell into the hands of Dr. John H.S.
Fogg, of Boston. The manuscript Orderly Book of Valley Forge, was
purchased by John H. Osborne, Esq., of Auburn. The seven volumes,
containing no autographs, were reserved at the sale and remain intact
In one of these is the Journal kept during Sullivan's campaign, as
transcribed by the son, of which the following is an extract:


PART OF COLONEL DEARBORN'S JOURNAL, 1779.

Sept. 21.--I was ordered with 200 men to proceed to the west side of
the Cayuga Lake, from thence down the side of the lake to the south
end, to burn and destroy such houses and corn as might be found and to
intercept the Cayugas if they attempted to escape Col. Butler. At 8
o'clock I marched, proceeded an east course about 8 miles and found 3
wigwams in the woods[155] with some small patches of corn, squashes,
water-melons and cucumbers and 15 horses which we could not take.
Destroyed this village, proceeded 4 miles to the lake where we found a
very pretty town of 10 houses[156] and a considerable quantity of
corn, all which we burnt. We discovered another small town about a
mile above this, we likewise destroyed. This place is called
Skannautenate.[157] After destroying this town I marched on one mile,
and came to a new town[158] consisting of 9 houses which we destroyed,
and proceeded one mile and found one large house which we set fire to,
and marched 2 miles and encamped. The land we marched over this day is
exceeding fine.

Sept. 22.--I marched ½ an hour before sunrise, proceeded 5 miles and
came to the ruins of a town which a part of our army burnt when it was
advancing who missed their way and happened to fall in with it, ½ a
mile distant found a large field of corn and 3 houses. We gathered the
corn and burnt it in the houses. This town is called Swahyawana.[159]
Moved on 5 miles and came to a wigwam with 3 squaws and one young
Indian who was a cripple. I took 2 of the squaws who were about 40
years of age and marched on 3 miles and found 1 hut and a field of
corn which was burnt. Went 4 miles further and encamped.

Sept. 23.--Marched at sunrise, proceeded without any path or track, or
any person who was ever in this part of the country before to guide
us, and the land so horribly rough and brushy that it was difficult to
advance, however with great labor and difficulty we proceeded 8 miles
to the end of a long cape[160] which I expected was the end of the
lake. We then marched off 2 or 3 miles from the lake, and went by a
point of compass 8 miles to the end of the lake and encamped. This
lake is 40 miles in length and from 2 to 5 miles in width, and runs
nearly No. and So. parallel to the Seneca lake which is from 8 to 10
miles distant.

Sept. 24.--Marched at sunrise, proceeded 3 miles on the high land and
came to an old path which led us to 2 huts and some cornfields, which
we burnt. I then sent several parties in different directions to look
for a large town that I had been informed was not many miles from the
end of the lake. The parties found 10 or 12 scattering houses and a
number of large cornfields on and near the stream that falls into the
lake. After burning several fields of corn and houses they discovered
the town, 3 miles from the lake, on the above mentioned stream, which
contained 25 houses and is called Coreorgonel[161] and is the capital
of a small nation or tribe. My party was employed from 9 till sunset
in destroying the town and corn. I expected to have met Col. Butler
with his party at this town.

Sept. 25.--Marched at sunrise for Catherine's Town, where I was
ordered to join the main army. Proceeded a due west course over a
very rough, mountainous country 18 miles, and at 4 o'clock reached the
town, but the army was gone forward. Advanced 6 miles in what is
called the Bear Swamp and encamped.

Sept. 26.--Marched at sunrise and at 12 o'clock joined the main army
at Kanawalahola which is 4 miles from where we fought the enemy on the
29th of August. The army had a day of rejoicing here in consequence
from the news of Spain.

Sept. 27.--Some detachments were sent up the Teago river to destroy
such houses and corn fields as they might find.

Sept. 28.--The same parties that were sent out yesterday were sent
again further up the river to destroy a Tory settlement which was
discovered yesterday, and a large detachment was sent off to complete
the destruction of the corn, &c., at and about New Town. At 12 o'clock
Col. Butler and his party arrived in Camp. In their route round the
lake they destroyed several towns and a vast quantity of corn.


FOOTNOTES:

[155] This hamlet appears to have been located on the farm of Thomas
Shankwiller, near the south-east corner of lot 15 in the town of
Fayette, Seneca County, probably on Sucker brook.

[156] A town of ten houses, located on the west bank of Cayuga lake at
the north-east corner of the town of Fayette, in Seneca County, about
a mile and a half from present Canoga village. Destroyed Sept. 21,
1779.

[157] SKANNAYUTENATE, a small village located about forty rods from
the shore of the lake, on the south bank of Canoga creek, about half a
mile north-east of present Canoga village. On the north bank of the
creek, between the site of the old Indian town and the north and south
road passing through Canoga, is said to be the birth-place of the
renowned Seneca orator, Sagoyewatha or Red Jacket. Destroyed Sept. 21,
1779.

[158] NEWTOWN--An Indian village of nine houses, located on the west
bank of Cayuga lake, on the Disinger farm, a mile south of present
Canoga village, and directly opposite the village of Union Springs on
the east side of the lake. Destroyed Sept. 21, 1779.

[159] SWAHYAWANA, was on the farm of Edward R. Dean, in the north-east
corner of the town of Romulus, in Seneca county, on the north bank of
Sinclair Hollow creek, near the shore of the lake, and almost exactly
opposite the important town of Chonodote, on the east side, at site of
present Aurora. Was burned September 6, by a party that wandered from
the track of the main army when they passed up on the east side of the
lake.

[160] TAGHANIC POINT, formerly known as Goodwin's Point. The bank of
the lake both north and south of this, is very much cut up with
ravines, and the lake shore is too rocky and precipitous for an Indian
path. For several miles the trail was back two miles from the lake,
along the heads of the ravines, probably passing through Hayt's
corners and Ovid Centre. From this high ground the lake appears to end
at Taghanic Point.

[161] COREORGONEL, called De-ho-riss-kanadia by George Grant, was
located on the west side of Cayuga inlet, about three miles from the
end of the lake, and two miles south of Ithaca. The main village was
on a high ground south of the school-house on the farm of James
Fleming, nearly opposite Buttermilk Falls. Several skeletons have been
exhumed here within a few years, and the usual variety of relics
found, such as hatchets, wampum, beads, &c. A solitary apple-tree
still remains, a fit memento to represent the race by which it was
planted. When first known to the whites there were five boles starting
from the ground, but these are now reduced to two, and are probably
shoots from the original tree cut down or girdled by Dearborn. The
town was destroyed September 24, 1779. At this time it contained
twenty-five houses, besides ten or twelve scattered between the main
village and the lake. Colonel Butler after passing up on the east side
of Cayuga Lake halted here on the 25th, and found Rev. Dr. Kirkland's
horse in the vicinity of the smoking ruins.

A peculiar interest is attached to this locality and village, from the
fact that here the representatives of a once powerful people, sought
to preserve for a brief period, the last remaining spark of a council
fire that from time immemorial had burned brilliantly in the presence
of assembled nations, numbering their warriors by thousands. They were
called by the Iroquois TODERICHROONES, one of the tribes known to the
English as Catawbas, sometimes called Saponies. They formerly resided
between the Potomac and Roanoke rivers, east of the Alleghanies. A
most inveterate hostile feeling existed between them and the Iroquois,
which reached back to near the middle of the seventeenth century. A
peace was arranged as early as 1685, through negotiations with the
government of Virginia, and again what was expected to be a "lasting
peace" and firm alliance, was concluded in 1714, but in the night
after the close of the council, the Iroquois deputies, while reposing
in fancied security were treacherously murdered while asleep. This
aroused the Iroquois to vengeance, and the war was renewed with
unexampled ferocity, with a determination to totally extirpate the
base, faithless and treacherous people. In 1717 through the
intercession of Governor Hunter, at the request of Governor Spottswood
of Virginia, a truce was arranged, and in 1722 delegates from the Five
Nations met Governor Spottswood at Albany to conclude what was to be
an "everlasting peace," in which the Iroquois bound themselves not to
cross the Potomac or go over the Alleghanies, without a passport from
the Governor of New York, Governor Spottswood engaging that the tribes
in his locality should not pass to the north or west of same lines.
The tribes mentioned by the Governor were the "NOTTOWAYS, MEHERINS,
NANSEMONDS, PAMUNKEYS, CHICOHOMINYS, and the CHRISTANNA INDIANS whom
you call TODERICHROONES," and others--in all, ten nations. This
council was conducted with great formality, and valuable presents were
presented, among which were a "_fine coronet_" and a "_gold horse
shoe_" with an inscription. In 1738 they were again at war, and in
1742 at peace. In 1731 Governor Clinton says "the Governor of South
Carolina sent six chiefs of the Catawbas, to make peace with the Five
Nations," and says that "they had been at war as long as any one in
this country can remember." In 1753 Sir William Johnson mentions the
fact that the Cayugas "_are about to strengthen their castle by taking
in the_ TEDARIGHROONES." In the same year they are mentioned as
attending a conference at Mt. Johnson and are described as "one of the
nine confederate nations." The town is indicated at the head of Cayuga
lake on the Guy Johnson map of 1771, in the same position where it was
found by Colonel Dearborn in 1779, under the name of TODEVIGHRONO, the
name of the people. In 1750 Zeisberger, the Moravian missionary,
passed through this valley while on his way to visit the Cayugas, but
makes no mention of an Indian village in the vicinity. Undoubtedly
they settled there in the summer of 1753. Their cleared fields were
found on the present site of Ithaca on the first settlement of the
country by the whites and were the first lands occupied in the county.
The town is indicated but not named on the map of Mr. Lodge, the
surveyor who accompanied Colonel Butler's detachment. To stand on the
identical spot from which this people sunk into oblivion, appeared
like standing on the grave of a nation. Their history, the beginning
of which extends far back into the unknown and unattainable, ends
where that of civilization begins, and adds another name to the long
list of extinguished nationalities that preceded us in sovereignty.
Here their council fire, fanned by the last expiring breath of a once
brave and numerous people, was extinguished forever.




RECAPITULATION.

INDIAN TOWNS DESTROYED IN SULLIVAN'S CAMPAIGN, 1779.


1. NEWTYCHANNING, an Indian town of about 20 houses, located on the
west side of the Susquehanna, near North Towanda, Bradford County, Pa.
Destroyed by Col. Proctor, Aug. 8, 1779. See note 60.

2. OLD CHEMUNG, an Indian town partially abandoned, located on the
north bank of Chemung river, half a mile above present Chemung
village. Destroyed Aug. 13, 1779. See note 66.

3. NEW CHEMUNG, an Indian town of fifty or sixty houses, located on
the left bank of the Chemung river, three miles above the present
village of Chemung, in Chemung County. Destroyed Aug. 13, 1779. See
note 66.

4. NEWTOWN, an Indian town of about 20 houses, located on the north
bank of Chemung river, five miles below Elmira. It gave the name to
the battle fought near it Aug. 29, 1779. Destroyed August 31, 1779.
See note 74.

5. A village of 20 to 30 new houses, located on both sides of
Baldwin's creek, about a mile and a half from Chemung river, at the
exact point where Gen. Poor commenced the ascent of the hill.
Destroyed Aug. 29, 1779. See note 74.

6. A small village on Baldwin's creek, near the works of the enemy, at
Newtown, the timbers of which were used in the construction of the
fortifications. See note 74.

7. A small village on Seely creek, near present Southport, south of
Elmira. Destroyed Aug. 30, 1779. See note 74.

8. ALBOUT, a Scotch, tory settlement on the east side the Unadilla,
about five miles above Unadilla. Burned August 12, 1779, by Gen.
Clinton. See note 129.

9. SHAWHIANGTO, a small Tuscarora town, four miles below Onoquago, of
ten or twelve houses, located on the west side of the Susquehanna,
near present Windsor, in Broome County. Burned August 17, 1779, by
Gen. Clinton. See note 134.

10. INGAREN, a Tuscarora town of five or six houses, sometimes called
Tuscarora, at Great Bend, Susquehanna county, Penn. Destroyed Aug. 17,
1779, by Gen. Clinton. See note 135.

11. OTSININGO or _Chenango_, an important Indian town abandoned and
destroyed by the Indians in the winter of 1778-9, located four miles
north of Binghamton in Broome County. See note 136.

12. CHOCONUT, or _Chugnutt_, an important Indian town of fifty or
sixty houses mostly on the south side of the Susquehanna river, at the
mouth of Big Choconut creek, in Broome County. Destroyed by Gen. Poor
Aug. 19, 1779. See note 137.

13. OWAGEA, an Indian town of about twenty houses, on Owego creek,
about a mile from the Susquehanna river, in the north part of present
Owego,--was a small hamlet, also near the river. Destroyed August 19,
1779. See note 138.

14. MANCKATAWANGUM, or _Red Bank_,--an Indian town on the south side
of the Susquehanna river, nearly opposite the present village of
Barton, in Tioga county,--near Fitzgerald's Farm, according to Beatty.
See note 139.

General Sullivan under date of Aug. 30th, says: "The number of Indian
towns destroyed since the commencement of the expedition, including
those burnt by General Clinton previous to the junction, is, I think,
fourteen, some of them considerable, others inconsiderable."

15. MIDDLETOWN, an Indian hamlet of eight houses, located on the north
bank of Chemung river, between Newtown and present Elmira. Destroyed
Aug. 31, 1779. See note 77.

16. KANAWLOHALLA or _Canaweola_, on the site of present Elmira in
Chemung county. George Grant says it contained twenty houses. This was
the site of Fort Reid. Destroyed while the army was on the march,
August 31, 1779. See note 77.

17. BIG FLATS, on the north bank of Chemung river, eight miles above
present Elmira. An early French map calls a village at this point
Runonvea, Destroyed by a detachment under Col. Dayton Aug. 31, 1779.
See note 77.

18. SHEOQUAGA or _Catharine's Town_, an Indian village of thirty
houses, located on the site of present Havana in Schuyler County.
Destroyed Sept. 2, 1779. See note 78.

19. PEACH ORCHARD, an Indian town of an unknown name on the site of
present Peach Orchard, ten miles north of Havana, on east shore of
Seneca lake. Destroyed Sept. 3, 1779. See note 79.

20. CONDAWHAW, a small Indian town on the east shore of Seneca lake,
at present site of North Hector, so called by Luke Swetland in 1778.
Destroyed Sept. 4, 1779. See note 80.

21. KENDAIA, or _Appletown_, located on lot 79, Romulus, on the east
side of Seneca lake. It contained about twenty houses. Destroyed Sept.
6, 1779. See note 81.

22. BUTLER'S BUILDINGS, so called, consisting of a few buildings,
located near present canal bridge in the village of Geneva. Destroyed
while on the march Sept. 7, 1779. See note 84.

23. KANADASEAGA, _the grand village_, and capital of the Senecas,
located one and a half miles north-west of present Geneva. It
contained about sixty well built houses. Destroyed Sept. 9, 1779. See
note 84.

24. GOTHSEUNGQUEAN or _Shenanwaga_, a village of twenty houses located
on both sides of Kershong creek, near the west shore of Seneca lake,
seven miles south of Geneva. Destroyed by a detachment under Major
Parr, Sept. 8, 1779. See note 84.

25. KANANDAIGUA, an Indian town of twenty-three houses, located about
a mile from the lake, in west part of present village of Canandaigua.
Destroyed Sept. 10, 1779. See note 86.

26. HANNEYAYE, an Indian town of twenty houses, located at foot of
Honeoye lake, east of the outlet. One house was occupied as a fort by
Capt. Cummings. Destroyed Sept. 11, 1779. See note 87.

27. KANAGHSAWS, also called _Adjutoa_, an Indian town of eighteen
houses located three-fourths of a mile south-east of the head of
Conesus lake on the farm of Dr. McMillen. Destroyed September 13,
1779. See note 89.

28. GATHTSEGWAROHARE or _Cassawauloughly_, an important Indian town of
twenty-five houses, located on the east side of Canaseraga creek,
about two miles from its confluence with the Genesee, at the
"Hermitage," formerly owned by Judge Caroll. Destroyed Sept. 14, 1779.
See note 93.

29. CHENANDOANES or _Great Genesee Castle_, sometimes called Little
Beard's Town,--contained one hundred and twenty-eight houses, located
on the west side of Genesee river, mostly on the north side of Beard's
creek, north-east of Cuylerville. Destroyed Sept. 15, 1779. See note
95.


TOWNS DESTROYED BY LIEUT. COL. BUTLER.

30. SCAWYACE, or _Long Falls_, an important Indian town on the north
bank of the Seneca river on present site of Waterloo, in Seneca
County,--was partially destroyed by a volunteer force under Col.
Harper, Sept. 8, 1779,--destruction completed Sept. 21, by Major
Scott, of Colonel Butler's detachment. See note 140.

31. CHOHARO, a hamlet of two houses at the foot of Cayuga lake, where
Colonel Butler's detachment forded the river. This was the ancient
Tichero of the Jesuit Relations. Destroyed Sept. 21, by Colonel
Butler. See note 142.

32. GEWAUGA, a small hamlet located on the east side of Cayuga lake,
on the site of present Union Springs in Cayuga County. Destroyed Sept.
22, 1779. See note 141.

33. GOIOGOUEN, of the Jesuit Relations, made up of three separate
towns, viz:

     (1). CAYUGA CASTLE, containing fifteen very large houses built
     of squared logs, located near the south line of the town of
     Springport in Cayuga County, on the north bank of Great Gully
     Brook, from one to two miles from the lake. See note 143.

     (2). EAST CAYUGA, OLD TOWN, containing thirteen houses, located
     in the south-east corner of the town of Springport, from three
     to four miles from Cayuga lake. A site in the south-west corner
     of Fleming, was probably a site of this clan. Destroyed Sept.
     22. See note 145.

     (3). UPPER CAYUGA, containing fourteen large houses, located
     near the north line of the town of Ledyard in Cayuga County, on
     the south bank of Great Gully Brook, from one to two miles from
     Cayuga Lake. Destroyed Sept. 22. See note 144.

     George Grant describes the three preceding towns as one town
     containing fifty houses, with many scattering towns within two
     or three miles. Gen. Sullivan's official report says that
     "Colonel Butler destroyed five principal towns and a number of
     scattering houses,--the whole making about one hundred in
     number." Capt. Lodge's Map designates three towns by name.

34. CHONODOTE or _Peach Tree Town_, also called Chandot, a town
containing fourteen houses, located on the site of present Aurora, in
Cayuga County. This town contained 1500 peach trees. Destroyed Sept.
24th by the detachment under Col. William Butler. See note 146.


TOWNS DESTROYED BY LIEUT. COL. DEARBORN.

35. A small hamlet of three houses, on the Shankwiller farm, in town
of Fayette, Seneca County, four miles from Cayuga lake. Destroyed by
Colonel Dearborn Sept. 21. See note 155.

36. A small town of ten buildings on the west shore of Cayuga lake,
one mile north of Canoga Creek. Destroyed by Col. Dearborn's
detachment Sept. 21, 1779. See note 156.

37. SKANNAYUTENATE, an Indian village of ten houses, located on the
south bank of Canoga creek, on the west shore of Cayuga lake, a half
mile north-east of Canoga village in Seneca County. Destroyed by
Lieut. Col. Dearborn Sept. 21, 1779. See note 157.

38. NEWTOWN, an Indian village of nine houses, located one mile
south-east of village of Canoga, on the west shore of Cayuga lake, a
mile south of Skannayutenate. Destroyed Sept. 21, 1779 by Lieut. Col.
Dearborn. See note 158.

39. SWAHYAWANA, an Indian town located on the west shore of Cayuga
lake, on the farm of Edward R. Dean, in the north-east corner of the
town of Romulus in Seneca County. Destroyed Sept. 22, 1779, by Lieut.
Col. Henry Dearborn. See note 159.

40. COREORGONEL, an important Indian town of twenty-five houses,
located on the west side of Cayuga inlet, about two miles south of
Ithaca, and three miles from the head of Cayuga lake. It appears as
Todevighrono, the name of the tribe on the Gay Johnson Map of 1771.
Destroyed by the detachment under Lieut. Col. Dearborn Sept. 24, 1779.
See note 161.




LIST OF JOURNALS.


The following Journals are those of officers actively engaged in
Sullivan's campaign:

I.--ANONYMOUS. From June 18 to Sept. 13, 1779. Printed in Hill's New
Hampshire Patriot, at Portsmouth, September 16, 1843. An imperfect
copy of Norris' Journal, with several omissions, and many important
errors.

II.--BARTON, WILLIAM, Lieutenant in the Jersey Brigade. From June 8 to
October 9, 1779. Published in the Transactions of the New Jersey
Historical Society, Vol. II, 1846-7, p. 22.

III.--BEATTY, ERKURIES, Lieutenant in the Fourth Pennsylvania
Regiment. From June 11 to October 22, 1779, in Sullivan's Campaign.
Also from April 6 to April 29 of same year in the campaign against the
Onondagas. The original manuscript in the Archives of the New York
Historical Society. Has never been published.

IV.--BLAKE, THOMAS, Lieutenant in Second New Hampshire Regiment. From
May 19 to October 15, 1779. Published in Ridder's History of the First
New Hampshire Regiment.

V.--CAMPFIELD, JABEZ, Surgeon in Spencer's Fifth New Jersey Regiment.
From May 23 to October 2, 1779. Published in the Proceedings of the
New Jersey Historical Society 1873, pp. 115 to 136, from the original
presented to the Society by Edmund D. Halsey.

VI.--DEARBORN, HENRY, Lieutenant Colonel commanding the Third New
Hampshire Regiment. From June 16 to October 15, 1779; transcribed from
the original by his son, General Henry A.S. Dearborn. This copy in
charge of Colonel C.G. Thornton, of Madison, Wisconsin, executor of
the Dearborn estate. The original manuscript of Henry Dearborn is in
the hands of John S. Fogg, Esq., of Boston, Mass.

VII.--ELMER, EBENEZER, Surgeon in Second New Jersey Regiment. From
June 18 to August 14, 1779. The original manuscript in the Archives of
the New Jersey Historical Society. Extracts were published in the
Transactions of the Society in 1846-7.

VIII.--FELLOWS, MOSES, Sergeant in the Third New Hampshire Regiment.
From July 22 to September 20, 1779. The original in possession of A.
Tiffany Norton, Esq., of Lima, N.Y.

IX.--GOOKIN, DANIEL, Ensign in Second New Hampshire Regiment. From May
4 to September 5, 1779. Published in the New England Hist. and Gen'l
Register for January, 1862.

X.--GRANT, GEORGE, Sergeant Major in the Third New Jersey Regiment.
From May 17 to November 3, 1779. Published in Hazard's Register (Pa.)
Vol. 14, pp. 72-76.

XI.--GRANT, THOMAS, appears from the Journal to have been one of the
surveying party under Captain Lodge, who accompanied the army from
Easton and with chain and compass, surveyed the entire route to the
Genesee river. From July 31 to September 25, 1779. Published in the
Historical Magazine for August and September, 1862.

XII.--HARDENBERGH, JOHN L., Lieutenant in Colonel Van Cortlandt's
Second New York Regiment. From May 1 to October 23, 1779. The original
manuscript in possession of the Hardenbergh family in Auburn.
Published by the Cayuga County Historical Society, 1879.

XIII.--HUBLEY, ADAM, Colonel of the Eleventh Pennsylvania Regiment.
From July 31 to October 7, 1779. Published in Miner's History of
Wyoming. Appendix, 1845. The original contained several illustrations,
and maps of encampments, not in the published copy.

XIV.--JENKINS, JOHN, Lieutenant and guide in the expedition. From June
5, 1778, to March 17, 1781. The original manuscript in the hands of
his grandson, Hon. Steuben Jenkins, of Wyoming, Pa. It has never been
published.

XV.--LIVERMORE, DANIEL, Captain in the Third New Hampshire Regiment.
From May 17 to December 7, 1779. Published in the New Hampshire
Historical Collections, Vol. VI, pp. 308-335.

XVI.--MACHIN, THOMAS, Captain in Col. John Lamb's Second Regiment
(N.Y.) Artillery. From April 19 to 23, 1779, in Colonel Van Schaick's
expedition against the Onondagas. Published in the Magazine of
American History, November, 1879. Communicated by F.H. Roof.

XVII.--NUKERCK, CHARLES, Lieutenant and Captain in Colonel Van
Cortlandt's Second New York Regiment. From May 1, 1779, to December
11, 1780. Captain (afterward Colonel) Nukerck was born in Hurley,
Ulster County, New York. In 1776 he was serving as Second Lieutenant
in Colonel Ritzema's 3d New York Regiment, organized to garrison the
forts southward of Crown Point. Under the call of September 16, 1776,
he entered the Second New York Regiment _to serve during the war_, and
continued with that regiment as Lieutenant and Captain until the
consolidation of the five New York regiments into two in December,
1780, when he was assigned to the class of deranged officers, and
continued in service to the close of the war. He afterward settled at
Palatine Church, in the Mohawk Valley, where he died greatly respected
in November, 1822.


     This Journal has had a somewhat interesting history. A portion
     of it appeared in 1831 in Campbell's Annals of Tryon County, as
     "extracts from the manuscript Journal of an officer," but
     without giving the author's name. Extracts have also appeared
     from time to time in the writings of the late Thomas Maxwell of
     Elmira, as the Journal of Colonel Gansevoort. In Colonel
     Stone's Life of Brant, 1838, Introduction p. xxiii, he says
     "the author has likewise been favored with the manuscript diary
     of the venerable Captain Theodosius Fowler of this city, who
     was an active officer during the whole campaign. In addition to
     the valuable memoranda contained in this diary, Capt. Fowler
     has preserved a drawing of the Order of March * * * and a plan
     of the _great battle fought at Newtown_, both of which drawings
     have been engraved, and will be found in the Appendix." In the
     body of the work he incorporates the text as found in
     Campbell's Annals, including several interpolations from
     Seaver's Life of Mary Jemison, which appear in the Annals _as
     quoted_, but in Colonel Stone's work as _part of the original
     Journal_. At page 18, Vol. II. appears the "Order of March" and
     "Order of Battle," the latter having no reference whatever to
     the battle of Newtown, it being nothing more than the general
     order of battle prescribed at the beginning of the campaign.
     After the death of Colonel Stone, the original manuscript fell
     into the hands of that distinguished scholar, Dr. Lyman C.
     Draper, Secretary of Wisconsin Historical Society, who
     purchased it at the sale in a bound volume of manuscripts. In
     June, 1879, he placed it in my hands for examination and
     directed my attention to the fact, of its unquestionable
     identity with the many fragments ascribed to Captain Fowler and
     others. The Journal is substantially a history of the movements
     of the Second regiment from the date of the first entry to the
     time of the consolidation in 1780, when it closes. It contains
     abundant evidence to warrant the conclusion that it must have
     been written by an officer of that regiment. This appears
     effectually to dispose of the claims of the supposed authorship
     of Captain Fowler, as he was made Captain of the First New York
     June 21, 1778, and continued in service with that regiment
     until the consolidation 1780, when he was assigned to the new
     New York Second, and continued in that position to the close of
     the war. It is highly probable that Captain Fowler was on duty
     with his regiment, which remained to guard the Mohawk Valley
     during Sullivan's campaign, and consequently could not have
     participated in the westward march, and if the author of a
     Journal it certainly cannot be the one in question, which
     beyond any doubt was written by an officer actively engaged in
     the main expedition. A careful examination of the manuscript
     disclosed the fact that unmistakably it is the hand writing of
     Captain Nukerck, and presumably his Journal. On being advised
     of this fact Dr. Draper addressed a note to Mrs. Miller, of
     Englewood, N.J., a granddaughter of Captain Nukerck, who
     answered "that she remembered distinctly, that her father
     loaned to Mr. Campbell the Diary of her grandfather relating to
     Sullivan's Campaign, and that afterward it was loaned to an
     agent of Colonel Stone, who failed to return it." The
     manuscript is in an excellent state of preservation, every word
     from beginning to end being plain and distinct, especially the
     proper names. It contains several maps indicating the line of
     march and encampments, and at the end a single leaf is missing,
     probably the order of march and order of battle, mentioned by
     Colonel Stone.

XVIII.--NORRIS, JAMES, Captain in the Third New Hampshire Regiment.
From June 18 to October 25, 1779. Original manuscript in the Archives
of the Buffalo Historical Society, N.Y. Published in July, 1879, Vol.
I, No. 7, of the Publications of that Society, by Bigelow Brothers,
Buffalo, N.Y.

XIX.--ROGERS, WILLIAM, D.D., Chaplain in Hand's Brigade. From June 15
to August 29, 1779. Published with notes and Biography, No. 7 of the
Rhode Island Historical Tracts by Sidney S. Rider, Providence, R.I.,
1879.

XX.--ROGERS, WILLIAM, Quartermaster Sergeant in Malcom's N.Y. Regiment
in 1777, but in 1779 appears to have belonged to the Second New York.
From April 5 to September 14, 1779, contains names of places, dates,
and distances. The original manuscript in the hands of B.L. Rogers,
Newark, N.J.

XXI.--SHUTE, SAMUEL MOORE, Lieutenant in Second New Jersey Regiment.
From May 29 to November 9, 1779. The original manuscript in possession
of William Shute, of Doylestown, Pa.

XXII.--VAN HOVENBERG, RUDOLPH, Lieutenant in Colonel Du Bois' Fifth
New York Regiment. From June 16, 1779, to November 24, 1780. He
accompanied General Clinton down the Susquehanna. Has never been
published.

XXIII.--WEBB, NATHANIEL, an officer in the Second New York Regiment.
His son, Dr. Ezekiel Webb, had the original in September, 1855, at
which time a part was published in the Elmira Daily Republican.

[The following Journals were once in existence, but diligent inquiry
has failed to bring them to light:]

XXIV.--DEAN, JUDGE JAMES, the well known interpreter, and first Judge
of Herkimer County, N.Y.

XXV.--PIERCE, WILLIAM, Captain in Colonel Harrison's Regiment of
artillery, First A.D.C. to General Sullivan.

XXVI.--HOOPS, ADAM, Major, Third A.D.C. to General Sullivan. "The
facts concerning Van Campen and Boyd are taken from a part of a copy
of _my journal_ which had been copied from that of Major William
Pierce."--Letter Sept. 18, 1841, p. 180 Sullivan's Campaign.

XXVII.--PRINCE, KIMBALL, Sergeant Major in the Artillery. His diary
was in possession of his son Frederick Prince as late as 1822, but was
then stolen from a trunk during the ravages of the yellow fever in New
York City.

XXVIII.--NEWMAN ---- Referred to in Miner's History of Wyoming.
Supposed to have been destroyed by fire in the office of the Record of
the Times at Wilkesbarre, Pa., April 9, 1869.

[The following narratives have been written by parties actively
engaged in the campaign. Some are valuable, others are untrustworthy,
and well calculated to mislead:]

XXIX.--DAVIS, NATHAN. Private in the First New Hampshire Regiment.
Published in the Historical Magazine, April, 1868, p. 198.

XXX.--GANO, REV. JOHN, Chaplain in Clinton's Brigade. Published in the
Historical Magazine, November, 1861, p. 330.

XXXI.--SALMON, JOHN. Published in Seaver's Life of Mary Jemison.

XXXII.--VAN CAMPEN, MOSES. Appears in a memorial to Congress for a
pension.

XXXIII.--VAN CORTLANDT, PHILIP, Colonel commanding Second New York
Regiment. Autobiography written in 1825. Published in full in
Magazine of American History, May, 1878.

XXXIV.--MAXWELL, Major. Published in Vol. VII of the Historical
Collections of the Essex Institute, p. 97.

XXXV.--LODGE, CAPT. BENJAMIN was in charge of a party that accompanied
the army from Easton, and with compass and chain surveyed the entire
route to the Genesee river. On the return march, commencing at
Kanadaseaga, the party accompanied Colonel Butler and made a like
survey along the east side of Cayuga Lake, connecting with the main
line near present Horseheads. But one section of the map has been
found, and that was among the papers of Captain Machin, an artillery
officer. The original is now in the hands of J.R. Symms, Esq., of Fort
Plain, N.Y. Several parties have photographic copies. This section
extends north of Tioga Point and west as far as Kanadaseaga.

In addition to the preceding, is the correspondence and instructions
of General Washington; General Sullivan's Official Reports; many
valuable letters from General James Clinton; and undoubtedly many
journals will be added to those already known, now that the attention
of the public has been directed to the revolutionary period, and
especially to the Campaign of 1779.



    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:                   |
    |                                                           |
    | Page 20: possessson replaced with possession              |
    | Page 30: Tobehannah replaced with Tobehanna               |
    | Page 40: arival replaced with arrival                     |
    | Page 40: Susquehannah replaced with Susquehanna           |
    | Page 55: Pensylvania replaced with Pennsylvania           |
    | Page 70: decended replaced with descended                 |
    | Page 71: Sept. 22, 1679 replaced with Sept. 22, 1779      |
    |                                                           |
    | Footnote  14: Lurenkil replaced with Lurenkill            |
    | Footnote  27: o'olock replaced with o'clock               |
    | Footnote  40: Weisenfels replaced with Weissenfels        |
    | Footnote  49: Hardenberg replaced with Hardenbergh        |
    | Footnote  50: Susquehanua replaced with Susquehanna       |
    | Footnote  69: miies replaced with miles                   |
    | Footnote  69: Atackted replaced with Attacked             |
    | Footnote  82: "on the west side or" replaced with         |
    |               "on the west side of"                       |
    | Footnote  90: "the the place" replaced with "the place"   |
    | Footnote  90: impentrable replaced with impenetrable      |
    | Footnote 111: VanCortlandt replaced with Van Cortlandt    |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JOURNAL OF LIEUT. JOHN L.
HARDENBERGH OF THE SECOND NEW YORK CONTINENTAL REGIMENT FROM MAY 1 TO
OCTOBER 3, 1779, IN GENERAL SULLIVAN'S CAMPAIGN AGAINST THE WESTERN
INDIANS***


******* This file should be named 32733-8.txt or 32733-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/2/7/3/32733



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
