The Project Gutenberg EBook of Subjectivity, by Norman Spinrad

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Subjectivity

Author: Norman Spinrad

Illustrator: Leo Summers

Release Date: December 21, 2009 [EBook #30722]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUBJECTIVITY ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

  This etext was produced from Analog Science Fact & Fiction January 1964.
  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S. copyright
  on this publication was renewed.


                             subjectivity


     Boredom on a long, interstellar trip can be quite a problem ... but
     the entertainment technique the government dreamed up for this one
     was a leeetle too good...!


                            NORMAN SPINRAD


                      Illustrated by Leo Summers

       *       *       *       *       *




Interplanetary flight having been perfected, the planets and moons of
the Sol system having been colonized, Man turned his attention to the
stars.

And ran into a stone wall.

After three decades of trying, scientists reluctantly concluded that a
faster-than-light drive was an impossibility, at least within the
realm of any known theory of the Universe. They gave up.

But a government does not give up so easily, especially a unified
government which already controls the entire habitat of the human
race. _Most_ especially a psychologically and sociologically
enlightened government which sees the handwriting on the wall, and has
already noticed the first signs of racial claustrophobia--an
objectless sense of frustrated rage, increases in senseless crimes,
proliferation of perversions and vices of every kind. Like grape juice
sealed in a bottle, the human race had begun to ferment.

Therefore, the Solar Government took a slightly different point of
view towards interstellar travel--Man _must_ go to the stars. Period.
Therefore, Man _will_ go to the stars.

If the speed of light could not be exceeded, then Man would go to the
stars within that limit.

When a government with tens of billions of dollars to spend becomes
monomaniacal, Great Things can be accomplished. Also, unfortunately,
Unspeakable Horrors.

_Stage One_: A drive was developed which could propel a spaceship at
half the speed of light. This was merely a matter of technological
concentration, and several billion dollars.

_Stage Two_: A ship was built around the drive, and outfitted with
every conceivable safety device. A laser-beam communication system was
installed, so that Sol could keep in contact with the ship all the way
to Centaurus. A crew of ten carefully screened, psyched and trained
near-supermen was selected, and the ship was launched on a
sixteen-year round-trip to Centaurus.

It never came back.

Two years out, the ten near-supermen became ten raving maniacs.

But the Solar Government did not give up. The next ship contained five
near-supermen, and five near-superwomen.

They only lasted for a year and a half.

The Solar Government intensified the screening process. The next ship
was manned by ten bona-fide supermen.

They stayed sane for nearly three years.

The Solar Government sent out a ship containing five supermen and five
superwomen. In two years, they had ten super-lunatics.

The psychologists came to the unstartling conclusion that even the
cream of humanity, in a sexually balanced crew, could not stand up
psychologically to sixteen years in a small steel womb, surrounded by
billions of cubic miles of nothing.

One would have expected reasonable men to have given up.

Not the Solar Government. Monomania had produced Great Things, in the
form of a c/2 drive. It now proceeded to produce Unspeakable Horrors.

The cream of the race had failed, reasoned the Solar Government,
therefore, we will give the dregs a chance.

The fifth ship was manned by homosexuals. They lasted only six months.
A ship full of lesbians bettered that by only two weeks.

Number Seven was manned by schizophrenics. Since they were _already_
mad, they did not go crazy. Nevertheless, they did not come back.
Number Eight was catatonics. Nine was paranoids. Ten was sadists.
Eleven was masochists. Twelve was a mixed crew of sadists and
masochists. No luck.

Maybe it was because thirteen was still a mystic number, or maybe it
was merely that the Solar Government was running out of ideas. At any
rate, ship Number Thirteen was the longest shot of all.

_Background_: From the beginnings of Man, it had been known that
certain plants--mushrooms, certain cacti--produced intense
hallucinations. In the mid-twentieth century, scientists--and others
less scientifically minded--had begun to extract those hallucinogenic
compounds, chiefly mescaline and psilocybin. The next step was the
synthesis of hallucinogens--L.S.D. 25 was the first, and it was far
more powerful than the extracts.

[Illustration]

In the next few centuries, more and more different hallucinogens were
synthesized--L.S.D. 105, Johannic acid, huxleyon, baronite.

So by the time the Solar Government had decided that the crew of ship
Number Thirteen would attempt to cope with the terrible reality of
interstellar space by denying that reality, they had quite an
assortment of hallucinogens to choose from.

The one they chose was a new, as-yet-untested ("Two experiments for
the price of one," explained economy-minded officials) and
unbelievably complex compound tentatively called Omnidrene.

Omnidrene was what the name implied--a hallucinogen with all the
properties of the others, some which had proven to be all its own, and
some which were as yet unknown. As ten micrograms was one day's dose
for the average man, it was the ideal hallucinogen for a starship.

So they sealed five men and five women--they had given up on sexually
unbalanced crews--in ship Number Thirteen, along with half a ton of
Omnidrene and their fondest wishes, pointed the ship towards
Centaurus, and prayed for a miracle.

In a way they could not possibly have foreseen, they got it.

       *       *       *       *       *

As starship Thirteen passed the orbit of Pluto, a meeting was held,
since this could be considered the beginning of interstellar space.

The ship was reasonably large--ten small private cabins, a bridge that
would only be used for planetfalls, large storage areas, and a big
common room, where the crew had gathered.

They were sitting in All-Purpose Lounges, arranged in a circle. A few
had their Lounges at full recline, but most preferred the upright
position.

Oliver Brunei, the nominal captain, had just opened the first case of
Omnidrene, and taken out a bottle of the tiny pills.

"This, fellow inmates," he said, "is Omnidrene. The time has come for
us to indulge. The automatics are all set, we won't have to do a thing
we don't want to for the next eight years."

He poured ten of the tiny blue pills into the palm of his right hand.
"On Earth, they used to have some kind of traditional ceremony when a
person crossed the equator for the first time. Since we are crossing a
far more important equator, I thought we should have some kind of
ceremony."

The crew squirmed irritably.

I _do_ tend to be verbose, Brunei thought.

"Well ... anyway, I just thought we all oughta take the first pills
together," he said, somewhat defensively.

"So come on, Ollie," said a skinny, sour-looking man of about thirty
years.

"O.K., Lazar, O.K." Marashovski's gonna be trouble, Brunei thought.
Why did they put _him_ on the ship?

He handed the pills around. Lazar Marashovski was about to gulp his
down.

"Wait a minute!" said Brunei. "Let's all do it together."

"One, two, _three_!"

They swallowed the pills. In about ten minutes, thought Brunei, we
should be feeling it.

He looked at the crew. Ten of us, he thought, ten brilliant misfits.
Lazar, who has spent half his life high on baronite; Vera Galindez,
would-be medium, trying to make herself telepathic with mescaline;
Jorge Donner.... Why is _he_ here?

Me, at least with me it's simple--this or jail.

What a crew! Drug addicts, occultists, sensationalists ... _and what
else?_ What makes a person do a thing like this?

It'll all come out, thought Brunei. In sixteen years, it'll all come
out.

"Feel anything yet, Ollie?" said Marsha Johnson. No doubt why _she_
came along. Just an ugly old maid liking the idea of being cooped up
with five men.

"Nothing yet," said Brunei.

He looked around the room. Plain steel walls, lined with cabinets full
of Omnidrene on two sides, viewscreen on the ceiling, bare floor, the
other two walls decked out like an automat. Plain, gray steel
walls....

_Then why were the gray steel walls turning pink?_

"Oh, oh ..." said Joby Krail, rolling her pretty blond head, "oh, oh ...
here it comes. The walls are dancing...."

"The ceiling is a spiral," muttered Vera, "a winding red spiral."

"O.K., fellow inmates," said Brunei, "it's hitting." Now the walls
were red, bright fire-engine red, and they were melting. No, not
melting, but evaporating....

"Like crystal it is," said Lin Pey, waving his delicate oriental
hands, "like jade as transparent as crystal."

"There is a camel in the circle," said Lazar, "a brown camel."

"Let's all try and see the camel together," said Vera Galindez
sharply. "Tell us what it looks like, Lazar."

"It's brown, it's the two-humped kind, it has a two-foot tail."

"And big feet," said Lin Pey.

"A stupid face," said Donner.

"Very stupid."

"Your camel is a great bore," said the stocky, scowling Bram Daker.

"Let's have something else," said Joby.

"Okay," replied Brunei, "now someone else tell what they see."

"A lizard," said Linda Tobias, a strange, somber girl, inclined to the
morbid.

"A lizard?" squeaked Ingrid Solin.

"No," said Lin Pey, "a dragon. A green dragon, with a forked red
tongue...."

"He has little useless wings," said Lazar.

"He is totally oblivious to us," said Vera.

Brunei saw the dragon. It was five feet long, green and scaly. It was
a conventional dragon, except for the most bovine expression in its
eyes....

Yes, he thought, the dragon is _here_. But the greater part of him
knew that it was an illusion.

How long would this go on?

"It's _good_ that we see the same things," said Marsha. "Let's always
see the same things...."

"Yes."

"Yes!"

"Now a mountain, a tall blue mountain."

"With snow on the peak."

"Yes, and clouds...."

       *       *       *       *       *

_One week out_:

Oliver Brunei stepped into the common room. Lin Pey, Vera, and Lazar
were sitting together, on what appeared to be a huge purple toadstool.

But that's _my_ hallucination, thought Brunei. _At least, I think it
is._

"Hello Ollie," said Lazar.

"Hi. What're you doing?"

"We're looking at the dragon again," said Vera. "Join us?"

Brunei thought of the dragon for a moment. The toadstool disappeared,
and the by-now-familiar bovine dragon took its place. In the last few
days, they had discovered that if any two of them concentrated on
something long enough to "materialize" it, anyone else who wanted to
could see it in a moment.

"What's so interesting about that silly dragon?" said Brunei.

"How about the camel?" said Lazar.

The dragon turned into the two-humped brown camel.

"Phooey!" said Lin Pey.

"O.K.," said Vera, "so what do you want?"

Lin Pey thought for a moment.

"How about a meadow?" he said. "A soft lawn of green grass, the sky is
blue, and there are a few white clouds...."

"Clover is blooming," said Lazar. "Smell it."

Brunei reclined on the soft green grass. The smell of the earth
beneath him was warm and moist. "A few apple trees here and there," he
said, and there was shade.

"Look over the hill!" said Lazar. "There's the dragon!"

"Will you _please_ get rid of that dragon?" snapped Brunei.

"O.K., Ollie, O.K."

       *       *       *       *       *

_One month out_:

"Get out of the way!" yelled Brunei. He gave the dragon a kick. It
mooed plaintively.

"That wasn't very nice, Ollie," said Lazar.

"That dragon is always underfoot," said Brunei. "Why don't you get rid
of it?"

"I've taken a liking to it," said Lazar. "Besides, what about your
Saint Bernard?"

"This ship is getting too cluttered up with everyone's
hallucinations," said Brunei. "Ever since ... when was it, a week
ago?... ever since we've been able to conjure 'em up by ourselves, and
make everyone else see 'em."

Daker dematerialised the woman on his lap. "Why don't we get
together?" he said.

"Get together?"

"Yes. We could agree on an environment. Look at this common room for
example. What a mess! Here, it's a meadow, there it's a beach, a
palace, a boudoir."

"You mean we should make it the same for all of us?" asked Lazar.

"Sure. We can have whatever we want in our cabins, but let's make some
sense out of the common room."

"Good idea," said Brunei. "I'll call the others."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Three months out_:

Brunei stepped through the stuccoed portal, and into the central
Spanish garden. He noticed that the sky was blue, with a few fleecy
white clouds.

But then, the weather was always good. They had agreed on it.

Lazar, Ingrid, Lin Pey and Vera were sitting on the green lawn
surrounding the fountain.

Daker, Joby, Linda and Donner preferred the shade, and lounged against
the white arabesqued wall which enclosed the garden on four sides,
broken only by four arched entrance portals.

The garden had been a good compromise, thought Brunei. Something for
everyone. Fresh air and sun-shine, but also the mental security
offered by the walls, which also provided shade for those who wanted
it. A fountain, a few palm trees, grass, flowers, even the little
formal Japanese rock garden that Lin Pey had insisted on.

"Hello, Ollie," said Lazar. "Nice day."

"Isn't it always?" replied Brunei. "How about a little shower?"

"Maybe tomorrow."

"I notice a lot of sleeping people today," said Brunei.

"Yes," said Lin Pey. "By now, the garden seems to be able to maintain
itself."

"You think it has a separate existence?" asked Ingrid.

"Of course not," said Vera. "Our subconscious minds are maintaining
it. It's probably here when we're all asleep."

"No way of telling _that_," said Brunei. "Besides, how can it exist
when we're asleep, when it doesn't really exist to begin with?"

"Semantics, Ollie, semantics."

Brunei took a bottle of Omnidrene out of his pocket. "Time to charge
up the old batteries again," he said.

He passed out the pills.

"I notice Marsha is still in her cabin."

"Yeah," said Lazar, "she keeps to herself a lot. No great--"

Just then, Marsha burst into the garden, screaming: "Make it go away!
Make it go away!"

Behind her slithered a gigantic black snake, with a head as big as a
horse's, and bulging red eyes.

"I thought we agreed to leave our private hallucinations in our
cabins," snapped Brunei.

"I tried! I tried! I _don't want_ it around, but it won't go away! Do
something!"

Ten feet of snake had already entered the garden. The thing seemed
endless.

"Take it easy," said Lazar. "Let's all concentrate and think it away."

They tried to erase the snake, but it just rolled its big red eyes.

"That won't work," said Vera. "Her subconscious is still fighting us.
Part of her must _want_ the snake here. We've _all_ got to be together
to erase it."

Marsha began to cry. The snake advanced another two feet.

"Oh, quiet!" rasped Lazar. "Ollie, do I have your permission to bring
my dragon into the garden? He'll make short work of the snake."

Brunei scowled. "You and your dragon.... Oh, maybe it'll work."

Instantly, the green dragon was in the garden. But it was no longer
five feet long and bovine.

It was a good twelve feet long, with cold reptilian eyes and big
yellow fangs.

It took one look at the snake, opened its powerful jaws, and belched a
huge tongue of orange flame.

The serpent was incinerated. It disappeared.

Brunei was trembling. "What happened, Lazar?" he said. "That's not the
same stupid little dragon."

"Hah ... hah...." squeaked Lazar. "He's ... uh ... grown...."

Brunei suddenly noticed that Lazar was ashen. He also noticed that the
dragon was turning in their direction.

"Get it out of here, Lazar! Get it out of here!"

Lazar nodded. The dragon flickered and went pale, but it was over a
minute before it disappeared entirely.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Six months out_:

_Things_ wandered the passageways and haunted the cabins. Marsha's
snake was back. There was Lazar's dragon, which seemed to grow larger
every day. There was also a basilisk, a pterodactyl, a vampire bat
with a five-foot wingspread, an old-fashioned red spade-tailed demon
and other assorted horrors.

Even Oliver Brunei's friendly Saint Bernard had grown to monstrous
size, turned pale green, and grown large yellow fangs.

Only the Spanish garden in the common room was free of the
monstrosities. Here, the combined conscious minds of the ten crew
members were still strong enough to banish the rampaging
hallucinations.

The ten of them sat around the fountain, which seemed a shade less
sparkling.

There were even rainclouds in the sky.

"I don't like it," said Bram Daker. "It's getting completely out of
control."

"So we just have to stay in the garden, that's all," said Brunei. "The
food's all here, and so is the Omnidrene. And _they_ can't come here."

"Not yet," said Marsha.

They all shuddered.

"What went wrong?" asked Ingrid.

"Nothing," said Donner. "They didn't know what would happen when they
sent us out, so we can't say they were _wrong_."

"Very comforting," croaked Lazar. "But can someone tell me why we
can't control _them_ any more?"

"Who knows?" said Brunei. "At least we can keep them out of here.
That's--"

There was a snuffling at the wall. The head of something like a
Tyrannosaurus Rex peered over the wall at them.

"Ugh!" said Lin Pey. "I think that's a new one."

The dragon's head appeared alongside the Tyrannosaur's.

"Well, at least _there's_ a familiar face," tittered Linda.

"Very funny."

Marsha screamed. The huge black snake thrust its head through a
portal.

And the flap of leathery wings could be heard. And the smell of
sulphur.

"Come on! Come on!" shouted Brunei. "Let's get these things out of
here!"

After five minutes of intense group concentration, the last of the
horrors was banished.

"It was a lot harder this time," said Daker.

"There were more of them," said Donner.

"They're getting stronger and bolder."

"Maybe some day they'll break through, and...." Lin Pey let the
sentence hang. Everyone supplied his own ending.

"Don't be ridiculous!" snapped Brunei. "They're not real. _They can't
kill us!_"

"Maybe we should stop taking the Omnidrene?" suggested Vera, without
very much conviction.

"At _this_ point?" said Brunei. He shuddered. "If the garden
disappeared, and we had nothing but the bare ship for the next fifteen
and a half years, and we _knew_ it, and at the same time knew that we
had the Omnidrene to bring it back.... How long do you think we'd hold
off?"

"You're right," said Vera.

"We just have to stick it out," said Brunei. "Just remember: _They
can't kill us. They aren't real._"

"Yes," the crew whispered in a tiny, frail voice, "they aren't
real...."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Seven months out_:

The garden was covered with a gloomy gray cloud layer. Even the
"weather" was getting harder and harder to control.

The crew of starship Number Thirteen huddled around the fountain,
staring into the water, trying desperately to ignore the snufflings,
flappings, wheezes and growls coming from outside the walls. But
occasionally, a scaly head would raise itself above the wall, or a
pterodactyl or bat would flap overhead, and there would be violent
shudders.

"I still think we should stop taking the Omnidrene," said Vera
Galindez.

"If we stopped taking it," asked Brunei, "which would disappear first,
_them_ ... _or the garden?_"

Vera grimaced. "But we've got to do something," she said. "We can't
even make them disappear at all, any more. And it's becoming a full
time job just to keep them outside the walls."

"And sooner or later," interjected Lazar, "we're _not_ going to be
strong enough to keep them out...."

"_Brr!_"

[Illustration]

"The snake! The snake!" screamed Marsha. "It's coming in again!"

The huge black head was already through a portal.

"Stop the snake, everyone!" yelled Brunei. Eyes were riveted on the
ugly serpent, in intense concentration.

After five minutes, it was obviously a stalemate. The snake had not
been able to advance, nor could the humans force it to retreat.

Then smoke began to rise behind the far wall.

"The dragon's burning down the wall!" shrieked Lazar. "Stop him!"

They concentrated on the dragon. The smoke disappeared.

But the snake began to advance again.

"They're too strong!" moaned Brunei. "We can't hold them back."

They stopped the snake for a few moments, but the smoke began to
billow again.

"They're gonna break through!" screamed Donner. "We can't stop 'em!"

"What are we gonna do?"

"Help!"

Creakings, cracklings, groanings, as the walls began to crack and
blister and shake.

Suddenly Bram Daker stood up, his dark eyes aflame.

"Only one thing's strong enough!" he bellowed. "Earth! _Earth!_ EARTH!
Think of Earth! All of you! We're back on Earth. Visualize it, make it
real, and the monsters'll have to disappear."

"But _where_ on Earth?" said Vera, bewildered.

"The Spaceport!" shouted Brunei. "The Spaceport! We all remember the
Spaceport."

"We're back on Earth! The Spaceport!"

"Earth!"

"_Earth!_"

"EARTH! EARTH!"

The garden was beginning to flicker. It became red, orange, yellow,
green, blue, violet, invisible; then back again through the spectrum
the other way--violet, blue, green, yellow, orange, red, invisible.

Back and forth, like a pendulum through the spectrum....

Oliver Brunei's head hurt unbearably, he could see the pain on the
other faces, but he allowed only one thought to fill his
being--_Earth! The Spaceport! EARTH!_

More and more, faster and faster, the garden flickered, and now it was
the old common room again, and _that_ was flickering.

Light was flickering, mind was flickering, time, too, seemed to
flicker....

_Only Earth!_ thought Brunei. Earth doesn't flicker, the Spaceport
doesn't flicker.

Earth! EARTH!

Now all the flickerings, of color, time, mind and dimensions, were
coalescing into one gigantic vortex, that was a thing neither of time,
nor space, nor mind, but all three somehow fused into one....

They're screaming! Brunei thought. Listen to the horrible screams!
Suddenly he noticed that he, too, was screaming.

The vortex was growing, swirling, undulating, and it, too, began to
flicker....

There was an unbearable, impossible pain, and....

       *       *       *       *       *

The sight of starship Number Thirteen suddenly appearing out of
nowhere, and sitting itself calmly down in the middle of the Spaceport
was somewhat disconcerting to the Spaceport officials. Especially
since at the very moment it appeared, and even afterward, they
continued to have visual and laser contact with its image, over three
light-months from Earth.

However, the Solar Government itself was much more pragmatic. One
instant, starship Thirteen had been light-months from Earth, the next
it was sitting in the Spaceport. Therefore, starship Thirteen had
exceeded the speed of light somehow. Therefore, it was possible to
exceed the speed of light, and a thorough examination of the ship and
its contents would show _how_.

Therefore.... You idiots, throw a security cordon around that ship!

In such matters, the long-conditioned reflexes of the Solar Government
worked marvelously. Before the air-waves had cooled, two hundred
heavily armed soldiers had surrounded the ship.

Two hours later, the Solar co-ordinator was on the scene, with ten
Orders of Sol to present to the returning heroes, and a large
well-armored vehicle to convey them to laboratories, where they would
be gone over with the proverbial fine-tooth comb.

An honor guard of two hundred men standing at attention made a pathway
from the ship's main hatch to the armored carrier, in front of which
stood the Solar Co-ordinator, with his ten medals.

They opened the hatch.

One, two, five, seven, ten dazed and bewildered "heroes" staggered
past the honor guard, to face the Co-ordinator.

He opened his mouth to begin his welcoming speech, and start the five
years of questioning and experiments which would eventually kill five
of the crew and give Man the secret of faster-than-light drive.

But instead of speaking, he screamed.

So did two hundred heavily armed soldiers.

Because, out of starship Thirteen's main hatch sauntered a twelve-foot
green dragon, followed by a Tyrannosaurus Rex, a pterodactyl, a
vampire bat with a five-foot wingspan, an old-fashioned red,
spade-tailed demon, and finally, big as a horse's, the pop-eyed head
of an enormous black serpent....

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Subjectivity, by Norman Spinrad

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUBJECTIVITY ***

***** This file should be named 30722.txt or 30722.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/7/2/30722/

Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
