The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Lilac Girl, by Ralph Henry Barbour,
Illustrated by Clarence F. Underwood


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: The Lilac Girl

Author: Ralph Henry Barbour

Release Date: July 8, 2004  [eBook #12858]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LILAC GIRL***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Karen Dalrymple, and Project
Gutenberg Distributed Proofreaders



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 12858-h.htm or 12858-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/8/5/12858/12858-h/12858-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/8/5/12858/12858-h.zip)





THE LILAC GIRL

BY

RALPH HENRY BARBOUR

Author of "Kitty of the Roses," "An Orchard Princess,"
"A Maid in Arcady," "Holly," "My Lady of the Fog," etc.

With Illustrations in Color by CLARENCE F. UNDERWOOD

and Decorations by EDWARD STRATTON HOLLOWAY

1909







[Illustration: OVER THE TIPS OF THE SPRAYS SHE SHOT A GLANCE AT WADE]




To L.D.K.




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


OVER THE TIPS OF THE SPRAYS SHE SHOT A GLANCE AT WADE

"OH, NO, SIR," REPLIED ZEPHANIA, WITH A SHOCKED, PITYING EXPRESSION

"YOUR HOUSE? THEN--THEN WHERE IS MINE, PLEASE?"

"STERN IN HER ANGER, MR. HERRICK, BUT OF AN AMIABLE AND FORGIVING
DISPOSITION"

"NOW WHAT HAVE YOU TO SAY?" HE DEMANDED





THE LILAC GIRL

I.


Two men were sitting beside a camp-fire at Saddle Pass, a shallow notch
in the lower end of the Sangre de Cristo Range in southern Colorado.
Although it was the middle of June and summer had come to the valleys
below, up here in the mountains the evenings were still chill, and the
warmth of the crackling fire felt grateful to tired bodies. Daylight yet
held, although it was fast deepening toward dusk. The sun had been gone
some little time behind the purple grandeur of Sierra Blanca, but
eastward the snowy tips of the Spanish Peaks were still flushed with the
afterglow.

Nearby three ragged burros were cropping the scanty growth. Behind them
the sharp elbow of the mountain ascended, scarred and furrowed and
littered with rocky debris. Before them the hill sloped for a few rods
and levelled into a narrow plateau, across which, eastward and
westward, the railway, tired from its long twisting climb up the
mountain, seemed to pause for a moment and gasp for breath before
beginning its descent. Beyond the tracks a fringe of stunted trees held
precarious foothold on the lower slope of a smaller peak, which reared
its bare cone against the evening sky. There were no buildings at Saddle
Pass save a snow-shed which began where the rails slipped downward
toward the east and, dropping from sight, followed for a quarter of a
mile around the long face of the mountain. It was very still up here on
the Pass, so still that when the Western Slope Limited, two hours and
more late at Eagle Cliff, whistled for the tunnel four miles below the
sound came echoing about them startlingly clear.

"Train coming up from the west," said the elder of the two men. "Must be
the Limited." The other nodded as he drained the last drop in his tin
cup and looked speculatively at the battered coffee pot.

"Any more of the Arbuckle nectar, Ed?" he asked.

"Not a drop, but I can make some."

"No, I've had enough, I reckon. That's the trouble with dining late, Ed;
you have too much appetite."

"We'll have to get some more grub before long," was the reply, "or it'll
be appetite and nothing else with us. I can eat bacon with the next man,
but I don't want to feast on it six days running. What we need, Wade, is
variety."

"And plenty of it," sighed the other, stretching his tired legs and
finding a new position. "The fact is, even after this banquet I feel a
little hollow."

"Same here, but I figure we'd better go a little short till we get
nearer town. We ought to strike Bosa Grande to-morrow night."

"Why not hop the train and go down to Aroya? We can find some real grub
there."

"Couldn't get back before to-morrow afternoon. What's the good of
wasting a whole day?"

"Looks to me like we'd wasted about twenty of them already, Ed."

Craig made no reply. He fished a corn-cob pipe and a little sack of
tobacco from his pocket and began to fill the bowl. Wade watched for a
moment in silence. Then, with a protesting groan, he rolled over until
he could get at his own pipe. Craig drew an ember from the edge of the
fire with calloused fingers, held it to his bowl and passed it on to
Wade. Then with grunts of contentment they settled back against the
sagging canvas of their tent and puffed wreaths of acrid smoke into the
twilight.

The shadows were creeping up the mountain side. Overhead the wide sweep
of sky began to glitter with white stars. A little chill breeze sprang
up in the west and fanned the fire, sending a fairy shower of tiny
lemon-yellow sparks into the air. And borne on the breeze came a hoarse
pounding and drumming that grew momentarily louder and reverberated from
wall to wall. The ground trembled and the grazing burros lifted their
shaggy heads inquiringly.

"She's almost up," said Wade. Craig nodded and replaced his pipe between
his teeth. The noise became multisonous. With the clangor of the
pounding wheels came the stertorous gasping of the engines, the creak
and clatter of protesting metal. The uproar filled the pass deafeningly.

"She's making hard work of it," shouted Craig.

"Probably a heavy train," Wade answered.

Then a path of pale light swept around the elbow of the mountain and the
wheezing, puffing monsters reached the head of the grade. The watchers
could almost hear the sighs of relief from the two big mountain-climbers
as they found the level track beneath them. Their breathing grew easier,
quieter as they clanged slowly across the pass a few rods below the
camp. The burros, having satisfied their curiosity, went back to supper.
The firemen in the cab windows raised their hands in greeting and the
campers waved back. Behind the engines came a baggage and express car,
then a day coach, a diner and a sleeper. Slower and slower moved the
train and finally, with a rasping of brakes and the hissing of released
steam, it stopped.

"What's up?" asked Wade.

"Hot-box on the diner; see it?"

"Yes, and smell it. Let's go down."

But Craig shook his head lazily, and Wade, cinching his loosened belt,
limped with aching legs down the slope. The trainmen were already
pulling the smouldering, evil-smelling waste from the box, and after
watching a minute he loitered along the track beside the car. Several of
the shades were raised and the sight of the gleaming white napery and
silver brought a wistful gleam to his eyes. But there was worse to come.
At the last table a belated diner was still eating. He was a large man
with a double chin, under which he had tucked a corner of his napkin. He
ate leisurely, but with gusto.

"Hot roast beef," groaned Wade, "and asparagus and little green beans!
Oh Lord!"

He suddenly felt very empty, and mechanically tightened his leather belt
another inch. It came over him all at once that he was frightfully
hungry. For the last two days he and his partner had been travelling on
short rations, and to-day they had been on the go since before sun-up.
For a moment the wild idea came to him of jumping on the train and
riding down to Aroya just so he could take a seat in the dining-car and
eat his fill.

"They wouldn't make much out of me at a dollar a throw," he reflected,
with a grin. But it wouldn't be fair to Craig, and he abandoned the idea
in the next breath. He couldn't stand there any longer, though, and see
that man eat. He addressed himself to the closed window before he turned
away.

"I hope it chokes you," he muttered, venomously.

Some of the passengers had descended from the day coach to stretch their
limbs, and with a desire to avoid them Wade walked toward the rear of
the train. Daylight dies hard up here in the mountains, but at last
twilight held the world, a clear, starlit twilight. Overhead the vault
of heaven was hung with deep blue velvet, pricked out with a million
diamonds. Up the slope the camp-fire glowed ruddily. In the west the
smouldering sunset embers had cooled to ashes of dove-gray and steel,
against which Sierra Blanca crouched, a grim, black giant. Wade had
reached the observation platform at the end of the sleeping-car. With a
tired sigh he turned toward the slope and the beckoning fire. But the
sound of a closing door brought his head around and the fire no longer
beckoned.

On the platform, one hand on the knob of the car door as though
meditating retreat, stood the straight, slim figure of a girl. She wore
a light skirt and a white waist, and a bunch of flowers drooped from her
breast. Her head was uncovered and the soft brown hair waved lustrously
away from a face of ivory. The eyes that looked down into his reflected
the stars in their depths, the gently-parted mouth was like a vivid red
rosebud in the dusk. To Wade she seemed the very Spirit of Twilight,
white and slim and ethereal, and so suddenly had the apparition sprung
into his vision that he was startled and bewildered. For a long moment
their looks held. Then, somewhat faintly,

"Why have we stopped?" she asked.

So unreal had she looked that his heart pounded with relief when she
spoke.

"There's a hot-box," he answered, in the tones of one repeating a lesson
learned. His eyes devoured her face hungrily.

"Oh!" said the girl, softly. "Then--then you aren't a robber, are you?"
Wade merely shook his head. "I heard noises, and then--when I opened the
door--and saw you standing there--." The first alarm was yielding to
curiosity. She glanced at the scarred and stained hand which grasped the
brass railing, and from there to the pleasant, eager, sunburnt face
under the upturned brim of the battered sombrero. "No, I see you're not
that," she went on reflectively. "Are you a miner?"

"No, only a prospector. We're camped up there." He tilted his head
toward the slope without moving his gaze.

"Oh," said the girl. Perhaps she found that steady, unwinking regard of
his disconcerting, for she turned her head away slightly so that her
eyes were hidden from him. But the soft profile of the young face stood
clear against the darkening sky, and Wade gazed enravished.

"You are looking for gold?" she asked.

"Yes."

"And--have you found it?"

"No."

"Oh, I'm so sorry!" There was sympathy in the voice and in the look she
turned upon him, and the boy's heart sang rapturously. Perhaps weariness
and hunger and the girl's radiant twilit beauty combined to make him
light-headed; otherwise how account for his behavior? Or perhaps
starlight as well as moonlight may affect the brain; the theory is at
least plausible. Or perhaps no excuse is needed for him save that he was
twenty-three, and a Southerner! He leaned against the railing and
laughed softly and exultantly.

"I've found no gold," he said, "but I don't care about that now. For
I've found to-night what is a thousand times better!"

"Better than--than gold!" she faltered, trying to meet his gaze. "Why,
what--"

"The girl I love!" he whispered up to her.

She gasped, and the hand on the knob began to turn slowly. Even in the
twilight he could see the swift blood staining the ivory of her cheek.
His eyes found hers and held them.

"What is your name?" he asked, softly, imperatively.

Oh, surely there is some quality, some magic power in mountain starlight
undreamed of in our philosophy, for,

"Evelyn," whispered the girl, her wide eyes on his and a strange wonder
on her face.

"Evelyn!" he echoed radiantly. "Evelyn! Evelyn what?"

"Walton," answered the girl obediently. He nodded his head and murmured
the name half aloud to his memory.

"Evelyn Walton. And you live in God's country?"

"In New York." Her breath came fast and one hand crept to her breast
where the flowers drooped.

"I'll remember," he said, "and some day--soon--I'll come for you. I love
you, girl. Don't forget."

There was a quick, impatient blast from the engine. The wheels creaked
against the rails. The train moved forward.

"Good night," he said. His hand reached over the railing and one of hers
fell into it. For a moment it lay hidden there, warm and tremulous. Then
his fingers released it and it fled to join its fellow at her breast.

"Good night--dear," he said again. "Remember!"

Then he dropped from the step. There was a long piercing wail of the
whistle that was smothered as the engine entered the snow-shed. The girl
on the platform stood motionless a moment. Then one of her hands dropped
from her breast, and with it came a faded spray of purple lilac. She
stepped quickly to the rail and tossed it back into the twilight. Wade
sprang forward, snatched it from the track and pressed it to his lips.
When the last car dipped into the mouth of the snow-shed he was still
standing there, gazing after, his hat in hand, a straight, lithe figure
against the starlit sky.




II.


Well down in the southeastern corner of New Hampshire, some twenty miles
inland from the sea, lies Eden Village. Whether the first settlers added
the word Village to differentiate it from the garden of the same name I
can't say. Perhaps when the place first found a name, over two hundred
years ago, it was Eden, plain and simple. Existence there proving
conclusively the dissimilarity between it and the original Eden, the New
England conscience made itself heard in Town Meeting, and insisted on
the addition of the qualifying word Village, lest they appear to be
practising deception toward the world at large. But this is only a
theory. True it is, however, that while Stepping and Tottingham and
Little Maynard and all the other settlements around are content to exist
without explanatory suffixes, Eden maintains and is everywhere accorded
the right to be known as Eden Village. Even as far away as Redding, a
good eight miles distant, where you leave the Boston train, Eden's
prerogative is known and respected.

Wade Herrick discovered this when, five years after our first glimpse of
him, he stepped from the express at Redding, and, bag in hand, crossed
the station platform and addressed himself to a wise-looking,
freckle-faced youth of fourteen occupying the front seat of a rickety
carryall.

"How far is it to Eden, son?" asked Wade.

"You mean Eden Village?" responded the boy, leisurely.

"I suppose so. Are there two Edens around here?"

"Nope; just Eden Village."

"Well, where is that, how far is it, and how do I get there?"

"About eight miles," answered the boy. "I kin take you there."

Wade viewed the discouraged-looking, flea-bitten gray horse dubiously.
"Are you sure?" he asked. "Have you ever driven that horse eight miles
in one day?"

"Well, I guess! There ain't a better horse in town than he is."

"How long will it take?"

"Oh, about an hour; hour an' a half; two hours--"

"Hold on! That's enough. This isn't exactly a sight-seeing expedition,
son. We'll compromise on an hour and a half; what do you say?"

The boy examined the prospective passenger silently. Then he looked at
the horse. Then he cocked an eye at the sun. Finally he nodded his head.

"All right," he said. Wade deposited his satchel in the carriage and
referred to an address written on the back of a letter.

"Now, where does Mr. Rufus Lightener do business?"

"Over there at the bank."

"Good. And where can I get something to eat?"

"Stand up or sit down?"

"Well, preferably 'sit down.'"

"Railroad Hotel. Back there about a block. Dinner, fifty cents."

"I certainly am glad I found you," said Wade. "I don't know what I'd
have done in this great city without your assistance. Now you take me
over to the bank. After that we'll pay a visit to the hotel. You'd
better get something to eat yourself while I'm partaking of that
half-dollar banquet."

An hour later the journey began. Wade, fairly comfortable on the back
seat of the carryall, smoked his after-dinner pipe. The month was June,
there had been recent rains and the winding, dipping country road
presented new beauties to the eyes at every stage. Wade, fresh from the
mountains of Colorado, revelled in the softer and gentler loveliness
about him. The lush, level meadow, the soft contour of the distant
hills, the ever-present murmur and sparkle of running water delighted
him even while they brought homesick memories of his own native
Virginia. It was a relief to get away from the towering mountains, the
eternal blue of unclouded skies, the parched, arid miles of unclothed
mesa, the clang and rattle of ore cars and the incessant grinding of
quartz mills. Yes, it was decidedly pleasant to have a whole summer--if
he wanted it--in which to go where he liked, do what he liked. One might
do much worse, he reflected, than find some such spot as this and idle
to one's heart's content. There would be trout, as like as not, in that
stony brook back there; sunfish, probably, in that lazy stream crossing
the open meadow yonder. It would be jolly to try one's luck on a day
like this; jolly to lie back on the green bank with a rod beside one and
watch the big white clouds sail across the wide blue of the sky. It
would seem almost like being a boy again!

Presently, when, after passing through the sleepy village of Tottingham,
the road crossed a shallow stream, Wade bade the boy drive through it.

"Don't have to," replied unimaginative fourteen. "There's a bridge."

"I know there is," answered Wade, "but my doctor has forbidden bridges.
Drive through the water. I want to hear it gurgle against the wheels."

He closed his eyes, expectantly content, and so did not see the alarmed
look which the boy shot at him. The horse splashed gingerly into the
stream, the wheels grated musically over the little stones, and the
water lapped and gurgled about the spokes. Wade leaned back with closed
eyes and nodded approvingly. "Just the same," he murmured. "It might be
the ford below Major Dabney's. This is surely God's own country again."

Further on they rattled through the quiet streets of East Tottingham, a
typical New England village built around a square, elm-shaded common. It
was all as Ed had described it; the white church with its tall spire
lost behind the high branches, the Town Hall guarded by an ancient black
cannon, the white houses, the green blinds, the lilac hedges, the
toppling hitching-post before each gate. Tottingham Center succeeded
East Tottingham and they eventually reached Eden Village twenty minutes
behind schedule.

It was difficult to say where country left off and village began, but
after passing the second modest white residence Wade believed he could
safely consider himself within the corporate limits. Before him
stretched a wide road lined with elms. So closely were they planted that
their far-reaching branches formed a veritable roof overhead, through
which at this time of day the sunlight barely trickled. They were sturdy
trees, many of them larger in the trunk than any hogs-head, and
doubtless some of them were almost as old as the village itself. The
cool green-shadowed road circled slightly, so that as they travelled
along it the vista always terminated in a wall of green, flecked at
intervals with a gleam of white where the sun-bathed front of some house
peeked through. Wade viewed the quaint old place with interest, for here
Ed had lived when a boy, and many a story of Eden Village had Wade
listened to.

The houses were set, usually, close to the street, with sometimes a
wooden fence, sometimes a hedge of lilacs before them. But more often
yard and sidewalk fraternized. Flowers were not numerous; undoubtedly
the elms threw too much shade to allow of successful floriculture. But
there were lilacs still in bloom, lavender and white, and their perfume
stirred memories. The houses in Eden Village were not crowded; for the
first quarter of a mile they passed hardly more than a dozen. After
that, although they became more neighborly, each held itself well aloof.
Then came a small church with a disproportionately tall spire, a
watering trough, the Town Hall, and "Prout's Store, Zenas Prout 2nd,
Proprietor." Here the gray sidled up to the ancient hitching-post. The
boy tossed the reins over the dashboard and jumped out. "You don't need
to hold him," he said reassuringly. Presently he was back. "It's further
up the street," he announced. "But he says there ain't anybody livin'
there an' the house is locked up."

"I've got the key," answered Wade. "Go ahead."

They went on along the leafy nave. Now and then a road or grass-grown
lane started off from the main highway and wandered back toward the
meadow-lands. Presently the street straightened out, the elms presented
thinner ranks, houses stood farther apart. Then the street divided to
enclose a narrow strip of common adorned with a flagpole greatly in need
of a new coat of white paint. The elms dwindled away and an occasional
maple dotted the common with shade. The driver guided the patient gray
to the left and, near the centre of the common, drew up in front of a
little white house, which, like the picket fence in front of it, the
flagstaff on the common, and so many other things in Eden Village,
seemed to be patiently awaiting the painter.

Inside the fence, thrusting its branches out between the pickets, ran a
head-high hedge of lilac bushes, so that, unless you stood directly in
front of the gate, all you saw of the first story were the tops of the
front door and the close-shuttered windows. Between house and hedge
there was the remains of a tiny formal garden. Rows of box,
winter-killed in spots, circled and angled about grass-grown spaces
which had once been flower-beds. The dozen feet of path from gate to
steps was paved with crumbling red bricks, moss-stained and
weed-embroidered. The front door had side-lights hidden by narrow, green
blinds and a fan-light above. Wade drew forth the key entrusted to him
by the agent and tried to fit it to the lock. But although he struggled
with it for several moments it refused stubbornly to have anything to do
with the keyhole.

"There's a side door around there," advised the boy from the carryall.
"Maybe it's the key to it."

"Maybe it is the key to it," responded Wade, wiping the perspiration
from his forehead. He pushed his way past the drooping branches of an
overgrown syringa, tripped over a box-bush, and passed around the left
of the house, following the remains of a path which led him to a door in
an ell. Back here there were gnarled apple and pear and cherry trees, a
tropical clump of rhubarb, and traces of what had evidently been at one
time a kitchen garden. Old-fashioned perennials blossomed here and
there; lupins and Sweet Williams and other sturdy things which had
resisted the encroachment of the grass. The key fitted readily, scraped
back, and the narrow door swung inward.

Gloom and mustiness were his first reward, but as his eyes became
accustomed to the darkness he saw that he was in the kitchen. There was
the sink with a hand-pump on one side and a drain-board on the other.
Here a table, spread with figured yellow oil-cloth; a range, chairs,
corner-cupboard, a silent, staring clock. His steps beat lonesomely on
the floor. A door, reached by a single step, led to the front of the
house. He pushed it open and groped his way up and in, across to the
nearest window. When the blinds were thrust aside he found himself
confronted by a long mahogany sideboard whose top still held an array of
Sheffield platters, covered dishes, candlesticks. Save for the dust
which lay heavily on every surface and eddied across the sunlight, there
was nothing to suggest desertion. Wade could fancy that the owner had
stepped out of doors for the moment or had gone upstairs. He found
himself listening for the sound of footsteps overhead or on the
staircase or in the darkened hall. But the only sounds were faint sighs
and crepitations doubtless attributable to the air from the open windows
stirring through the long-closed house, but which Wade, letting his
fancy stray, chose to believe came from the Ghosts of Things Past. He
pictured them out there in the hall, peering through the crevice of the
half-open door at the intruder with little, sad, troubled faces. He
could almost hear them whispering amongst themselves. He felt a little
shiver go over him, and threw back his shoulders and laughed softly at
his foolishness.

But the feeling that he was an intruder, a trespasser, remained with him
as he passed from room to room, throwing open windows and blinds, and
now and then sneezing as the impalpable dust tickled his nostrils. In
the sitting-room, as in every other apartment, everything looked as
though the occupant had passed out of the room but a moment before.
Wade's face grew grave and tender as he looked about him. On the sewing
machine a shallow basket held sewing materials and a few pairs of coarse
woollen stockings, neatly rolled. The poker was laid straight along the
ledge of the big "base-burner" in the corner. A table with a green cloth
stood in front of a window and bore a few magazines dated almost ten
years before. A set of walnut book-shelves held a few sober-clad
volumes, Bulfinch's "Age of Fable," "Webster's Dictionary," Parker's
"Aids to English Composition," Horace's "Odes" in Latin, "The Singer's
Own Book," "Henry Esmond" and "Vanity Fair," "A Chance Acquaintance,"
two cook-books, a number of yellow-covered "Farmer's Almanacs," and "A
Guide to the City of Boston." A sewing-stand supported a huge family
Bible. The walls were papered in brown and a brown ingrain carpet
covered the floor. There was a couch under the side window and a few
upholstered chairs were scattered about. Now that the windows were open
and the warm sunlight was streaming in, it was a cosy, shabby, homey
little room.

Wade opened the door into the hall. Perhaps the Ghosts of Things Past
scampered up the winding stairway; at least, they were not to be seen.
He found the front-door key in the lock and turned the bolt. When the
door swung inward a little thrill touched him. For the first time in his
life he was standing on his own doorsill, looking down his own front
path and through his own front gate!

In every man's nature there is the desire for home-owning. It may lie
dormant for many years, but sooner or later it will stir and call. Wade
heard its voice now, and his heart warmed to it. Fortune had brought him
the power to choose his home where he would, and build an abode far
finer than this little cottage. And yet this place, which had come to
him unexpectedly and through sorrow, seemed suddenly to lay a claim upon
him. It was such a pathetic, down-at-heels, likable little house! It
seemed to Wade as though it were saying to him: "I'm yours now. Don't
turn your back on me. I've been so very, very lonesome for so many
years! But now you've come, and you've opened my doors and windows and
given me the beautiful sunlight again, and I shall be very happy. Stay
with me and love me."

In the carryall the boy was leaning back with his feet on the dasher and
whistling softly through his teeth. The gray was nibbling sleepily at
the decrepit hitching-post. Wade glanced at his watch, and looked again
in surprise. It was later than he had thought. If he meant to get out of
Redding that night it was time he thought of starting back. But after a
moment of hesitation he turned from the door and went on with his
explorations. In the parlor there was light enough from the front door
to show him the long formal room with its white marble centre-table
adorned with a few gilt-topped books and a spindly lamp, the square
piano, the stiff-looking chairs and rockers, the few pictures against
the faded gold paper, the white mantel, set with shells and vases and a
few photographs, the quaint curving-backed sofa between the side
windows. He closed the door again and turned down the hall.

The stairway was narrow and winding, with a mahogany rail set upon white
spindles. It was uncarpeted and his feet sounded eerily on the steps. On
the floor above doors opened to left and right. The first led into what
had evidently been used as a spare bedroom. It was uncarpeted and but
scantily furnished. The door of the opposite room was closed. Wade
opened it reverently and unconsciously tiptoed to the window. When the
sunlight was streaming in he turned and surveyed the apartment with a
catch of his breath. It had been Her room. He had never seen her, yet he
had heard Ed speak of her so much that it seemed that he must have known
her. He tried not to think of the days when, lying there on the old
four-post bed with the knowledge of approaching death for company, she
had waited and waited for her son to come back to her. Ed had never
forgiven himself that, reflected Wade. He had been off in Wyoming at
the time, and when he had returned the two telegrams lay one upon the
other with a month's dust over them, the one apprising him of his
mother's illness and asking him to hurry home, the other tersely
announcing her death. Well, she knew all about it now, reflected Wade.
Ed had told her long before this.

It was a pleasant little room with its sloping ceilings and cheerful
pink paper. The bed was neatly spread with a patchwork quilt, and the
blankets and counterpane were folded and piled upon the foot. The old
mahogany bureau was just as she had left it, doubtless. The little,
knick-knacks still stood upon the brackets, and in the worsted-worked
pincushion a gold brooch was sticking.

He closed the window and returned to the floor below. A door under the
stairway led from the hall to the kitchen. He crossed the latter and
passed out into the yard. Back of the house the ground sloped slightly
to a distant stone wall, which apparently marked the limit there of
Wade's domain. At one time there had been a fence between the orchard
and the meadow beyond, but now only an occasional crumbling post
remained. Trees had grown up here and there in the meadow, a few young
maples, a patch of locusts, and some straggling sumacs. Birds sang in
the trees, and once, when he listened, Wade thought he could hear the
tinkling of a brook.

Toward the centre of the village his ground ran only to a matter of ten
or twelve yards from the kitchen door. There was just room for the
little garden between house and fence. On that side his nearest neighbor
was distant the width of several untenanted lots. On the other side,
however, there was more space. There were some shade-trees here, and
around one of them, an ancient elm, ran a wooden seat, much carved and
lettered. The boundary here was a continuation of the lilac hedge which
fronted the street, and in it was an arched gate leading to the next
yard. But from the gate all Wade could discern was the end of a white
house and a corner of a brick chimney some forty yards distant; trees
and shrubbery hid more of his neighbor's estate.

Wade returned to the front of the house, hands in his pockets, a tune on
his lips. He had taken his valise from the back of the carryall before
the driver, who was half asleep, discovered his presence. He blinked and
dropped his feet from the dashboard.

"You all ready?" he asked.

Wade shook his head.

"I've changed my mind," he said. "I'm going to stay awhile."




III.


That was a stirring afternoon in Eden Village. Wade's advent was like
the dropping of a stone into the centre of a quiet pool. Prout's Store
was the centre of the pool, and it was there that the splash and
upheaval occurred, and from there the waves of commotion circled and
spread to the farthest margins. By supper time it was known from one
length of Main Street to the other that the Craig place was tenanted
again. As to who the tenant was rumor was vague and indefinite. But
before bedtime even that point was definitely settled, Zenas Prout 2nd
having kept the store open a full half-hour later than usual to
accommodate delayed seekers after knowledge.

It was a rather stirring afternoon for Wade, too. First there was a
visit to the store in the carryall for the purchase of supplies. Mr.
Prout, who combined the duties of merchant with those of postmaster and
express agent, was filling out a requisition for postal supplies when
Wade entered. Poking his pen behind his ear, he stepped out from behind
the narrow screen of lock-boxes and greeted the visitor.

"Afternoon, sir. You found the house all right?"

"Yes, thanks." Wade drew forth a pencil and tore off a piece of wrapping
paper.

"Sort of out of repairs, of course, seem' it ain't been lived in for
most ten years, not since Mrs. Craig died. Was you considerin'
purchasin', sir?"

"Er--no." Wade was writing rapidly on the brown paper. "The fact is, Mr.
Prout, I own the Craig house now."

"You don't say?" exclaimed the store-keeper in genuine surprise. "You
ain't--surely you ain't Ed Craig?"

"No, my name's Herrick. Ed was a good friend of mine. We were partners
in a mining enterprise in Colorado. Ed died almost a year ago now;
typhoid."

"I want to know! Well, well! So Ed Craig's gone, has he? I remember him
when he was 'bout so high. Used to come down here an' I'd set him up on
the counter right where you be now, Mr. Herring, and give him a stick of
candy. I recollect he always wanted the kind with the pink stripes on
it. An' he's dead, you say? We often wondered what had become of Ed.
Folks thought it kind of queer he didn't come home the time his mother
died."

"He was away and didn't learn of her illness until it was too late,"
said Wade. "He felt mighty badly about that, Mr. Prout, and I wish you'd
let the people here know how it happened. Not that it matters much to Ed
now, but he was the best friend I ever had, and I don't want folks who
used to know him to think he deliberately stayed away that time."

"That's so, sir. An' I'm glad to hear the truth of it. Ed didn't seem to
me when I knew him the sort of feller to do a thing like that. Folks'll
be glad to know about it, Mr. Herring."

"Herrick, please. Now just look over that list and check off what you
can let me have, will you? I'm going to stay awhile, and so I will have
to get in a few provisions."

Mr. Prout ran his eye down the list dubiously, checking now and then.
When he laid it down and pushed it across the counter his tone was
apologetic.

"Ain't a great deal there I can sell you, Mr. Herrick. I'm kind of out
of some things. I guess I can get most of 'em for you, though, if you
ain't got to have 'em right away."

Wade looked at the slip.

"You put up what you've got," he said, "and I'll send over to Tottingham
Center for the rest."

"Don't believe you'll get 'em all there," commented Mr. Prout. "Things
like bacon in jars an' canned mushrooms there ain't much call for around
here."

But Wade was busy revising his list, and made no comment. Presently he
went out and despatched the boy to the Center. When he returned to the
store Mr. Prout was weighing out sugar.

"So you come into the Craig place, Mr. Herrick. I suppose you bought
it."

"No, Ed left it to me in his will. Wanted me to come on here and have a
look at it and see that it was all right. He was very fond of that
place. So I came. And--well, it's a pleasant place, Mr. Prout, and it's
a pretty country you have around here, and so I reckon I'll stay awhile
and camp out in the cottage."

"Going to do your own cooking?" asked Mr. Prout.

"Have to, I reckon. It won't be the first time, though."

"Guess you wouldn't have any trouble findin' some one to come in an' do
for you, if you wanted they should," said Mr. Prout. "There's my gal,
now. She's only fifteen, but she's capable an' can cook pretty tolerable
well. Course you know your business best, Mr. Herrick, but--"

"Send her over in the morning," said Wade, promptly. "Is there a mail
out of here to-night?"

"Five o'clock."

"Then let me have a sheet of paper and a stamped envelope, if you
please. I'll write down to Boston and have them send my trunk up."

He met but few persons on his way back to the cottage, but many a
curious gaze followed him from behind curtained windows, and, since the
ripples had not yet widened, he left many excited discussions in his
wake. Back in the cottage he threw off coat and vest, lighted his pipe
and set to work. First of all, up went the parlor windows and shades.
But a dubious examination of that apartment was sufficient. If he should
ever really live here the parlor could be made habitable, but for the
present its demands were too many. He closed the windows again and
abandoned the room to its musty solitude. From the spare room upstairs
he brought bed and bedding and placed it in the sitting room. It
required some ingenuity to convert the latter apartment into a bedroom,
but the difficulty was at last solved by relegating the sewing machine
to the parlor and moving the couch. When the bed was made Wade went out
to the kitchen and looked over the situation there. Closet and
cup-board displayed more dishes and utensils than he would have known
what to do with. He tried the pump and after a moment's vigorous work
was rewarded with a rushing stream of ice-cold water that tasted pure
and fresh. Then he looked for fuel. The lean-to shed, built behind the
kitchen, was locked, and, after a fruitless search for the key, he pried
off the hasp with a screw-driver. The shed held the accumulated rubbish
of many years, but Wade didn't examine it. Fuel was what he wanted and
he found plenty of it. There was a pile of old shingles and several feet
of maple and hickory neatly stowed against the back wall. Near at hand
was a chopping-block, the axe still leaning against it. There was a
saw-horse, too, and a saw hung above it on a nail. But there was no wood
cut in stove size, and so Wade swung the door wide open to let in light,
and set to work with the saw and axe. It felt good to get his muscles
into play again and he was soon whistling merrily. Fifteen minutes later
he was building a fire in the kitchen stove. It was too early for
supper, but the iron kettle looked very lonely without any steam curling
from its impertinent spout. After he had solved the secrets of the
perplexing drafts, and ascertained by the simple expedient of placing a
sooty finger in it that the water was really getting warm, he washed his
hands at the sink and returned to the sitting-room to don vest and coat.
He had done that and was ruminantly filling his pipe when something drew
his gaze to one of the side windows. The pipe fell to the floor and the
tobacco trailed across the carpet.

For a moment, for just the tiny space of time which it took his heart to
charge madly up into his throat, turn over and race back again, the open
casement framed the shoulders and face of a woman. There were greens and
blues in the background, and sunlight everywhere, and a blue shadow fell
athwart the sill. The picture glared with light and color, but for that
brief fragment of time Wade's eyes, half-blinded by the dazzlement,
looked into the woman's. His widened with wonder and dawning
recognition; hers--but the vision passed. The frame was empty again.

Wade passed a hand over his eyes, blinked and asked himself startledly
what it meant. Had he dreamed? He gazed dazedly from the fallen pipe to
the empty window. The sunlight dazzled and hurt, and he closed his eyes
for an instant. And in that instant another vision came.... It was
twilight on Saddle Pass.... Two starlit eyes looked wonderingly down
into his. The mouth beneath was like a crimson bud with parted
petals.... A slim, warm hand was in his and his heart danced on his
lips.... The slender form lessened and softened in the tender darkness
and became only a pale blur far down the track, and he was standing
alone under the cold white stars, with a spray of lilac against his
mouth.

He opened his eyes with a shiver. It was uncanny. All that had been five
years ago, five years filled to the brim with work and struggle and
final attainment, all making for forgetfulness. The thing was utterly
absurd and impossible! His senses had tricked him! The light had
blinded his eyes and imagination had done the rest! And yet--

He strode to the window and looked out. The garden was empty and still.
Only, under the window, at the edge of the path, lay a spray of purple
lilac.




IV.


"Eh? Yes? What is it?"

Wade sat up in bed and stared stupidly about him. In Heaven's name where
was he? And what was the noise that had awakened him? There it was
again!

_Rat, tat, tat, tat!_

Was he still asleep? What was this room? The stove looked dimly
familiar, and there were his clothes over the back of a green rep
rocker. But where--Then memory routed sleep and he sank back onto the
pillow with a sigh of relief. It was all right. He remembered now. He
was in his own cottage in Eden Village, he had had a fine long sleep and
felt ready for--

_Rat, tat, tat, tat--TAT!_

"Hello! What is it? Who is it? Why in thunder don't you--"

"Please, sir, it's me."

The reply came faintly through the dining room. Some one was knocking at
the kitchen door. The apologetic tones sounded feminine, however, and
Wade was in no costume to receive lady visitors. He looked desperately
around for his dressing-gown and remembered that it was in his trunk and
that his trunk still reposed in the porter's room of a Boston hotel.

"Who--who is 'me'?" he called.

"Zephania."

Zephania! Who in thunder was Zephania?

"I'm very sorry, Miss Zephania, but I'm not dressed yet. If you wouldn't
mind calling again in, say, half an hour--"

"Please, sir, I'll wait."

"Oh, well--er--was there something you wanted?"

"Please, sir, I've come to do for you."

To do for him! Wade clasped his knees with his arms and frowned
perplexedly at the big stove. It was distinctly threatening. He wondered
how she intended to accomplish her awful purpose. Perhaps she had
stopped in the woodshed and secured the axe. To do for him! Then he
laughed and sprang out of bed. It was Zenas Prout's girl, and she had
come to get his breakfast.

"Zephania!" he called.

"Yes, sir?" It sounded as though she were sitting on the back doorstep.

"The door is unlocked. Come in. You'll find things to eat on the table
and things to cook with in the closets. I'll be dressed in a few
minutes."

He heard the door open as he closed his own portal, and in a moment a
stove-lid fell clanging to the floor. After that Zephania's presence in
the house was never for a moment in doubt. Rattle-bang went the poker,
clicketty-click went the shaker, and triumphant over all rose Zephania's
shrill young voice:

  "'O Beulah land, sweet Beulah land,
    As on thy highest mount I stand;
  I look away across the sea,
    Where mansions are prepared for me.'"

"She has a cheerful presence," muttered Wade. "I wonder if she does that
all the time."

But Zephania's vocal efforts were forgotten for the moment in the
annoying discovery that he had neglected to provide washing
accommodations. He had intended using the kitchen sink for ablutions,
but with Zephania in possession of that apartment it was out of the
question. It was evident that if he meant to wash in the kitchen he
would have to get up earlier. What time of day was it, anyhow? He looked
at his watch and whistled.

"Twenty minutes of seven!" he ejaculated. "This won't do. I guess I'd
better get my own breakfasts. If there's one thing a chap wants to do in
vacation it's sleep late."

He raised the shades and flung open the front windows. On the lilac
hedge a bird was poised singing his heart out. Wade watched him in
admiration and wondered what kind of a bird he was. To Wade a bird was a
bird as long as it was neither a buzzard nor a crow.

"You're not a buzzard," he told the songster, "nor a crow. You have a
gray breast and brown body and a black cap on your head. Wonder who you
are. Guess you're a sparrow. I believe I'll get a book telling about
birds. They're interesting little devils. Look at him put his head back!
Just as though he meant to crack things wide open. By Jove! I have it!
Your name's Zephania!"

A baker's cart ambled by beyond the hedge, the driver leaning around the
corner of the vehicle to regard the cottage curiously. Out on the common
a bay horse, his halter-rope dragging under his feet, cropped the lush
grass.

"You're happy," murmured Wade. "The bird's happy. Zephania's happy. This
must be a happy village." He pondered a moment, gazing contentedly about
the cosy sunlit room. Then, "And I'm happy myself," he added with
conviction. And to prove it he began to whistle merrily while he
finished dressing. Presently there was a knock on the dining-room door.

"Yes?" responded Wade.

"Please, sir, what will you have for breakfast?" Being by this time
decently dressed, Wade opened the door.

"Hello!" he said.

"Good morning," answered Zephania.

If he had not been informed that her age was fifteen Wade would have
supposed Zephania's years to be not over a baker's dozen. She was a
round-faced, smiling-visaged, black-haired, black-eyed, ruddy-cheeked
little mite who simply oozed cheerfulness and energy. She wore a
shapeless pink cotton dress which reached almost to her ankles, and over
that a blue-checked apron which nearly trailed on the floor. Her sleeves
were rolled elbow-high and one little thin hand clutched a dish-cloth as
a badge of office. Wade stared dubiously at Zephania and Zephania smiled
brightly back.

"Look here, my child," said Wade, "how old are you, anyway?"

"Fifteen in March, sir."

"Next March?"

"No, sir, last."

"You don't look it."

"No, sir, folks say I'm small for my age," agreed Zephania, cheerfully.

"I agree with them. Do you think you're strong enough to do the work
here?"

"Oh, yes, sir. This is a very easy house to look after."

"Well," said Wade, hesitatingly, "you can have a try at it, but it seems
to me you're too young to be doing housework."

"I've always done it," replied Zephania, beamingly. "What'll you have
for breakfast, sir?"

"Coffee--can you make coffee?"

"Yes, sir, three ways."

"Well, one way will do," said Wade, hurriedly. "And you'll find some
eggs there, I believe, and some bread. You might fry the eggs and toast
the bread. I guess that will do for this morning."

"Yes, sir, thank you," answered Zephania, politely. "Wouldn't you rather
have the eggs poached?"

"Er--why, yes, if you can do it."

"I can cook eggs eleven ways," said Zephania, proudly. "Are you going to
eat breakfast in here or in there?" She nodded past Wade at the
sitting-room.

"Well, what do you think?"

"It's sunnier in there, sir. I could just clear the end of that table.
There's a fine big tray, sir."

"An excellent idea," replied Wade. "I place myself--and my house--in
your hands, Zephania."

"Thank you, sir," said Zephania.

Breakfast was prepared that morning to the strains of "Jesus, Lover of
My Soul." Wade went out to the kitchen presently to wash hands and face
at the sink and dry them on a roller towel, which Zephania whisked
before him as if by magic. Watching her for a minute or two dispelled
all doubts as to her ability. The way in which she broke the eggs and
slipped them into the boiling water was a revelation of dexterity. And
all the while she sang on uninterruptedly, joyously, like the
gray-breast on the hedge. Wade went out into the garden and breathed in
deep breaths of the cool, moist air. The grass and the shrubs were heavy
with dew and the morning world was redolent of the perfume exhaled from
moist earth and growing things. In the neglected orchard the birds were
chattering and piping, and from a nearby field came the excited cawing
of crows. It was corn-planting time.

Wade ate his breakfast by the open window. He didn't know in which of
the three ways Zephania had prepared his coffee, but it was excellent,
and even the condensed milk couldn't spoil it. The eggs were snowy
cushions of delight on golden tablets of toast, and the butter was hued
like old ivory. Zephania objected to condensed milk, however, and
suggested that she be allowed to bring a quart of "real milk" with her
when she came in the mornings.

"Of course, you won't need a whole quart, unless you drink it, but, if
you like cream in your coffee, it'll be a great deal heavier from a
quart than from a pint. We get six cents for milk."

"By all means, let us have a quart," replied Wade, recklessly. "Such
good coffee as this, Zephania, deserves the best cream to be had."
Zephania blushed with pleasure and beamed down upon him radiantly.

"And maybe, sir, you'd like me to make you some bread?"

"I would. I was about to broach the subject," was the mendacious answer.
"Could you do it?"

"Yes, indeed. Why, when they had the church fair over to The Center last
winter I sent four loaves, and Mrs. Whitely, that's the minister's wife,
sir, said it was just as good as any there."

"I want to know!" said Wade, unconsciously falling into local idiom.

"Yes, sir. I can make two kinds of bread. I'll make the milk bread
first, though, and let you try that. Most folks likes milk bread the
best. Shall I set some to-night?"

"Set some? Oh, yes, please do."

While she was removing the tray Zephania asked: "Which room would you
like to have me clean first, sir?"

"Well, I suppose we ought to clean the whole place up, hadn't we?"

[Illustration: "OH, NO, SIR," REPLIED ZEPHANIA, WITH A SHOCKED, PITYING
EXPRESSION]

"Oh, yes, sir! Everything's just covered with dust. I never did see such
a dirty house. Houses do get that way, though, if they're shut up for
a long time. Maybe I'd just better begin at the top and work down?"

"That seems sensible," said Wade. "You could just sort of sweep the dirt
down the front stairs and right out of the front door, couldn't you?"

"Oh, no, sir," replied Zephania, with a shocked, pitying expression.
"I'd never do that. I'd clean each room separately, sir; sweep and wash
up the floors and around the mop-board and--"

"Whatever way you think best," interrupted Wade. "I leave it all to you,
Zephania, and I'm sure it will be done beautifully."

"Thank you, sir. Mother says I'm a real smart cleaner. Shall I get some
more flowers in this vase, sir? This piece of lilac's dreadfully
wilted."

"No, Zephania, just let that remain, please. The fact, is, that--that's
a rather particular piece of lilac; something out of the common."

"Out of the common?" echoed Zephania, in faint surprise, surveying as
much of the common as she could see through the window. "You don't mean
our common?"

"No," answered Wade, gravely, "not our common. That piece of lilac,
Zephania, is a clue; at least, I think it is. Do you know what a clue
is?"

"Yes, sir. It's something you find that puts you on the trail of the
murderer." Zephania eyed the lilac interestedly.

"Well, something of that sort. Only in this case there isn't any
murderer."

"A thief?" asked Zephania, eagerly and hopefully.

"Not even a thief," laughed Wade. "Just--just somebody I want very much
to find. I suppose, Zephania, you know about every one in the village,
don't you?"

"Pretty nearly, I guess."

"Good. Now suppose you tell me something about my neighbors. Every one
ought to know about his neighbors, eh?"

"Yes, sir. After you've been here some time, though, you'll know all
about them."

"Yes, but the trouble is I don't want to wait that long. Now, for
instance, who lives over there on my left; the square white house with
the drab blinds?"

"Miss Cousins, sir. She's a maiden lady and has a great deal of money.
They say she owns some of the railroad. She plays the organ in church,
and--"

"Youngish, is she, with sort of wavy brown hair and--"

"No, sir," Zephania tittered, "Miss Cousins is kind of old and has real
gray hair."

"Really? On my other side, then, who's my neighbor there? Or haven't I
one?"

"Oh, yes, sir," answered Zephania, eagerly. "That's the Walton house,
and that's--"

"The--_what_?" asked Wade, sitting up very suddenly in the green rep
rocker.

"The Walton house, sir."

"Oh! Hum! And--er--who lives there, Zephania?"

"Miss Walton and Miss Mullett."

"What's this Miss--Miss Walton like? Is she rather stout with quite
black hair, Zephania?"

"Oh, no, Mr. Herring! I guess you saw Mrs. Sampson, the dressmaker. She
lives over there across the common, in the little yellowish house with
the vines; see?"

"Yes, yes, I see. That's where Miss Sampson lives, eh? Well, well! But
we were speaking about Miss Walton, weren't we?"

"Yes, sir. Miss Walton's a young lady and as pretty as--as--" Zephania's
words failed her and she looked about apparently in search of a simile.

"Now let's see what you call pretty," said Wade. "What color is her
hair?"

"It's brown."

"Oh, well, brown hair isn't uncommon."

"No, sir, but hers is kind of wavy and light and I don't believe she
ever has to curl it."

"You don't tell me! And her eyes, now? I suppose they're brown too?"

"Blue, sir. She has beautiful eyes, Mr. Herring, just heavenly!
Sometimes I think I'd just give almost anything if my eyes were like
hers."

"Really? But you seem to have a very good pair of your own. Don't
trouble you, do they?"

"They're black," said Zephania, cheerfully. "Black eyes aren't pretty."

"Oh, I wouldn't go as far as that," murmured Wade, politely.

"No, sir, but Miss Walton's are just as blue as--as the sky up there
between those two little white clouds. She's awfully pretty, Mr.
Herring."

"Complexion dark, I suppose."

"No, sir, not dark at all. It's real light. Some folks say she's too
pale, but I don't think so. And sometimes she has just lots of pink in
her cheeks, like--like a doll I have at home. Folks that think she's too
pale ought to have seen her yesterday afternoon."

"Why is that?'"

"'Cause she was just pink all over," answered Zephania. "I took some
eggs up to her house and just when I was coming out she came up on the
porch. She looked like; she'd been running and her face was just as
pink as--as that lamp-mat!"

The object in question was an excruciating magenta, but Wade let it
pass.

"Yesterday was rather a warm day for running, too," observed Wade.

"Yes, sir, and I don't see what made her run, because she had been in
the garden. Maybe a bee or a wasp--"

"How did you know she had been in the garden?"

"Why, 'cause she came from there. She hadn't ought to run like that in
hot weather, and I told her so. I said 'Miss Eve'--What, sir?"

"Nothing," answered Wade, poking industriously at the tobacco in the
bowl of his pipe. "You were saying--"

"I just told her, 'Miss Eve, you hadn't ought to overheat yourself like
that, 'cause if you do you'll have a sunstroke.' There was a man over at
the Center last summer who--"

"And what did she say?" asked Wade.

"She said she'd remember and not do it again. And then Miss Mullett
came out and I went home."

"Who's Miss Mullett, Zephania?"

"She's Miss Walton's friend. They live there together in the Walton
house every summer. Folks say Miss Mullett's very poor and Miss Walton
looks after her."

"Young, is she?"

"Not so very. She's kind of middle-aged, I guess. She's real pleasant.
Miss Walton thinks a lot of her."

"And they're here only in the summer?"

"Yes, sir. They come in June and stay until September. This is the third
summer they've been here. Before that the house was empty for a long,
long time; just like this one."

"Very interesting, Zephania. Thank you. Now don't let me keep you from
your labors any longer."

"No, sir, but don't you want to hear about any one else?"

"Another time, thanks. We'll do it by degrees. If you tell me too much
at once I shan't be able to remember it, you see."

"All right," answered Zephania, cheerfully. "Now I'll wash up the
dishes."

After she had gone Wade sat for a long while in the green rep rocker,
his eyes on the spray of lilac on the table and his unlighted pipe
dangling from his mouth. From the kitchen came a loud clatter of dishes
and pans and Zephania's voice raised in song:

  "'We shall sleep, but not forever,
    There will be a glorious dawn;
  We shall meet to part, no, never,
    On the resurrection morn!'"




V.


When one has spent six years prospecting and mining in Colorado and the
Southwest one has usually ceased to be capable of surprise at any tricks
Fate may spring. Nevertheless Wade was forced to wonder at the chain of
events which had deposited him here in a green rep rocking chair in Eden
Village. That the Western Slope Limited, two hours late and trying to
make up time, should have had a hot-box and, perhaps for the first time
in months, stopped at the top of Saddle Pass and presented Evelyn Walton
to him was one of Fate's simpler vagaries; but that now, after five
years, he should find himself beside her nearly two thousand miles from
their first place of meeting was something to think about. First event
and last were links in a closely-welded chain of circumstance. Looking
back, he saw that one had followed the other as logically as night
follows day. By a set of quite natural, unforced incidents Fate had
achieved the amazing.

Wade no longer had any doubt as to the identity of the person who had
looked in upon him through the window yesterday. The marvellous
resemblance to the face he remembered so well, the dropped lilac spray
were in themselves inconclusive, but the evidence of her name made the
case clear and left but one verdict possible. Chance, Fate, Providence,
what you will, had brought them together again.

It would, I realize, add interest to a dull narrative to say that Wade's
heart beat suffocatingly with passionate longing, and that a wild desire
to go to her possessed him. As a matter of fact his heart behaved itself
quite normally and he showed no disposition to leave his chair. He was
chiefly concerned with wondering whether she had recognized him, whether
she even remembered him at all, and, if she did, what she thought of him
for the idiotic way in which he had acted. Oh, he had been sincere
enough at the moment, but, looked at calmly with the austere eyes of
twenty-eight, his behavior on that occasion had been something--well,
_fierce_! He groaned at the thought of it and almost wished that Fate
had let things alone and spared him a second meeting. Of course there
had been extenuating circumstances. She had stepped suddenly into his
vision out of the twilight, a veritable vision of love and romance, and
his heart, a boy's heart, starved and hungry for those things, had taken
fire on the instant. He had--well, he had lost his head, to put it
charitably. And after a fashion he had lost his heart as well. For a
week he had dreamed of her at night and thought of her by day, had
wondered and longed and built air castles. Doubtless, had he seen her
again within the next year, the romance would have grown and flourished.
But at the end of that first week they had found gold. The intoxication
of success succeeded the intoxication of love, and in the busy months
that followed the vision of Evelyn Walton's face visited him less and
less frequently. At the end of a year she had become a pleasant memory,
a memory that never failed to bring a half-sad, half-joyous little
throb. That he had never actually forgotten her meant little, when you
think how very tiny and unimportant a thing must be to utterly escape
memory. He didn't want to forget her, for she represented the only
sentimental episode that had come to him since school days. He had been
much too busy to seek love affairs, and up in the mountains they don't
lie in wait for one. Therefore at twenty-eight Wade Herrick was
heart-whole. He wondered with a smile how long he was destined to remain
so unless that same meddling Fate removed either him or Evelyn Walton
from Eden Village.

Zephania went through the hall singing, on her way upstairs to
inaugurate her war of extermination against dirt. Wade roused himself
and lighted his pipe. After all, he had done nothing criminal and there
were ninety-nine chances in a hundred that the girl wouldn't connect him
for a moment with the astounding youth who had made violent love to her
for an ecstatic five minutes on the top of Saddle Pass so many years
ago. He got up and looked at himself in the old gold-framed mirror above
the table.

"My boy," he muttered, "you're quite safe. You used to be fairly good
looking then, if I do say it myself. But now look at you! You have
day-laborer written all over you! Your hair--I wonder when and why you
ever began to part it away down near your left ear. But that's easily
changed. Your nose--well, you couldn't alter that much, and it's still
fairly straight and respectable. But that scar on the cheek-bone doesn't
help your looks a bit, my boy. Still, you mustn't kick about that, I
reckon, for if that slice of rock had come along an inch or so farther
to the right you'd have been _tuerto_ now. Not that your eyes are
anything to be stuck up about, though; they're neither brown nor green,
nor any other recognized color; just a sort of mixture--like Pedro's
_estofados_. Your mouth, now--you always had a homely sort of mouth, too
big by far. And you were an idiot to shave off your mustache. You might
let it grow again, now that you're where you could have it trimmed once
in awhile, but I suppose it would take a month and look like a
nail-brush in the meanwhile! And then there's your complexion, you poor
ugly _hombre_. I remember when it was like anybody else's and there was
pink in the cheeks. Look at it now! It's like a saddle-flap. And your
hands!"

He viewed them disdainfully. They were immaculately clean and the nails
were well tended, but two years of pick and shovel had broadened them,
and at the base of each finger a calloused spot still remained. On the
left hand the tip of one finger was missing and another was bent and
disfigured. They were honorable scars, these, like the one on his cheek,
but he looked at them disgustedly and finally shoved them out of sight
in his pockets.

"No, don't you worry about her recognizing you," he said to the
reflection in the mirror. "Even if she did she'd be ashamed to own it!"

Wade, however, was over-critical. Whatever might be said of the
features individually, collectively they were distinctly pleasing. The
impression one received was of a clean, straight-limbed, clear-eyed
fellow, who, if he had worked with his hands, had won with his brain. He
looked a little older than his twenty-eight years warranted, and a
little taller than his scant five-feet-eleven proved. Above all, he
appeared healthful, alert, capable, and kindly. He made friends at sight
with men, children, and dogs and wore his friendships as easily as he
wore his clothes. The West puts an indefinable stamp on a man, and Wade
had it. When presently he donned a cloth cap, torn from the confused
depths of his valise, and passed out of doors he walked like a man who
was used to covering long distances afoot, and with a certain swing of
his broad shoulders that suggested a jovial egotism. And as he made his
way through the orchard and into the meadow beyond his mind was still
busy with Evelyn Walton.

Of course he would meet her sooner or later; he was bound to unless he
pulled up stakes and hiked out at once. And he didn't want to do that.
He was enjoying a totally new sensation, that of householder. And he
liked Eden Village with its big elms and shaded roads, its wide meadows
and encircling green hills. It was all new and delightful after the
bare, primeval grandeur of the mountains. Besides, and Wade laughed
softly to himself, when all was said and done, he really wanted to meet
her. The prospect brought a flutter to his heart and a pleasant
excitement to his mind. He would probably fall in love with her again,
but there was no harm in that since he would be off before the disease
could strike in very deep.

He had reached the stone wall dividing his property from the land
beyond. At a little distance a brook bubbled along its sunken course.
Bushes, ferns, and here and there a small tree lined its banks, and Wade
could follow its journeying with his eyes for some distance. He vaulted
the wall and crossed to the brook, examining it with the curiosity of a
fisherman. It was rather disappointing. He didn't believe any
self-respecting fish would deign to inhabit such meagre quarters. But
it was a fascinating little stream for all of that, and it sang and
purled and had such a jolly good time all to itself that unconsciously
Wade fell into step with it, so to speak, and kept it company through
the meadow. Swallows darted above him and sparrows took flight before
him in mild alarm. Once he disturbed a catbird on her nest and she flew
circling about his head, scolding harshly.

What had he been thinking about a moment before? Oh, yes, he had been
considering the danger of overdoing the falling in love business. Well,
there was a proverb about its being better to have loved and lost than
never to have loved at all. Wade agreed with those sentiments. To go
head over ears in love with some nice girl like--well, like Evelyn
Walton--even if you got turned down was better than nothing. Of course
the girl mustn't know. It wasn't a part of his plan to worry her any. He
was quite certain that if he was careful she needn't even guess his
sentiments. Perhaps--well, what if it was nonsense? A fellow could think
nonsense if he wanted to, couldn't he, on a day like this? Perhaps she
might care for him enough to marry him! There wasn't any reason why he
shouldn't marry. He had plenty of money and would have more; he could
give the woman that married him about as much as the next man. She could
have a house in New York if she wanted it! And servants and--and motors
and--all the things a woman usually wants. Of course he didn't want to
be married for his money, but--well, he wondered whether it would help
if he managed to convey the idea that he was pretty well off, that he
owned more than a controlling interest in one of the richest gold mines
in Colorado. Undoubtedly there were girls who would jump at the chance
to marry the principal owner of a mine like the--

He stopped with a gasp.

Great Scott! she mustn't hear the name of that mine! At least, not
unless things turned out as they never could turn out. He groaned. He
would have to watch himself every minute when he was with her or he
would be blurting it out!

He found himself confronted by a fence, beyond which a wooded hill
sloped upward. Should he return the way he had come, or--no, he could
commit trespass on somebody's wheat field and so in all probability
reach the highway. Five minutes later he found himself on the road and
started back towards the cottage. He rather hoped that Miss Walton would
not be on her front porch as he went by. He wasn't quite ready yet to
show himself. It was a good ten minutes' walk to the end of the common,
but he was so busy with his thoughts that he paid little attention to
time or distance. He only came to himself when he suddenly found the
lilac hedge beside him and the gate hospitably open. He walked up the
steps, dimly conscious that his cottage looked this morning far less
disreputable than it had seemed yesterday, and tried the front door. He
didn't remember whether he had locked it last night. But evidently he
had not, for it swung open and he found himself staring blankly into a
pair of very lovely and much surprised blue eyes.




VI.


Time passed.

Somewhere about the house a canary twittered softly. Evelyn Walton,
arrested on the sitting room threshold, a fold of the light portière
clasped in one hand, gazed at the intruder. Wade, frozen to immobility
just inside the door, one hand still grasping the knob, gazed at the
girl. His mind was a blank. His lips moved mechanically, but no words
issued from them. It seemed to him that whole minutes had passed,
although in reality the old-fashioned clock at the end of the hall had
ticked not more than thrice. He felt the color surging into his face,
and at last sheer desperation loosened his tongue.

"Is there anything I can do--" he began.

But at the very same moment Evelyn Walton's power of speech returned
likewise, and--

"You wished to see--some one?" she inquired.

As they spoke absolutely together neither heard the other's question
and each silently awaited an answer.

"_Tick ... tock_" said the old clock, sleepily.

Wade's gaze wandered. He wondered whether it would be unforgivable to
dash quickly out and slam the door behind him. But in the next breath
escape was forgotten and he was looking about him in sheer amazement.
Here was his hallway, but no longer empty. A shield-backed chair stood
beside the parlor door. A settle ran along the wall beyond. A
pink-cheeked moon leered at him from the top of a tall clock.
Bewilderedly he looked toward the sitting-room. There, too, everything
was changed. The floor was painted gray. Rugs took the place of carpet.
Gauzy lace curtains hung at the windows. A canary in a gilt cage sung
above an open window. Oh, plainly he was bewitched or the world was
topsy-turvy! The look he turned on the girl was so helpless, so
entreating that her face, which had begun to set coldly, softened
instantly. The hand clasping the curtain fold fell to her side and she
took a step toward him.

"Can I help you?" she asked, kindly.

Wade passed a hand over his eyes.

"I don't know," he murmured. "Will you please tell me where I am?"

"You're in my house. I am Miss Walton."

"Your house? Then--then where is mine, please?" he asked, helplessly.

"Just beyond here; the next one."

"Oh!" he said. He sought for words with which to explain the situation,
but found none. He backed out, tripped slightly over the sill and found
himself on the top step. He dared one more look into the girl's amused
and sympathetic face and then turned and fled precipitately. At the gate
he brushed against some one, muttered an apology, and plunged through.
Evelyn Walton, following his course of flight from the doorway, laughed
softly. Miss Caroline Mullett, standing on tiptoe in the middle of the
path, strove to see over the hedge, and, failing, turned to the girl
with breathless curiosity.

[Illustration: "YOUR HOUSE? THEN--THEN WHERE IS MINE, PLEASE?"]

"Why, Eve, who was that?"

"He didn't leave his card, dear," replied Eve, with a gurgle of
suppressed laughter, "but there is every reason to believe that his name
is Herrick."

"The gentleman who has taken the next house? And what did he want? He
seemed in such a hurry, and so very much excited! You don't think, do
you, that he is going to have a sunstroke? His face was extremely
congested."

"No, dear," replied Eve, as she followed Miss Mullett into the
sitting-room, "I don't think he's in danger of sunstroke. You're getting
to be quite as bad as Zephania on that subject. The fact is, dear, that
the ensanguined condition of Mr. Herrick's face was due to his having
mistaken our humble abode for his."

"My dear! How embarrassing!"

"So he seemed to think," laughed Evelyn.

"But I can quite understand it," continued Miss Mullett, laying aside
her hat and smoothing down her hair. Miss Mullett's hair was somewhat of
the shade of beech leaves in fall and was not as thick as it had once
been. She wore it parted in the middle and combed straight down over the
tips of her ears. Such severe framing emphasized the gentleness of her
face. "You know yourself, Eve dear, that the first summer we were here
we often found ourselves entering the wrong gate. The houses are as much
alike as two peas."

"I know. But, oh, Carrie, if you could have seen his expression when it
dawned on him that he was in the wrong house! It's too bad to laugh at
him, but I just have to."

"I hope you didn't laugh while he was here," said Miss Mullett,
anxiously.

"I'm afraid I did--just a little," replied Eve, contritely. "But I don't
think he saw it. He was too--too bewildered and horrified, and terribly
embarrassed. I really pitied him. I don't think I ought to pity him,
either, for he gave me quite a fright when he opened the front door and
walked in just as though he'd come to murder us all."

"Poor man!" sighed Miss Mullett. "He must be feeling awfully about it.
And--and didn't you think him exceedingly nice looking? So big and--and
manly!"

"Manly?" laughed Eve. "He looked to me more like a very small boy
discovered in the preserve closet!"

"Of course, but I'm afraid you were a little--oh, the least little bit
unfeeling, dear."

"Perhaps I was," owned Eve, thoughtfully. "I shouldn't want him to think
me--impolite."

"No indeed! Do you think he will call?"

"After this morning? My dear Carrie, did he look to you like a man
coming to call?"

"But in a day or two, perhaps? Don't you think that it is possibly our
duty to convey to him in some delicate manner that he--that we--that his
mistake was quite natural--"

"We might put a personal in the Tottingham _Courier_. 'If the gentleman
who inadvertently called at The Cedars on Tuesday morning will return,
no questions will be asked and all will be forgiven.' How would that
do?"

"I'm afraid he would never see the paper unless we lent him our copy,"
replied Miss Mullett, with a smile. "But surely we might convey by our
manner when meeting him on the street that we would be pleased to make
his acquaintance?"

"Why, Caroline Mullett!" gasped Eve, in mock astonishment. "What kind of
behavior is that for two respectable maiden ladies?"

"My dear, I'm an old maid, I know, but you're not. And if you think for
a moment that I'm going to sit here and twiddle my thumbs while there's
a nice-looking bachelor in the next house, you're very much mistaken.
Dear knows, Eve, I love Eden Village from end to end, but I never heard
of an Eden yet that wasn't better for having a man in it!"

"You're right," sighed Eve. "Do you realize, Carrie, that the only
eligible man we know here is Doctor Crimmins? And he's old enough to be
father to both of us."

"The Doctor plays a very good hand of cribbage," replied Miss Mullett,
approvingly. And then triumphantly: "I have it, dear!"

"What?"

"The Doctor shall call on Mr. Herrick and bring him to see us!"

"Splendid!" laughed Eve. "And he will never know that we schemed and
intrigued to get him. Carrie, I don't see how, with your ability, you
ever missed marriage."

"I never have missed it," replied Miss Mullett, with a sniff. She took
up her hat and started toward the hall. At the door she turned and
seemed about to speak, but evidently thought better of it and
disappeared. Eve smiled. And then Miss Mullett's plain, sweet little
face peered around the corner of the door, and--

"Much," she whispered.




VII.


When Wade came to himself he discovered that he was standing with folded
arms staring blankly at the Declaration of Independence which, framed in
walnut and gilt, adorned the wall of the sitting-room. How long he had
been standing there he didn't know. He swung around in sudden uneasiness
and examined the room carefully. Then he gave a deep sigh of relief. It
was all right this time; this was his own house! He sank into the green
rocker and mechanically began to fill his pipe. From the floor above
came the swish of the broom and Zephania's voice raised in joyful song:

  "'I was a wand'ring sheep, I did not love the fold;
  I did not love my Shepherd's voice, I would not be controlled.
  I was a wayward child, I did not love my home;
  I did not love my Father's voice, I loved afar to roam.'"

Wade lighted his pipe, and when he had filled the adjacent atmosphere
with blue smoke he groaned. After that he gazed for a long time at his
hands, turning them this way and that as though he had never really
noticed them before. Then he laughed shortly a laugh seemingly quite
devoid of amusement, and got up to wander aimlessly about the room. At
last he caught a glimpse of himself in the mirror and walked over to it,
and glared fiercely at the reflection for a full round minute. Twice he
opened his mouth, only to close it again without a sound. At length,
however, the right words came to him. He looked himself witheringly in
the eyes.

"You blundering, God-forsaken ass!" he enunciated.

That seemed to cheer him up quite a bit, for he turned away from the
mirror with a less hopeless expression on his face and began to unpack
his valise and distribute the contents about the room. Later he borrowed
some of Zephania's hot water from the singing kettle and shaved himself.
No matter to what depths of degradation a man may fall, shaving
invariably raises him again to a fair level of self-respect. He ate
luncheon with a good appetite, and then wandered down to Prout's Store,
ostensibly to ask if his trunk had arrived, but in reality to satisfy a
craving for human intercourse. The trunk had not come, Mr. Prout
informed him, but, as Wade couldn't well expect it before the morning,
he wasn't disappointed. He purchased one of Mr. Prout's best
cigars--price one nickel--and sat himself on the counter.

"Yes," said Mr. Prout, "them two houses is a good deal alike. In fact I
guess they're just alike. Anyway, old Colonel Selden Phelps built 'em
alike, an' I guess they ain't been much changed. I recollect my mother
tellin' how the old Colonel had them two houses built. The Colonel lived
over near Redding and folks used to say he was land-crazy. Every cent
the Colonel would get hold of he'd up an' buy another tract of land with
it. Owned more land hereabouts than you could find on the county map,
and they say he never had enough to eat in the house from one year's end
to t'other. Family half starved most of the time, so they used to tell.
The boy, Nathan, he up an' said he couldn't stand it; said he might's
well be a Roman Catholic, because then he would be certain of a full
meal once in awhile, but as it was every day was fast day. So he run
away down to Boston an' became a sailor. The Colonel never saw him
again, because he was lost at sea on his second voyage. That just left
the two girls, Mary and Evelyn. My mother used to say that every one
pitied them two girls mightily. Always looked thin and peaked, they did,
while as for Mrs. Phelps, why, folks said she just starved to death.
Anyway, she died soon after Nathan was drowned. Just to show how pesky
mean the old Colonel was, Mr. Herrick, they tell how one night the women
folks was sewing in the sittin'-room. Seems they was workin' on some
mighty particular duds and Mrs. Phelps had lighted an extra candle; the
Colonel never would allow a lamp in his house. Well, there they was
sittin' with the two candles burnin' when in stomps the Colonel. 'Hey,'
says he, blowin' out one of the candles, 'what's all this blaze of
light? Want to ruin your eyes?

"Folks liked the Colonel, too, spite of his meanness. He was a great
church man, an' more'n half supported the Baptist church over there.
Seemed as if he was willin' to give money to the Lord an' no one else,
not even his own family. Mary was the first of the girls to get married,
she bein' the eldest. She married George Craig, from over Portsmouth
way, an'--"

"Craig? Then she was Ed's mother?" interrupted Wade.

"Yes. About a month after the engagement was given out the Colonel drew
up the plans of those two houses. He made the drawin's himself, and then
sot down an' figured out just how much they'd cost; so much for stone
an' masonry; so much for lumber and carpentry; so much for brick an' so
much for paint. Then he went to a carpenter over in Redding an' showed
him the plans with the figures writ on 'em an' asked him if he'd put up
the houses. The carpenter figured an' said he'd be switched if he'd do
it for any such price. So the Colonel he goes to another feller with
like results. They say most every carpenter between here an' Portsmouth
figured on those houses an' wouldn't have anything to do with them.
Then, finally, the Colonel found a man who'd just settled down in
Tottingham and opened a shop there. Came from Biddeford, Maine, I
believe, and thought he was pretty foxy. 'Well,' he says, 'there ain't
any money in it for me at those figures, Colonel, but work's slack an'
I'll take the contract.' You see, he thought he could charge a little
more here an' there an' make something. But he didn't know the Colonel.
Every time he'd talk about things costin' more than he'd thought the
Colonel would flash that contract on him. When the houses was finished
he sued the Colonel for a matter of four hundred dollars, but there was
the contract, plain as day, an' he lost his suit. Just about put him out
of business an' he had to move away. The Colonel gave one of the houses
to Mary--Mrs. Craig she was by that time--and the other to Evelyn when
she married Irv Walton a year afterwards."

"But look here," said Wade. "Do you mean that Ed Craig's mother and Miss
Walton's mother were sisters?"

"Yes, Ed and Eve was first cousins."

"Well, I'll be hanged!" sighed Wade. "I never savvied that. What became
of Mr. Walton, Ed's uncle?"

"Dead. Irv was what you call a genius, a writer chap. Came of a good
family over to Concord, he did, an' had a fine education at Exeter
Academy. He an' his wife never lived much at The Cedars--that's what
they called their place--but used to come here now and then in the
summer. They lived in New York. He had something to do with one of those
magazines published down there. Irv Walton was a fine lookin' man, but
sort of visionary. Made a lot of money at one time in mines out West an'
then lost it all about four years ago. That sort of preyed on his mind,
an' somethin' like a year after that he up an' died."

"And his wife?"

"Oh, she died when Eve was a little girl. An' Ed's mother died about
ten years ago. Miss Eve's the last one of the old Colonel's folks."

Wade sat silent for a minute, puffing hard on his cigar and trying to
arrange his facts.

"Does she know of Ed's death?" he asked.

"Miss Eve? Oh, I guess so. I told Doctor Crimmins myself last night an'
I guess he's been up to The Cedars by this time. I guess Ed's death
wouldn't affect her much, though."

"Why is that?"

"Well, the brothers-in-law never got on very well together in the old
days, an' far as I know Miss Eve never saw Ed except, perhaps, when they
were both babies. Ed went away to school, winters down to Boston, to a
school of tech--tech--well, a place where they taught him engineerin'
an' minin' an' such. Summers he worked in a mill over to Lansing."

"Is Miss Walton well off?"

"Only tolerable, I guess. She's got that house and what little money
was saved out of her father's smash-up."

"Where does she live when she's not here, Mr. Prout?"

"New York. She does some sort of writing work, like her father.
Inherited some of his genius, I guess likely."

Later Wade walked leisurely back to the cottage. The afternoon sunlight
lay in golden ribbons across the deserted street. Up in the high elms
the robins were swaying and singing. An ancient buggy crawled past him
and here and there an open window framed a housewife busy with her
needle. But save for these signs of life, he reflected, he might be
walking through the original Deserted Village. Come to think of it,
Craig's Camp was a busy metropolis compared to Eden Village, only--Wade
paused in front of his garden hedge and peered pleasurably up into the
leafy golden mists above him--only for some reason the absence of human
beings didn't make for loneliness here. Nature was more friendly. There
was jovial comradeship in every mellow note that floated down to him
from the happy songsters up there.

  "'The cheerful birds of sundry kind
  Do sweet music to delight his mind.'"

Wade swung around with a start and found himself looking over the
hedge-top into a smiling, ruddy, gold-spectacled countenance.

"Spenser, I think, sir," continued the stranger, "but I'll not he
certain. Perhaps you recall the lines?"

"I'm afraid I don't," replied Wade, passing through the gateway.

"No? But like enough the poets aren't as much to a busy, practical man
like you, Mr. Herrick, as they are to me. Even I don't find as much time
to devote to them as I'd like, however. But I haven't introduced myself
nor explained my presence in your garden. My name is Crimmins, Doctor
Crimmins."

"Glad to know you, Doctor," replied Wade, as they shook hands. "It was
friendly of you to call, sir."

The Doctor tucked his gold-headed cane under his arm and thrust his
hands into the pockets of his slate-colored trousers, a proceeding which
brought to view the worn satin lining of the old black frock-coat.

"Wait until you know us better, sir, and you'll not speak of it as
kindness. Why, 'tis a positive pleasure, a veritable debauch of
excitement, Mr. Herrick, to greet a newcomer to our mislaid village! The
kindness is on your side, sir, for dropping down upon us like--like--"

"A bolt from the blue," suggested Wade.

"Like a dispensation of Providence, sir."

"That's flattering, Doctor. Won't you come in?"

"Just for a moment." At the sitting-room door the Doctor paused. "Well!
well!" he exclaimed, reverently under his breath. "Nothing changed! It's
ten years ago since I stood here, Mr. Herrick. Dear me! A fine Christian
woman she was, sir. Well! Well! 'Time rolls his ceaseless course.' Bless
me, I believe I'm getting old!" And the Doctor turned his twinkling gray
eyes on Wade with smiling dismay.

"Try the rocking chair, Doctor Crimmins. Let me take your hat and
cane."

"No, no, I'll just lay them here beside me. I see you've chosen the best
room for your chamber, sir. You're not one of us, Mr. Herrick, that's
evident. Here we make the best room into a parlor, the next into a
sitting-room, the next into a spare room and sleep in what's left. We
take good care of our souls and let our bodies get along as best they
may. You, I take it, are a Southron."

"From Virginia, Doctor, and, although I've been in the West for some six
years, I hope I haven't entirely forgotten Southern hospitality.
Unfortunately my sideboard isn't stocked yet, and all the hospitality I
can offer is here." He indicated his flask.

"H'm," said the Doctor, placing his finger-tips together and eying the
temptation over his spectacles. "I believe I've heard that it is an
insult to refuse Southern hospitality. But just a moment, Mr. Herrick."
He arose and laid a restraining hand on. Wade's arm. "Let's not fly in
the face of Providence, sir." He guided his host into the dining-room
and softly closed the door, cutting off the view from the front window.
Then he drew a chair up to the table and settled himself comfortably.
"We are a censorious people, Mr. Herrick."

"As bad as that, is it?" laughed Wade as he placed glasses on the cloth
and brought water from the kitchen.

"We are strictly abstemious in Eden Village," replied the Doctor,
gravely, "and only drink in dark corners. Your very good health, sir.
May your visit to our Edenic solitude prove pleasant."

"To our better acquaintance, Doctor."

"Thank you, sir, thank you. Ha! H'm!" And the Doctor smacked his lips
with relish, wiped them carefully on his handkerchief and led the way
back to the sitting-room.

"And now, Mr. Herrick, to come to the second object of my call, the
first being to extend you a welcome. Zenas--I refer to our worthy
Merchant Prince, Mr. Zenas Prout--Zenas informed me last evening that
you had been a close friend of Ed Craig's, had, in fact, been in
partnership with him in some Western mining-enterprise; that Ed had
died and that you had come into his property. That is correct?"

"Quite, sir."

"I brought him into the world. I'm sorry to hear of his death. Well,
well! 'Our birth is nothing but our death begun, as tapers waste that
instant they take fire.' Young's 'Night Thoughts,' Mr. Herrick. Full of
beautiful lines, sir." The Doctor paused a moment while he cleaned his
spectacles with a corner of his coat. "Let me see; ah, yes. I wonder if
you know that you have next door to you Ed's only surviving near
relative?"

"I learned it only an hour ago, Doctor."

"I see. I felt it my duty to inform Miss Walton of her cousin's death
and called on her at noon. Miss Walton's parents and Ed's were not
intimate when the two were children; some silly misunderstanding in
regard to a division of old Colonel Phelps's property after he died. As
it turned out they might have spared themselves the quarrel, for a later
will was afterwards found leaving his entire estate to churches and
schools. Well, I was going to say that Ed's death was not much of a
grief to Miss Walton because she had really never known him, but,
nevertheless, she would naturally wish to hear the particulars. I came
to suggest that you should give me the honor of allowing me to present
you to Miss Walton, Mr. Herrick."

"I shall be very glad to meet her," replied Wade, "and tell her all I
can about Ed. We were very close friends for several years and a finer
chap never breathed."

"I'm delighted to hear you say so. I've brought a good many into this
world, Mr. Herrick, but very few have ever made me proud of the fact."

"I fear you're a bit of a pessimist, Doctor."

"No, no, I'm only honest. With myself, that is. In my dealings with
others, sir, I'm--just an ordinary New Englander."

"That sounds hard on New Englanders," said Wade with a smile. "Do you
mean to say that they're not honest?"

"New Englanders are honest according to their lights, Mr. Herrick, but
their lights are sometimes dim. Shall we say this evening for our call
on the ladies? Miss Walton has with her a Miss Mullett, a very dear and
estimable girl who resides with her in the role of companion. I say
girl, but you mustn't be deceived. When you get to sixty-odd you'll find
that any lady under fifty is still a girl to you. Miss Mullett, through
regrettable circumstances, was overlooked by the seekers after wives and
is what you would call a maiden lady. She plays a remarkable hand of
cribbage, Mr. Herrick."

"This evening will suit me perfectly, Doctor."

"Then shall we say about half-past seven? We don't keep very late hours
in Eden Village. We sup at six, make our calls at seven or half-past,
and go to bed promptly at ten. A light in a window after ten o'clock
indicates but one thing, illness."

"How about burglars?" laughed Wade.

"Burglars? Bless my soul, we never have 'em, sir. Sometimes a tramp, but
never a burglar. Even tramps don't bother us much." The Doctor chuckled
as he rescued his hat and cane from beside his chair. "Zenas Prout tells
a story to show why Eden Village is exempt. We have a lady here, Mr.
Herrick, who should have been of rights a descendant of old Colonel
Phelps, Ed's grandfather on his mother's side. The old Colonel's name
was synonymous for--let us say self-denial. The lady in question is a
very estimable lady, sir, oh, very estimable, but, while she is probably
our richest citizen, she is extremely careful and saving. Zenas says a
tramp stopped at her door once and asked for food. Miss Cousins--there,
I didn't mean to give her name! But no matter--Miss Cousins brought him
a slice of stale bread thinly spread with butter. Zenas says the tramp
looked from the bread to Miss Cousins, who, I should explain is
extremely thin in face and figure, and back to the bread. Then he held
it out to her. 'Lady,' he said, 'I haven't the heart to take this from
you. You need it more than I do. Eat it yourself!'"

Under cover of Wade's appreciative laughter the Doctor made his adieux,
promising to call again at half-past seven. Wade watched him depart down
the street, very erect and a trifle pompous, his gold-headed stick
serving no other purpose than that of ornament. Then he went indoors and
walked to the mirror.

"Gee!" he muttered, "I wish my trunk were here!"




VIII.


The parlor at The Cedars was very different from that in the Craig
cottage. It was pretty and comfortable, with lamps that diffused a
cheerful, mellow glow over the lower half of the room and left the upper
in pleasantly mysterious gloom. There was much old-fashioned
furniture--such as the spindle-legged card table at which Miss Mullett
and the Doctor were deeply absorbed in cribbage--but enough comfortable
modern chairs had been provided to render martyrdom unnecessary. The
four windows were hung with bright creton and muslin, and the dull-green
carpet neither stared one out of countenance nor made one fearful to set
foot upon it. It was a jolly, chummy sort of carpet that seemed to say,
"Walk on me all you want to, and don't be afraid to spill your crumbs; I
like crumbs." A very large tortoise-shell cat lay stretched along the
arm of the couch, half asleep, and purred as Eve dipped her fingers in
the long fur. The windows on the side of the room were open and the
draperies swayed gently with the little breeze. Wade, seated at the
other end of the couch from his hostess, was feeling happy and
inexplicably elated.

"I feel quite guilty about this morning," Eve was saying. "I'm afraid I
wasn't very polite. Did I--did I smile?"

"If you didn't, you were a saint," answered Wade. "It's a wonder to me
you didn't howl!"

"It was funny, though, wasn't it? Now that it's all over, I mean; now
that I've apologized and Carrie has apologized for me and you've
apologized. You did look so--so utterly dumfounded!"

"I was!" replied Wade grimly. "For a moment I thought I'd had a
sunstroke or something and was out of my head. At first, when I came in
and saw you standing there, I thought--it was a foolish thing to think,
of course--but I thought you had come to call on me!"

"Again?"

"Again? I'm afraid I don't--"

"Now let's be honest, Mr. Herrick. You did see me the--the first time,
didn't you?"

"Just as you wish," laughed Wade. "I did or I didn't."

"You did. I wish you hadn't, but I know you did. I wonder what you
thought of me!"

"I--there wasn't much chance to think anything," answered Wade
evasively. "You didn't stay long enough."

"I was going by and saw the windows open and couldn't think what to make
of it, you see," she explained. "The cottage has been closed up so long
that it was quite breath-taking to see it open. My only idea was that it
was being aired out. So I thought I'd take a peep. I wanted to see
inside, for once I spent a whole day there with Aunt Mary, when I was
just a little bit of a girl, and I wondered whether it would look the
same. If you think you were surprised this morning when you came in and
found me confronting you, what do you suppose I was when I looked in
that window and right into your face? Don't you think we're quits now?"

"I reckon we are. Only you didn't make such an ass of yourself as I did.
You had presence of mind to get away. In fact you got away so quick I
wasn't sure whether I'd seen you or just imagined you. If I hadn't found
a lilac bloom on the ground out there I reckon I'd have been sort of
worried about myself."

"Did I drop it?"

"You must have. You're fond of it, aren't you?" He nodded at the tiny
spray tucked in the front of her white gown.

"Very. And I'm always sorry when it goes. This, I fear, is the very
last. It was later this year than usual; last summer it was almost all
gone when we got here."

"It's awfully sweet," said Wade. "Driving into the village the other day
the fragrance was almost the first thing that struck me. I reckon when I
go back West my memory of Eden Village will be perfumed with lilac.

"That's very pretty," said Eve. "Coup-ling lilacs with the West reminds
me of something that happened once when I was out there with papa."

Wade's glance wavered and shifted to the couple at the card table. She
knew, after all, or suspected!

"It was quite a few years ago. Papa was interested in some mines in
Nevada, and he took me out with him one spring on a business trip.
Coming back we stopped one morning at a little town. I don't remember
whether it was in Nevada or Colorado, and I've forgotten the funny,
outlandish name it had. There were just a few houses and stores there.
Papa and I got out of the Pullman and walked up and down the station
platform. Just across the road was a little frame house and in front of
it was a lilac bush just full of blooms. It seemed so strange to find
such a thing out there, and the blossoms were so lovely that I called
papa's attention to it. 'I do wish I could have some!' I said. There
were some men standing about the station, great big rough-looking men,
miners or ranchers, I suppose. One of them heard me and whipped off his
hat. 'Do the flowers please you, ma'am?' he asked. He looked so kind of
wild and ferocious that I was too startled to answer him at first,
'Cause if they do,' he went on, 'I'll get all you want.' 'Indeed they
do,' I said, 'but they're not yours, are they?' 'No, ma'am, they're
yourn,' he said. He pulled out a big knife, strode across to the bush
and began cutting the poor thing all to pieces. 'Oh, please don't!' I
cried. 'That's more than enough!' 'Just as you say, ma'am,' and he came
back with a dozen great branches of them. I took them and thanked him. I
told him it was dear of him to give them to me and I did hope he hadn't
spoiled his bush. He--he--well, he emptied his mouth of a great deal of
tobacco juice, wiped his big hand across it and said: 'It ain't my bush,
ma'am, but you're just as welcome to them lilocks as if it was. There
ain't nothin' in this town a pretty girl can't have for the askin'!'
Thank goodness, the conductor cried 'All aboard' just then and I ran up
the steps. There wasn't any reply I could have made to that, was there?
As the train went off we could see the other men on the platform
laughing and hitting my friend on the back, and enjoying it all greatly.
But wasn't it dear of him?"

"Yes," answered Wade, warmly. "They're like that out there, though rough
and uncultured, maybe, but kind and big-hearted underneath. I dare say
that incident made him feel so good that he went out and shot a
Greaser."

"Oh, I hope not!" laughed Eve. "But he looked as though he might have
shot dozens of them, one every morning for breakfast! The flowers lasted
me all the way to Chicago. The porter put them in the ice-water tank and
I picked fresh lilacs every day."

Wade wondered whether she had forgotten another incident, which must
have happened on the evening of that same day. He hoped she had, and
then he hoped she hadn't. If she recalled it she made no mention of it,
nor did the smiling unconsciousness of her face suggest that she
connected him with her trip in the remotest degree. He felt a little
bit aggrieved. It wasn't flattering to be forgotten so completely.

"You said your father was interested in some mines in Nevada. Do you
mind telling me the name?"

"The New Century Consolidated, they were called."

"Oh, that was too bad," exclaimed Wade, regretfully. "That property
never was any good. The whole thing was a swindle from first to last.
Was your father very badly hit?"

"Ruined," answered Eve, simply. "He had to sell everything he had. They
had made him a director, you see, and when the exposure came he paid up
his share. The lawyer said he didn't have to, but he insisted. He was
right, don't you think, Mr. Herrick?"

"No--well, perhaps. I don't know. It depends how you look at it, I
reckon."

"There was only one way to look at it, wasn't there? Either it was right
or it was wrong. Father believed it was right."

"So it was! But plenty of men would have hidden behind the law. I wish
your father might have bought into our property instead of the New
Century. I wanted Ed to write to him; we needed money badly at first,
and I'd heard Ed speak of him once; but he wouldn't do it; said his
uncle wouldn't have anything to do with any schemes of his."

"I'm afraid he was right," said Eve, sadly. "When I was a little girl my
father and Ed's father had some sort of a misunderstanding and would
never have anything to do with each other afterwards. It made it very
hard for mamma, for she and Aunt Mary were very fond of each other.
Please tell me about Cousin Edward, Mr. Herrick. I think I only saw him
once or twice in my life, but he was my cousin just the same, and now
that he's dead I suddenly realize that all the time I was unconsciously
taking a sort of comfort out of the knowledge that somewhere I had some
one that belonged to me, even if I never saw him and hardly knew him.
What was he like?"

"A big, silent, good-hearted fellow. I think there was a resemblance to
you, Miss Walton. He was dark complexioned, with almost black eyes,
but--there's something in your expression at times--that reminds me of
Ed." Wade frowned and studied the girl's face. "But I have a photograph
of him at the Camp. I'll send for it. Shall I?"

"It wouldn't be too much trouble?"

"No trouble at all. I'll just send a wire to Whitehead, the
superintendent. I met Ed in a queer way. It was at Cripple Creek. I'd
been there almost a year. After my mother died there wasn't anything to
keep me at home in Virginia, and there wasn't much money. So I hiked out
to Colorado, thinking about all I'd have to do was to cinch up my belt
and start to pick up gold nuggets in the streets. The best I could find
was work with a shovel in one of the mines over Victor way. Then I got
work in another mine handling explosives. I got in front of a missed
hole one fine day and was blown down a slope with about a hundred tons
of rock on top of me. As luck had it, however, the big ones wedged over
me and I wasn't hurt much, just scratched up a bit."

"But that was wonderful!" breathed Eve.

"Yes, it was sort of funny. I was covered up from one in the afternoon
until five, quite conscious all the time and pretty well scared. You
see, I couldn't help wondering just what would happen if the rocks
should settle. My eyes got the worst of it and I had to stay in the
hospital about a month. But I'm afraid I'm boring you. I was just
leading up to my meeting with Ed."

"Boring me! Don't be absurd! Then what happened?"

"Well, after I got out of the hospital I bought a burro and a tent and
hiked out for the Sangre--for the southern part of the State. I still
had some money coming to me for work when the trouble happened, and
after I got out I cashed an accident policy I'd luckily taken out a
month before. I stayed in the mountains pretty much all summer
prospecting. I found the biggest bunch of rock I'd ever seen, but no
yellow iron--I mean gold. Came sort of near starving before I got out. I
sold my outfit and went back to Cripple and struck another job with the
shovel and pick, digging prospect ditches. It was pretty tiresome work
and pretty cold, too. So when I'd got a month's wages I told the boss
he'd either have to put me underground or I'd quit. I said I was a miner
and not a Dago. You see, I felt independently rich with a month's wages
in my jeans--pockets, that is. The boss said I could quit. I've been
wondering ever since," laughed Wade, "whether I quit or was fired."

"That was lovely," said Eve. "Oh, dear, I've often wished I'd been a
man!"

"H'm; well, every one to his taste. But look here, Miss Walton, you're
certain I'm not boring you to death?"

"Quite. What did you do with all that money? And how much did a month's
wages amount to?"

"About ninety dollars. You get three a day and work seven days a week.
But, of course, I owed a good deal of that ninety by the time I got it.
Well, I paid my bills and then did a fool thing. I got my laundry out of
the Chinaman's, put on a stiff shirt and went over to Colorado Springs.
It just seemed that I had to have a glimpse of--well, you know;
respectability--dress clothes--music--flowers. I remember how stiff and
uncomfortable that shirt felt and how my collar scratched my neck. When
I got over to the Springs I ran across some folks I'd known back home in
Virginia. Richmond folks, they were. I dined with them and had a fine
time. I forgot to tell them I'd been pushing a shovel with the
Pinheads--that is, Swedes. They asked me to be sure and visit them when
I went back to Virginia for Christmas, for of course I would go! I told
'em I'd do that very thing. Rather a joke, wasn't it? If railroads had
been selling at forty dollars a pair I couldn't have bought a headlight!
I went back to Cripple the next day, having spent most of my money,
feeling sort of grouchy and down on my luck. That night I thought I'd
have a go at the wheel--roulette, you know. I'd steered pretty clear of
that sort of thing up to then, but I didn't much care that night what
happened. I only had about fifteen dollars and I played it dollar by
dollar and couldn't win once. Finally I was down to my last. I remember
I took that out of my pocket and looked at it quite awhile. Then I put
it back and started to go. But before I'd reached the door I concluded
that a dollar wasn't much better than none in Cripple, and so I went
back to the table. It was pretty crowded and I had to work my way in
until I could reach it. Just when I got my dollar out again and was
going to toss it on, blind, some one took hold of my arm and pulled me
around. I'd never seen the fellow before and I started to get peeved.
But he--may I use his words? They weren't polite, but they were
persuasive. Said he: 'Put that back in your pocket, you damned fool, and
come out of here."

Wade looked anxiously at his audience to see if she was shocked. She
didn't look so; only eager and sympathetic. He went on.

"Well, I went. He lugged me over to his room across the street and--and
was hospitable. He made me talk and I told him how I was fixed. He told
me who he was and said he thought he could find a job for me. And he
did. He was partner with a man named Hogan in an assay office and knew a
good many mine managers and superintendents. The next day I went to work
running an air-drill at four dollars a day. That's how I met Ed. We got
to be pretty good friends after that. Later I went over and roomed with
him. He was only two years older than I, but he always seemed about ten.
I told him about the Sangre--about the country I'd prospected in the
summer and we agreed to go over it together. In the spring, when the
snow was off, we started out. We bought a good outfit, two burros, a
good tent, and everything we could need. We expected to be away all
summer, but we struck gold about five weeks after we reached the
mountains. Struck it rich, too. All that summer we slaved like Dagoes
and by fall we had a prospect good enough to show any one. But we needed
money for development, and it was then I suggested to Ed that he write
to Mr. Walton. You see, I'd heard a good deal about his folks and about
Eden Village by that time. Evenings, after you've had supper and while
you're smoking your pipe, there isn't much to talk about except your
people and things back in God's country. And we'd told each other about
everything we knew by autumn. But Ed wouldn't consider his uncle; said
we'd have to find some one else to put in the money. So we had a
clean-up and I started East with a trunk full of samples and a pocket
full of papers. Ed gave me the names of some men to see. As luck had it,
I didn't have to go further than Omaha. The first man I tackled bit and
three months later we started development. Ed and I kept a controlling
interest. Now the--" Wade pulled himself up, gulped and hesitated--"the
mine is the richest in that district and is getting better all the
time."

"It's like a fairy tale, almost," said Eve.

"What is the name of the mine, Mr. Herrick?"

"Well--er--we usually just called it 'The Mine.' It isn't listed on the
exchange, you see. There aren't any shares on the market."

"Really? But I wasn't thinking of investing, Mr. Herrick," responded
Eve, dryly. "If there's any reason why I shouldn't know the name, that's
sufficient."

Wade observed her troubledly.

"I--I beg your pardon, Miss Walton. I didn't mean to be rude. The mine
has a name, of course, and--and sometime I'll tell it to you. But just
now--there's a reason--"

"It sounds," laughed Eve, "as though you were talking of a cereal
coffee. Indeed, though, I don't want to know if you don't want me to."

"But I do! That is--sometime--"

"I understand; it's a guilty secret. But you were telling me about my
cousin. When did he die, Mr. Herrick?"

"Last August. We'd both been working pretty hard and Ed was sort of run
down, I reckon. He got typhoid and went quick. I got him to Pueblo as
soon as I learned what the trouble was, but the doctor there said he
never had a chance. We buried him in Pueblo."

Wade was looking down at his roughened hands and spoke so low that Eve
had to bend forward a little to hear him.

"It--it was a pretty decent funeral," he added simply. "There were seven
carriages."

"Really?" she murmured.

"Yes." He raised his head and looked at her a trifle wistfully. "You
can't understand just what Ed's death meant to me, Miss Walton. You see,
he was about the only real friend I ever had, the only fellow I ever got
real close to. And he was such a thoroughbred, and--and was so darn--so
mighty good to me! I tell you, it sort of knocked me out for awhile."

"I'm sorry I didn't know him," said Eve, softly. "I'm sure I'd have
liked him as well as you did. And perhaps he'd have liked me."

"I'm sure of that," said Wade with conviction.

"I suppose he never spoke of me?"

"Only once, I think. Before he died he told me he had made a will and
left me his share of the mine and everything else he had. I--oh, well, I
didn't like it and said so. 'You'll have to take it,' he answered.
'There's no one else to leave it to; I've got no relatives left except
an uncle and a cousin, and they have all the money they need. You see,
he didn't know about--"

"I understand. And even had papa been alive he would have accepted
nothing from Edward, I'm certain."

"But you--"

"Nor I."

"I'm sorry to hear you say that," said Wade, frowningly. "I've been
thinking that perhaps--something might be done. There's so much money,
Miss Walton, and it doesn't belong to me. Don't you think--"

"No." Eve shook her head gently, but decisively. "It's nice of you to
want it, Mr. Herrick, but you mustn't think any more about it. Papa
would never have allowed me to accept any of Cousin Edward's property if
he had been alive, and I shan't do it now that he is dead. We won't
speak about that any more, please. Tell me how you came to visit Eden
Village. To see the house you'd inherited?"

"Yes. Ed wanted me to. He was very fond of this place and fond of the
house. 'I'd rather you always kept it,' he told me. 'If the time ever
comes when you have to sell it, all right; but until then see that it's
looked after and kept up.' So this summer, when I found I was going to
have a vacation--the first real one for six years, Miss Walton--I
decided that the first thing I'd do would be to come here and look after
Ed's place."

"Then yours is only a flying visit? I'm sorry."

"No, I think I shall stay some time," replied Wade. "I like it
immensely. It's so different from where I've been. And, besides, the
house needs looking after. I think I'll have it painted."

"Then you'll be sure to make mistakes," laughed Eve. "Or perhaps you'll
paint it a different color from this?"

"No, I shan't; white it must be. Then, you see, I'll have every excuse
for mistaking this house for my own."

"I hope you won't feel that you need an excuse to come here, Mr.
Herrick. We're not a ceremonious people here. We can't afford to be;
neighbors are too scarce."

Wade thanked her and there was a moment's silence. Then Eve, who had
been smilingly watching the players, turned with lowered voice.

"And sometimes when you come to see us, Mr. Herrick, won't you come
through the gate in the hedge, please?"

"Certainly," he answered, looking a little puzzled.

"Does that sound queer?" she asked with a soft laugh. "I suppose it
does. There was a time when the dwellers in your house and in mine used
that gate in the hedge as my poor old grandfather meant they should.
Perhaps I have a fancy to see it used so again. Or perhaps that isn't
the reason at all. You have your secret; we'll call this mine. Maybe
some day we'll tell our secrets."

"Is that a promise?" he asked, eagerly.

She hesitated a moment. Then, "If you like," she answered, smiling
across at him.

"Good! Then let us have it all shipshape, in contract form."

"Oh, you business men!"

"I hereby agree to tell you before I leave Eden Village the name of my
mine, and you agree to tell me why--why--"

"Why you are to come to see us by way of the gate in the hedge. Agreed,
signed, sealed, and delivered in the presence of Miss Caroline Mullett
and Doctor Joseph Crimmins."

"Eh?" asked the Doctor. "What's that? I heard my name spoken, didn't I?"

"You did, Doctor, but quite respectfully," answered Eve.

"Respectfully!" grumbled the Doctor. "That's all age gets, just respect!
Thirty years ago, madam, you wouldn't have dared to respect me! I beg
your pardon, Miss Mullett; you are right, it is my first count.
Fifteen-two, fifteen-four, fifteen-six, and a pair's eight and one's
nine. And that puts me out!"

"Brute!" said Miss Mullett.

"Who won?" asked Eve.

"I, Miss Eve, but an empty victory since I have incurred this dear
lady's displeasure," replied the Doctor, arising. "I had the misfortune
to run out when she needed but one to win, an unpardonable crime in the
game of cribbage, Mr. Herrick."

"I'm not sure we wouldn't hang you for that out our way, Doctor," said
Wade, with a smile.

"Well, something ought to be done to him," grumbled Miss Mullett,
closing the cribbage box with a snap.

"Madam, leave me to the reproaches of my conscience," advised the
offender.

"Your conscience!" jeered Miss Mullett. "You haven't any. You're a
doctor."

[Illustration: "STERN IN HER ANGER, MR. HERRICK, BUT OF AN AMIABLE AND
FORGIVING DISPOSITION"]

"Mr. Herrick, let us be going, I pray.

  "'From pole to pole the thunder roars aloud,
  And broken lightnings flash from ev'ry cloud.'

"Besides which, sir, it is close upon ten o'clock, I see, the bed-hour
of our virtuous village. Miss Mullett, I shall pray for your
forgiveness. Miss Eve, I trust you to say a good word for me. If the
storm clears, do you hang a white handkerchief from the window there and
I, going by, will see it and be comforted." The Doctor laid a hand on
Wade's shoulder and, with a mischievous glance at Miss Mullett,
whispered hoarsely: "Stern in her anger, Mr. Herrick, but of an amiable
and forgiving disposition."

"I'll forgive you when I've had my revenge," answered Miss Mullett,
laughingly.

"Ah, the clouds break! Let us be gone, Mr. Herrick, while the sun shines
on our pathway!"

When the front door had closed Miss Mullett turned eagerly to Eve.

"Sit down, dear, and tell me! Was he nice? What did he say?"




IX.


  "'When He cometh, when He cometh
    To make up His jewels,
  All His jewels, precious jewels,
    His loved and His own.
  Like the stars of the morning,
    His bright crown adorning,
  They shall shine--'"

"Mr. Herring, sir, breakfast's most ready."

"So am I," answered Wade, throwing open the door. "It certainly smells
good, Zephania. Got lots of coffee?"

"Oh, yes, Mr. Herring."

"Herrick, Zephania."

"Yes, sir; excuse me; Herrick."

After breakfast Zene, as his father and Zephania called him, or Zenas
Third, as he was known to the Village, appeared with Wade's trunk on a
wheelbarrow. Zenas Third was a big, broad-shouldered youth of twenty
with a round, freckled, smiling face and eager yellow-brown eyes. He
always reminded Wade of an amiable animated pumpkin. Wade got his
fishing tackle out of the trunk and he and Zenas Third started off for a
day's fishing.

They took the road past The Cedars, Wade viewing the house on the chance
of seeing the ladies. But although he failed and was a little
disappointed he did not escape observation himself.

"There goes Mr. Herrick with Zenas Third," announced Miss Mullett,
hurrying cautiously to the sitting-room window. As she had been in the
act of readjusting her embroidery hoops when she arose, her efforts to
secure all the articles in her lap failed and the hoops went circling
off in different directions. "They're going fishing, Eve."

"Are they?" asked Eve from the old mahogany desk by the side window,
with only a glance from her writing.

"Yes, and--_Did_ you see where those hoops rolled to?"

"No, I didn't notice. But your handkerchief is over by the couch and
you're stepping on a skein of linen."

"So I am." Miss Mullett rescued and reassembled her things and sat down
again. "Are you very busy, dear?"

"No." Eve sighed impatiently and laid her pen down. "I'm not at all
busy. I wish I were. I can't seem to write this morning."

"I'm so glad. Not that you can't write, of course, but that you're not
busy. I want to talk."

"Talk on." Eve placed her hands behind her head and eyed the few lines
of writing distastefully.

"But I want you to talk, too," said Miss Mullett, snipping a thread with
her tiny scissors.

"I haven't anything to say."

"Nonsense, dear! There's always plenty to say. Why, I'm sure if I lived
to be a thousand, I'd not be talked out. There's always so many
interesting things to talk about."

"And what is it this morning?" asked Eve, smiling across at the sleek
head bent above the embroidery frame.

"Mr. Herrick. Tell me what you think of him, Eve."

"I haven't thought--much."

"But you ought to. I'm positive he is very much impressed, dear."

"Really? With what?"

"With you." Eve laughed, softly.

"Carrie, you're incorrigible! You won't be satisfied until you've got me
married to some one."

"Of course I shan't. I don't intend that you shall make the mistake I
did."

"You didn't make a mistake, you dear thing. Your mistake would have been
to marry. You'd never have been contented with just one man, Carrie; you
know you think every one you meet is perfectly beautiful."'

"Because I haven't one of my very own," replied Miss Mullett,
tranquilly. "I made a great mistake in not marrying. I would have been
happier married, I'm sure. Every woman ought to have a man to look
after; it keeps her from worrying over trifles."

"Do you think I worry over trifles?" asked Eve.

"You're worrying over that story this minute."

"If I am, it's unkind of you to call my stories trifles. Please
remember that if it wasn't for the stories, such as they are, I couldn't
afford marmalade with my tea."

"And you probably couldn't afford me," said Miss Mullett, "and I guess
I'm a good deal like marmalade myself--half sweet and half bitter." Miss
Mullett laughed at the conceit.

"Anyway, dear, you don't cloy," said Eve. "But you're not like marmalade
the least bit; you're--you're like a nice currant jelly, just tart
enough to be pleasant. How's that?"

"Just so long as you don't call me a pickle I don't mind," replied the
other. Presently: "You must acknowledge that he's very attractive,
dear."

"Who?" asked Eve, coming suddenly out of her thoughts.

"Mr. Herrick. And I think he has the most wonderful voice, too; don't
you? It's so deep and--and manly."

"Carrie, if his Satanic Majesty called on us, you'd be telling me after
he'd gone how manly he looked!"

"Well, I'm not one to deny the resemblance between man and the Devil,"
responded Miss Mullett, with a chuckle. "I dare say that's why we like
them so--the men, I mean."

"Does Mr. Herrick strike you as being somewhat devilish?" inquired Eve,
idly.

"N-no, I suppose not. Not too much so, at least. I think he must be very
kind; he has such nice eyes. He's the sort of man that makes a lovely
husband."

Eve clapped her hands to her ears, laughing.

"Carrie, stop it! I refuse to listen to any more laudations of Mr.
Herrick! Think how the poor man's ears must burn!"

"Let them. He has very nice ears, Eve. Did you notice how small and
close they were?"

"I did not!" declared Eve despairingly. "Nor did I specially observe his
teeth or his hair or his feet, or--"

"But you noticed the scar on his face, didn't you?"

"Yes, I couldn't very well help doing that," owned Eve. "Any more than
I could help noticing his hands."

"So strong looking, aren't they?" asked Miss Mullett, eagerly.

"Are they? I thought them rather ugly."

"Oh, how can you say so? Just think of all the wonderful things those
hands must have done! And as for the scar, I thought it gave him quite a
distinguished air, didn't you?"

"Carrie Mullett, I am not interested in Mr. Herrick. If you say another
word about him before luncheon--"

"You can say that if you like," interrupted Miss Mullett placidly, "but
you are interested in him, my dear."

"Carrie!"

"Then why can't you write your story? Oh, you can't fool me, my dear!"

Eve turned a disdainful back and picked up her pen, resentful of the
warmth that she felt creeping into her cheeks.

Miss Mullett smiled and drew a new thread from the skein.




X.


"You observe," said Wade the next morning, "I come through the gate in
the hedge."

The intermittent showers of yesterday afternoon and night had cleaned
the June world, and the four ancient cedars from which the Walton place
had received its name, and in the broken shade of which Eve was reading,
exhaled a spicy odor under the influence of moisture and warmth. Eve, a
slim white figure against the dark-green of the foliage, the sun
flecking her waving hair, looked up, smiled and laid her book down.

"Good morning," she said. "Have you come to help me be lazy?"

"If you need help," he replied. "I brought these. They're not much, but
I think they're the last in the village." He handed her a half-dozen
sprays of purple lilac, small and in some places already touched with
brown.

"Oh," she said, "they're lovely!" She buried her face in them and
crooned over them delightedly. Witnessing her pleasure, Wade had no
regrets for his hour's search over the length and breadth of Eden
Village. She laid them in her lap and looked up curiously. "Where did
you get them? Not from your hedge?"

"Oh, I just stopped at the florist's as I came along," he laughed. "He
apologized for them and wanted me to take orchids, but I told him they
were for the Lilac Girl."

"Is that me?" smiled Eve. "Thank you very much." She made a little bow.
"I feel dreadfully impolite and inhospitable, Mr. Herrick, at not asking
you to sit down, but--you see!" She waved a hand before her. "There's
nothing but the ground, and that's damp, I'm afraid. So let us go
indoors. Besides, I must put these in water."

"Please don't," he begged. "The ground isn't damp where the sun shines,
and I wouldn't mind if it were. If I'm not keeping you from your book
I'll sit down here. May I?"

"You'll catch rheumatism or ague or something else dreadful," she
warned.

"Not I," he laughed. "I've never been sick a day in my life, unless it
was after I'd got mixed up with dynamite that time. Don't you think you
might wear those lilacs?"

"Surely not all of them. One, perhaps." She tucked a spray in at the
bosom of her white waist. "You haven't told me yet where you got them.
Have you been stealing?"

"Some I stole, some I begged, and some I--just took. I think I can
truthfully declare, though, that there is not another bit of lilac at
this moment in the whole village. I went on a foraging expedition after
breakfast and there is the result. I've examined every bush and hedge
with a microscope."

"And all that trouble for me!" she exclaimed. "I'm sure I'm flattered."
A little flush of rose-pink crept into her clear cheeks. "Do you know,
Mr. Herrick, you're a perfectly delightful neighbor? Last night fish,
to-day flowers! And I haven't thanked you for the fish, have I? They
were delicious, and it was good of you to send them. Especially as
Zenas Third said you didn't have very good luck."

"No, we didn't catch many," answered Wade, "but we had a good time. I
was sorry I couldn't send more, though."

"More! Pray how many trout do you think two ladies of delicate appetites
can eat, Mr. Herrick? You sent six, and we didn't begin to eat all of
those."

"Really? They were little chaps, too. I'm glad you liked them. Next time
I hope I'll have some better ones to offer. Zenas and I are going to try
again the first cloudy day."

"I hope you have good luck." There was a moment's silence. Eve raised
the lilacs to her face again and over the tips of the sprays shot a
glance at Wade. He had crossed his legs under him and was feeling for
his pipe. He looked up and their eyes met.

"I'm afraid I can't offer you any tobacco," she said.

"I've got plenty," he laughed, "if you don't mind my smoking."

"Not a bit. Perhaps I should call Carrie. I think she likes the smell
of tobacco better than any perfume she knows."

"Is she well?" asked Wade, contritely. "I should have asked before,
but--you--something put it out of my head."

"Quite well, thanks. She's making something for luncheon and has
forbidden me the kitchen. It's a surprise. Do you like surprises, Mr.
Herrick?"

"Some. It depends on the nature of them."

"I suppose it does. An earthquake, for instance, would be a rather
disagreeable surprise, wouldn't it?"

"Decidedly. I can imagine a surprise that would be distinctly pleasant,
though," said Wade, giving a great deal of attention to the selection of
a match from his silver case. "For instance, if you were to give me a
small piece of that lilac for my buttonhole."

"That would surprise you?" laughed Eve. "Then I'm to understand that you
think me ungenerous?"

"No, indeed, I was--was considering my unworthiness."

"Such humility is charming," answered Eve, breaking off a tiny spray and
tossing it to him. "There; aren't you awfully surprised? Please look
so."

Wade struck an attitude and made a grimace which to a third person would
have indicated wild alarm.

"Oh, dear," laughed Eve, "if that's your idea of looking pleasant I'd
hate to see you in an earthquake!"

Wade placed the spray in his buttonhole. "Thank you," he said, "I shall
have quite a collection--"

"You were going to say?" asked Eve politely as he paused.

"I was going to say"--he paused again. "You know I already have a spray
of this that belongs to you." He shot a quick, curious glance at her.

"You have? And where did you get it?"

Wade lighted his pipe very deliberately.

"You dropped it outside my window the other day."

"Oh!" said Eve, with a careless laugh.

"I'm afraid that must be withered by this time."

"It is," said Wade. There was no reply to this, and he looked up to find
her gazing idly at the pages of her book, which she was ruffling with
her fingers. "I'm keeping you from reading," he said.

"No, I don't want to read. It's not interesting."

"May I see what it is?" She held the cover up for his inspection.

"Have you read it?" she asked. He shook his head slowly.

"I don't read many novels, and those I do read I forget all about the
next minute. Of course I try to keep up with the important ones, the
ones folks always ask you about, like Mrs. Humphrey Ward's and Miss
Wharton's."

"Yes? And do you like them?"

"I suppose so," he replied, dubiously. "I think the last one I read was
'The Fruit of Mirth.' I didn't care very much for that, did you? If I'd
had my way I'd have passed around the morphine to the whole bunch early
in the book."

Eve smiled. "I'm afraid you wouldn't care for this one either," she
said, indicating the book in her lap. "I heard this described as 'forty
chapters of agony and two words of relief.'"

"'The End,' eh? That was clever. You write stories yourself, don't you?"

"Of a sort, stories for little children about fairies, usually. They
don't amount to much."

"I'll bet they're darn--mighty good," said Wade, stoutly.

"I wish they were 'darned good,'" she laughed. "If they were they'd sell
better. I used to write little things for our college paper, and then,
when papa died, and there wasn't very much left after the executors had
got through, writing seemed about the only thing I could do. I took some
stories to the magazine that papa was editor of, and they were splendid
to me. They couldn't use them, but they told me where to take them and I
sold several. That was the beginning. Now I'm fast becoming a specialist
in 'Once-Upon-a-Time' stories."

"I'd like to read some of them," said Wade. "I'm awfully fond of fairy
stories." "Oh, but these are very young fairy stories, like--like this
one." Eve pulled a pencilled sheet of paper from the pages of her book,
smiled, hesitated, and read: "'Once upon a time there was a Fairy
Princess whose name was Dewdrop. She lived in a beautiful Blue Palace
deep in the heart of a Canterbury Bell that swayed to and fro, to and
fro, at the top of the garden wall. And when the sun shone against the
walls of her palace it was filled with a lovely lavender light, and when
the moon shone it was all asparkle with silver. It was quite the most
desirable palace in the whole garden, for it was the only one that had a
view over the great high wall, and many fairies envied her because she
lived in it. One of those who wanted the Blue Palace for himself was a
very wicked fairy who lived under a toadstool nearby. He was so terribly
wicked that I don't like to even tell you about him. He never got up to
breakfast when he was called, he never did as he was told, and he used
to sit for hours on top of his toadstool, putting out his tongue at all
the other fairies who flew by. And he did lots and lots of other
things, too, that only a thoroughly depraved fairy could ever think of,
like putting cockleburs in the nests where the baby birds lived, and
making them very uncomfortable, and chasing the moles about underground,
and making a squeaking noise like a hungry weasel, and scaring the poor
little moles almost to death. Oh, I could tell you lots of dreadful
things about the wicked fairy if I wanted to. His name was Nettlesting,
and his father and mother were both dead, and he lived all alone with
his grandmother, who simply spoiled him! And--'and that's all there is.
How do you like it?"

"Bully," said Wade. "What's the rest of it?"

"I don't know. That's as far as I've got. I suppose, though, that the
wicked fairy tried to oust the Princess from the Blue Palace, and there
were perfectly scandalous doings in Fairyland."

"I hope you'll finish it," said Wade. "I rather like Nettlesting."

"Oh, but you mustn't! The moral is that fairies who don't get up to
breakfast when they're called always come to some bad end. You must
like the Princess and think the wicked fairy quite detestable."

"Can't help it," Wade replied, apologetically. "The wicked fairy had a
sense of humor and I like him. That chasing the moles around and
squeaking like a weasel appeals to me. I'll bet that's just what I'd do
if I were a fairy!"

"I know," said Eve, nodding her head sympathetically. "I'm ashamed to
say it, but I always like the wicked fairies, too. It's dreadfully hard
sometimes for me to give them their deserts. I'm afraid I don't make
them mean enough. What is your idea of a thoroughly depraved fairy, Mr.
Herrick?"

Wade frowned a moment, thinking deeply.

"Well," he said finally, "you might have him go around and upset the
bird-nests and spill the little birds out. How would that do?"

"Beautifully! Oh, he _would_ be wicked; even I couldn't like a fairy who
did that. Thank you ever so much, Mr. Herrick; I would never have
thought of that myself. What a beautifully wicked imagination you must
have! I'll make Nettlesting do that very thing."

"No, don't change him, please; I like him the way he is. When will that
story he published?"

"Oh, I may never finish it, and, if I do, it may never be accepted."

Wade pondered a minute. Then--"Of course, you know it's perfect
nonsense," he charged.

"My story? Isn't that a little cruel, Mr. Herrick?"

"I don't mean your story. I mean the idea of you having to write things
to make a living when--when there's all that money that really belongs
to you. I wish, Miss Walton, you'd look at it sensibly."

"Mr. Herrick, you're not flattering any more."

"Can't help it," answered Wade, doggedly. "You ought to consider the
matter from--from a practical point of view. Now you can't deny--"

"A woman can deny anything," laughed Eve, "especially if it's logic."

"This isn't logic; it's incontrovertible fact."

"Good gracious! No, I don't believe I'd have the courage to deny such a
thing as that. I'm sure it would be quite unlawful, wouldn't it, Mr.
Herrick?"

"Won't you please be serious?" he begged.

"No, not to-day, thank you."

"Then we'll talk about it some other day."

"No, but we won't, please. I'd like you to understand, Mr. Herrick, that
I appreciate your--your kindness, your generosity, but all the argument
in the world won't shake my resolution to take none of Cousin Edward's
money. Now we understand each other, don't we?"

"I suppose so," answered Wade, regretfully. "But you're making a
mistake, Miss Walton. Won't you just think about it?' Won't you take
advice from--from your friends?"

"The last thing I'd do," Eve replied, smilingly. "One's friends are the
very ones to avoid when you want unbiased advice. For instance, there's
Carrie Mullett. I told her what you said the other night, and what do
you suppose her advice was?"

"I'm sure it was sensible," said Wade. "She's a very sensible, as well
as a very charming, lady."

"H'm; well, she said: 'Accept enough to live on, my dear. Your father
would never have wanted you to be dependent on yourself for your
living.'"

"Well?" asked Wade, hopefully.

"She never knew papa," replied Eve. "Besides, I am not dependent on
myself for my living. I have enough to live on even if I never sold a
thing. I'm not so poverty-stricken as you imagine."

"If you'd talk it over with a lawyer--"

"But it isn't a question of law, Mr. Herrick. It's something between me
and my conscience, you see. And surely," she ended with a smile, "you
wouldn't consult a lawyer about an affair of conscience? Why, I might
have to explain what a conscience was!"

"Well," said Wade, grimly. "I've made no promises, and I haven't given
up yet. And you'll find, Miss Walton, that I'm a tiresome chap when it
comes to having my own way."

"And you'll find, Mr. Herrick, that I'm a stubborn woman when it comes
to having mine. There, the battle is on!"

"And I shall win," said Wade, looking up at her with a sudden gleam in
his eyes. For an instant she met his gaze and found herself a little
dismayed at some expression she found there. But--

"We'll see," she answered, calmly. "Is it to be war to the knife, Mr.
Herrick?"

"I hope it won't come to that," he answered. "But there's another thing
I want you to do, and as it's something you can do without wounding your
conscience, I hope you will."

"It sounds formidable. What is it, please?"

"Come over this afternoon and have tea, you and Miss Mullett. Will you?"

"Gladly. I haven't had afternoon tea since I left New York."

"Then shall we say four o'clock? Don't fail me, please, Miss Walton,
for Zephania and I will be terribly disappointed if you do. It's our
first tea, you know."

"Indeed we won't fail you!" answered Eve. "And, please, I like lemon
with mine."

All was ready for the guests long before the time appointed, and Wade,
attired in his best blue serge, whitest vest, and bluest silk tie, and
clean-shaven to a painful degree, paced impatiently between the kitchen,
fragrant with the odor of newly-baked cake, and the parlor, less chill
and formal than usual under the humanizing influence of several bowls
and vases of flowers.

The ladies were quite on time, Miss Mullett looking sweet and cheerful
in pink and white, and Eve absolutely lovely and adorable in pale-blue
linen that matched her eyes to the fraction of a tone. They settled
themselves in the cool parlor and talked while the shades rustled and
whispered in the little scented breeze that stole through the open
windows. Zephania, starched and ribboned, bore proudly in the best
silver tea service, Wade watching the progress of the heavily laden tray
across the room with grave anxiety.

"I'd like you to know," he announced when it was safely deposited on the
little table at Eve's side, "that this is Zephania's spread. She made
the cake herself--and the bread too."

"The dear child!" said Miss Mullett.

"Why, Zephania!" exclaimed Eve.

And Zephania, very proud and rosy, and trying hard to look unconcerned,
made her escape just as Doctor Crimmins, happening by, heard the voices
and demanded admittance with the head of his cane on the window-sill.
That was a very jolly tea-party. The Doctor ate six pieces of cake and
drank three cups of tea, praising each impartially between mouthfuls.
Wade, eating and drinking spasmodically, told of his adventures in
search of lemons.

"Prout's emporium was quite out of them," he explained. "Prout said he
had had some a few weeks ago, but they were sold. So I walked over to
The Centre and got them there."

Miss Mullett eluded him anxiously and insisted that the Doctor should
examine his pulse.

"You ought never to have taken such a walk on such a hot day, Mr.
Herrick. The idea! Why, you might have died! Why don't you scold him,
Eve?"

Eve's eyebrows went up.

"Why should I scold him, Carrie? Mr. Herrick knew that I liked lemon in
my tea and, being a very gallant gentleman, he obtained lemon. You all
know that I am quite heartless where my wants are concerned."

"Well, I think it was extremely wrong, Mr. Herrick, and I shan't touch
another slice of lemon."

"Which," laughed Eve, "considering that you already have four pieces
floating about in your cup, is truly heroic!"

After the ladies had gone the Doctor lingered, and presently, in some
strange way, he found himself in the dining-room with the doors
carefully closed, saying "Ha! H'm!" and wiping his lips gratefully. He
made Wade promise to come and see him, quoted a couplet anent
hospitality--neglecting to give the author's name--and took his
departure. After supper Wade lighted his pipe and started in the
direction of the Doctor's house, but he never got there that evening.
For an hour or more he wandered along the quiet, almost deserted street,
and smoked and thought and watched the effect of the moonlight amidst
the high branches of the elms, finally finding himself back at his own
gate, tapping his pipe against the post and watching the red sparks
drop.

"It isn't going to be very hard, after all," he murmured.




XI.


June mellowed into July and July moved by in a procession of hot,
languorous days and still, warm nights. Sometimes it rained, and then
the leaves and flowers, adroop under the sun's ardor, quivered and
swayed with delight and scented the moist air with the sweet, faint
fragrance of their gratitude. Often the showers came at night, and Wade,
lying in bed with doors and windows open, could hear it pattering upon
the leaves and drumming musically upon the shingles. And he fancied,
too, that he could hear the thankful earth drinking it in with its
millions of little thirsty mouths. After such a night he awoke to find
the room filled with dewy, perfumed freshness and radiant with sunshine,
while out of doors amidst the sparkling leaves the birds trilled pæans
to the kindly heavens.

By the middle of July Wade had settled down comfortably into the quiet
life of Eden Village. Quiet it was, but far from hum-drum. On the
still, mirrored surface of a pool even the dip of an insect's wing will
cause commotion. So it was in Eden Village. On the placid surface of
existence there the faintest zephyr became a gale that raised waves of
excitement; the tiniest happening was an event. It is all a matter of
proportion. Wade experienced as much agitation when a corner of the
woodshed caught on fire, and he put it out with a broom, as when with
forty men behind him, he had fought for hours to save the buildings at
the mine two years before. Something of interest was always happening.
There was the day when the serpent appeared in Eden. Appropriately
enough, it was Eve who discovered it, curled up in the sun right by the
gate. Her appeals for assistance brought Wade in a hurry, and the
serpent, after an exciting chase through the hedges and flower beds, was
finally dispatched. It proved to be an adder of blameless character, but
neither Eve nor Miss Mullett had any regrets. Eve declared that a snake
was a snake, no matter what any one--meaning Wade--said, and Wade was
forced to acknowledge the fact. Armed with a shovel, they marched to the
back garden, Wade holding the snake by its unquiet tail, and interred it
there, so that Alexander the Great, the tortoise-shell cat, wouldn't eat
it and be poisoned. Subsequently the affair had to be discussed in all
its aspects by Eve and Wade in the shade of the cedars.

And then there was the anxious week when Zephania had a bad sore throat
that looked for awhile like diphtheria, and Wade prepared his own
breakfasts and lunches and dined alternately at The Cedars and with
Doctor Crimmins. And, of course, there was the stirring occasion of
Zephania's return to duty, Zephania being patently proud of the
disturbance she had created, and full of quaint comments on life, death,
and immortality, those subjects seemingly having engaged her mind
largely during her illness. For several days her voice was noticeably
lacking in quality and volume, and "There is a Happy Land," which was
her favorite hymn during that period, was rendered so subduedly that
Wade was worried, and had to have the Doctor's assurance that Zephania
was not going into a decline.

These are only a few of the exciting things that transpired during
Wade's first month in Eden Village. There were many others, but as I
tell them they seem much less important than they really were, and I
shall mention only one more. That was something other than a mere event;
it savored of the stupendous; it might almost be called a phenomenon.
Its fame spread abroad until folks discussed it over the tea-table or in
front of the village stores in places as far distant as Stepping and
Tottingham and Bursley. In Eden Village it caused such a commotion as
had not disturbed the tranquillity since the weather-vane on the church
steeple was regilded. As you are by this time, kind reader, in a fever
of excitement and curiosity, I'll relieve your suspense.

Wade had his cottage painted, inside and out!

Not content with that, he had a new roof put on, built a porch on the
south side of the house, cut a door from the sitting-room, and had the
fence mended and the gate rehung! It was the consensus of Eden Village
opinion that you can't beat a Westerner for extravagance and sheer
audacity.

But I haven't told you all even yet. I've saved something for a final
thrill. Wade had dormer windows built into the sleeping-rooms, a thing
which so altered the appearance of the house that the neighbors stood
aghast. Some of the older ones shook their heads and wondered what old
Colonel Selden Phelps would say if he could say anything. And the spirit
of progress and improvement reached even to the grounds. Zenas Third
toiled with spade and pruning-knife and bundles of shrubs and plants
came from Boston and were set out with lavish prodigality. In the matter
of alterations to the house Eve was consulted on every possible
occasion, while garden improvements were placed entirely in Miss
Mullett's capable hands. That lady was in her element, and for a week or
more one could not pass the cottage without spying Miss Mullett and
Zenas Third hard at work somewhere about. Miss Mullett wore a
wide-brimmed straw hat to keep the sun from her pink cheeks and a pair
of Wade's discarded gloves to save her hands. The gloves were very, very
much too large for her, and, when not actually engaged in using her
trowel, Miss Mullett stood with arms held out in scarecrow style so as
not to contaminate her gown with garden mold, and presented a strange
and unusual appearance. Every afternoon, as regular as clockwork, the
Doctor came down the street and through the gate to lavish advice,
commendation, and appropriate quotations from his beloved poets. At five
Zephania appeared with the tea things and the _partie carrée_ gathered
in the parlor and brought their several little histories up to date, and
laughed and poked fun at each other, and drew more and more together as
time passed.

Perhaps you've been thinking that Wade's advent in Eden Village was the
signal for calls and invitations to dinners, receptions, and bridge. If
you have you don't know New England, or, at least, you don't know Eden
Village. One can't dive into society in Eden Village; one has to wade
in, and very cautiously. In the course of events the newcomer became
thoroughly immersed, and the waters of Eden Village society enclosed him
beneficently, but that was not yet. He was still undergoing his
novitiate, and to raise his hat to Miss Cousins, when he encountered
that austere lady on the street, was as yet the height of social
triumph. Wade, however, was experiencing no yearnings for a wider social
sphere. Eve and Miss Mullett and the Doctor, Zephania, and the two
Zenases were sufficient for him. In fact he would have been quite
satisfied with one of that number could he have chosen the one.

For Wade's deliberate effort to fall in love with Eve had proved
brilliantly successful. In fact he had not been conscious of the effort
at all, so simple and easy had the process proved. Of course he ought to
have been delighted, but, strange to tell, after the first brief moment
of self-gratulation, he began to entertain doubts as to the wisdom of
his plan. Regrets succeeded doubts. Being in love with a girl who didn't
care a rap whether you stayed or went wasn't the unalloyed bliss he had
pictured. He would know better another time.

That was in the earlier stage. Later it dawned upon him that there never
could be another time, and he didn't want that there should. This
knowledge left him rather dazed. He felt a good deal like a man who,
walking across a pleasant beach and enjoying the view, suddenly finds
himself up to his neck in quicksand. And, like a person in such a
quandary, Wade's first instinctive thought was to struggle.

The struggle lasted three days, three days during which he sedulously
avoided The Cedars and tramped dozens of miles with Zenas Third in
search of fish--and very frequently lost his bait because his thoughts
were busy elsewhere. At the end of the three days he found himself, to
return to our comparison, deeper than ever.

Then it was that he looked facts in the face. He reduced the problem to
simple quantities and studied it all one evening, with the aid of an
eighth of a pound of tobacco and a pile of lumber which the carpenters
had left near the woodshed. The problem, as Wade viewed it, was this:

A man, with little to recommend him save money, is head over heels in
love with the loveliest, dearest girl the Lord ever made, a girl a
thousand times too good for the man, and who doesn't care any more for
him than she does for the family cat or the family doctor. What's the
answer?

Wade gave it up--the problem, not the girl. He wasn't good at problems.
Out West it had been Ed Craig who had figured out the problems on paper,
and Wade who had reached the same conclusions with pick and shovel and
dynamite. Their methods differed, but the results attained were similar.
So, as I have said, Wade abandoned the problem on paper and set to work,
metaphorically, with steel and explosives.




XII.


There was a bench outside the kitchen door at The Cedars, a
slant-legged, unpainted bench which at one time had been used to hold
milk-cans. Wade settled himself on this in company with several dozen
glasses of currant jelly. From his position he could look in at the
kitchen door upon Eve and Miss Mullett, who, draped from chin to toes in
blue-checked aprons, were busy over the summer preserving. A sweet,
spicy fragrance was wafted out to him from the bubbling kettles, and now
and then Eve, bearing a long agate-ware spoon and adorned on one cheek
with a brilliant streak of currant juice, came to the threshold and
smiled down upon him in a preoccupied manner, glancing at the jelly
tumblers anxiously.

"If you spill them," she said, "Carrie will never forgive you, Mr.
Herrick."

"Nonsense," declared Miss Mullett from the kitchen. "I'd just send you
for more, Mr. Herrick, and make you help me put them up."

"I think I'd like that," answered Wade.

"It must be rather good fun messing about with sugar and currants and
things."

"Messing about!" exclaimed Eve, indignantly. "It's quite evident that
you've never done any of it!"

"Well, I stewed some dried apricots once," said Wade, "and they weren't
half bad. I suppose you're going to be busy all the morning, aren't
you?" he asked, forlornly.

"I'm afraid so."

"Indeed you're not," said Miss Mullett, decisively. "You're going to
stop as soon as we get this kettleful off. I can do the rest much better
without you, dear."

"Did you ever hear such ingratitude?" laughed Eve. "Here I've been hard
at work since goodness only knows what hour of the morning, and now I'm
informed that my services are valueless! I shall stay and help just to
spite you, Carrie."

"I wanted you to take a walk," said Wade, boldly. "It's a great
morning, too fine to be spent indoors."

"Is it?" Eve looked up at the fleecy sky critically. "Don't you think it
looks like rain?"

"Not a bit," he answered, stoutly. "We're in for a long drought.
Zephania told me so not half an hour ago."

"Is Zephania a weather prophet?"

"She's everything. She knows so much that she makes me ashamed of
myself. And she never makes a mistake about the weather."

Wade waited anxiously.

"We-ll," said Eve, finally, "if you're sure it isn't going to rain, and
Carrie really doesn't want me--"

"I do not," said Miss Mullett, crisply. "A walk will do you good. She
stayed up until all hours last night, Mr. Herrick, writing. I wish you'd
say something to her; she pays no attention to me."

Wade flushed. Eve turned and shot an indignant glance at Miss Mullett,
but that lady was busy over the kettle with her back toward them.

"I'm afraid she would pay less heed to me than to you," answered Wade
with a short laugh. "But if you'll persuade her to walk, I'll lecture
her as much as you wish."

"If I'm to be lectured," replied Eve, "I shan't go."

"Well, of course, if you put it that way," hedged Wade.

"Go along, dear," said Miss Mullett. "You need fresh air. But do keep
out of the sun if it gets hot."

"I wonder," observed Wade, with a smile, "what you folks up here would
do down in New Mexico, where the temperature gets up to a hundred and
twenty in the shade."

"I'd do as the Irishman suggested," answered Eve, pertly, "and keep out
of the shade. If you'll wait right where you are and not move for ten
minutes I'll go and get ready."

"I won't ruffle a feather," Wade assured her. "But you'd better come
before dinner time or I may get hungry and eat all the jelly."

Twenty minutes later she was back, a cool vision of white linen and
lace. She wore no hat, but had brought a sunshade. Pursued by Miss
Mullett's admonitions to keep out of the sun as much as possible, they
went down the garden and through the gate, and turned countryward under
the green gloom of the elms. Alexander the Great, laboring perhaps under
the delusion that he was a dog instead of a cat, followed them
decorously for some distance, and then, being prevailed on to desist,
climbed a fence-post and blinked gravely after them.

"It really is nice to-day," said Eve. "When the breeze comes from the
direction of the coast it cools things off deliciously. I suppose it's
only imagination, but sometimes I think I can smell the salt--or taste
it. That's scarcely possible, though, for we're a good twenty miles
inland."

"I'm not so sure," he answered. "Lots of times I've thought I could
smell the ocean here. Does it take very long to get to Portsmouth or the
beach? Couldn't we go some day, you and Miss Mullett and the Doctor and
I?"

"That would be jolly," said Eve. "We must talk it over with them. I'm
afraid, though, the Doctor couldn't go. There's always some one sick
hereabouts."

"Oh, he could leave enough of his nasty medicine one day to last through
the next. He's one of the nicest old chaps I ever met, Miss Walton. He's
awfully fond of you, isn't he?"

"I think he is," she answered, "and I'm awfully fond of him, I don't
know whether I ought to tell this, but I have a suspicion that he used
to be very fond of my mother before she was married. He's told me so
many little things about her, and he always speaks of her in such a
quiet, dear sort of way. I wonder--I wonder if he ever asked her to
marry him."

"Somehow I don't believe he ever did," said Wade, thoughtfully. "I could
imagine him being sort of shy if he were in love. Perhaps, while he was
working his courage up to the sticking point, your father stepped in and
carried off the prize. That happens sometimes, you know."

"I suppose it does," laughed Eve. "Or perhaps he was so busy quoting
bits of poetry to her that he never had time!"

"That's so." Wade smiled. "There's one thing certain, and that is, if
she did refuse him, he had a quotation quite ready for the occasion."

"''Tis better to have loved and lost' and so on?"

"Something of the sort," answered Wade. "I wonder, though, if that is
true, Miss Walton?"

"What?" asked Eve.

"That it's better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at
all."

"I'm sure I don't know. Probably not. Perhaps, like a great many of the
Doctor's quotations, it's more poetical than truthful."

"I think it must be," mused Wade. "It doesn't sound logical to me. To
say that, when you've seen a thing you want and can't have it, you're
better off than before you wanted it, doesn't sound like sense."

"Have you ever wanted much you didn't get?" asked Eve.

Wade thought a minute.

"Come to think of it, Miss Walton, I don't believe I have. I can't think
of anything just now. Perhaps that's why I'd hate all the more to be
deprived of what I want now," he said, seriously. She shot a glance at
him from under the edge of the sunshade.

"You talk as though some one was trying to cheat you out of something
you'd set your heart on," she said lightly.

"That isn't far wrong," he answered. "I have set my heart on something
and it doesn't look now as though I'd ever get it."

"Oh, I hope you will," said Eve, sincerely.

"Your saying that makes it look farther off than ever," responded Wade,
with a wry smile.

"My saying that? But why?" she asked in surprise.

"Because," he answered, after a moment's silence, "if you knew what it
is I want, I don't think you'd want me to have it, and that you don't
know proves that I'm a long way off from it."

"It sounds like a riddle," said Eve, perplexedly. "Please, Mr. Herrick,
what is the answer?"

Wade clenched his hands in his pockets and looked very straight ahead up
the road.

"You," he said.

"_Me?_" The sunshade was raised for an instant. "_Oh!_" The sunshade
dropped. They walked on in silence for a few paces. Then said Wade, with
a stolen glance at the white silken barrier:

"I hope I haven't offended you, Miss Walton. I had no more intention of
saying anything like that when we started out than--than the man in the
moon. But it's true, and you might as well know it now as any other
time. You're what I want, more than I've ever wanted anything before or
ever shall again, and you're what I'm very much afraid I won't get. I'm
not quite an idiot, after all. I know mighty well that--that I'm not the
sort of fellow you'd fall in love with, barring a miracle. But maybe I'm
trusting to the miracle. Anyhow, I'm cheeky enough to hope that--that
you may get to like me enough to marry me some day. Do you think you
ever could?"

"But--oh, I don't know what to say," cried Eve, softly. "I haven't
thought--!"

"Of course not," interrupted Wade, cheerfully. "Why should you? All I
ask is that you think about it now--or some time when you--when you're
not busy, you know. I guess I could say a whole lot about how much I
love you, but you're not ready to hear that yet and I won't. If you'll
just understand that you're the one girl in the whole darn--in the whole
world for me, Miss Walton, we'll let it go at that for the present. You
think about it. I'm not much on style and looks, and I don't know much
outside of mining, but I pick up things pretty quickly and I could
learn. I don't say anything about money, except that if you cared for me
I'd be thankful I had plenty of it, so that I could give you most
anything you wanted. You--you don't mind thinking it over, do you?"

"No," said Eve, a little unsteadily, "but--oh, I do wish you wouldn't
talk as you do! You make me feel so little and worthless, and I don't
like to feel that way."

"But how?" cried Wade, in distress. "I don't mean to!"

"I know you don't. That's just it. But you do. When you talk so meanly
of yourself, I mean. Just as though any girl wouldn't feel proud at
having--at hearing--oh, you must know what I mean!" And Eve turned a
flushed, beseeching face toward him.

"Not quite, I'm afraid," Wade answered. "Anyhow, I don't want you to
feel proud, Miss Walton. If any one should feel proud, it's I, to think
you've let me say this to you and haven't sent me off about my
business."

"Oh, please!" begged Eve, with a little vexed laugh.

"What?" he asked, perplexedly.

"Don't talk of yourself as though you were--were just nothing, and of me
as though I were a princess. It's absurd! I'm only a very ordinary sort
of person with ordinary faults--perhaps more than my share of them."

"You're the finest woman I ever saw, and the loveliest," replied Wade
stoutly. "And if you're not for me no other woman is."

The sunshade intervened again and they walked on for some little
distance in silence. Then Wade began slowly, choosing his words: "Maybe
I've talked in a way to give you a wrong impression. You mustn't think
that there's any--false modesty about me. I reckon I have rather too
good an opinion of myself, if anything. I wouldn't want you to be
disappointed in me--afterwards, you know. I reckon I've got an average
amount of sense and ability. I've been pretty successful for a man of
twenty-eight, and it hasn't been all luck, not by a whole lot! Maybe
most folks would say I was conceited, had a swelled head. It's only when
it comes to--to asking you to marry me that I get kind of down on
myself. I know I'm not good enough, Miss Walton, and I own up to it. The
only comforting thought is that there aren't many men who are. I'm
saying this because I don't want to fool you into thinking me any more
modest and humble than I am. You understand?"

"Yes, I understand," replied Eve, from under the sunshade.

"And you won't forget your promise?"

"You mean--"

"To think it over."

"No, I won't forget. But please don't hope too much, Mr. Herrick, for I
can't promise anything, really! It isn't that I don't like you, for I
do, but"--her voice trailed off into silence.

"I hardly dared hope for that much," said Wade, gratefully. "Of course
it isn't enough, but it's something to start on."

"But liking isn't love," objected Eve, gravely.

"I know. And there was never love without liking. You don't mind if I
get what comfort I can out of that, do you?"

"N-no, I suppose not," answered Eve, slowly.

"It doesn't bind you to anything, you see. Shall we turn back now? The
breeze seems to have left us."

Presently he said: "There's something I want very much to ask you, but
I don't know whether I have any right to."

"If there's anything I can answer, I will," said Eve.

"Then I'll ask it, and you can do as you please about answering. It's
just this. Is there anyone who has--a prior claim? I mean is there any
one you must consider in this, Miss Walton. Please don't say a word
unless you want to."

Eve made no reply for a moment. Then, "I think I'm glad you did ask
that, Mr. Herrick," she said, "for it gives me a chance to explain why I
haven't answered you this morning, instead of putting it off. I am not
bound in any way by any promise of mine, and yet--there is some one
who--I hardly know how to put it, Mr. Herrick."

"Don't try if it is too hard. I think I understand."

"I don't believe you do, though. I'm not quite sure--it's only this;
that I want to feel quite free before--I answer you. I may have to keep
you waiting for awhile, perhaps a few days. May I? You won't mind?"

"I can wait for a year as long as waiting means hope," replied Wade,
gravely.

"But maybe--it doesn't."

"But it does. If there was no hope, absolutely none, you'd have told me
so ten minutes ago, wouldn't you?"

"I suppose so. I don't know. I mean"--she stopped and faced him, half
laughing, half serious. "Oh, I don't know what I mean; you've got me all
mixed up! Please, let's not talk any more about it now. Let's--let's go
home!"

"Very well," said Wade, cheerfully. "I hope I haven't walked you too
far."




XIII.


After supper that night Wade called on Doctor Crimmins. The Doctor
occupied a small house which had many years before been used as a
school. At one side the Doctor had built a little office, with an
entrance from a short brick walk leading to the street. The ground-glass
door held the inscription, "Josiah L. Crimmins, M.D. Office." Wade's
ring brought the Doctor's housekeeper, a bent, near-sighted, mumbling
old woman, who informed Wade that the Doctor was out on a call, but
would be back presently. She led the way into the study, turned up the
lamp and left him. The study was office and library and living-room in
one, a large, untidy room with books lining two sides of it, and a third
devoted to shelf on shelf of bottles and jars and boxes. Near the bottle
end of the apartment the Doctor had his desk and his few appliances. At
the other end was a big oak table covered with a debris of books,
magazines, newspapers, tobacco cans, pipes, and general litter. There
was a mingled odor, not unpleasant, of drugs and disinfectants, tobacco
and leather. Wade made himself comfortable in a big padded armchair, one
of those genuinely comfortable chairs which modern furnishers have
thrust into oblivion, picked up a magazine at random, slapped the dust
off it and filled his pipe. He was disturbed by the sound of brisk
footsteps on the bricks outside. Then a key was inserted in the lock and
the Doctor entered from the little lobby, bag in hand.

"Ha! Who have we here? Welcome, my dear Herrick, welcome! I hope you
come as a friend and not as a patient. Quite right, sir. Keep out of the
doctor's clutches as long as possible. Well, well, a warm night this."
The Doctor wiped his face with his handkerchief, wafting a strong odor
of ether about the room. Then he took off his black frock-coat, hung it
on a hook behind the door, and slipped into a rusty old brown velvet
house-coat. After that he filled his pipe, talking the while, and, when
it was lighted, said "Ha" again very loudly and contentedly, and took
down a half-gallon bottle from the medicine shelves. This he placed on
the table by the simple expedient of sweeping a pile of newspapers to
the floor.

"Now where are those glasses, I wonder?" He looked about the room
searchingly over the tops of his spectacles. "There we are." He
discovered one on his desk and another on the shelf over the little
sink. The latter held some liquid which he first smelled, then tasted
and finally threw away. "Wonder what that was," he muttered. "Well, a
little rinsing will fix it. Here we are now, Mr. Herrick. Pour your
drink, sir, and I'll put the water in. Don't be afraid of it. It's as
mild as milk."

"You're quite sure it isn't laudanum?" asked Wade, with a suspicious
look at the big bottle.

"Bless you, no." The Doctor lowered himself into a chair with a sigh of
relief and contentment. "Now tell me the news, Mr. Herrick. I haven't
seen our good friends at The Cedars since yesterday."

Wade sipped from his glass, set it down, hesitated.

"The only piece of news I have, Doctor," he said, finally, "is that I
asked Miss Walton to marry me this morning."

"Bless my soul!" The Doctor started to rise. "I do most heartily
congratulate you, Mr. Herrick!"

"Hold on, though," said Wade. "Don't jump to conclusions. She hasn't
accepted me, Doctor."

"What! But she's going to?"

"I wish I was certain," replied Wade, with a smile.

"But--why, I'd have said she was fond of you, Mr. Herrick. Miss Mullett
and I were talking it over just the other day. Old busy-bodies, I
suppose you'd call us. But what did she say--if that isn't an
impertinent question, sir."

"Well, it seems that there's some one else."

"Never!"

"Yes. I don't know why there shouldn't be."

"Miss Mullett told me that Miss Eve had never shown the slightest favor
to any one since she'd known her."

"Maybe this was before that. It isn't very clear just how the other chap
stands with her. But she asked time to think it over."

The Doctor chuckled. "Who hesitates is lost, Mr. Herrick. Take my word
for it,--she'll come around before long. I'm very glad. She's a fine
woman, a fine woman. I knew her mother."

"Well, I hope you're right, Doctor. Maybe you'd better not say anything
about it just yet."

"Not a word, sir. I presume, though, if you do marry her, you'll take
her out West with you."

"I don't dare make plans yet. I'm sure, though, we'd come to Eden
Village in the summer."

"I hope so. I wouldn't want to think I wasn't to see her again. I'm very
fond of her in an old man's way. How is the house getting along? Workmen
almost through, I guess."

"They've promised to get out to-morrow. And that reminds me, Doctor. I
want the ladies and you to take dinner with me Saturday night. It's to
be a sort of house-warming, you know. Mrs. Prout is coming over to cook
for me and Zephania is to serve. I may depend on you?"

"To be sure, sir. I'll just make a note of it. Saturday, you said? H'm,
yes, Saturday. About half-past six, I presume?" The Doctor pulled
himself from his chair and rummaged about his desk. "Well, I can't ...
seem to ... find my ... memorandum, but I'll remember without it.
You--ah--you might mention it to me again in a day or two. I hope by
that time we'll be able to drink a toast, sir, to you and Miss Eve."

"You don't hope so any more than I do," said Wade gravely. "I only
wish--" He stopped, frowned at his pipe and went on. "The devil of it
is, Doctor, I feel so confoundedly cheeky."

"Eh?"

"I mean about asking her to marry a fellow like me."

"What's the matter with you? You're of sound body and mind, aren't
you?"

"Yes, I reckon so. But I'm such a useless sort, in a way. I've never
done anything except make some money."

"Some women would think you'd done quite enough," replied the Doctor,
dryly.

"But she's not that sort. I don't believe she cares anything about
money. I've been trying to get her to let me do the square thing with
Ed's property, but she won't listen."

"Wanted to parcel some of it out to her, eh? Well, I guess Eve wouldn't
have it."

"No, she wouldn't. She ought to, too. It should have been hers, by
rights. If it wasn't for that silly quarrel between her father and
Ed's--"

"I know, I know. But she's right, according to her lights, Mr. Herrick.
Irv Walton wouldn't have touched any of that money with a pair of
pincers. Still, I don't see as you need to have such a poor opinion of
yourself. We can't all be great generals or statesmen or financiers.
Some of us have to wear the drab. And, after all, it doesn't matter
tuppence what you are, Mr. Herrick, if you've got the qualities that
appeal to Eve. Lord love us! Where would civilization be if it was only
the famous men who found wives? I don't think any the worse of myself,
Mr. Herrick, because I've never made the world sit up and take notice.
I've had my battles and victories, and I don't despise them because
there was no waving of flags or sounding of trumpets. I've lived
clean--as clean as human flesh may, I guess,--I've been true to my
friends and honest to my enemies, and here I am, as good as the next
man, to my own thinking."

"I dare say you're right," answered Wade, "but when you love a woman,
you sort of want to have a few trophies handy to throw down at her feet,
if you see what I mean. You'd like to say, 'Look, I've done this and
that! I've conquered here and there! I am Somebody!'"

"And if she didn't love you she'd turn up her nose at your trophies, and
like as not walk off with the village fool."

"Well, but it seems to me that a woman isn't likely to love a man
unless he has something to show besides a pocketbook."

"Mr. Herrick, there's just one reason why a woman loves a man, and
that's because she loves him. You can invent all the theories you want,
and you can write tons of poetry about it, and when you get through
you'll be just where you started. You can find a reason for pretty near
everything a woman does, though you may have to rack your brains like
the devil to do it, but you can't explain why she falls in love with
this man and not with that. Perhaps you recall Longfellows's lines: 'The
men that women marry, and why they marry them, will always be a marvel
and a mystery to the world.' Personally, I'm a bit of a fatalist
regarding love. I think hearts are mated when they're fashioned, and
when they get together you can no more keep them apart than you keep two
drops of quicksilver from running into each other when they touch. It's
as good a theory as any, for it can't be disproved."

"Then how account for unhappy marriages?" asked Wade.

"I said hearts were mated, not bodies and brains, nor livers, either.
Half the unhappy marriages are due, I dare say, to bad livers."

"Well," laughed Wade, rising and finding his hat, "your theory sounds
reasonable. As for me, I have no theory--nor data. So I'll go home and
go to sleep. Don't forget Saturday night, Doctor."

"Saturday night? Oh, to be sure, to be sure. I'll not forget, you may
depend. Good night, Mr. Herrick, and thank you for looking in on me.
And--ah--Mr. Herrick?"

"Yes?"

"Ah--I wouldn't be too meek, if I were you. Even Fate may relish a
little assistance. Good night. I wouldn't be surprised if we had a
thunder storm before morning."




XIV.


Wade was relieved to find that Eve's manner toward him had undergone no
change by reason of his impromptu declaration. They met quite as before,
and if there was any embarrassment on the part of either of them it was
not on hers. During the next few days it happened that he seldom found
himself alone with her for more than a few moments, but it did not occur
to him that Chance alone was not responsible. As Wade understood it, it
was a period of truce, and he was careful not to give word or look that
might be construed into a violation of terms. Perhaps he overdid it a
little, for there were times, usually when he was not looking, when Eve
shot speculating, slightly puzzled glances at him. Perhaps she was
thinking that such subjects as last night's thunder storm, dormer
windows, and the apple crop outlook were not just what a declared lover
might be supposed to choose for conversation. Once or twice, notably
toward the end of the week, and when she had been presumably making up
her mind for three days, she exhibited signs of irritability and
impatience. These Wade construed as evidences of boredom and acted upon
as such, cheerfully taking himself off.

The house-warming, as Wade chose to call his dinner-party, came off on
Saturday night. Wade had moved his bed back to the guest-room upstairs
and the sitting-room had regained its former character. In this room and
in the parlor and dining-room bowls and vases of pink roses--which had
come from Boston on ice in great wooden boxes, and about which the
village at large was already excitedly speculating--stood in every
available spot. But if Eden Village found subject for comment in the
extravagant shipment of roses, imagine its wonderment when it beheld,
shortly after six o'clock, Doctor Crimmins parading magnificently up the
street in swallow-tailed coat and white vest, a costume which Miss
Cousins was certain he had not worn in twenty years!

Wade and his guests sat on the new side porch while awaiting dinner and
Wade came in for a lot of praise for the improvements he had worked in
his garden, praise which he promptly disclaimed in favor of Miss
Mullett.

"Goodness only knows what I'd have done if it hadn't been for her," he
laughed. "I wanted to plant American Beauty roses and maiden-hair fern
all over the place. I even think I had some notion of growing
four-dollar orchids on the pear trees. The idea of putting in things
that would really grow was entirely hers."

"I like the idea of planting the old-fashioned, hardy things," said the
Doctor. "They're the best, after all. Asters and foxgloves and deutzia
and snowballs and all the rest of them."

"And phlox," said Wade. "They told us we were planting too late, but the
phlox has buds on it already. Come and see it."

So they trooped down the new gray steps and strolled around the garden,
Wade exhibiting proudly and miscalling everything, and Miss Mullett
gently correcting him.

Their travels took them around the house and finally to the gate in the
hedge, over the arch of which Miss Mullett was coaxing climbing roses.
When they turned back Eve and the Doctor walked ahead.

"Eve told me once such a quaint thing about that gate," said Miss
Mullett. "It seems that when she was a little girl and used to play in
the garden over there, she imagined all sorts of queer things, as
children will. And one of them was that some day a beautiful prince
would come through the gate in the hedge and fall on his knee and ask
her to marry him. Such a quaint idea for a child to have, wasn't it?"

"Yes," answered Wade thoughtfully. There was silence for a moment, and
then he glanced down and met Miss Mullett's gaze. He laughed ruefully.

"Do you think I look much like a prince?" he asked.

"Do looks matter," she said, gently, "if you _are_ the prince?"

"Perhaps not, but--I'm afraid I'm not."

Thereupon Miss Mullett did a most unmaidenly thing. She found Wade's
hand and pressed it with her cool, slim fingers.

"If I were a prince," she replied, "I'd be afraid of nothing."

There was just time to return the pressure of her hand and give a
grateful look into the kindly face, and then they were back with the
others on the porch.

That dinner was an immense success from every standpoint, Mrs. Prout
cooked like _cordon bleu_, Zephania, all starch and frills and
excitement, served like a--but no, she didn't; she served in a manner
quite her own, bringing on the oysters with a whispered aside to Wade
that she had "most forgot the ice," introducing the chicken with a
triumphant laugh, and standing off to observe the effect it made before
returning to the kitchen for the new potatoes, late asparagus, and
string-beans, so tiny that Mrs. Prout declared it was a sin and a shame
to pick them. There was a salad of lettuce and tomatoes, and the Doctor,
with grave mien, prepared the dressing, tasting it at every stage and
uttering congratulatory "Ha's!" And there were plenty of strawberries
and much cake--Zephania's very best maple-layer--and ice-cream from
Manchester, a trifle soft, but, as Eve maintained, all the better when
you put it over the berries. And--breathe it softly lest Eden Village
hear--there was champagne! Eve and Miss Mullett treated it with vast
respect, but the Doctor met it metaphorically with open arms, as one
welcomes an old friend, and, under its gentle influence, tossed aside
twenty years and made decorous, but desperate, love to Miss Mullett. And
then, to continue the pleasant formality of the occasion, the ladies
withdrew to the parlor, and Wade and the Doctor smoked two very stout
and very black cigars and sipped two tiny glasses of brandy.

In the parlor Miss Mullett turned to Eve in excited trepidation. "My
dear," she asked, in a thrilling whisper, "_do_ you think I took too
much champagne? My cheeks are positively burning!"

"I don't know," laughed Eve, "but the color is very becoming, dear."

"But I shouldn't want Mr. Herrick to think--"

"He won't," replied Eve, soothingly. "No matter how intoxicated you got,
I'm sure he is too much of a gentleman to think any such thing."

"Any such thing as what?"

"Why, what you said."

"But I hadn't said!" declared Miss Mullett, sinking tragically onto the
couch. Whereupon Eve laughed, and Miss Mullett declared that rather than
have the gentleman think her the least bit--well--the very least bit,
you understand!--she would go right home. And Eve was forced to assure
her with serious face that she wasn't the least bit, and wasn't in any
danger of becoming so. Miss Mullett was comforted and Eve, who had been
standing by the marble-topped table, idly opened a book lying there. It
wasn't a very interesting volume, from her point of view, being a work
on metallurgy. She turned to the front and found Wade's name written on
the fly-leaf, and was about to lay it down when she caught sight of a
piece of paper marking a place. With no thought of prying, she opened
the book again. The paper proved to be an empty envelope addressed to
Wade in typewritten characters. In the upper left-hand corner was an
inscription that interested her: "After five days return to The Evelyn
Mining Co., Craig's Camp, Colo."

She studied the words for a long minute. Then she smiled and closed the
book again. Oddly enough, both she and Wade had discovered each other's
secrets that evening.

When the men joined them the Doctor suggested whist. Wade protested his
stupidity, but was overruled and assigned to Miss Mullett as partner.

"If you played like John Hobb," declared the Doctor, "you'd win with
Miss Mullett for partner."

Eve and Wade desired to know who John Hobb was, and the Doctor was
forced to acknowledge him a quite mythical character, whose name in that
part of the world stood proverbially for incompetence. After that when
any of the four made a mistake he or she was promptly dubbed John Hobb.
For once the unwritten law was unobserved, and it was long past ten when
the party broke up, Eve and the Doctor having captured the best of a
series of rubbers. After they had gone Wade put out the downstair lights
and returned to the side porch, where, with his pipe flaring fitfully in
the moonlit darkness, he lived over in thought the entire evening and
conjured up all sorts of pictures of Eve. When he finally went to bed
his last waking sensation was one of gratitude toward Miss Mullett for
the words she had spoken in the garden.

The next morning Eve was out under the cedars when the Doctor came
marching down the street, carrying his bag and swinging his cane, his
lips moving a little with the thoughts that came to him. Opposite Eve's
retreat he stood on tiptoes and smiled across the hedge, unseen. She
made a pretty picture there over her book, her brown hair holding
golden-bronze glints where the sun kissed it, and her smooth cheek
warmly pallid in the shade.

  "'Old as I am, for ladies' love unfit,
  The power of beauty I remember yet,'"

quoted the Doctor. "Good morning, fair Eve of Eden. And how do you find
yourself to-day? For my part I am haunted by a gentle, yet insistent,
regret." The Doctor placed a hand over his heavy gold watch-chain. "It
is here."

"Better there than here," laughed Eve, touching her forehead.

The Doctor pretended affront. "Do you mean to insinuate, young lady,
that I drank too much of the wine last night? Ha! I deny it;
emphatically I deny it. Besides, one couldn't drink too much of such
wine as that! To prove how steady my hand and brain are, I'll come in a
moment and talk with you."

The Doctor entered through the gate and advanced toward Eve, who with
anxious solicitude cautioned him against colliding with the trees or
walking over the flower-beds. Things had changed in the cedars' shade,
and now there were three rustic chairs and an ancient iron table there.
The Doctor sat himself straightly in one of the chairs and glared at
Eve.

"Now what have you to say?" he demanded.

"That you conceal it beautifully," she replied, earnestly.

"Madam, I have nothing to conceal."

"Oh, well, if you persist! Where are you off to this morning?"

"Mother Turner's."

"Is she ill?"

"Probably not. I think myself she's too old to ever be really ill any
more. At ninety-eight the body is too well seasoned to admit disease.
She will just run peacefully down like a clock some day."

"Does she still smoke her pipe, Doctor?"

[Illustration: "NOW WHAT HAVE YOU TO SAY?" HE DEMANDED]

"All day long, I think. I remonstrated with her once ten or fifteen
years ago when she had a touch of pleurisy. 'Mrs. Turner,' I said, 'if
you persist in smoking, you'll injure your health and die young.' She
was then eighty-something. 'Doctor,' said she, with a twinkle in those
bright little eyes of hers, 'I'll live to be a hundred, and that's
more than you'll do.' And, bless me, I think she will! To-day she
sent word for me to 'look in.' That means that she needs gossip and not
medicine. Well, I'm glad to go. It always does me good to talk with
Mother Turner. She's the best lesson in contentment I know. She's buried
two husbands, seven children, and the dear Lord only knows how many
grandchildren, she lives on charity and hasn't a soul near her she can
claim relationship to, and she's as cheerful as that oriole up there,
and almost as bright. The pathetic part of it is that she can't read any
more, although she puts on her spectacles and pretends that she can.
Three years ago she confided to me that her eye-sight was 'failing a
bit.' She's not blind yet, by any means, but print's beyond her. And so
when I see her she always gets me to read to her a little, explaining
that her eyes 'be a bit watery this morning.' Sometimes it's the Bible,
but more often it's a newspaper that some one has left. Just now her
hobby is airships. She can't hear enough about airships." The Doctor
chuckled. "She's been on a train but once in her life, she tells me,
and that was thirty years ago."

"I don't want to live that long," said Eve thoughtfully. "I don't want
to live after every one I've cared for has gone."

"So you think now," replied the Doctor, with a faint shrug of his
shoulders, "but wait till you are old. I've seen many snuffed out, my
dear, but there's only one or two I recall who went willingly. The love
of life is a strong passion. Bless my soul, what's that?"

The Doctor turned toward the lilac hedge and the neighboring cottage,
listening. Eve laughed, merrily.

"Why, that's Zephania," she said.

  "'We shall sleep, but not forever,
    There will be a glorious dawn!
  We shall meet to part, no, never,
    On the resurrection morn!'"

sang Zephania, in her piping voice. The Doctor smiled. Then he nodded
sideways in the direction of the voice.

"Have you seen our host this morning?" he asked.

"No," said Eve.

"I wonder," he chuckled, "if I hadn't better go over and administer a
bromide. These fashionable dinner-parties--" He shook his head
eloquently.

"I don't believe he's that bad," responded Eve. "I wish you'd tell me
what you think of him, Doctor."

"Mr. Herrick? Well, aside from his intemperance--"

"No, I'm in earnest, please. Afterwards I'll tell you why I
ask--perhaps."

"I think him a very nice young man, Miss Eve, don't you?"

"Ye-es."

"I wouldn't call him strictly handsome; he doesn't remind me of the
copper-engraved pictures of Lord Byron, who, when I was a lad, was
considered the standard of masculine beauty, but he looks like a man,
which is something that Byron didn't, to my thinking."

"But do you--do you think he's sincere?"

"Lord, bless me, yes! I'd stake my word on his being that if nothing
else."

"Even if he is a mining man?" asked Eve, with a smile.

"H'm, well, I guess there are honest mining men as well as honest
lawyers."

"Yes, I think he's honest," said Eve, thoughtfully, "but as to
sincerity--"

"Aren't they the same?"

"Perhaps they are," answered Eve, doubtfully. She was silent for a
moment, possibly considering the question. Then she looked across at the
Doctor with a little flush in her cheeks. "You see," she said, "he--he's
asked me to marry him."

The Doctor rolled his cane under his palms and nodded his head slowly
several times. Eve waited. At last--

"You don't seem much surprised," she said, questioningly.

"Surprised? No. I'd have been surprised if he hadn't asked you to marry
him, my dear. It's what I'd have done in his place."

"And I'd have accepted you," said Eve with a little laugh.

"And him?" asked the Doctor.

Eve was silent, looking across the garden. Finally she shrugged her
slim shoulders and sighed.

"I don't know," she said, frankly.

"Well," began the Doctor, slowly and judicially. Then he stopped,
wondering what he had started to say.

"Why should I?" challenged Eve, a trifle querulously.

"You shouldn't, unless you feel that you want to."

"But I don't know whether I want to--or don't want to."

The Doctor studied her face a moment, until her eyes dropped and the
flush deepened in her cheeks. Unseen of her, he smiled.

"Take plenty of time to find out," said the Doctor, softly and kindly.
"Don't marry him until you are sure that you can't be happy without him,
my dear. Don't try it as an experiment. That's what makes unhappy
marriages; at least, that's one thing. There are others too numerous to
mention. There's just one reason why a man and a woman should join
themselves together in matrimony, and that is love, the love that the
poets sing and the rest of us poke fun at, the love that is the nearest
thing to Heaven we find on earth." The Doctor sat silent a moment,
looking past the girl's grave face into the green blur of the garden.
Then he stirred, sighed, and looked at his watch. "Well, well, I must be
on my way," he said briskly. "I'm a vastly busy old man."

"But, Doctor, you haven't helped me a bit to decide," she said,
aggrievedly.

"I can't, my dear. No one can. And, what's more, you don't want me to."

"Why, Doctor, I"--she began. Then she dropped her eyes and a little
smile trembled at her lips. "How do you know?" she asked.

"I know a few things yet, Miss Eve," he chuckled, picking up his old
black leather bag.

"Just a moment, please," begged Eve. "Did he ever tell you that he
wanted me to take some of Cousin Edward's money?"

"M'm, yes, he did tell me that," responded the Doctor cautiously. "But
that's nothing against him."

"N-no, I know it isn't. And he said--says he will have his way."

The Doctor settled his hat and gripped his stick.

"Then I guess he will. He looks that kind of a man."

"He never will," said Eve, firmly, "never!"

"Unless," chuckled the Doctor, "you marry him." He waved his cane and
strode away toward the gate. "How about that?" he called back over the
hedge.

Eve made no answer. She was thinking very busily. "Unless I marry him!"
she repeated, somewhat blankly, staring at the turquoise ring which she
was slipping around and around on her finger. The moments passed. A
frown crept into her forehead and grew there, dark and threatening,
under the warm shadow of her hair. "And so that's it," she thought
bitterly and angrily. "That's what it means. That's why he's acted so
strangely since--since he asked me to marry him. It's just a trick to
get his own way. He'd marry me as a sop to his conscience. It's just the
money, after all. Oh, I wish--I wish Cousin Edward had never had any
money!"

She sat there a long time, while the shadows shortened and the birds
grew silent, one by one, and the noonday hush fell over the old garden;
sat there until Miss Mullett came to the kitchen door and summoned her
to luncheon.




XV.


Wade rolled a vest into a tight wad and tucked it into a corner of the
till. Then he glanced around the sitting-room, saw nothing else to pack,
and softly dropped the lid. That done he sat down on it and relighted
his pipe.

It was two days since Eve and the Doctor had talked under the cedars,
one day since Wade had received her note. He had not seen her since. She
hadn't asked him not to, but Wade had stereotyped ideas as to the proper
conduct of a rejected suitor, and he intended to live up to them. Of
course he would call in the morning and say good bye.

He felt no resentment against Eve, although her note would have supplied
sufficient excuse. He didn't quite know what he did feel. He had striven
the evening before to diagnose his condition, with the result that he
had decided that his heart was not broken, although there was a
peculiar dull aching sensation there that he fancied was destined to
grow worse before it got better. So far, what seemed to trouble him most
was leaving the cottage and Eden Village. He had grown very fond of
both. Already they seemed far more like home to him than Craig's Camp or
any place he had known. There had been nothing in that brief,
unsatisfactory note intimating that he was expected to leave Eden
Village, but he was quite sure that his departure would be the best
thing for all concerned. The Doctor, to whom he had confided his plan,
had thought differently, and had begged him to wait and see if things
didn't change. The Doctor was a mighty good sort, but--well, he hadn't
read Eve's note!

He wasn't leaving Eden Village for good and all. There was comfort in
that thought. Some day, probably next summer, he would come back. By
that time he would have gotten over it in all probability. Until such
time Mr. Zenas Prout and Zephania, in fact the whole Prout family, there
to take care of the cottage. Zephania was to sweep it once a month from
top to bottom. Wade smiled. He hadn't suggested such care as that, but
Zephania had insisted. Zephania, he reflected with a feeling of
gratitude, had been rather cut up about his departure.

Of course it was nobody's fault but his own. He had deliberately fallen
in love, scorning consequences. Now he was staring at the consequences
and didn't like their looks. Thank Heaven, he was a worker, and there
was plenty of work to do. Whitehead and the others out there would be
surprised to see him coming into camp again so soon. Well, that was
nothing. Perhaps, too, it was just as well he was going back early.
There was the new shaft-house to get up, and the sooner that was ready
the sooner they could work the new lead. He raised his head, conscious
of a disturbing factor, and then arose and closed the door into the
hall. Closing the door muffled the strains that floated down from
upstairs, where Zephania, oppressed, but defiant of sorrow, was singing:

  "'My days are gliding swiftly by,
    And I, a pilgrim stranger,
  Would not detain them as they fly!
    Those hours of toil and danger.'"

After awhile, his pipe having gone out again from neglect, he strapped
and locked the trunk, glanced at his watch and took up his hat. He
passed out through the immaculate kitchen, odorous of soapsuds and
sunlight, and down through the orchard, which Zenas Third with his saw
and shears had converted from a neglected and scrubby riot into a spruce
and orderly parade. Unconsciously his feet led him over the same course
he had taken on that first walk of his, which ended in an unintentional
and disconcerting visit to The Cedars. As before, he followed the brook,
much less a brook now than then by reason of the summer drought, and
speculated as to the presence of fish therein. He had intended all along
to stroll down here some day and try for sunfish, but he had never done
it. Well, that was one of several dreamed-of things which had not come
to pass.

The meadow grass had grown tall and heavy, and was touched with gold
and russet where the afternoon sunlight slanted across it. The birds
flew up at his approach and scattered in darts and circles. To-day when
he reached the fence he didn't turn aside toward the road, but climbed
over and found an open space on the side of the little hill under the
trees, and threw himself down there to smoke his pipe and stare back
across the meadow. It was very still in the woods, with only the sleepy
chirp of a bird or rustling of a squirrel to be heard, but from
somewhere in the hot glare of the afternoon came the rasping of the
first locust.

Zephania served supper that evening with chastened mien, and for once
she neglected to sing.

"You do think you'll come back, don't you, Mr. Herrick?" she asked.

"Why, yes, Zephania, I expect to. Do you want me to?"

"Oh, yes, sir! We all want you to. Father says if there was more
gentlemen like you here, Eden Village would perk right up. And Zenas
says you and he haven't done nearly all the fishing you were going to."

"No, I suppose not. Tell him we'll try again next summer. I'm leaving my
tackle here, tell him, so as I will be sure to come back."

"Yes, sir." Zephania hesitated, half-way to the door. Finally, "It's
been awful nice for me, Mr. Herrick," she said. "I've had just the best
summer I ever did have."

"Why, you've had a lot of hard work," said Wade. "Is that what you call
nice?"

"Yes, sir, but it ain't been very hard. I like to work. It seems as
though the harder I work the happier I am, Mr. Herrick."

"Really? Well, now, I reckon that's the way with me, Zephania, come to
think about it. I suppose keeping busy at something you like doing comes
just as near to spelling happiness as anything can, eh?"

"Yes sir."

"By the way, Zephania, do you wear a hat?"

"Why, yes, sir, of course!"

"Oh! Well, I didn't know; I never saw you with one on. How would you
like me to send you a hatpin, then, with a nice little gold nugget for a
head?"

"I'd love it! But--but what is a nugget, Mr. Herrick?"

"Oh, a little--a little lump."

"Do you mean real gold?" asked Zephania, awedly.

"Yes, real gold, virgin gold, just as it comes out of the ground, you
know."

"Wouldn't it be worth a good deal, though?" asked Zephania, doubtfully.

"Oh, a few dollars; ten or fifteen. Why?"

"I'd almost be afraid of losing it, Mr. Herrick. Would you please see
that it wasn't a very big nug--nug--"

"Nugget'? All right," he laughed. "I'll see that it's only about as big
as your thumbnail."

"Thank you, sir; I'd think a great deal of it. Will you have some more
tea?"

"No, no more tea, Zephania. No more anything. You may take the things
out."

Later in the evening came Doctor Crimmins, very regretful and full of
arguments in favor of postponing action. When twilight passed they went
out onto the porch with their pipes and glasses. They talked as friends
talk on the eve of parting, often of trivial things, with long pauses
between. The moon came up over the tree tops, round and full, and
flooded the garden with silver.

"'The moon, serene in glory, mounts the sky,'" murmured the Doctor.
"'The wandering moon'--how does it go? I'm thinking of some lines of
Milton's. Let me see; ah!"

                "'The wandering moon,
  Riding near her highest noon,
  Like one that has been led astray
  Through the heaven's wide pathless way.'"

Later, when the lights of the village had disappeared one by one under
the tranquil elms, the Doctor returned to the attack.

"Take another week to think it over, Herrick," he urged. "Who knows what
may happen in a week, eh? Women's minds have been known to change before
this, my friend."

"Hers won't," answered Wade, convincedly. "Her note left little doubt
as to that."

"But don't you think you ought to see her again?"

"Yes, I shall call in the morning to say good-by."

"H'm, yes," muttered the other, doubtfully. "I know what such a call is
like. You go into the parlor and Miss Eve and Miss Mullett come in
together, and you all talk a lot of pasty foolishness for five minutes
and then you shake hands and leave. That doesn't help any. See her alone
if only for a minute, Herrick; give yourselves a chance; bless my soul,
lad, don't you realize that you can't risk spoiling two lives for the
want of a moment's determination? If it's pride, put it in your pocket!"

"I'd do anything," replied Wade, with a little laugh, "if I thought it
could do any good. The fact is, Doctor, I'm pretty certain that the
other fellow is too strong for me."

"The other fellow! I don't believe there is or has been another fellow!
I'd bet my bottom dollar that you two young folks care for each other.
You've gone and made a mess of things between you, and damned if I don't
think it's my duty to meddle!"

"Please don't," said Wade. "It's good of you to want to help,
but--what's the use of talking about it? Miss Walton knows her own
mind--"

"She didn't a couple of days ago," said the Doctor, gruffly. "She asked
my advice about you. I told her to take you if she wanted you, and she
said she didn't know whether she did or didn't."

"She seems to have found out since then," said Wade, dryly.

"It must have been sudden, then. Look here, was there any quarrel? Any
misunderstanding?"

"None. I haven't spoken to her since Saturday night."

"Well, it beats me," said the Doctor, leaning over to knock the ashes
from his pipe. "I'm plumb certain she cares for you, and just as certain
that you're making a mistake by running away." He stood up and scowled
fiercely at the moon. "Well, I must be off. I'll see you to-morrow.
You're not going until afternoon, you said?"

"I leave here about two," said Wade. "I shall spend to-morrow night in
Boston and take a morning train west."

"Well, you know my opinion," the Doctor growled. "Sleep on it; think it
over again. Good night."

After the Doctor had gone Wade sat for a while longer on the porch. He
didn't feel the least bit sleepy, and the Doctor had shaken his
determination in spite of himself. Supposing, after all--then he shook
his head and sighed. There was the note. He fumbled in his pocket and
found it and looked at it in the moonlight. There was no use in
imagining things when that sheet of paper stared him in the face. He
strove to reread the message, but the light was too faint. He folded it
again, started to drop it back in his pocket, hesitated, and then tore
it savagely into tiny bits and tossed it over the side of the porch. It
was as though he had destroyed a malign influence, for, even as the
little white fragments went floating down into the shadow, a new hope
crept into his heart, and he went upstairs, arguing this way and that in
a sudden fever of mental energy. In the bedroom there was no need to
light his lamp, and he started to undress in the broad path of moonlight
that flooded the little chamber. But after he had thrown his coat aside
he forgot to go on with the process, and after many minutes he found
himself leaning on the sill of the open window staring at the moon.

"Bed?" he muttered, in a strange excitement. "Why should I go to bed?
I'm not sleepy. I'm moon-struck, probably. I'm full of crazy thoughts
and fancies. I don't want to sleep, I want to walk--and think. I want to
be out of doors."

He found his way down the stairs, unmindful of the fact that he had left
his coat behind, and stepped out into the warm fragrant night. The road
was a dark cavern, splotched with silver. He turned away from it,
seeking the open spaces of the garden, his shadow stalking beside him,
purple-black in the moonlight. The air scarcely moved.

The world was hushed and heavy with sleep. Once, as he passed under the
drooping branches of a tree, a bird stirred in its nest with a sleepy
_cheep_. He made his way around the house at the back, absentmindedly
feeling for his coat pocket and his pipe. He had left it upstairs, but
no matter. Why should one want to defile such a night as this with
tobacco-smoke, anyway? He stopped once under a pear-tree and wondered
why his pulse raced so.

"What's the matter with me?" he murmured. "Am I going to be sick? Or am
I just plain locoed by that moon? Well!"

He sighed, laughed softly at himself, and went on. He was in the shade
now, but beyond him was a moonlit space where stood the little arched
gateway in the hedge. He went toward it, his footsteps making scant
sound on the soft turf; reached it; passed--but no, he didn't pass
through just then. Instead he stopped suddenly, drew in his breath and
stared wonderingly into the startled face confronting him.




XVI.


For a little time, perhaps as long as it took his heart to pound thrice
in wild tumult, they confronted each other in silence. Then--"Eve!" he
cried, softly; and--

"You!" she whispered.

Again a silence, in which he could have sworn that he heard his heart
beating with gladness and the stars singing in the heavens.

"I--I wasn't sleepy," she said, breathlessly.

"Nor I. I didn't want to sleep. I wanted"--he stepped through the
gateway and seized the hand that lay against her breast--"you."

"Please!" she cried, straining away at the length of her slender arm.
"You mustn't! You got my note!"

"And tore it to fragments--an hour since! I don't remember a word of
it!"

"But I meant it!"

"You didn't!"

"Let me go, please; I ought not to be here; I don't want to stay here."

"You must stay until--but you're trembling!" He dropped her hand and
stood back contritely. "Have I scared you?"

"Yes.... I don't know.... Good night."

She turned, but didn't go. The moonlight enfolded her slim form with
white radiance and danced in and out of her soft hair. Wade drew a deep
breath.

"Will you listen a moment to me, please?" he asked, calmly.

She bowed her head without turning.

"You said in your note that you did not care to be made a convenience
of. What did that mean, please?"

"You know!"

"But I don't. You must tell me."

"I don't wish to. Why do you try to pretend with me?" she asked with a
flash of scorn.

"Pretend! Good Lord, is this pretense? What do you mean? Is it pretense
to be so madly in love with you that--that yesterday and to-day
have"--he caught himself up. "You must tell me," he said, quietly.

"I meant that I would not marry you to salve your conscience." She
turned and faced him, her head back scornfully. "You thought some of
that money should be mine and because I refused to take it you--you
tried to trick me! You pretended you--cared for me. Don't I understand?
You threatened one day to have your way, and you thought I was so--so
simple that I wouldn't guess."

"You mean," he asked, incredulously, "that you think I want to marry you
just so I can--can restore that money to you?"

"Yes," she answered, defiantly. But there was a wavering note in the
word, as though she had begun to doubt. He was silent a moment. Then--

"But if I told you--convinced you that you were wrong? What then?"

There was no answer. She had turned her head away and stood as though
poised for flight, one little clenched hand hanging at her side and
gleaming like marble. He went toward her slowly across the few yards of
turf. She heard him coming and began to tremble again. She wanted to
run, but felt powerless to move. Then he was speaking to her and she
felt his breath on her cheek.

"Eve, dear, such a thought never came to me. Won't you believe that,
please? I care nothing about Ed's money. If you like I'll never touch a
cent of it. All I want on this earth is just you."

His arms went around her. She never stirred, save for the tremors that
shook her as a breeze shakes a reed.

"Am I frightening you still?" he whispered. "I don't want to do that. I
only want to make you happy, dear, and, oh, I'd try very hard if you'd
let me. Won't you, Eve?"

There was no answer. He held her very-lightly there with arms that ached
to strain her close against his fast-beating heart. After a moment she
asked, tremulously:

"You tore up--the note?"

"Yes," he answered. He felt a sigh quiver through her.

"I'm glad," she whispered.

Of a sudden she struggled free, pushing him away with her outstretched
arms.

"You must stand there," she said, in laughing whispers. She crossed her
hands, palms out, above her forehead to keep the moonlight from her
eyes. "Now, sir, answer me truthfully. You didn't--do that, what I
said?"

"No."

"And you won't say anything more about having your way?"

"No," he answered, with a happy laugh.

"And you won't ever even want it?"

"Never!"

"And you--like me?"

"Like you! I--"

"Wait! Stay just where you are, please, Mr. Herrick."

"Mr. Herrick?"

"Well,--I haven't learnt any other name."

"But you know it!"

"No," she fibbed, with a soft laugh. "Anyhow--well, so far you've passed
the examination beautifully. Is there--is there anything more you have
to say for yourself before sentence is passed?"

"Yes," he answered. "I came through the gate in the hedge." He went
forward and dropped on his knee. "And I ask you to be my wife."

"Who told you?" she gasped, striving to recover the hand he had seized
on.

"Miss Mullett."

"Traitress!" Then she laughed. "That was my secret. But I know yours."

"Mine? You mean--"

"Yes, about the name of your mine. I saw it on an envelope in the parlor
the other night. I don't see why you didn't want me to know. I'm sure I
think it was very sweet of Edward to name the mine after me." She looked
down at him mischievously. He got to his feet, still holding her
hands--he had captured both now--and looked down at them as they lay in
his.

"It wasn't Ed who--I mean it wasn't exactly his idea," he said.

"You mean that it was yours?"

"Well, yes, it was."

"Indeed? But I suppose it was named after some one?"

"Ye-es."

"Another Evelyn, then," she said coldly.

"No--that is--well, only in a way."

"Let go of my hands, please."

"No."

"Very well. What was she like, this other Evelyn?"

"Like--like you, dearest."

"Oh, really!"

"Listen, Eve; do you remember once five years ago when a train stopped
at the top of the Saddle Pass out in Colorado? There was a hot-box. It
was twilight in the valleys, but up there it was still half daylight and
half starlight. A little way off, in the shadow of the rocks, there was
a camp-fire burning."

"Yes, I remember," she answered softly. "I thought we had been held up
by train-robbers and I went out to the back platform to see. I didn't
say anything to papa, because it might have scared him, you know."

"Of course," said Wade, with a smile.

"And so I went out and saw the track stretching back down the hill, with
the starlight gleaming on the rails, and--"

"And the mountains in the west all purple against the sky."

"Yes. And there was a breeze blowing and it was chilly out there. So I
was going back into the car when a dreadful-looking man appeared, oh,
a--a fearsome-looking man, really!"

"Was he?" asked Wade, somewhat lamely.

"Oh, yes! And I thought, of course, he was a robber or a highwayman or
something."

"And--he wasn't?" asked Wade, eagerly.

"No." She shook her head. "No, he was something much worse."

"Oh! What?"

"He was a deceiver, a--a Don Juan. He made love to me and made me
promise never to forget him, and he promised to come and get me some
day. That was five years ago. Why didn't you come?"

"Eve! Then--you knew? You've known all along?"

She fell to laughing, swaying away from him in the moonlight.

"Why didn't you tell me?" he asked, wonderingly.

"Why didn't you ask me? Yes, I knew from the moment I peeked in your
window that day."

"Think of that! And I was sure you didn't remember at all. And now,
after all that time, I've got you again, dear! It's wonderful!"

"Not so fast, please," she said, sternly. "You forgot me once--"

"I never forgot you."

"And you may do it again."

"I didn't forget you, dear. I still have that lilac you threw me. I--"

"You mean the one I dropped?" she asked, innocently.

"It was a week later that we found gold, Eve, and I named the mine for
you. I worked hard that year, and--well, I'll be honest; I didn't forget
you; you were always a sort of vision of loveliness in my memory;
but--there was so much to do--and--"

"And you changed your mind. I see. And you never thought of poor me,
waiting for you all these years!"

"I guess you forgot me quick enough," said Wade, ruefully. "When that
other fellow came along, I mean."

"Stupid!" she whispered. "That was you."

"_Me?_"

"Yes, the you I met out there on the mountain, the you that made love to
me and set my silly little girl's heart a-fluttering. Don't you think
now it was wicked of you? Why, Wade--oh!"

"That's my name," he laughed.

"It's a funny name, isn't it?" she murmured, shyly.

"I suppose it is."

"But I like it. Oh, dear, I must go! It must be midnight!"

"No, only twenty minutes of," he answered, holding his watch to the
light. "Don't go yet. There's so much I want to say!"

"To-morrow," she answered, smiling up at him. "Do you know that you're
still holding my hands?"

"I don't know what I know," he answered, softly. "Only that I love you
and that I'm the happiest man alive."

"Are you? Why?"

"Because you're going to marry me."

"I haven't said so," she objected.

"But you're going to?"

"To-morrow--perhaps."

"No, to-night--surely."

"To-morrow."

"To-night."

"Am I?" she sighed. "We-ell--do you want me to?"

"Yes," he answered, tremulously. He drew her to him, unresistingly. The
moon made silver pools of her eyes. Her mouth, slightly parted, was like
a crimson rosebud.

"Eve!" he whispered, hoarsely.

Her eyes closed and her head dropped happily back against his arm. The
moonlight was gone now from her face.

Ages later--or was it only a few moments?--they were standing apart
again, hands still linked, looking at each other across the little space
of magic light.

"I must go now," she said softly. "Good night."

"Please, not yet!"

"But think of the time! Besides, it's quite--quite awful, anyway!
Suppose Carrie heard of it!"

"Let her! You're mine, aren't you?"

"Good night."

"Aren't you?"

"Every little bit of me, dear, for ever and ever," she answered.

They said good night again a few minutes later and a little nearer the
house. And again after that.

At a quarter to one Wade came to himself after a fashion at the end of
the village street, smiling insanely at a white gate-post. With a happy
sigh he turned homeward, his hands in his pockets, his head thrown back,
and his lips pursed for a tune that forgot to come. A few steps brought
him opposite the Doctor's house and the imp of mischief whispered in his
ear. Wade laughed aloud. Then he crossed the street under the dark
canopy of the elms and-pulled the office bell till it jangled wildly. A
head came out of a window above.

"What's wanted?" asked the Doctor's sleepy voice. "Who is it?"

"It's Herrick. Come down, please."

After a moment the key turned and the Doctor, arrayed in a vast figured
dressing-gown stood in the open door.

"Is it you?" he asked. "What's wrong? Who's ill"?"

"No one's ill, Doctor," said Herrick. "I just wanted to know if you had
any remedy for happiness?"

Perhaps Wade's radiant, laughing face gave the Doctor his cue, for,
after studying it a moment, he asked, with a chuckle:

"Have you tried marriage?"

"No, but I'm going to. Oh, I'm not crazy, Doctor. I was out for a stroll
and thought I'd just drop by and tell you that I'd taken your advice
and had decided not to leave to-morrow."

"Humph; nor the next day, either, I guess! Lad, is it all right? Have
you seen her?"

"Yes, I've seen her and it's all right! Everything's all right! Look at
this world, Doctor. Did you ever see a more beautiful one? For Heaven's
sake reel off some poetry for me!"

"Go to bed," laughed the Doctor, "go to bed!"

"Bed!" scoffed Wade.

"H'm, you're right," said the Doctor. "Stay up and be mad as you can, my
lad. Bay to the moon! Sing under her window! Act the happy fool! Lord,
if I wasn't so old I'd come out and help you. Youth, youth! Now go away
before I hate you for it!"

"You couldn't hate anything, you old fraud," laughed Wade. "Go back to
bed if you won't sing or dance with me or recite verses. But first,
congratulations, please."

"My dear fellow," said the Doctor as he clasped Wade's hand, "you don't
need any one's good wishes, but I give mine just the same. It's good
news to me, the best of news."

"Thanks, Doctor. Good night. I'm off to bay the moon."

"Good night, good night!"

The Doctor stood for a moment at the door and watched him pass across
the strip of moonlight and become engulfed in the gloom of the elms.

"I wonder," he mused, "what he's done with his coat!" He chuckled as he
closed the door, and sighed as he locked it. Then, instead of returning
to the stairway, he passed into the study and walked across to the
book-shelves. You would have thought that he would have had difficulty
in finding What he wanted even in broad daylight in that confusion of
volumes. But he put his hand at once on what he sought and bore it to
the window where the moonlight shone. Bending closely, he turned the
pages, paused and read half-aloud to the silent room:


  "'Oh, love, first love, so full of hope and truth,
  A guileless maiden and a gentle youth.
  Through arches of wreathed rose they take their way,
  He the fresh Morning, she the better May,
  'Twixt jocund hearts and voices jubilant.
  And unseen gods that guard on either hand,
  And blissful tears, and tender smiles that fall
  On her dear head--great summer over all!"



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LILAC GIRL***


******* This file should be named 12858-8.txt or 12858-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/8/5/12858



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
