The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Principles of English Versification, by 
Paull Franklin Baum

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Principles of English Versification

Author: Paull Franklin Baum

Release Date: May 7, 2007 [EBook #21342]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ENGLISH VERSIFICATION ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, LN Yaddanapudi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE PRINCIPLES OF ENGLISH VERSIFICATION

BY

PAULL FRANKLIN BAUM

[Illustration]


CAMBRIDGE

HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS

1924


LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS


COPYRIGHT, 1922

BY HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS


_Third printing_


PRINTED AT THE HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
CAMBRIDGE, MASS., U. S. A.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  |                      Transcriber's note                      |
  |                                                              |
  | The following symbols have been used in the text:            |
  |                                                              |
  | ‸    CARET a musical rest                                    |
  |                                                              |
  | ◡   LOWER HALF CIRCLE an unstressed syllable                |
  |                                                              |
  | _̷    COMBINING SHORT SOLIDUS OVERLAY a stressed syllable     |
  |                                                              |
  | ^{x} superscript x                                           |
  |                                                              |
  | [`]  grave accent over the preceding unstressed syllable     |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+


TO
C. H. N. B.




PREFACE


Most of the older discussions of English versification labored under two
difficulties: an undue adherence to the traditions of Greek and Latin
prosody more or less perfectly understood, and an exaggerated formalism.
But recently the interest and excitement (now happily abated) over
free-verse have reopened the old questions and let in upon them not a
little light. Even today, however, a great deal of metrical analysis has
wrecked itself on the visible rocks of a false accuracy, and it is
therefore not only out of caution but also out of mere common sense that
we should eschew the arbitrary, even at the risk of vagueness and an
'unscientific' admission of uncertainty. For the only great and
annihilating danger of writing on versification is dogmatism. Our
theorists, both old and new, are first tempted and then possessed with
their theories--all else becoming wrong and intolerable. In the
following pages I have perhaps erred in a too frequent insistence on
doubts and perplexities; perhaps also, on occasion, in a too plain
statement of opinion where judgments are bound to differ--_sic se res
habent_.

Now it is plain that rhythm is one of the ultimate facts of nature and
one of the universal principles of art; and thus versification, which
is the study of the rhythms of verse, is both a science and an art. But
it differs from the other sciences in that its phenomena are not
'regular' and reducible to law, but varying and subject to the dictates,
even the whims, of genius; inasmuch as every poem involves a fresh fiat
of creation. Of course, no poet when he is composing, either in the
traditional "fine frenzy" or in the more sober process of revision,
thinks of prosody as a science, or perhaps thinks of it at all. If he
did he would go mad, and produce nothing. But the phenomena remain,
nevertheless, and the analysis of them becomes for us a science.

This analysis has what Bacon would call two inconveniences. The first is
complexity. The various ways in which the formal rhythms of verse
combine with the infinitely modulated rhythms of natural prose produce a
resultant which is complicated to the last degree and which almost
precludes orderly exposition. No system has been devised to express it.
The simpler ones fail through omission of important difficulties, the
more elaborate totter under their own weight. And thus the Gentle Reader
is either beguiled by false prophets--looks up and is not fed--or loses
heart and saves himself by flight. There is, to be sure, an arcanum of
prosodic theory which is the province of specialists. It has its place
in the scheme of things; but it is no more necessary for the genuine
enjoyment of Milton (or the 'moderns') than a knowledge of the formulae
for calculating the parallax of Alpha Leonis is necessary for enjoying
the pillared firmament. We must then compromise with a system which
reveals the existence of all the phenomena and tries to suggest their
interrelated workings.

The other inconvenience is that of seeming to deny the real poetry by
our preoccupation with its metrical expression. "Under pretence that we
want to study it more in detail, we pulverize the statue." This is an
old charge, and our answer is easy. For, however it may be with the
statue, a poem is never pulverized; it is still there on the page! No
amount of analyzing can injure the poem. If we think it has injured us,
even then we err, and need only recall our natural aversion to hard
labor. In nearly every instance it was the work and not the analysis
that bothered us.

This is a small book and therefore not exhaustive. And since it is as
elementary, especially in the treatment of the principles of rhythm, as
is consistent with a measure of thoroughness, the apparatus of mere
learning has been suppressed, even where it might perhaps seem needed,
as in footnote references to the scientific investigations on which part
of the text is based. I have consulted and used, of course, all the
books and articles I could find that had anything of value to offer; but
I have rarely cited them, not because I wish to conceal my indebtedness,
but because there is no room for elaborate documentation in such a book
as this. On the other hand, I owe a very great deal, both directly and
indirectly, to Professor Bliss Perry--although my manuscript was
finished before I saw his Study of Poetry; and this debt I wish to
acknowledge most fully and gratefully.

In lieu of a formal bibliography, I think it sufficient (in addition to
the footnotes that occur in their proper place) to refer the reader to
the larger works of Schipper and Saintsbury, to the smaller volumes of
Professor Perry and Professor R. M. Alden, and particularly to Mr. T. S.
Omond's English Metrists, 1921.

P. F. B.




CONTENTS

                                       PAGE
    I. RHYTHM                             3
   II. RHYTHM OF PROSE AND VERSE         22
  III. METRE                             49
   IV. METRICAL FORMS:
       1. THE LINE                       69
       2. THE STANZA                     88
       3. BLANK VERSE                   133
       4. FREE-VERSE                    150
       5. EXOTIC FORMS                  159
    V. MELODY, HARMONY, AND MODULATION  165
       GLOSSARIAL INDEX                 207




CHAPTER I

RHYTHM


Rhythm, in its simplest sense, is measured motion; but by various
natural extensions of meaning the word has come to be used almost as a
synonym of regularity of variation. Whatever changes or alternates
according to a recognizable system is said to be rhythmic, to possess
rhythm. In this sense, rhythm is one of the universal principles of
nature. We find it in the stripes of the zebra, the indentation of
leaves, the series of teeth or of crystals, the curves of the horizon;
in the tides, the phases of the moon, the rising and setting of the sun,
the recurrence of seasons, the revolutions of planets; in the vibrations
of color, sound, and heat; in breathing, the throbbing of the pulse, the
stride of walking. All action and reaction whatever is rhythmic, both in
nature and in man. "Rhythm is the rule with Nature," said Tyndall; "she
abhors uniformity more than she does a vacuum." So deep-rooted, in
truth, is this principle, that we imagine it and feel it where it does
not exist, as in the clicking of a typewriter. Thus there is both an
_objective rhythm_, which actually exists as rhythm, and a _subjective
rhythm_, which is only the feeling of regularity resulting from a
natural tendency of the mind to 'organize' any irregularity that we
meet.

There are two fundamental forms of rhythm, though these are not
altogether mutually exclusive, (1) spatial, and (2) temporal.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Spatial Rhythms._ The simplest spatial rhythm is a series of
equidistant points--

  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

More complex forms are the succession of repeated designs in mouldings
and wainscotings (for example, the alternation of egg and dart), the
series of windows in a wall, or of the columns of a Greek temple, or of
the black and white keys of a piano. Still more complex is the balanced
arrangement of straight lines and curves in a geometrical design, as in
certain Oriental rugs or the Gothic rose windows. And probably the most
complex spatial rhythms are those of the facades of great buildings like
the Gothic cathedrals or St. Mark's of Venice, where only the trained
eye perceives the subtleties of alternation and balance.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Temporal Rhythms._ Temporal rhythms, apart from those of planetary
motion, the alternation of seasons, and the like (which are called
rhythmic by a metaphorical extension of the term), manifest themselves
to us as phenomena of sound; hence the two concepts time-rhythm and
sound-rhythm are commonly thought of as one and the same.

The simplest form is the tick-tick-tick of a watch or metronome. But
such mechanical regularity is comparatively rare, and in general the
temporal rhythms are all highly complex composites of sounds and
silences. Their highest manifestations are music and language. The
rhythm of language, and _a fortiori_ that of verse, is therefore
primarily a temporal or sound rhythm, and as such is the particular
subject of the following pages.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Combinations._ Language, however, when addressed to the eye rather than
to the ear, that is, when written or printed rather than spoken, is
partly a spatial phenomenon; and, as will appear presently, the
arrangement of words and sentences on the formal page is a real factor
in the rhythm of verse. Moreover, most of the rhythms of motion, such as
walking, the ebb and flow of tides, the breaking of waves on the beach,
are composites of temporal and spatial.[1]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [1] One hears sometimes of 'rhythmic thought' and 'rhythmic  |
  | feeling.' This is merely a further extension or metaphorical |
  | usage of the term. In Othello, for instance, there is a more |
  | or less regular alternation of the feelings of purity and    |
  | jealousy, and of tragedy and comedy. In some of the          |
  | Dialogues of Plato there is a certain rhythm of thought.     |
  | This usage is fairly included in the Oxford Dictionary's     |
  | definition: "movement marked by the regulated succession of  |
  | strong and weak elements, or of opposite or different        |
  | conditions."                                                 |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sound Rhythm._ These elementary generalizations must be narrowed now to
the special phenomena of sound, and then still more particularly to the
sounds of language.

All musical tones, including the phonetic sounds of words, have four
characteristics: pitch, loudness or intensity, quality or tone-color,
and duration. The last, of course, needs no definition.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Pitch_ is dependent on the number of vibrations per second. The greater
the number of vibrations, the higher the pitch and the more 'acute' the
tone. The lowest pitch recognizable as a tone (as distinguished from
noise) is 8 vibrations a second; the highest pitch the ear can hear is
between 20,000 and 30,000 a second. In normal English speech among
adults the voice ranges from about 100 to 300 vibrations, but in
animated speaking this range is greatly increased.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Loudness_ is a comparative term for the strength of the sensation of
sound in the ear. It is determined by the energy or intensity of the
vibrations and varies (technically speaking) as the product of the
square of the frequency and the square of the amplitude (_I=n^{2}A^{2}_).
But for ordinary purposes it is sufficient to regard loudness and
intensity as the same. The distinction, however, is clear in common
practice; for whether one says "father" loudly or quietly, there is a
relatively greater intensity of sound in the first syllable than in the
second. In speech this intensity is called _accent_ or _stress_.

The third characteristic, variously called _quality_, _timbre_,
_tone-quality_, _tone-color_, is that which distinguishes sounds of the
same loudness and pitch produced by different instruments or voices. It
is the result of the combination of the partial tones of a sound, that
is, of the fundamental and its overtones. In music, tone-quality is of
the utmost importance, but as an element of speech rhythm it is
practically non-existent, and may be wholly neglected, though it plays,
of course, a prominent part in the oral reading of different persons.[2]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [2] There is, however, another phenomenon (to be discussed   |
  | later) called by the same name, 'tone-color,' but having     |
  | only a metaphorical relation to it. Many words--_father_,    |
  | _soul_, _ineluctable_, for example--have emotional           |
  | associations which stand to the literal meaning somewhat     |
  | like overtones to the fundamental. This tone-quality of      |
  | language is one of the primary and most significant sources  |
  | of poetical effect, but it should never be confused with the |
  | musical term on which it is patterned.                       |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

What is the relation of these physical attributes of sound to sound
rhythm? The answer lies in a closer examination of the nature of rhythm,
especially as it concerns the rhythm of speech.

Rhythm means measured flow or succession. Now first, in order that any
succession may be measured, there must be something recognizable which
distinguishes one unit from the next. In spatial rhythms the point of
division is almost always easily perceived; hence the greater difficulty
of analyzing the simplest time-rhythms as compared with the most complex
space-rhythms. Moreover, the basis of measurement, that by which the
'distance' between any point of division and that which follows it is
determined, must, by definition, be duration of time. Suppose, however,
that the time-distance between successive points of emphasis or division
is equal, is the rhythm therefore necessarily regular? No, because the
points of emphasis themselves may vary in force or energy. Thus if in
the following scheme (´ = point of emphasis; -= equal time-distance):

    ´-´-´-´-´-´-etc.

every ´ is not of the same value, the result might be (´´= twice as much
emphasis as ´;´´´ = three times as much):

    ´´-´-´´´-´´-´´´-etc.

and this could not be called regular. A simple illustration of this is
the difference in music between 3/4 time, where we count 1´ 2 3, 1´ 2 3,
1´ 2 3 and 6/4 or 6/8 time, where we count 1´´ 2 3 4´ 5 6, 1´´ 2 3 4´ 5
6. Furthermore, apart from any question of force or energy applied in
the production of a sound, it is clear that high notes seem to possess a
greater strength than low notes, and must therefore be recognized as an
element in rhythmic emphasis. For example, if the following series of
notes were sounded on a piano, and each struck with equal force--

[Illustration: Musical notes--A E A E A E] etc.

a certain 'accent' would probably be felt on the _e_ which was not felt
on the _a_. And it is well known that shrill sounds and high-pitched
voices carry farther and _seem louder_ than others.

In the simplest kind of temporal rhythm, therefore, where the beats are,
say, drum-taps of equal force, the primary element is time. But if there
is the added complication of drum-taps of unequal force, the element of
comparative stress must be reckoned with. And if, finally, the drum-taps
are not in the same key (say, on kettledrums differently tuned), then
the further element of comparative pitch must be considered as a
possible point of emphasis. In a word, pitch may sometimes be
substituted for stress.

In music rhythmic units may be marked by differences in tone-quality as
well, and thus the potential complexity is greatly increased; but in
spoken language, as has been said, this element of rhythm is
negligible. In speech-rhythm, however, the three conditions of time,
stress, and pitch are always present, and therefore no consideration of
either prose rhythm or verse can hope to be complete or adequate which
neglects any one of them or the possibilities of their permutations and
combinations. And it is precisely here that many treatments of the
rhythm of language have revealed their weakness: they have excluded
pitch usually, and often either stress or time. They have tried to build
up a whole system of prosody sometimes on a foundation of stress alone,
sometimes of time alone. The reason for this failure is simple, and it
is also a warning. Any attempt to reckon with these three forces, each
of which is extremely variable, not only among different individuals but
in the same person at different times--any attempt to analyze these
elements and observe, as well, their mutual influences and combined
effects, is bound to result in a complication of details that almost
defies expression or comprehension. The danger is as great as the
difficulty. But nothing can ever be gained by the sort of simplification
which disregards existent and relevant facts. It is to be confessed at
once, however, that one cannot hope to answer in any really adequate way
all or even most of the questions that arise. The best that can be
expected is a thorough recognition of the complexity, together with some
recognition of the component difficulties.

Moreover, only a part of the problem has been stated thus far. Not only
is all spoken language the resultant of the subjectively variable
forces of time, stress, and pitch, but these three forces are themselves
subject to and intimately affected by the thought and emotion which they
express. Though educated persons probably receive the phenomena of
language more frequently through the eye than through the ear, it is
true that words are, in the first instance, sounds, of which the printed
or written marks are but conventional symbols. And these symbols and the
sounds which they represent have other values also, logical or
intellectual and emotional values. Language is therefore a compound
instrument of both sound and meaning, and speech-rhythm, in its fullest
sense, is the composite resultant of the attributes of sound (duration,
intensity, and pitch) modified by the logical and emotional content of
the words and phrases which they represent.

For example, utter the words: "A house is my fire," and observe the
comparative duration of time in the pronunciation of each word, the
comparative stress, and the relative pitch (e. g. of _a_ and _fire_).
Now rearrange these nearly meaningless syllables: "My house is afire."
Observe the differences, some slight and some well marked, in time,
stress, and pitch. Then consider the different emotional coloring this
sentence might have and the different results on time, stress, and pitch
in utterance, if, say, the house contains all that you hold most
precious and there is no chance of rescue; or if, on the other hand, the
house is worthless and you are glad to see it destroyed. And even here
the matter is comparatively simple; for in reading the following
sentence from Walter Pater, note the manifold variations in your own
utterance of it at different times and imagine how it would be read by a
person of dull sensibilities, by one of keen poetic feeling, and finally
by one who recalled its context and on that account could enjoy its
fullest richness: "It is the landscape, not of dreams or of fancy, but
of places far withdrawn, and hours selected from a thousand with a
miracle of finesse."[3]

   +--------------------------------------------------------------+
   | [3] Walter Pater, "Leonardo da Vinci," in The Renaissance.   |
   | For an account of scientific experiments on the time and     |
   | stress rhythm of this sentence, see W. M. Patterson, The     |
   | Rhythm of Prose, New York, 1916, ch. iv. An idea of the      |
   | complexity may be obtained from Patterson's attempt to       |
   | indicate it by musical notation:                             |
   |                                                              |
   | [Illustration: Metrical pattern expressed in musical         |
   | notation]                                                    |
   +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The last step of the complication, which can only be indicated here, and
will be developed in a later chapter, comes with the mutual adjustment
of the natural prose rhythm and the metrical pattern of the verse. Such
a sentence as the following has its own peculiar rhythms: "And, as
imagination bodies forth the forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing a local habitation and a
name." Now read it as verse, and the rhythms are different; both the
meaning and the music are enhanced.

    And as imagination bodies forth
    The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
    Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing
    A local habitation and a name.
        SHAKESPEARE, Midsummer Night's Dream, V, i.

These then are the problems and the difficulties. The solutions can be
only partial and tentative, but they are the best we are able to obtain
with our present knowledge and our present capabilities of analysis. As
science today has advanced in accuracy of knowledge and understanding of
the facts of nature far beyond the powers of our ancestors to imagine,
so in the future psychologists may, and let us hope will, enable us to
comprehend the subtleties of metrical rhythm beyond our present power.
Yet there will always remain, since the ever-inexplicable element of
genius is a necessary part of all art, a portion which no science can
describe or analyze.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Psychology of Rhythm._ That nearly all persons have a definite
sense of rhythm, though sometimes latent because of defective education,
is a familiar fact. The origin and source of this sense is a matter of
uncertainty and dispute. The regular beating of the heart, the regular
alternation of inhaling and exhaling, the regular motions of walking,
all these unconscious or semi-conscious activities of the body have been
suggested; and they doubtless have a concomitant if not a direct
influence on the rhythmic sense. Certainly there is an intimate relation
between the heart action and breath rate and the external stimulus of
certain rhythmic forces, as is shown by the tendency of the pulse and
breath to adapt their _tempo_ to the beat of fast or slow music. But
this can hardly be the whole explanation. More important, from the
psychological point of view, is doubtless the alternation of effort and
fatigue which characterizes our mental as well as physical actions. A
period of concentrated attention is at once followed by a period of
indifference; the attention flags, wearies, and must be recuperated by a
pause, just as the muscular effort of hand or arm. In truth, the muscles
of the eye play a real part in the alternations of effort and rest in
reading. The immediate application of this psychological fact to the
temporal rhythms has been clearly phrased by the French metrist, M.
Verrier:

     I hear the first beat of a piece of music or of a verse, and, my
     attention immediately awakened, I await the second. At the end of a
     certain time--that is, when the expense of energy demanded has
     reached a certain degree--this second beat strikes my ear. Then I
     expect to hear the third when the dynamic sense of attention shall
     indicate an equal expense of energy, that is, at the end of an
     equal interval of time. Thus, by means of sensation and of memory
     of the amount of energy expended in the attention each time, I can
     perceive the equality of time-interval of the rhythmic units. Once
     this effort of attention becomes definite and fixed, it repeats
     itself instinctively and mechanically--by reflex action, so to say,
     like that of walking when we are accustomed to a stride of a given
     length and rapidity. Here we have truly a sort of metronome which
     will beat out the rhythm according as we regulate it. And it goes
     without saying that with this we can not only note the rhythm in
     our songs or spoken verse or movements, but also perceive it in the
     sounds and movements of other persons and other things.

     This metronome of attention functions, indeed, still more simply.
     With attention, as with all the psycho-physiological processes,
     effort alternates with rest: it grows stronger and weaker,
     contracts and expands in turn. This _pulse of attention_ varies in
     different persons according to the peculiar rhythm of the organism.
     In the same person, under normal conditions, it remains nearly
     constant. It is always subject to modification by the
     psycho-physiological conditions of the moment, especially by the
     emotions and by external circumstances. In a series of identical
     equidistant stresses, those which coincide with the pulse of
     attention seem the stronger: this is what is called _subjective
     rhythm_. Since this coincidence is nearly always somewhat inexact,
     there results an easy accommodation of the pulse of attention,
     although even in the subjective rhythm there has already occurred
     an objective influence capable of affecting us sensibly.[4]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [4] Paul Verrier, Essai sur les Principes de la Métrique     |
  | Anglaise (Paris, 1909), Deuxieme Partie, Livre II, ch. x,    |
  | pp. 56, 57; and cf. p. 90, n. 1.                             |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Thus we have always at hand both a more or less efficient bodily
metronome in the pulse and in respiration, and also a "cerebral
metronome" capable not only of easy adjustment to different rates of
speed but also of that subtlest of modulations which psychologists call
the 'elastic unit,' and which musicians, though not so definitely or
surely, recognize as _tempo rubato_.

The sense of rhythm, as has been said, differs remarkably in different
individuals--just as the sense of touch, of smell, of hearing.[5] To
some, rhythm appears chiefly as a series of points of emphasis or
stresses alternating with points of less emphasis or of none at all;
such are called, in scientific jargon, 'stressers.' To others the
principal characteristic of rhythm is the time intervals; such are
called 'timers.' But this is a practical, not a philosophical
distinction. For it is the _succession_ of points of emphasis which
even the most aggressive stresser feels as rhythmic; and succession
implies and involves a temporal element. The stresser's only difficulty
is to feel the approximate _equality_ of the interval. The essential
thing, however, is to understand that, while time is the foundation of
speech-rhythm, stress is its universal adjunct and concomitant.[6]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [5] A simple experiment will illustrate this. Place two      |
  | persons back to back, so that they cannot see each other,    |
  | and have them beat time to an audible melody; as soon as the |
  | music ceases they will begin to beat differently. (Verrier,  |
  | II, p. 65.) The difficulty of keeping even a trained         |
  | orchestra playing together illustrates the same fact.        |
  |                                                              |
  | [6] "If rhythm means anything to the average individual, it  |
  | means motor response and a sense of organized time."         |
  | Patterson, p. 14.                                            |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The explanation of this duality is simple. A series of identical tones

[Illustration: Identical notes] etc.

contains a simple objective rhythm. The pronounced timer will feel it
clearly; the extreme stresser will not. Change the series to

[Illustration: Alternate long and short notes] etc.,

or

[Illustration: Alternate longer stressed notes and shorter unstressed
notes] etc.,

and both will feel it; for in the last example both time and stress are
obvious, and in the other the longer notes of the series produce the
effect of stress.[7] Most persons, therefore, with a greater or less
degree of consciousness, allow their physical or cerebral metronome to
affect the simple

[Illustration: Identical notes] etc.,

so that they hear or feel either

[Illustration: Alternate stressed and unstressed notes] etc.,

or

[Illustration] etc.,

It is thus that the clock says tick-_tock_, tick-_tock_, the locomotive
_chu_-chu, _chu_-chu. Timers are in the minority.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [7] Musicians often 'dot' a note for the sake of emphasizing |
  | the accent, especially in orchestral music and with such     |
  | instruments as the flute, where variations of stress are     |
  | difficult to produce.                                        |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

A converse phenomenon of the subjective introduction of stress into a
series of identical tones at equal intervals is the subjective
'organization' of a series of irregular beats. Some do this more easily
and naturally than others, but the tendency is present in all who are
not absolutely rhythm-deaf. The "minute drops from off the eaves" beat
out a tune, the typewriter develops a monotonous song, the public
speaker 'gets his stride' and continues in a sing-song.

Thus, when there are equal intervals but stress is absent, we more or
less unconsciously supply it; when there are distinct stresses at
irregular intervals we organize them into approximately regular
intervals. We have in us by instinct and by development both the
_ability_ and also the _need_ to draw forth rhythm wherever it is
latent. Rhythm becomes one of our physical and mental pleasures,
manifest in primitive dancing and balladry, sailors' chanteys, and the
simple _heave-ho_'s of concerted labor. It induces economy of effort,
and so makes work lighter; and it has, though perhaps not always, a
certain æsthetic value, in making labor more interesting as well as
easier. It is one of the attributes of the god we worship under the name
of System.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Coördination, Syncopation, Substitution._ The processes of the
subjective organization of rhythm may best be explained under the heads
of coördination, syncopation, and substitution. Their application to the
particular problems of verse will be apparent at once, and will, in
fact, constitute the bulk of the following pages.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Coördination_ has two aspects, according as it is thought of simply as
an existing fact or as a process. In the former sense it is the
agreement or coincidence (or the perception of agreement or coincidence)
between the simple normal recurrence of beats and the actual or
predetermined pattern. Thus in the lines

    And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies,
        MILTON, Paradise Lost, II, 950.

    A sable, silent, solemn forest stood,
        THOMSON, Castle of Indolence, st. 5.

the 'natural' beat of the words uttered in the most natural and
reasonable manner coincides with the 'artificial' beat of the metrical
line.

On the other hand, coordination is the process which results in one's
reduction of irregular beats to an approximately regular series. When we
hear a haphazard succession of drum-taps or the irregular click-click of
the typewriter, most of us soon begin to feel a certain orderly
arrangement, a rhythmical _swing_ in the repeated sounds, a grouping
according to a sort of unit which recurs with nearly equal intervals.
The units are not absolutely equal, but are elastic, allowing of some
contraction and expansion; yet they are so nearly equal, or we feel them
so, that the series seems regular.

Now this process of coördination involves two activities, syncopation
and substitution. The workings of both are highly complex and somewhat
uncertain; they differ greatly in different individuals, and when
analyzed scientifically seem to produce more difficulties than they
explain. But fortunately the outstanding ideas are beyond dispute, and
detailed examination can properly be left to the scientists.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Syncopation_ is the union, or the perception of the union, of two or
more rhythmic patterns.[8] A familiar example is perhaps the 'three
against two' in music, where one hand follows a _tum_-te-te, _tum_-te-te
rhythm, the other a _tum_-te, _tum_-te. This complexity, which strikes
us as sophisticated subtlety and is not always easy to reproduce, is in
fact both simple and familiar to the untutored savage. We must remember
that the evolution of language and of music has been for the more part
in the direction of greater simplicity of structure. Primitive music, as
we find it in the undeveloped Indians and Australasians, is often too
complex to be expressed by our regular notation. Another familiar
example of syncopation is the negro dance, in which the "dancer taps
with his feet just half-way between the hand-claps of those who are
accompanying his performance."[9] And of course the commonest example is
the strongly marked syncopation of ragtime.[10]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [8] Cf. Patterson, p. 3, "... the possibility of preserving  |
  | a certain series of time intervals, but of changing in       |
  | various ways the nature of the motions or sensations that    |
  | mark the beats." This may be tested by a simple experiment.  |
  | With the foot or finger tap evenly, regularly, and rather    |
  | rapidly. Without changing the regularity of the tapping, but |
  | merely by a mental readjustment, the beats may be felt as    |
  | _tum_-te, _tum_-te, _tum_-te (or te-_tum_, etc.) or as       |
  | _tum_-te-te, _tum_-te-te, _tum_-te-te (or te-te-_tum_,       |
  | etc.), or even as _tum_-te-te-te, _tum_-te-te-te (or         |
  | te-te-te-_tum_, etc.). It is but a step from this successive |
  | perception of various rhythms from the same objective source |
  | to a combined and simultaneous perception of them.           |
  |                                                              |
  | [9] Patterson, p. xx, n. 3.                                  |
  |                                                              |
  | [10] Experiments have shown that with a little practice one  |
  | can learn to beat five against seven, and thus actually      |
  | though unconsciously count in thirty-fives. (Patterson, p.   |
  | 6.)                                                          |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

In prose, this syncopation is evident in the apparent recognition, and
even reproduction in reading aloud, of a regularity of rhythm where none
really exists; as when protracted reading or listening develops or seems
to develop a monotonous sing-song. But this phenomenon cannot be
explained briefly, and the details must be omitted here.[11] In verse
also syncopation frequently occurs, though it is seldom recognized
except as an 'irregularity.' In the following lines of Paradise Lost the
first two coincide pretty closely with the normal beats of the measure;
while in the third line the series is an entirely different one.

    So Satan spake, and him Beelzebub
    Thus answered: "Leader of those armies bright,
    _Which but th' Omnipotent none could have foil'd_...."
        MILTON, Paradise Lost, I, 271-273.

Here to stress distinctly _but_,-_tent_, _could_ utterly ruins both the
meaning and the music of the line: to utter the words as if they were
ordinary prose would preserve the meaning, but destroy the
verse-movement. In Milton's ear, however, and in ours if we do not
resist, there is a subtle syncopation of four beats against five. (Of
course syncopation alone does not explain the rhythm of this line.) A
most startling syncopation is ventured by Milton in Samson Agonistes
(1071-72):

    I less conjecture than when first I saw
    _The sumptuous Dálila floating this way_.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [11] Those who are interested will find the scientific       |
  | experiments discussed in Patterson, ch. i and Appendix III.  |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *

_Substitution_ is simpler. It merely means recognizing the equivalence,
and therefore the possibility of interchange, of a long interval with
two or more shorter intervals whose sum equals the one long. That is, in
music two quarter-notes are equal to a half-note, and they may be
anywhere substituted one for the other; or a dotted half-note equal
three quarter-notes, etc. In verse it means that three syllables (or
one, or even four) may be substituted for the normal two syllables of a
foot if the three (or one or four) are uttered in approximately the same
period of time.

The term _substitution_, however, may be used in a larger sense. Thus
far only the purely temporal element of the rhythm has been thought of.
When the two others, stress and pitch, are recalled, it becomes clear
that another sort of substitution is both possible and usual, namely,
that of either pitch or stress for duration. In other words, the groups
that make up a rhythmic series may be determined or marked off by
emphasis of pitch or emphasis of stress as well as by duration of time.
In fact, it is from this habitual interplay of the three elements that
most of the complexity of metre arises; as it is the failure to
recognize this substitution which has given the older prosodies much of
their false simplicity and their mechanical barrenness.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Summary._ The fundamental problems of versification are all involved in
the principles of rhythm, especially the temporal rhythm of language.
The rhythm of both prose and verse is a resultant of the three
attributes of sound: stress, duration, and pitch (the first two being
usually the determining elements, the third an accessory element)
modified by the thought and emotion of the words. The feeling for this
rhythm, or perception of it, has both physical and psychological
explanations, and varies considerably among individuals, some being
'timers,' others 'stressers,' apparently by natural endowment. The
processes of our perception of rhythm are those of coordination, or
partly subjective reduction of actual 'irregularities' to a standard of
'regularity'; this reduction being accomplished mainly by syncopation
and substitution.




CHAPTER II

RHYTHM OF PROSE AND VERSE


It is clear now that all language is more or less definitely rhythmical;
and that the two fundamental and determining elements of speech-rhythm
are time and stress. It is clear also that the essential thing in our
perception of rhythm is the experience or recognition of groups, these
groups being themselves distinguished and set off by stress and time.
When there is an easily felt regularity of the groups, when the
alternation of stress and unstress and the approximate equality of the
time intervals are fairly apparent, then the rhythm is simple. When the
regularity is not obvious, the rhythm is complex, but none the less
existent and pleasing.[12] In other words, the character of language
rhythm is determined by the relative proportion of coincidence and
syncopation. In verse, coincidence preponderates; in prose, syncopation
(and substitution). Between absolute coincidence, moreover, and the
freest possible syncopation and substitution, infinite gradations are
possible; and many passages indeed lie so close to the boundary between
recognizable preponderance of the one or of the other that it is
difficult to say _this_ is verse, _that_ is prose. Various standards
and conventions enter into the decision.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [12] When no organization of the irregularity is possible,   |
  | the language is unrhythmical; and such, of course, is often  |
  | the case in bad prose and bad verse.                         |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

For practical convenience three main sorts of rhythmic prose may be
distinguished: (1) _characteristic prose_, or that in which no
regularity (coincidence) is easily appreciable; (2) _cadenced prose_, or
that in which the regularity is perceptible, but unobtrusive, and (3)
_metrical prose_, or that in which the regularity is so noticeable as to
be unpleasing. No very clear lines can be drawn; nor should one try to
classify more than brief passages in one group or another. And,
obviously, longer selections will combine two or more sorts in
succession. A few examples will serve to show what is meant.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Characteristic Prose._ No prose, as has been said above, is without
rhythmic curves; but the best prose, that which always keeps in view the
best ideals of prose, carefully avoids consecutive repetitions of the
same rhythmic patterns. It is the distinction of verse to follow a
chosen pattern, with due regard to the artistic principles of variety
and uniformity; it is the distinction of prose to accomplish its object,
whether artistic or utilitarian, without encroaching on the boundaries
of its neighbor. Prose may be as 'poetic,' as charged with powerful
emotion, as possible, but it remains true prose only when it refuses to
borrow aids from the characteristic excellences of verse.

To be sure, it is not always easy to avoid regular patterns in writing
the most ordinary prose. They come uncalled; they seem to be inherent in
the language. Here is, chosen casually, the first sentence of a current
news item, written surely without artistic elaboration, and subjected,
moreover, to the uncertainties of cable transmission. It was no doubt
farthest from the correspondent's intention to write 'numerous' prose;
but notice how the sentence may be divided into a series of rhythmic
groups of two stresses each, with a fairly regular number of
accompanying unstressed syllables:

     A general mobilization | in Syria has been ordered | as a reply to
     the French | ultimatum to King Feisal | that he acquiesce in the
     French | mandate for Syria, | according to a dispatch | to the
     London Times | from Jerusalem.

No one would read the sentence with a very clear feeling of this
definite movement; in fact, to do so rather obscures the meaning. But
the potential rhythm is there, and the reader with a keen rhythmic sense
will be to some extent aware of it.

Again, there is in the following sentence from Disraeli's Endymion a
latent rhythm which actually affects the purely logical manner of
reading it:

     She persisted in her dreams of riding upon elephants.

Here one almost inevitably pauses after _dreams_ (or prolongs the word
beyond its natural length), though there is no logical reason for doing
so. Why? Partly, at least, because _persisted in her dreams_ and _of
riding upon el_-have the same 'swing,' and the parallelism of mere sound
seems to require the pause.

For these reasons, then, among others, the most 'natural' spontaneous
and straightforward prose is not always the best. Study and careful
revision are necessary in order to avoid an awkward and unpleasant
monotony of rhythmic repetition, and at the same time obtain a flow of
sound which will form a just musical accompaniment to the ideas
expressed. Only the great prose masters have done this with complete
success. Of the three following examples the first is from Bacon; the
second is from Milton, who as a poet might have been expected to fall
into metre while writing emotional prose; the third is from Walter
Pater--the famous translation into words of the Mona Lisa painted by
Leonardo da Vinci. The first is elaborate but unaffected, the second is
probably spontaneous, the third highly studied.

     This kind of degenerate learning did chiefly reign amongst the
     schoolmen: who having sharp and strong wits, and abundance of
     leisure, and small variety of reading, but their wits being shut up
     in the cells of a few authors (chiefly Aristotle their dictator) as
     their persons were shut up in the cells of monasteries and
     colleges, and knowing little history, either of nature or time, did
     out of no great quantity of matter and infinite agitation of wit
     spin out unto us those laborious webs of learning which are extant
     in their books. For the wit and mind of man, if it work upon
     matter, which is the contemplation of the creatures of God, worketh
     according to the stuff and is limited thereby; but if it work upon
     itself, as the spider worketh his web, then it is endless, and
     brings forth indeed cobwebs of learning, admirable for the fineness
     of thread and work, but of no substance or profit.
         Advancement of Learning, Bk. I, iv, 5.

     Truth indeed came once into the world with her divine Master, and
     was a perfect shape most glorious to look on; but when he ascended,
     and his Apostles after him were laid asleep, then straight arose a
     wicked race of deceivers, who, as that story goes of the Egyptian
     Typhon with his conspirators how they dealt with the good Osiris,
     took the virgin Truth, hewed her lovely form into a thousand
     pieces, and scattered them to the four winds. From that time ever
     since, the sad friends of Truth, such as durst appear, imitating
     the careful search that Isis made for the mangled body of Osiris,
     went up and down gathering up limb by limb still as they could find
     them.
         Areopagitica.

     Hers is the head upon which all "the ends of the world are come,"
     and the eyelids are a little weary. It is a beauty wrought from
     within upon the flesh, the deposit, little cell by cell, of strange
     thoughts and fantastic reveries and exquisite passions. ... She is
     older than the rocks among which she sits; like the vampire, she
     has been dead many times, and learned the secrets of the grave; and
     has been a diver in deep seas, and keeps their fallen day about
     her; and trafficked for strange webs with Eastern merchants: and,
     as Leda, was the mother of Helen of Troy, and, as Saint Anne, the
     mother of Mary; and all this has been to her but as the sound of
     lyres and flutes, and lives only in the delicacy with which it has
     moulded the changing lineaments, and tinged the eyelids and the
     hands.
         "Leonardo da Vinci," in The Renaissance.

Here no continuous patterns are recognizable, yet the whole is felt to
be musically and appropriately rhythmic. In the next excerpt, however
(from John Donne), and in many passages in the Authorized Version of the
Psalms, of Job, of the Prophets, there is a visible balance of phrases
and of clauses, a long undulating swing which one perceives at once,
though only half consciously, and which approaches, if it does not
actually possess, the intentional coincidence of cadenced prose.

     If some king of the earth have so large an extent of dominion in
     north and south as that he hath winter and summer together in his
     dominions; so large an extent east and west as that he hath day and
     night together in his dominions, much more hath God mercy and
     justice together. He brought light out of darkness, not out of a
     lesser light; He can bring thy summer out of winter though thou
     have no spring; though in the ways of fortune, or of
     understanding, or conscience, thou have been benighted till now,
     wintered and frozen, smothered and stupefied till now, now God
     comes to thee, not as in the dawning of the day, not as in the bud
     of the spring, but as the sun at noon to illustrate all shadows, as
     the sheaves in harvest to fill all penuries. All occasions invite
     His mercies, and all times are His seasons.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Cadenced Prose._ Cadenced prose is in English chiefly an historical
phenomenon of the seventeenth century. It is part of the late
Renaissance literary movement, when prose, after vaguely classic models,
was held worth cultivating on its own account; and is in some degree a
tempered afterglow of the crude brilliance of euphuistic balance and
alliteration. It made no effort to conceal its definite rhythmic
movements--rather, it gloried in them; but was always careful that they
should not become monotonous or too palpable.

In the following examples the rhythmic units are for the sake of
clearness indicated by separate lines, after the fashion of
'free-verse.' The passages should be read first with the line-division
uppermost in the attention; then as continuous prose. The result of the
second reading will be perhaps a fuller appreciation of the rhythmic
richness of the sentences, both as to variety and uniformity. Sing-song
and 'pounding' are by all means to be deprecated.

(_a_) Simple two-and three-beat rhythms--

        O eloquent just
        and mighty Death!
        whom none could advise
        thou hast persuaded;
        what none hath dared
        thou hast done;
    and whom all the world hath flattered
    thou only hast cast out of the world and despised.
        Thou hast drawn together
    all the far-stretched greatness
    all the pride cruelty
        and ambition of man,
        and covered it all over
        with these two
        narrow words
        _Hic jacet_.
            SIR WALTER RALEIGH, History of the World, Bk. V, ch. vi.

(_b_) Simple three-and four-beat rhythms--

    They that have great intrigues of the world
        have a yoke upon their necks
        and cannot look back.
    And he that covets many things greedily
        and snatches at high things ambitiously
        that despises his neighbor proudly
        and bears his crosses peevishly
        or his prosperity impotently and passionately
    he that is a prodigal of his precious time
    and is tenacious and retentive of evil purposes
    is not a man disposed to this exercise:
    he hath reason to be afraid of his own memory
        and to dash his glass in pieces
    because it must needs represent to his own eyes
        an intolerable deformity.
            JEREMY TAYLOR, Holy Dying, ch. ii, sect. 2.

(_c_) Mainly two-beat rhythms--

    Now since these dead bones
        have already outlasted
        the living ones of Methuselah
        and in a yard under ground
        and thin walls of clay
        outworn all the strong
    and spacious buildings above it,
        and quietly rested
        under the drums and tramplings
        of three conquests;
        what Prince can promise
        such diuturnity
        unto his reliques
        or might not gladly say
    'Sic ego componi versus in ossa velim.'
        SIR THOMAS BROWNE, Urn Burial, ch. v.

(_d_) Mainly three-beat rhythms--

    What song the Syrens sang
    or what name Achilles assumed
    when he hid himself among women though puzzling questions
    are not beyond all conjecture.
    What time the persons of these ossuaries
    entered the famous nations of the dead
    and slept with princes and counsellors
    might admit a wide solution.
    But who were the proprietaries of these bones
    or what bodies these ashes made up
    were a question above antiquarism;
    not to be resolved by man
    nor easily perhaps by spirits
    except we consult the provincial
    guardians or tutelary Observators.
        Ibid.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Metrical Prose._ The above passages are daring, but greatly daring. So
great is the subtlety, the variety, the art, that they never fail of
their intended effect. They are justifiable because they justify
themselves--partly by their lofty and dignified content, partly of
course by their sheer artistry. But when the same thing is attempted by
unskilful hands it fails ingloriously. We say it has "a palpable design
upon us," and balk. Gibbon and Burke, as inheritors of the
seventeenth-century tradition, sometimes fell into the error; Ruskin,
with his 'poetical' style, was sometimes guilty; but the worst and most
conspicuous offenders were Dickens and Blackmore. Examples are abundant.
Not all are equally unpleasant; the individual taste of some readers
will approve passages which others will reject. With Dickens and
Blackmore, however, the phenomenon approaches downright deliberate
trickiness.

     The calculation of profit in all such wars is false. On balancing
     the account of such wars, ten thousand hogsheads of sugar _are
     purchased at ten thousand times their price_. The blood of man
     should never _be shed but to redeem the blood of man_. It is well
     shed for our family, for our friends, for our God, for our country,
     for our kind. _The rest is vanity; the rest is crime._
         BURKE, Letters on a Regicide Peace, I.

    When Death strikes down the innocent and young
    for every fragile form from which he lets
        the panting spirit free
        a hundred virtues rise
    in shapes of mercy, charity, and love,
        to walk the world and bless it.
    Of every tear that sorrowing mortals shed
            on such green graves
            some good is born
        some gentler nature comes.
            DICKENS, Old Curiosity Shop, ch. 72

    "I wear the chain I forged in life," replied the Ghost,
    "I made it link by link, and yard by yard."
        DICKENS, Christmas Carol.

    I cannot rest, I cannot stay,
    I cannot linger anywhere.
        Ibid.

    Much they saw and far they went,
    and many homes they visited,
    but always with a happy end.
        DICKENS, Christmas Carol.

    But above the curved soft elbow,
    where no room was for one cross word
        (according to our proverb)
            three sad gashes
            edged with crimson
      spoiled the flow of the pearly flesh.
          BLACKMORE, Lorna Doone, ch. 38.

A peculiar instance of metrical prose, avowedly an experiment and
fortunately (as most will think) not repeated, is the passage near the
end of Kingsley's Westward Ho! Kingsley called it 'prose shaped into
song.' The objection is simply that in such a situation song is out of
place. Let prose do the legitimate work of prose; and when the intensity
of feeling justifies song, let there be song. No hybrids, no
cross-breeding--unless, as here, for purposes of experiment. Here is a
part of the passage:

     Then he took a locket from his bosom; and I heard him speak, Will,
     and he said: "Here's the picture of my fair and true lady; drink to
     her, Señors, all." Then he spoke to me, Will, and called me, right
     up through the oar-weed and the sea: "We have had a fair quarrel,
     Señor; it is time to be friends once more. My wife and your brother
     have forgiven me; so your honour takes no stain."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Elements of Prose Rhythm._ Thus far the discussion of language rhythm
has been confined to a general perception of rhythmic movement. When an
attempt is made to carry the investigation into greater detail, more
difficult and from a prosodic point of view really crucial problems
present themselves. The essential thing in any perception of rhythm is
the experience of groups; but what are the nature and determining
qualities of these groups? In music there are bars--the primary rhythmic
group, comprising a single rhythmic wave, that is, covering the
time-distance from one point of division to another--phrases, cadences,
etc. The dual nature of language, however, its union of sound elements
and thought elements, gives the question another aspect. Corresponding
to the musical bar there is the metrical foot; to the musical phrase,
the logical phrase; to the musical cadence, a similar melodious flow of
word-sounds. But there are also in prose what are called breath-groups
and attention-groups, series of words bound together by the
physiological requirements of utterance and the mental requirements of
perception and understanding.[13] The first step towards clearness will
be a closer distinction between prose and metrical rhythms.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [13] Compare the sentence from Disraeli on page 24, above.   |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *

_Syllable._ The simplest and smallest unit of speech-sound is the
syllable; then follow, in increasing magnitude, the word, the phrase
(that is, words held together by their meaning or by their sound), the
clause, the sentence, the paragraph. These units exist in verse as well
as in prose, but while verse has other units (which are arbitrary and
artificial), prose rhythm has only these. The rhythm of a paragraph is
determined by the length, structure, content, and arrangement of the
sentences; that of a sentence by the length, structure, content, and
arrangement of the phrases; that of the phrase by the length, structure,
content, and arrangement of the words; that of a word by the character
of the syllables. Now syllables, as has been explained above, have the
sound attributes of duration, intensity (or lack of intensity), and
pitch--called, however, in the terminology of phonetics, length or
quantity, accent (or no accent), and pitch. These must be studied
individually before their combined effects can be understood.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Length._ Length is of course comparative. Some vowels require a longer
time to enunciate than others: the _e_ in _penal_ than the _i_ in _pin_,
the _o_ in _coat_ than the _o_ in _cot_, etc. Again, some consonants are
shorter by nature than others: the explosives, _p_, _t_, _k_, etc., than
the continuants _s_, _z_, _th_, _f_, _m_, _n_, _l_, etc. When vowels and
consonants are combined into syllables the comparative length is still
more apparent: thus _form_ is longer than _god_, _stole_ than _poke_,
_curl_ than _cut_, etc. Moreover, it is not alone the natural quantity
of vowels and consonants that affects or determines their length, but
also their position in a word and in a sentence. Thus, for example, the
same sounds are uttered more rapidly when closely followed by one or
more syllables than when alone: as _bit_, _bitter_, _bitterly_; _hard_,
_hardy_, _hardily_. This elasticity of syllabic quantity is clearly
shown in Verrier's examples:[14]

  [Illustration:
  They come fast--faster yet--faster and faster
  Barren mountain tracts--barren affections.]

These indications, moreover, cover normal utterance only; in emotional
language or elocutionary delivery there are deliberate and arbitrary
lengthenings and shortenings.[15]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [14] Vol. i, pp. 79, 80. The musical notation must be taken  |
  | as merely approximate.                                       |
  |                                                              |
  | [15] Experiments have been made to obtain absolute           |
  | measurements of syllabic quantity, and elaborate rules       |
  | formulated for determining longs and shorts. Thus far,       |
  | however, the results have been very variable and             |
  | unsatisfactory, and should be accepted with great caution.   |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *

_Accent and Stress._ The term _accent_ may best be reserved for
grammatical or dictionary accent--the greater emphasis placed according
to standard usage upon one syllable of a word as compared with the
others. Thus _portion_ has an accent on the first syllable, _material_
on the second, _apprehension_ on the third, _deliberation_ on the
fourth. The other syllables are either unaccented, as the first of
_material_ and the second of _portion_, or have a secondary accent, as
the second of _deliberation_.

Accent should be distinguished from _stress_, which is the rhythmical
emphasis in a series of sounds. In prose the rhythmical stress is
determined almost wholly by accent; in verse the two sometimes coincide
and sometimes differ markedly.

In certain words whose accent is somewhat evenly divided between two
syllables, and in certain combinations of monosyllables, there is a
tendency to subject even grammatical accent to rhythmical stress. Hence
the common pronunciations _Newfound_land, _Hawthorn_den; the alternation
of stress in _poor old man_, _sad hurt heart_; and the shift of accent
in "In a _Chi_nese restaurant the waiters are Chi_nese_."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Pitch._ Pitch is a very uncertain and variable phenomenon. For the most
part it is an ornament or aid to simple language rhythms, but under some
conditions it plays an important rôle which cannot be neglected. Because
of the physical structure of the vocal organs pitch is constantly
changing in spoken discourse, though often the changes are not readily
perceptible. Usually it coincides with accent.[16] It is also a frequent
but by no means regular means of intensifying accent: compare "That was
done simply" (normal utterance) with "That was simply wonderful"
(intensive utterance). On the other hand pitch and accent sometimes
clash: compare "The idea is good" (normal utterance) with "The _i_dea!"
(exclamatory). Other examples of pitch as a significant factor in prose
are: "One should not say 'good' but 'good_ly_,' not 'brave' but
'brave_ly_'"; "Not praise but prais_ing_ gives him delight."[17]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [16] To adduce Greek in explanation of English pitch would   |
  | be a clear case of _ignotum per ignotius_. But interesting   |
  | parallels have been noted by Mr. Stone (in R. Bridges,       |
  | Milton's Prosody, 2d ed.). "The ordinary unemphatic English  |
  | accent," he says, "is exactly a raising of pitch, and        |
  | nothing more" (p. 143); and there are similar habits in      |
  | English and Greek of turning the grave accent into acute, as |
  | in _to gèt money_ and _to gét it_. The Greeks recognized     |
  | three degrees of pitch: the acute (high), and the grave      |
  | (low), (which, according to Dionysius, differed by about the |
  | musical interval of a fifth), and midway, the circumflex.    |
  | Compare _thát?_ (acute, expressing surprise); _thât?_        |
  | (circumflex, expressing doubt); and _thàt book_              |
  | (grave--'book' and not 'table'). The main difference between |
  | the two languages is that so far as we can tell classical    |
  | Greek had (very much like modern French) a pitch-accent and  |
  | very little or no stress-accent, whereas English has both    |
  | (though stress-accent preponderates).                        |
  |                                                              |
  | [17] Cf. J. W. Bright, "Proper Names in Old English Verse,"  |
  | Publications of the Modern Language Association, vol. 14     |
  | (1899), pp. 347 ff.; especially pp. 363-365.                 |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Another aspect of pitch is that which in the rhetorics is usually called
inflection. A question is uttered with rising inflection, that is, with
a higher pitch at the end. Declarative sentences usually have a falling
inflection just before the final period, that is, a lower pitch.
Exclamations often have a circumflex inflection, as "Really!" spoken in
a sarcastic tone; that is, the pitch rises and falls.

Experimental attempts to indicate variations of pitch by our common
musical notation are given by Verrier. A single example will suffice
here.[18]

[Illustration: "I come from haunts of coot and hern"]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [18] Verrier, vol. iii, p. 229. A more ambitious attempt,    |
  | from Pierson, Métrique naturelle du langage (Paris, 1884),   |
  | pp. 226, 227, is given by Verrier, vol. ii, p. 14--a musical |
  | transcription of the opening verses of Racine's Athalie.     |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Perhaps the most important aspect of pitch from the point of view of
rhythm is its actual influence upon accent. We say naturally: "He was
_fif_teen years old"; but place the numeral for emphasis at the end of
the sentence and it receives a kind of pitch accent: "His age was
fif_teen_." Compare also _Chi_nese and Chi_nese_ in the example above.

Observe carefully the elements of duration, stress, accent, and pitch in
the following sentences:

     Now he's a great big man.

     He was a _re_markable young fellow, but he had an _un_governable
     temper.

     Off went Joy; on came Despair.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Word and Phrase Rhythm._ The next larger unit after the syllable is the
word; after the word, the phrase. Something has already been said in the
previous paragraphs on word and phrase rhythm: it remains to examine
them more closely.

Words vary in length from one to eight or even ten syllables; and the
accents (main and secondary) may fall on any of these syllables
according to the origin and historical development of the word--thus
words of two syllables: _ápple_, _alóne_; of three syllables:
_béautiful_, _accéssion_, _appercéive_; of four syllables: _ápoplexy_,
_matérial_, _evolútion_, _interreláte_. But generally in polysyllables
the tendency to rhythmic alternation of stress produces one or more
secondary accents more or less distinctly felt; thus on the first
syllable of _apperceive_ and on the third of _apoplexy_ there is an
obvious secondary accent; on the third syllable of _beautiful_ and the
fourth of _material_ there are potential accents, not regularly felt as
such but capable, under certain circumstances, of rhythmic stress. For
example, in the phrase 'beautiful clothes' there is no accent and no
stress on -_ful_; but in 'beautiful attire' the syllable -_ful_
receives a very slight accent (properly not recognized by the
dictionaries) which can well serve as a weak rhythmic stress. Long words
illustrate the same principle: _antitranssubstantionalistic_,
_pseudomonocotyledonous_, _perfectibiliarianism_. This potential stress
is of the utmost importance in verse--as when Milton out of three words,
two of which have no recognized secondary accent, makes a 5-stress line:

    Immutable, immortal, infinite.
        Paradise Lost, III, 373.

The result of this tendency to alternation, or in other words of the
difficulty of pronouncing more than three consecutive syllables without
introducing a secondary accent or stress, is that English phrases fall
naturally into four rhythmic patterns or movements (and their
combinations): 1. accent + no-accent (_a._ one syllable, _b._ two
syllables); 2. no-accent (_a._ one syllable, _b._ two syllables) +
accent. Examples: 1a _beauty_, 1b _beautiful_, 2a _relate_, 2b
_intercede_. These four movements are variously named: the first two are
called _falling_, the second two _rising_; 1a and 2a are called _duple_
or _dissyllabic_, 1b and 2b _triple_ or _trisyllabic_; 1a is called
_trochaic_, 1b _dactylic_, 2a _iambic_, 2b _anapestic_ (after the names
of the metrical feet in classical prosody). _Beauty_, by this usage, is
a trochee, _beautiful_ a dactyl, _relate_ an iamb, _intercede_ an
anapest. But these patterns alone are by no means sufficient to explain
or register all the phrasal movements of English prose--as a single
sentence will show.

     He that hath wife and children | hath given hostages | to fortune,
     | for they are impediments | to great enterprises | either of
     virtue | or of mischief.
         BACON, Essay VIII.

Here the first phrase is in falling rhythm, the second (probably) in
rising rhythm, the third is--rising or falling? To some readers it will
appear of one sort, to others of another. The fourth phrase is probably
rising, the fifth doubtful, the sixth falling, the seventh probably
rising. To say that the first phrase is made up of a dactyl and two
trochees means very little. The primary fact to be recognized and
understood is that these four patterns exist in English speech not as
absolute entities but as tendencies. In prose they are discontinuous,
irregularly alternating, often hardly perceptible; but they are there as
potential forces whose latent effects are brought out by regular metre.

Another problem at once obvious is to determine the limits of a phrase.
Some readers will feel "to fortune" in the above sentence as a separate
phrase, others will join it to the three words that precede. No rules
can be laid down. Two tentative but useful criteria are possible,
however. A phrase may be regarded as purely musical, a group of sounds
that either by their own nature or by their possibility of utterance in
a single expulsion of breath seem to belong together. But this is an
uncertain criterion, since we separate the sounds of words with great
difficulty from their meaning, and the periods of breathing are subject
to arbitrary control. And some phrases are uttered in much less than the
time required in normal breathing. The other criterion, sometimes
supporting sometimes contradicting the former, is the logical content of
words. But this also is uncertain, since logical content ought to hold
subject and verb together, whereas in the example above it clearly does
not. And neither breath grouping nor logical grouping will enable us to
determine whether "either of virtue or of mischief" is two phrases or
one.

The limits of the sentence, with its clauses, are, largely through the
modern conventions of printing, more distinctly felt and observed. But
its rhythm is none the less complex. For it is not only the sum of the
smaller rhythmic movements of word and phrase and clause, but forms a
new entity of itself, created by the union of the lesser elements--just
as a building is more than its component bricks, stones, and timbers.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Composite Speech Rhythm._ Such, briefly described, are the rhythmic
elements of spoken English prose. When only small sections are analyzed
singly, it is possible to understand something, at least, of the
intricate pattern of forces which are interwoven in the rhythms of
ordinary language. When one undertakes to analyze and express the
combined rhythms--musical, logical, emotional--of connected sentences
and paragraphs, one finds no system of notation adequate; the melodies
and harmonies disappear in the process of being explained. Those who
wish to enjoy to the fullest the rhythmic beauties of English prose must
patiently scrutinize the smallest details, then study the details in
larger and still larger combinations--the balance and contrast of
phrases, the alternation of dependent and independent clauses, the
varieties of long and short sentences, of simple, compound, periodic
sentences--and finally endeavor to rejoin the parts into a complete
whole. To pursue the subject further would be to encroach upon the
domain of formal rhetoric and would be out of place here. The best
counsel is the old counsel: try to _understand_ and _feel_ the great
passages of the great prose masters. A few examples have been given on
pages 25 ff., above; they should be studied diligently.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Prose and Verse Rhythm._ It is but a short step from the occasional
regularity of rhythm in the passages on pages 27-29 to the deliberately
continuous regularity of verse. A tendency to rhythmic flow, it has
already been shown, is inherent in ordinary language. When the words are
made to convey heightened emotion this tendency is increased, and "the
deeper the feeling, the more characteristic and decided the rhythm"
(John Stuart Mill). Then, as Coleridge says, "the wheels take fire from
the mere rapidity of their motion," and finally we have

              high and passionate thoughts
    To their own music chanted.

Intensified, regularized rhythm is reciprocally both a result of
impassioned feeling and a cause of it: hence its double function in
poetry. It springs, on the one hand, from "the high spiritual instinct
of the human being impelling us to seek unity by harmonious adjustment
and thus establishing the principle that _all_ the parts of an organized
whole must be assimilated to the more _important_ and _essential_
parts." On the other hand, it "resembles (if the aptness of the simile
may excuse its meanness) yeast, worthless or disagreeable by itself,
but giving vivacity and spirit to the liquor with which it is
proportionally combined."[19]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [19] Coleridge, Biographia Literaria, ch. xviii. Compare the |
  | more poetical expression of the same truth in Carlyle's      |
  | Heroes, Hero-Worship, and the Heroic in History: "Observe    |
  | too how all passionate language does of itself become        |
  | musical--with a finer music than the mere accent; the speech |
  | of a man even in zealous anger becomes a chant, a song. All  |
  | deep things are Song. It seems somehow the very central      |
  | essence of us, Song; as if all the rest were but wrappings   |
  | and hulls! The primal element of us; of us, and of all       |
  | things. The Greeks fabled of Sphere-Harmonies: it was the    |
  | feeling they had of the inner structure of Nature; that the  |
  | soul of all her voices and utterances was perfect music....  |
  | See deep enough, and you see musically; the heart of Nature  |
  | _being_ everywhere music, if you can only reach it." (The    |
  | Hero as Poet.)                                               |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The question is as old as Aristotle, whether metre, that is, regularized
rhythm, is an inalienable and necessary concomitant of poetry. The
answer rests on a precise understanding of terms; for the right
antithesis, so far as there is one, is not between prose and poetry, but
between prose and verse. High and passionate thoughts, true poetical
feeling and expression may and do exist in prose, but their most natural
and characteristic expression is in verse. The old question has been
lately reopened, however, by the anomalous form called 'free-verse.'
Only the name is new; the thing itself is, at its best, but a carefully
rhythmed prose printed in a new shape: an effort to combine in an
effective union some of the characteristics of spatial rhythm with the
established temporal rhythms of language. Free-verse will be discussed
more fully on a later page; it is mentioned here because it is a natural
transition between prose and verse, claiming as it does the freedom of
the one and the powers of the other.

Another means of recognizing the close relations of verse and prose is
to try to determine which of several passages of similarly heightened
emotion, printed in the same form, was originally verse and which prose.

     Yet, as I would not catch your love with a lie, but force you to
     love me as I am, faulty, imperfect, human, so I would not cheat
     your inward being with untrue hopes nor confuse pure truth with a
     legend. This only I have: I am true to my truth, I have not
     faltered; and my own end, the sudden departure from the virile
     earth I love so eagerly, once such a sombre matter, now appears
     nothing beside this weightier, more torturing bereavement.

     But follow; let the torrent dance thee down to find him in the
     valley; let the wild lean-headed eagles yelp alone, and leave the
     monstrous ledges there to slope, and spill their thousand wreaths
     of dangling water-smoke, that like a broken purpose waste in air.
     So waste not thou; but come; for all the vales await thee; azure
     pillars of the hearth arise to thee; the children call, I thy
     shepherd pipe.

     A late lark twitters from the quiet skies; and from the west, where
     the sun, his day's work ended, lingers as in content, there falls
     on the old, gray city an influence luminous and serene, a shining
     peace. The smoke ascends in a rosy-and-golden haze. The spires
     shine, and are changed. In the valley shadows rise. The lark sings
     on. The sun, closing his benediction, sinks, and the darkening air
     thrills with a sense of the triumphing night--night with her train
     of stars and her great gift of sleep.

     There, suddenly, within that crimson radiance, rose the apparition
     of a woman's head, and then of a woman's figure. The child it
     was--grown up to woman's height. Clinging to the horns of the
     altar, voiceless she stood--sinking, rising, raving, despairing;
     and behind the volume of incense, that, night and day, streamed
     upwards from the altar, dimly was seen the fiery font, and the
     shadow of that dreadful being who should have baptized her with the
     baptism of death. But by her side was kneeling her better angel,
     that hid his face with wings; that wept and pleaded for _her_; that
     prayed when _she_ could _not_; that fought with Heaven by tears
     for _her_ deliverance; which also, as he raised his immortal
     countenance from his wings, I saw, by the glory of his eye, that
     from Heaven he had won at last.

     Dost thou already single me? I thought gyves and the mill had tamed
     thee. Oh that fortune had brought me to the field where thou art
     famed to have wrought such wonders with an ass's jaw! I should have
     forced thee soon wish other arms, or left thy carcass where the ass
     lay thrown; so had the glory of prowess been recovered to
     Palestine.

     And when, in times made better through your brave decision
     now,--might but Utopia be!--Rome rife with honest women and strong
     men, manners reformed, old habits back once more, customs that
     recognize the standard worth,--the wholesome household rule in
     force again, husbands once more God's representative, wives like
     the typical Spouse once more, and Priests no longer men of Belial,
     with no aim at leading silly women captive, but of rising to such
     duties as yours now,--then will I set my son at my right hand and
     tell his father's story to this point.[20]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [20] The first is from a poem in free-verse, Meditation, by  |
  | Richard Aldington; the second is blank verse, from the Small |
  | Sweet Idyl in Tennyson's Princess; the third is from         |
  | Henley's Margaritae Sorori (also in free-verse); the fourth  |
  | is from DeQuincey's English Mail-Coach, Dream Fugue IV       |
  | (prose); the fifth is from Milton's Samson Agonistes, ll.    |
  | 1092 ff. (blank verse); the sixth is from Browning's The     |
  | Ring and the Book, Bk. V (blank verse).                      |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

On the other hand, it is worth observing what effect metrical
arrangement has upon the emotional quality and power of words and
phrases. Hardly anyone would, perhaps, find the following passages
strikingly melodious:

     Prince Lucifer uprose on a starr'd night. The fiend, tired of his
     dark dominion, swung above the rolling ball, part screen'd in
     cloud, where sinners hugg'd their spectre of repose.

     Here there is sweet music that falls softer on the grass than
     petals from blown roses, or night-dews on still waters in a
     gleaming pass between walls of shadowy granite; music that lies
     gentlier on the spirit than tired eyelids upon tired eyes.

But turn these words back to their original metrical order, and it is
almost a miracle performed. One recalls Coleridge's definition of poetry
as the best words in the best places.

    On a starr'd night Prince Lucifer uprose.
      Tired of his dark dominion swung the fiend
      Above the rolling ball in cloud part screen'd,
    Where sinners hugg'd their spectre of repose.
        MEREDITH, Lucifer in Starlight.

    There is sweet music here that softer falls
    Than petals from blown roses on the grass,
    Or night-dews on still waters between falls
    Of shadowy granite in a gleaming pass,
    Music that gentlier on the spirit lies
    Than tired eyelids upon tired eyes.
        TENNYSON, Lotos Eaters.

It should now be clear that prose and verse are not so antithetical as
is often supposed; that they are only different forms of the same
substance, language; two branches from the same root. At certain points
they overlap and are practically one; at other points the divergence is
obvious but not great; and even in their extreme differences the common
basis of the rhythms is the same. In both prose and verse are the same
relations of time, stress, and pitch, except that in verse the
arrangement and order of them are according to a perceptible pattern.
_Verse is but prose fitted over a framework of metre._ Herein lies the
whole art of versification, the whole psychology of poetic rhythm, the
whole problem of metrical study and investigation.

We must always remember that "a line of verse is a portion of
speech-material with all its phonetic features (corresponding to its
ethos as well as its logos) _adjusted_, without violence, to a fixed and
definite metrical scheme. The two entities, metrical scheme and portion
of speech-material adjusted thereto, are distinct and the chief study of
the metricist is the manner of adjustment of the latter to the former,
the way in which a suitable portion of phonetic liquid is chosen and
poured into metrical bottles."[21] Only after having grasped what can be
grasped of the subtleties of prose rhythm, and having learned the common
forms and patterns of metre, can we put the two together, recognize
their new unity, perceive the new rhythmic beauties, harmonies,
modulations that spring from their mutual adjustment.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [21] Thomas Rudmose-Brown, "English and French Metric," in   |
  | Modern Language Review, vol. 8 (1913), p. 104.               |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

A word may be added here, though the subject is one rather of æsthetics
than of prosody, on the function of metre in emphasizing and reinforcing
the beauties of thought, emotion, and expression that poetry offers. Two
practical illustrations have just been given above. Every writer on
poetics, from Aristotle down, has had something to contribute, but the
substance of it all may be found in the eighteenth chapter of
Coleridge's Biographia Literaria, from which a few sentences have
already been quoted.[22] It is not merely that verse by its external
appearance notifies the reader, or by its perceptible regularity
notifies the listener, that the writer is putting forth his highest
efforts, that language is being driven to its highest possibilities; it
is not that the use of verse signalizes greater aims and intentions than
the use of prose; but rather that the higher efforts, the greater aims,
turn by a natural, spontaneous, but partly mysterious instinct to
metrical forms for adequate or fit expression. The poets themselves have
proved this. No one, barring a few notable exceptions, who felt the
creative powers of poetry within him has dared neglect or refuse the
added difficulties and the potential beauties of metre. Not the sense of
obstacles overcome, but of possibilities realized prompts to formal
rhythms. Music, in Dryden's phrase, is inarticulate poetry; but poetry,
while it remains articulate and endeavors to accomplish its own
destinies, will always approach as close as its own conditions permit to
the powers of music. Some poets are inclined more powerfully to music
than others. Burns composed with definite melodies in mind; Shelley
often began with a little tune which he gradually crystallized into
words; Schiller tells us that inspiration often came to him first in the
form of music. Tennyson, Swinburne, and others, have chanted rather than
read their poetry aloud. And even Browning, who sometimes appears to
prefer discord to music, is found to have studied not only the science
of music, but also the musical effectiveness of words.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [22] A convenient collection of extracts from various        |
  | writers is made by Professor R. M. Alden in Part IV of his   |
  | English Verse, New York, 1903.                               |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

While it is unquestionably going too far to insist as Hegel does that
"metre is the first and only condition absolutely demanded by poetry,
yea even more necessary than a figurative picturesque diction"; or even
to say that the finest poetry is always metrical; still it remains a
simple fundamental truth that metre is the natural form of poetic
language. The great exceptions to this--the poetic prose of a Sir Thomas
Browne, a Pater, a Carlyle, or the free-verse of Whitman--do but prove
its soundness; for we always feel them to be something exceptional,
something not quite natural though not quite amiss, something wonderful,
like _tours de force_. We would not wish them otherwise, perhaps; but we
should doubt them if we did not actually have them before us.




CHAPTER III

METRE


_Elements of verse rhythm._ The simplest metrical unit is the syllable;
the next higher unit is the foot, a group of syllables; the next higher
unit the line, a group of feet; then the stanza or strophe.

In some prosodies--as the French and Italian, for example--the standard
unit of verse is the syllable. The first essential of a line is that it
have a certain number of syllables; the accents or stresses may,
theoretically at least, fall anywhere in the line. In English verse also
the syllable has sometimes been regarded as the unit, but for the most
part only by a few poets and prosodists of the late sixteenth, the
seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries.

The foot corresponds in English verse to what has been described in
Chapter I as the rhythmic unit of all rhythms, namely that which recurs
in regular sequence. It comprises, therefore, a point of emphasis and
all that occupies the time-distance between that point of emphasis and
the following one. In other words, a foot is a section of speech-rhythm
containing a stressed element and an unstressed element, usually one or
two unaccented syllables. So much is clear and undisputed in theory. But
there are few single topics on which writers on English prosody are so
much at variance as on the further, more accurate definition of the
foot. One of the main sources of difficulty, however, is easily removed.
The metrical foot is not a natural division of language, like the word
or the phrase, but an arbitrary division, like the bar in music, an
abstraction having no existence independent of the larger rhythm of
which it is a part. The analogy between the metrical foot and the
musical bar is very close: they are both artificial sections of rhythm
which either in whole or in part may be grouped into such phrases as the
ideas or melodies may require.[23] They may be isolated and treated by
themselves only for the purposes of analysis, for they are merely
theoretical entities, like the chemical elements. There is no reason,
therefore, that the foot should correspond with word divisions, no
objection to the falling of different syllables of one word into
different feet. Thus in Gray's line

    The cur | few tolls | the knell | of part | ing day

both _curfew_ and _parting_ are divided.[24] Further, the division
between clauses may fall in the middle of a foot, as in Wordsworth's
lines

    The world | is too | much with | us; late | and soon
    Getting and spending we lay waste our powers.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [23] The chief difference perhaps between the foot and the   |
  | bar is that the latter always begins with a rhythmic stress, |
  | whereas the foot may begin with an unstressed element.       |
  |                                                              |
  | [24] Some metrists, holding that every foot should begin     |
  | with a stress, divide thus:                                  |
  |                                                              |
  |     The | curfew | tolls the | knell of | parting | day.     |
  |                                                              |
  | Such a division can be justified on several grounds, but it  |
  | remains awkward and obscures the plain fact of rising        |
  | rhythm. It does not affect the division of word and foot;    |
  | for compare Shelley's line:                                  |
  |                                                              |
  |     Ne | cessi | ty! thou | mother | of the | world.         |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

But another difficulty remains, which is apparent in the second line
just quoted from Wordsworth. The general rhythm of the whole sonnet of
which these two lines are the beginning is plainly duple rising, or
iambic. The first line and the latter part of the second are easily
divisible into iambs; but how shall _Getting and spend_- be divided?
Clearly _and spend_- is an iamb, but _Getting_ is not. Can trochees and
iambs occur together in the same line without either obscuring or
actually destroying the rhythm? The simpler solution would be to keep
the whole line in rising rhythm by regarding -_ing and spend_- as the
second foot and ‸ _Gett_- as the first. (The sign ‸ indicates a missing
syllable or musical rest. See below, page 63.)

The most common feet are the iamb, the trochee, the anapest, and the
dactyl (see above, page 38), to which may be added the spondee. The
names are borrowed, not quite felicitously, from classical prosody.
Various symbols are in use:

  FOOT              SYMBOLS           EXAMPLES

  iamb       ◡_̷      X  ̷     _xa_    alone, despair, to walk.
  trochee    _̷◡       ̷ X     _ax_    study, backward, talk to.
  anapest    ◡◡_̷    X X  ̷   _xxa_   interdict, to permit,
  dactyl     _̷◡◡     ̷ X X   _axx_   tenderly, after the.
  spondee    _̷_̷       ̷  ̷      _aa_    stone deaf, broad-browed.

Classical prosody distinguished several other feet, some of which are
occasionally mentioned in treatises on English verse: amphibrach ◡_◡,
tribrach ◡◡◡, pyrrhic ◡◡, paeon _◡◡◡, choriamb _◡◡_.

The objection to the use of these classical terms is not so serious as
is frequently supposed. Since Greek and Latin prosody was primarily
quantitative, that is, based upon syllabic length, and every long
syllable was theoretically equal to two short syllables, an iamb or
◡-had the musical value of ♪♩, a trochee of ♩♪, a dactyl of ♩♪♪, etc.
And since no such definite musical valuation can be given to English
feet, a Greek iamb and an English iamb are obviously different. But
after all there was inevitably an element of stress in the classical
feet, and there is a very positive element of time in the English, so
that the difference is not so great, and no confusion need result once
the facts are recognized. Another set of terms, however, borrowed from
the Greek and Latin is open to more grave objection, for no real
equivalence exists between the classical and the modern phenomena. The
_iambic trimeter_ in Greek consists of three dipodies or six iambs; as
used by English prosodists it consists of three iambs. The Greek
_trochaic tetrameter_, similarly, contains eight trochees, the English
'trochaic tetrameter' but four. The common term _iambic pentameter_ is
not so objectionable, but is to be rejected because of its similarity to
the others, which are actually confusing.

The next larger metrical unit after the foot is the _line_ or _verse_.
It is distinguished (1) mechanically by the custom of printing, (2)
phonetically by the pause usual at the end, and (3) structurally by its
use as a unit in forming the stanza. Lines are of one, two, three, or
more feet, according to the metrical form used by the poet (see Chapter
IV). In rimed verse the end of the line is so emphasized that the line
itself stands out as a very perceptible rhythmic unit; in unrimed verse,
however, the line is frequently not felt as a unit at all, but is so
interwoven with the natural prose rhythm of the words as to be almost
indistinguishable to the ear, though of course visible to the eye on the
printed page. This fact is easily apparent in reading the second, fifth,
and sixth illustrative selections on pages 43, 44.

The _stanza_ or _strophe_ is a combination of two or more lines of the
same or varying lengths, according to a regular pattern chosen by the
poet. 'Irregular' stanzas sometimes occur, in which the thought rhythm
is said to control and determine the stanzaic rhythm; that is, the
length of line and position of rimes are regulated by the logical and
emotional content of the words. On the various kinds of stanzaic
structure, see pages 88 ff., below.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Metrical Patterns._ It must be fully understood that these metrical
patterns of line and stanza are purely formal. They are the bottles into
which the poet pours his liquid meaning, or better, the sketched-in
squares over which the painter, copying from an old masterpiece, draws
and paints his figures. They have no literal or concrete existence. They
are no more the music of verse than

[Illustration: Waltz rhythm]

is the music of a waltz. They are absolutely fixed and predetermined
(though the poet may invent new patterns if he chooses). But he uses
them _only as forms_ on which he arranges his words and phrases. For the
rhythm of language is extremely soft and malleable: by skilful handling
it can be moulded into an infinite variety of shapes. Perhaps the
comparison of a stanza by John Donne with a stanza by W.B. Yeats, both
based on the same metrical scheme, will help to make this clear. The
formal scheme is

    ◡_̷◡_◡_̷◡_̷◡_̷

    Death, be not proud, though some have callèd thee
    Mighty and dreadful, for thou art not so:
    For those whom thou think'st thou dost overthrow
    Die not, poor Death; nor yet canst thou kill me.
        JOHN DONNE, Death.

    When you are old and gray and full of sleep
    And nodding by the fire, take down this book,
    And slowly read, and dream of the soft look
    Your eyes had once, and of their shadows deep.
        W. B. YEATS, When You are Old.

Even more striking is the difference of rhythmical effect observable in
reading, one after the other, a page of Pope's heroic couplets in the
Essay on Man, of Keats's same couplets in Endymion, and Browning's same
couplets in My Last Duchess.

While the formal pattern remains fixed and inflexible, over its surface
may be embroidered variations of almost illimitable subtlety and change;
but _always the formal pattern must be visible, audible_. The poet's
skill lies largely in preserving a balance of the artistic principles of
variety in uniformity and uniformity in variety. Once he lets go the
design, he loses his metrical rhythm and writes mere prose. Once we
cease to hear and feel the faint regular beating of the metronome we
fail to get the enjoyment of sound that it is the proper function of
metre to give. On the other hand, if the mechanical design stands out
too plainly, if the beat of the metronome becomes for an instant more
prominent than the music of the words, then also the artistic pleasure
is gone, for too much uniformity is as deadly to art as too much
variety.

    The curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
      The lowing herd winds slowly o'er the lea,
    The plowman homeward plods his weary way,
      And leaves the world to darkness and to me.

These verses are regular (as is appropriate for the theme), and vary
comparatively little from the formal metrical pattern. The coincidence
of prose rhythm and metrical rhythm is almost complete. Yet by means of
small subtleties of variation in pause, word order, long and short
syllables, Gray always saves the poem from monotony. How far the
variations may be carried, how much the ear may be depended upon for
rhythmic substitution and syncopation, is determined by many things.
Certain lines are unmistakably metrical to all ears and in all
positions--such as these verses of Gray's Elegy. Certain lines are
generally felt to contain daring variations and yet be successful and
effective--such as

    The blue Mediterranean, where he lay.
        SHELLEY, Ode to the West Wind.

    Myriads of rivulets hurrying thro' the lawn.
        TENNYSON, Small Sweet Idyl, in The Princess.

Other lines stretch our metrical sense to the breaking point, and
according to individual taste we judge them bold or too bold--such as
Tennyson's

    Take your own time, Annie, take your own time.
        Enoch Arden.

or Milton's

    Burnt after them to the bottomless pit.
        Paradise Lost, VI, 866.

In all of these examples the metrical pattern is the same: five
consecutive iambs. The modifications illustrate plainly the
extraordinary flexibility of language.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Time and Stress._ Probably the most disputed point in all prosodic
theory is the relative importance of time (duration, syllabic length)
and stress (accent) in English verse. Some writers have attempted to
explain all the phenomena entirely by stress; others entirely by time.
Neither side, of course, has been very successful.[25] The difficulty is
partly one of theory and partly one of correct analysis of the facts.
Thanks, now, to the attention paid in recent decades by the experimental
psychologists to rhythm and metre, we are in a position to reach at
least approximate clearness on this vexed point. Since the older
theorists have mostly started either from the traditional conceptions of
classical prosody or from examination of but a part of the phenomena,
their work may be left out of account here. Certainly no great blame
attaches to them; they are the Bacons and Harveys and Newtons of
metrical science. A more nearly correct analysis of the facts is
possible now because with the minutely accurate instruments of the
scientists to aid us we need no longer trust to the uncertainties of
perception and statement of separate individuals. Of course no one today
holds the extreme belief that science explains everything; and of course
the scientific experiments on the nature and effect of rhythm must have
a starting point in the personal equations of those who have submitted
themselves to the scientific tests. With all its patience and
thoroughness of investigation, experimental psychology is only now
establishing itself. But it does offer, on this one mooted point of
versification, invaluable help.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [25] An historical survey of the problems and theories,      |
  | somewhat colored by the author's own theory, may be found in |
  | English Metrists, Oxford, 1921, by T. S. Omond.              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The theory presented in the previous pages states that sound rhythm
consists of a succession of points of emphasis separated by equal time
divisions. This is the ideal rhythm. When subjected to the conditions of
metrical language it suffers two alterations. In the first place, our
notions of time are extremely untrustworthy. Days vanish in a moment and
they drag like years. Very few of us can estimate correctly the passage
of five minutes: syllables are uttered in a few hundredths of a second.
We are satisfied with the accuracy shown by an orchestra in keeping
time; but if we took a metronome to the concert we should find the
orchestra very deficient in its sense of time. The fact is that the
orchestra knows better than the metronome, that perfectly accurate time
intervals become unpleasantly monotonous, that we rebel at 'mechanical'
music. Thus the time divisions of pleasurable rhythm are not
mathematically equal, nor even necessarily approximately equal, but are
such as are _felt to be equal_. The second alteration of ideal rhythm
is that which results from the conformity of fluid language to its
metrical mould. This metrical scheme, based theoretically on equal time
units marked by equal stresses, becomes a compromise of uneven stresses
and apparently equal time divisions.

Almost every line of verse is a proof of this: both the fact and the
explanation are clear when approached from the right angle, and may be
tested by carefully prepared statistics. In the following examples the
figures beneath each syllable give the time of utterance in tenths and
one-hundredths of a second; the figures in parentheses represent
pauses.[26] The first, from Paradise Lost, II, 604-614, is in blank
verse, with five iambic feet to a line; the second, from Shelley's The
Cloud, is apparently irregular, but the basis is clearly anapestic. The
ideal rhythm or metrical pattern of the first is

    ◡_̷◡_̷◡_̷◡_̷◡_̷

regularly repeated. The ideal rhythm of the second is

    ◡◡_̷◡◡_̷◡◡_̷◡◡_̷
        ◡◡_̷◡◡_̷(◡◡_̷)

six times repeated.[27]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [26] I take these figures from the two articles by Professor |
  | Ada L. F. Snell in the Publications of the Modern Language   |
  | Association for September, 1918, pp. 396-408, and September, |
  | 1919, pp. 416-435. For the first example I have made an      |
  | average from the records of three different readers; for the |
  | second Miss Snell gives only one set of figures.             |
  |                                                              |
  | [27] The second and fourth lines have two feet each, the     |
  | alternate lines throughout the rest of the poem have three   |
  | feet each; but it is noteworthy that the average length of   |
  | these two short lines (1.61) is only .37 less than the       |
  | average of the four longer lines (1.98). The first, third,   |
  | fifth, etc., lines have four feet each.                      |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

  They fer-ry  o - ver this Le-the-an sound
  .29 .36 .15 .24  .13 .26 .23 .23 .23 .62  (.18)

  Both to and fro,   their sor-row to  aug-ment,
  .41 .27 .2 .63 (.36).26  .4  .16 .24 .32 .43 (.6)

  And wish and strug-gle,      as  they pass,    to reach
  .2  .47  .25  .33  .25 (.13) .21 .21  .57 (.4) .24 .35

  The tempt-ing stream,     with one small drop     to lose
  .14 .32    .3   .69 (.44) .24  .37  .53  .47 (.09).21 .47

  In sweet for-get-ful-ness     all pain and woe,
  .2 .37   .19 .28 .17 .25 (.1) .39 .53  .17 .52 (.59)

  All in one mo-ment      and  so near the brink;
  .42 .2 .21 .34 .3 (.47) .27 .28 .37  .11  .57 (.49)

  But Fate with-stands,   and, to  op - pose the attempt
  .23 .39  .28   .66 (.49).22  .18 .11  .48  .23  .52 (.33)

  Me - du - sa with Gor-go-nian ter-ror guards
  .15 .33  .15 .21  .3  .3 .23  .28 .21  .51

  The ford,    and of it-self the wa - ter flies
  .14  .6 (.3) .27 .2 .2  .48 .13 .25  .22  .64

  All taste of liv-ing wight,     as once  it fled
  .26  .48 .16 .19 .18  .43 (.5) .29  .39 .16  .43

  The lip  of Tan - ta -lus.
   .1 .32 .14 .33  .15   .3

         *       *       *       *       *

  I  bring fresh showers  for the thirst-ing flowers,
  .25 .35   .15  .8 (.15) .15 .15   .3   .2    .6 (.2)

    From the seas and the streams;
     .2  .18  .42 .15 .15   .62  (.75)

  I  bear light shade for the leaves when laid
  .2 .35   .3    .5   .18 .18  .34    .4   .45

    In their noon-day dreams.
    .18 .2   .22   .2   .7 (.6)

  From my wings are shak-en the dews that wak - en
  .25 .35  .44  .22  .3  .2 .1   .6   .2  .25  .25

    The sweet buds      ev - ery one,
    .1   .35  .53 (.15) .2   .21  .5 (.55)

  When rocked to rest      on their moth - er's breast,
  .18   .47   .2  .4 (.2) .18  .2   .22    .18   .47  (.4)

    As she danc - es  a - bout the sun.
    .2 .2   .45   .2 .1   .25   .2  .5 (.85)

  I   wield the flail  of the lash - ing hail,
  .22  .22  .1   .5   .15 .15  .25   .15  .45 (.3)

    And whit - en the green plains un - der,
    .2  .22   .18 .1   .32    .5   .2   .2 (.5)

  And then a - gain  I  dis - solve  in rain,
  .22 .38  .1  .55  .15 .2     .7   .15  .55 (.07)

    And laugh    as   I  pass  in  thun - der.
    .2   .4 (.2) .15 .18  .39  .18  .22   .25

Two facts emerge from these statistics at once: (1) that in about 90 per
cent of the feet the ◡ or unstressed element is shorter than the _̷ or
stressed element, or, in other words, stress and syllabic length nearly
always coincide; and (2) that while there is very great variation in the
absolute lengths of short syllables and long syllables, the proportion
of average lengths is about 2:4.[28] One need not suppose that the
conscious mind always hears or thinks it hears the syllables pronounced
with these quantitative proportions. Though we deceive ourselves very
readily in the matter of time, it is not true that we have no sense of
duration whatever. Quite the contrary. Our cerebral metronome is set
when we read verse for about .6 seconds for a foot (.2 seconds for the
unstressed element;.4 seconds for the stressed element). If we read
faster or more slowly the proportions remain the same. When, however, in
Paradise Lost, II, 607,

   ◡   _̷    ◡    _̷
  with one small drop
  .24  .37  .53  .47

the normal proportions are so patently departed from that the
theoretically unstressed syllable _small_ is actually longer than the
theoretically stressed syllable _drop_, and the foot _small drop_ takes
1. second, or 2/5 longer than the average foot beside it (_with one_,
.61 seconds)--when divergences so great as this are both possible and
pleasurable, the conclusion should be, not that the ear makes no
recognition of the time, but that it is capable, by syncopation and
substitution, of adjusting itself to a very great possibility of
variation without losing hold of the rhythmic pattern. Looked at from
one point of view, the extreme variations would appear to be
irregularities and warrant the judgment that no element of duration
exists as a principle of English verse; but from the right point of view
these variations mean only that the metrical time unit is
extraordinarily elastic while still remaining a unit; that the ear is
willing and able to pay very high for the _variety_ in uniformity which
it requires.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [28] This statement is based on Miss Snell's computations    |
  | from analysis of several records for blank verse and several |
  | kinds of lyric verse. The short syllables range in blank     |
  | verse from .02 to .54, in lyrics from .09 to .7; the long    |
  | syllables range in blank verse from .08 to .84, in lyrics    |
  | from .11 to .92. The average length of all long syllables is |
  | .4, of all short syllables is .21.                           |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *

_Pause._ The time element of English verse is affected also by different
kinds of pauses. Three kinds may be distinguished, two of which belong
properly to prose rhythm as well. (1) The _logical_ pause is that
cessation of sound which separates the logical components of speech. It
helps hold together the members of a unit and separates the units from
each other, and never occurs unless a break in the meaning is possible.
It is usually indicated in printed language by punctuation. (2) The
_rhythmical_ pause separates the breath groups of a sentence and
therefore concerns language chiefly as a series of sounds independent
for the most part of logical content or symbolism. Though its origin is
primarily physiological, it soon induces a psychological state and
results in an overuse or overdevelopment of the cerebral metronome. Both
readers and writers get into a certain 'swing' which turns to monotony
and sing-song in reading and to excessive uniformity of sentence length
and structure in writing--what is called a jog-trot style. This pause as
it affects the reading of verse is only slightly dependent upon the
logical content of words, for it takes its pace, especially in rimed
verse, from the normal line length, and tends to make every line sound
like every other, regardless of the meaning. (3) _Metrical_ pause is
primarily independent of the other two, but most frequently falls in
with them. It belongs to the formal metrical pattern, and serves usually
to mark off the line units. There is thus theoretically a pause at the
end of every line, and a greater pause at the end of every stanza. When
verses are 'run on,' i. e., when there is no logical pause at the end,
many readers omit the metrical pause or reduce it to a minimum. Others,
whose rhythmic sense is very keen, preserve it, making it very slight
but still perceptible. The metrical pause is greatly emphasized by rime.

There are two other time elements in English verse, related in different
ways to each of these three pauses, one which is nearly equivalent to
the musical _rest_; the other which is nearly equivalent to the musical
_hold_. The latter is common to both verse and prose, and is emotional
or elocutionary in origin; "If....," "Well----?" "'_These_ roses?' she
drawled." In verse it often coincides with and supports a metrical
pause, especially on rime words. Many readers in fact combine the hold
and the metrical pause or use them interchangeably. The former, the
_rest_, is a pause used to take the place of an unstressed element. As
such, however, it does not altogether compensate the break in the normal
time-space, but fills in the omission sufficiently to preserve the
rhythm of the verse.

These various pauses are all well illustrated in Tennyson's lyric,
Break, Break, Break.

  Break,   break,   break,
    .5 (.6) .5 (.28) .6  (.3)

    On  thy cold grey stones,    O sea!
    .35 .3   .6   .5   .7 (.15) .3 .55 (.65)

  And I would that my tongue could ut - ter
  .2 .2  .4    .2 .25   .4    .18  .18  .3 (.35)

    The thoughts that  a - rise in me.
     .2   .5      .3  .2    .4  .3 .5 (.8)

  O, well for the fish - er - man's boy
  .6  .6  .2  .2  .22   .15   .45   .6 (.55)

    That he shouts with his sis - ter at play!
     .2 .18  .55   .25  .2  .35   .18 .2  .6 (.9)

  O,      well for the sail - or lad
  .5 (.3) .61  .25 .3  .55   .2   .5 (.45)

    That he sings in  his boat  on the bay.
    .18 .18  .55  .25 .2  .45  .15 .15 .6

Logical pauses occur at the end of ll. 2, 4, 6, 8; and probably after
_stones_ in l. 2. After _stones_ there would be also a rhythmic pause,
but it is reinforced and practically replaced by the logical pause.
Another rhythmic pause might occur after _tongue_ in l. 3, but it is
absorbed partly by the length of _tongue_ and partly by the necessity of
preserving the line rhythm through _utter_. It will be felt, however, if
the lines are read thus:

    And I would that my tongue
    Could utter the thoughts
        That arise
        In me.

The metrical pause appears clearly after _utter_ in l. 3. The pauses
after _boy_ (l. 5) and _lad_ (l. 7) are both metrical and logical. The
hold is illustrated by _O_ in l. 5 and l. 7. [29] The rest appears
distinctly in l. 1. From reading the whole poem we know that the
movement is anapestic. The pattern rhythm for the first line would be

  ◡◡_̷  ◡◡_̷  ◡◡_̷
   Break  break  break

The number of syllables is three, whereas the other lines have from
seven to nine syllables each. That is, before each _break_ two light
syllables, or their time equivalent, are lacking, their place being
supplied by the rest-pause (which is also logical and emotional).[30]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [29] In the latter case it is supplemented by a pause in     |
  | Miss Snell's marking. Many readers would no doubt combine    |
  | the hold and pause; as was done in fact in l. 5.             |
  |                                                              |
  | [30] It should be noted that the average line length here    |
  | (including pauses within the line, excluding those at the    |
  | end of the line) is 2.8, and the first line is therefore     |
  | only .32 shorter than the average. If additional allowance   |
  | (omitted in Miss Snell's computation) be made for the        |
  | theoretical initial ◡◡ the average would be 2.85 and l. 1   |
  | would total 2.92. If the end pause is included the average   |
  | would be 3.38 and l. 1 2.78--a difference of .66; or with    |
  | the additional allowance the average would be 3.44 and l. 1  |
  | 3.22. While too much faith is not to be placed in the mere   |
  | figures, the inference is plain that the rests practically   |
  | compensate here for the omitted ◡◡.                         |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The reader may analyze the comparative lengths of foot, line, pause, and
rest in the following record:[31]

  Kent-ish Sir Bing    stood for the king,
  .4   .32 .46  .8 (.2) .5   .18 .16  .8 (.6)

  Bid-ding the crop-head-ed par-lia-ment swing;
  .26  .2  .12 .45   .3  .2 .4  .1  .35   .72 (.6)

  And, press-ing  a troop     un - ab - le to stoop,
  .2    .38  .12 .1  .55 (.2) .18 .26  .12 .2  .58 (.5)

  And see the rogues flour-ish     and hon - est folk droop;
  .22 .35 .15   .5    .6   .2 (.2) .26 .45   .18 .35   .48 (.75)

  Marched then a - long      fif - ty - score strong
    .52   .22 .12   .8 (.14) .35  .25    .5     .7 (.7)

  Great-heart-ed gent-le-men,     sing-ing this song.
  .35    .3   .2 .3  .12 .3 (.45) .44  .25 .28   .68 (.9)

  God for King Charles!   Pym and such carles
  .6 .46   .5     .8 (.5) .38 .26  .3   .85 (.42)

  To  the Dev - il that prompts them their treas-on-ous parles!
  .18 .18 .35  .25 .42     .5    .38  .2    .38  .1 .32  .75 (.55)

  Cav - a - liers,   up!    Lips from the cup.
  .35  .15   .5 (.4) .5 (.4) .6   .3  .12  .4

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [31] Miss Snell, Pause; a Study of its Nature and its        |
  | Rhythmical Function in Verse (Ann Arbor, 1918), pp. 78, 79.  |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *

_Pitch._ Pitch appears to be sometimes a determining element in rhythm,
as has been shown above; but since its chief function in verse is that
of supporting the recognized determinants and adding grace-notes to the
music, it is omitted here and discussed in Chapter V, below.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Balance of Forces._ It is not to be inferred from the foregoing
sections that the basis of English metre is time. For the basis of
English metre is dual: time and stress are inextricable. Beneath all
metrical language runs the invisible current of time, but the surface is
marked by stress. The warp of the metrical fabric is time; stress is the
woof. And from the surface, of course, only the woof is visible.
Moreover, the poet's point of view in composing and generally the
reader's point of view in reading has always been that of the
'stresser.' No poet ever wrote to a metronome accompaniment; extremely
few readers are fully conscious--few can be, from the nature of our
human sense of time--of the temporal rhythm that underlies verse. Thus
it has come about, historically, that modern English verse is written
and regarded as a matter of stress only, because to the superficial view
stress is predominant.[32] Probably the truth is that most poets compose
verse with the ideal metrical scheme definitely in mind and trust (as
they well may) to their rhythmical instinct for the rest. Whatever
device they employ for keeping the pattern always before them, they do
keep it distinctly before them--except perhaps in the simpler measures
which run easily in the ear--and build from it as from a scaffolding.
They may not know and may not need to know that this metrical scheme
does itself involve equal time units as well as equal stresses. They
vary and modulate both time and stress according to the thought and
feeling the words are asked to express. And though it is a point on
which no one can have a dogmatic opinion, one inclines to the belief
that usually the finest adaptations of ideas and words to metre are
spontaneous and intuitive. Skill is the result of habit and training,
and metrical skill like any other; but there is also the faculty divine.
One is suspicious of the

    Laborious Orient ivory sphere in sphere;

for when we can see how the trick is done we lose the true thrill.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [32] Modern English verse theory may be dated from           |
  | Coleridge's famous manifesto in the prefatory note to        |
  | Christabel in 1816: "I have only to add that the metre of    |
  | Christabel is not, properly speaking, irregular, though it   |
  | may seem so from its being founded on a new principle:       |
  | namely, that of counting in each line the accents, not the   |
  | syllables. Though the latter may vary from seven to twelve,  |
  | yet in each line the accents will be found to be only four.  |
  | Nevertheless, this occasional variation in number of         |
  | syllables is not introduced wantonly, or for mere ends of    |
  | convenience, but in correspondence with some transition in   |
  | the nature of the imagery or passion." Even here there is    |
  | implied a vague perception of the time unit, but Coleridge   |
  | was apparently unaware of its significance. See Leigh Hunt's |
  | comments in "What is Poetry?" in Imagination and Fancy.      |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

It would be absurd to imagine a prosody which was independent of its own
materials. It would be absurd therefore not to find in all language the
elements out of which verse is made. Indeed, M. Jourdain, having
recovered from his first shock on learning that he had actually been
talking prose, must prepare for a second: that he has actually been
talking potential verse. The three acoustic properties of
speech--duration, intensity, pitch--modified by the logical and
emotional content of which the sounds are symbolic, combine to produce
an incredibly subtle and elastic medium which the poet moulds to his
metrical form. In this process of moulding and adjustment, each element,
under the poet's deft handling, yields somewhat to the other, the
natural rhythm of language and the formal rhythm of metre; and the
result is a delicate, exquisite compromise. When we attempt to analyze
it, its finer secrets defy us, but the chief fundamental principles we
can discover, and their more significant manifestations we can isolate
and learn to know. In all the arts there is a point at which technique
merges with idea and conceals the heart of its mystery. The greatest
poetry is not always clearly dependent upon metrical power, but it is
rarely divorced from it. No one would venture to say how much the metre
has to do with the beauty of the

        magic casements opening on the foam
    Of perilous seas, in faery lands forlorn.




CHAPTER IV

METRICAL FORMS


I. THE LINE

_Line Length._ A line of English verse may contain from one to eight
feet. Theoretically, of course, more than eight feet would be possible;
but just as there are sounds which the human ear cannot hear and colors
which the eye cannot see, so there appears to be a limit beyond which we
do not recognize the line as a unit. The most frequently used lines are
of four and five feet, most conveniently called, respectively, 4-stress
and 5-stress lines;[33] those of one, two, and three feet tend to become
jerky, those of more than five to break up into smaller units.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [33] The expression '4-foot line' is too suggestive of       |
  | fishing or surveying; 'tetrameter' is confusing because of   |
  | its different usage in classical prosody; '4-stress line' is |
  | open to objection because it seems to overlook the temporal  |
  | quality of the foot. On the whole, however, the last seems   |
  | preferable.                                                  |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *

_Line Movement._ The movement of a line is determined primarily by the
foot of which it is composed. It is iambic, trochaic, anapestic,
dactylic, according as the metrical pattern is made up of iambs,
trochees, etc. Thus

    That time of year them mayst in me behold
    When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
    Upon those boughs that shake against the cold--
    Bare ruin'd choirs where late the sweet birds sang.
        SHAKESPEARE, Sonnet 73.

is plainly iambic.

    You and I would rather see that angel,
    Painted by the tenderness of Dante,
    Would we not?--than read a fresh Inferno.

    You and I will never see that picture.
    While he mused on love and Beatrice,
    While he soften'd o'er his outlined angel,
    In they broke, those "people of importance":
    We and Bice bear the loss forever.
        BROWNING, One Word More.

is plainly trochaic.

    I have found out a gift for my fair,
    I have found where the wood-pigeons breed.
        SHENSTONE, Pastoral Ballad.

is plainly anapestic.

    Take her up tenderly,
      Lift her with care;
    Fashion'd so slenderly,
      Young, and so fair!
          HOOD, Bridge of Sighs.

is plainly dactylic.

But very few poems conform exactly to the metrical pattern. For example,
Blake's

    Tiger, tiger, burning bright
    In the forests of the night,
    What immortal hand or eye
    Could frame thy fearful symmetry?

seems clearly to be trochaic; yet the last trochee of each line lacks
its unstressed element, and the fourth line has an extra-metrical
syllable, _Could_. By itself the fourth line would be called iambic: in
this context it is called trochaic with 'anacrusis,' i. e., with one or
more extra-metrical syllables at the beginning.[34] Or again in Clough's
stanza,

    And not by eastern windows only,
      When daylight comes, comes in the light;
    In front the sun climbs slow, how slowly!
      But westward, look, the land is bright!
            'Say Not, the Struggle Naught Availeth.'

the movement is clearly iambic, yet the first and third lines have an
extra-metrical syllable at the end. This is called 'feminine ending.'

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [34] From the point of view of stanzaic rhythm _Could_ may   |
  | be said to complete the final trochee of the previous line:  |
  |                                                              |
  |     What immortal hand or eye Could                          |
  |     Frame, etc.                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Moreover, sometimes the word or phrase rhythm clashes with the metrical
rhythm and makes the resultant seem doubtful. Thus

    Of hand, of foot, of lips, of eye, of brow.
        SHAKESPEARE, Sonnet 106.

    I slip, I slide, I gloom, I glance.
        TENNYSON, The Brook.

are unmistakably iambic, and Wordsworth's

    Pansies, lilies, kingcups, daisies.
        To the Small Celandine.

is unmistakably trochaic; but in Tennyson's

    This pretty, puny, weakly little one.
        Enoch Arden.

    With rosy slender fingers backward drew.
        Œnone.

there are metrically five iambs in each line, but also in each four
words that are trochaic. The result is a conflict of rhythms, a kind of
syncopation, which produces a very pleasing variant of the formal
rhythm.

Furthermore, in a passage like the following, which everyone recognizes
as exquisitely musical, it is not obvious whether the rhythm is iambic
or anapestic or trochaic.

    When the hounds of spring are on winter's traces,
      The mother of months in meadow or plain
    Fills the shadows and windy places
      With lisp of leaves and ripple of rain;
    And the brown bright nightingale amorous
    Is half assuaged for Itylus,
    For the Thracian ships and the foreign faces,
      The tongueless vigil, and all the pain.
          SWINBURNE, Atalanta in Calydon.

If the first two syllables be regarded as anacrusis, the first line
would be trochaic, with a dactyl substituted for a trochee in the second
foot. The third line is apparently trochaic. But only three lines of the
eight have a feminine or trochaic ending, and all except the third have
iambic or rising rhythm in the first foot; so that it is more simple and
natural to consider the last syllable of the first, third, and seventh
lines as extra-metrical, and call the rhythm iambic-anapestic, or
rising. Since the ◡_̷ and ◡◡_̷ are both rising rhythm they may be
readily substituted one for the other--the appearance of equal time
values being preserved--without disturbing the musical flow of sounds.
Thus of the thirty-two feet in the eight lines, seventeen are iambs and
eleven anapests, two are weak iambs (-_orous_, -_ylus_), one a spondee
(_bright night_-), and one monosyllabic with a rest (‸ _Fills_).
Tennyson's Vastness may also be studied for its combinations of
trochees, dactyls, and spondees. Here is one stanza:

    Stately purposes, valour in battle, glorious annals of army and
        fleet,
    Death for the right cause, death for the wrong cause, trumpets of
        victory, groans of defeat.

Similar combinations, still freer, with frequent anacrusis as well, are
characteristic of Swinburne's Hesperia; e. g.--

    Shrill | shrieks in our | faces the | blind bland | air that was |
        mute as a | maiden,
      Stung into | storm by the | speed of our | passage, and | deaf
        where we | past;
    And our | spirits too | burn as we | bound, thine | holy but | mine
        heavy | laden,
      As we | burn with the | fire of our | flight; ah, | love, shall
        we | win at the | last?

The first line of a poem is not always a good criterion of the metre of
the whole poem--though Poe declared that it should be. For Tennyson's
The Higher Pantheism is chiefly in triple falling rhythm, but it begins

    The sun, the moon, the stars, the seas, the hills and the plains.

The first stanza of Campbell's famous Battle of the Baltic runs:

    Of Nelson and the North,
    Sing the glorious day's renown,
    When to battle fierce came forth
    All the might of Denmark's crown,
    And her arms along the deep proudly shone;
    By each gun the lighted brand,
    In a bold determined hand,
    And the Prince of all the land
    Led them on.

Here the first line might be 3-stress or 2-stress; the second, third,
fourth, sixth, seventh, eighth might have three stresses or four; the
fifth five or six; the ninth two or one. It is not, in fact, until we
reach the

    Again! again! again!

of the fourth stanza that we are sure how the poem ought to be read. But
Campbell was not a faultless artist. There is the same metrical
ambiguity, however, in Tennyson's

    Come into the garden, Maud,

until the second line shows us we should read it with three stresses,
not four. There is a curious verse in Gay's Beggar's Opera which well
illustrates the necessity of consulting the context to determine the
pattern, for it can, taken by itself, be scanned in three different
ways:

    How happy could I be with either.
        Air XXXV.

viz., ◡_̷◡◡_̷◡_̷◡_̷◡ or ◡_̷◡◡◡_̷◡_̷◡ or ◡_̷◡◡_̷◡◡◡_̷◡.

But sometimes it is difficult, if not impossible, to say whether a line
or series of lines is in rising or falling rhythm, or what sort of foot
is predominant--in other words, what is the formal metrical pattern.
This difficulty is, of course, no fault of the poet's: it lies in the
complexity of the phenomena, and is after all a weakness of our power of
analysis. In the spectrum blue merges into green, red into yellow, and
though we invent names for various tints, others still escape
classification. And just as some verses combine iambic and anapestic
(rising), or dactylic and trochaic (falling) movements, so others
combine rising and falling rhythms. For example,

    The mountain sheep are sweeter,
    But the valley sheep are fatter;
    We therefore deemed it meeter
    To carry off the latter.
        PEACOCK, War-song of Dinas Vawr, from The Misfortunes of Elphin.

This may be trochaic with anacrusis or iambic with feminine endings, but
neither quite adequately describes it. Is Shelley's To Night
prevailingly iambic or trochaic? All of the twenty-five long lines end
with an iamb, but only eleven begin with rising rhythm (thirteen begin
with falling or trochaic rhythm, and one is ambiguous). Two of the short
lines are definitely iambic, the other eight are doubtful, but
apparently trochaic. If it is read as iambic, eleven of the hundred feet
in the long lines will be 'irregular'; if it is read as trochaic, eleven
likewise will be 'irregular.' Milton's L'Allegro and Il Penseroso
contain lines that are purely iambic, as

    And oft, as if her head she bow'd;

some that are purely trochaic, as

    Whilst the landskip round it measures;

and others which are a combination, as

    Bosom'd high in tufted trees.
    Then to the spicy nut-brown ale.
    The melting voice through mazes running.

Again, how shall the following stanza from F. W. H. Myers's Saint Paul
be classified?

    Lo, if some strange intelligible thunder
      Sang to the earth the secret of a star,
    Scarce could ye catch, for terror and for wonder,
      Shreds of the story that was peal'd so far.

The metrical scheme appears to be

    _̷◡◡_̷◡_̷◡_̷◡_̷◡
    _̷◡◡_̷◡_̷◡_̷◡_̷
    _̷◡◡_̷◡_̷◡_̷◡_̷◡
    _̷◡◡_̷◡_̷◡_̷◡_̷

that is, 5-stress trochaic, with dactylic substitution in the first foot
and truncation or catalexis of the last foot in the second and fourth
lines; or perhaps iambic, with anapestic substitution in the second foot
and a feminine ending in the first and third lines. But when many of
these stanzas are read in succession, the movement is found to be

    _̷◡◡_̷◡_̷◡◡◡_̷◡
    _̷◡◡_̷◡_̷◡◡◡_̷
    _̷◡◡_̷◡_̷◡◡◡_̷◡
    _̷◡◡_̷◡◡◡_̷◡_̷

that is, 4-stress falling rhythm, with intermixed duple, triple, and
quadruple time.

This introduces a new question, whether English verse admits of a foot
resembling the Greek paeon, _̷◡◡◡. The answer seems to be that
theoretically it does not, but practically it does.[35] It would,
doubtless, be more accurate to describe the foot as _̷◡◡[`]◡, for some
stress, however slight, is regularly felt on the third syllable. But the
poets have had their way, and written what certainly try to be paeonic
feet. Thus Macaulay's The Battle of Naseby begins:

    Oh! wherefore come ye forth in triumph from the north,
    With your hands, and your feet, and your raiment all red?
    And wherefore doth your rout send forth a bitter shout?
    And whence be the grapes of the wine-press that ye tread?[36]

And Mr. Kipling's The Last Chantey:

    Thus said the Lord in the vault above the Cherubim,
    Calling to the angels and the souls in their degree:
      "Lo! Earth has passed away
      On the smoke of Judgment Day.
    That Our word may be established, shall We gather up the sea?"

And Mr. E. A. Robinson's The Valley of the Shadow is in this same
rhythm, the first four lines being almost perfectly regular:

    There were faces to remember in the Valley of the Shadow,
    There were faces unregarded, there were faces to forget;
    There were fires of grief and fear that are a few forgotten ashes,
    There were sparks of recognition that are not forgotten yet.

Some have read Browning's A Toccata of Galuppi's to the same tune, but
at grave risk of destroying the music.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [35] Apparent paeons occur now and then, where the usual     |
  | contraction would reduce them to triple time. Mr. Omond,     |
  | Study of Metre, pp. 96, 97, gives among others these         |
  | examples:                                                    |
  |                                                              |
  |     The leaves they were _withering and_ sere.               |
  |     Our _memories were treacherous and_ sere.                |
  |         POE.                                                 |
  |                                                              |
  |                     The rags of the sail                     |
  |     Are _flickering in_ ribbons within the fierce gale.      |
  |         SHELLEY.                                             |
  |                                                              |
  |     A land that is _lonelier than_ ruin.                     |
  |         SWINBURNE.                                           |
  |                                                              |
  | [36] In the last stanza occurs the foot:                     |
  |                                                              |
  |      _̷  ◡ ◡  ◡ ◡                                          |
  |     she of the seven                                         |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Rightly described, this movement is a discontinuous syncopation of fours
and twos; the prevailing formal unit is _̷◡◡◡, but it is varied now by
_̷◡_̷◡, and now by simply _̷◡, with the usual substitution of _̷◡◡ for
_̷◡. It is an excellent exercise to analyze Jean Ingelow's Like a
Laverock in the Lift and observe the pauses, holds, and substitutions.
The most notable are _̷_̷◡ for _̷◡◡◡ (_we too, it's_), and _̷◡_̷ (_lass,
my love_, l. 5; _thou art mine_, l. 6; _missed the mark_, l. 7, etc.).
The third line may be read

    Like a | laverock in the | lift ‸ etc.

or

    Like a laverock | in the lift | etc.

The former seems preferable.[37]

    It's we two, it's we two, it's we two for aye,
    All the world, and we two, and Heaven be our stay.
    Like a laverock in the lift, sing, O bonny bride!
    All the world was Adam once, with Eve by his side.

    What's the world, my lass, my love!--what can it do?
    I am thine, and thou art mine; lift is sweet and new.
    If the world have missed the mark, let it stand by,
    For we two have gotten leave, and once more we'll try.

    Like a laverock in the lift, sing, O bonny bride!
    It's we two, it's we two, happy side by side.
    Take a kiss from me, thy man; now the song begins:
    "All is made afresh for us, and the brave heart wins."

    When the darker days come, and no sun will shine,
    Thou shalt dry my tears, lass, and I'll dry thine.
    It's we two, it's we two, while the world's away.
    Sitting by the golden sheaves on our wedding day.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [37] See Sidney Lanier's scansion of the first stanza, in    |
  | his Science of English Verse, p. 228.                        |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

How musical and effective this rhythm is, judgments will differ. It is
clearly capable of great variety, but the large proportion of light
syllables forces heavier stress on some of the accents, and the number
of naturally heavy syllables which do not coincide with the metrical
stress is excessive; and the almost inevitable result is a thumping
which only the deftest manipulation can avoid.[38]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [38] An interesting variation of this rhythm (though perhaps to be |
  | related to the Middle English descendant of the Anglo-Saxon        |
  | long line) occurs in Shelley's Prometheus Unbound, Act I,          |
  |                                                                    |
  |     O sister, desolation is a difficult thing.                     |
  |                                                                    |
  | Compare also Shelley's earlier poem, Stanzas--April, 1814;         |
  | and for a more recent example:                                     |
  |                                                                    |
  |     Ithaca, Ithaca, the land of my desire!                         |
  |     I'm home again in Ithaca, beside my own hearth-fire.           |
  |     Sweet patient eyes have welcomed me, all tenderness and truth, |
  |     Wherein I see kept sacredly, the visions of our youth.         |
  |         AMELIA J. BURR, Ulysses in Ithaca.                         |
  |                                                                    |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------------+

Probably the most striking and successful use of the 4-beat movement is
that of Meredith's Love in a Valley. So marked is the time element, with
the compensatory lengthenings and pauses, that the poem almost demands
to be chanted rather than read; but when well chanted it is peculiarly
musical, and when ill read it is horribly ragged and choppy. The whole
poem will repay study for the metrical subtleties, but the first stanza
is sufficient to illustrate the rhythm (there are normally four _̷◡◡◡ in
each line).[39]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [39] This metre has been used, e. g., by George Darley       |
  | (1795-1846) in The Flower of Beauty (four stanzas) and       |
  | (rather monotonously) by Charles Swain (1803-74) in Tripping |
  | down the Field-Path (cf. Stedman's Victorian Anthology, pp.  |
  | 17, 76); and more recently by Mr. Alfred Noyes.              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

    Under yonder beech-tree single on the greensward,
      Couch'd with her arms behind her golden head,
    Knees and tresses folded to slip and ripple idly,
      Lies my young love sleeping in the shade.
    Had I the heart to slide an arm beneath her,
      Press her parting lips as her waist I gather slow,
    Waking in amazement she could not but embrace me:
      Then would she hold me and never let me go?

       *       *       *       *       *

_Examples._ There occur examples of 1-, 2-, 3-, 4-, 5-, 6-, 7-, 8-stress
iambic, trochaic, anapestic, and dactylic lines, sometimes used
continuously and sometimes used in combinations with other lengths. But
many of these are unusual, and may be found only by diligent search.[40]
Some have already been illustrated in the previous section, others occur
here and there throughout this volume, especially in the paragraphs on
the stanza; some of the more important, however, are given below. But,
of course, the line rhythm is significant mainly as a unit of the longer
composition, and brief selections cannot well represent the rhythmic
movement of a whole poem. Whenever possible the poem should be read
complete.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [40] For a classified collection see Alden, English Verse,   |
  | pp. 24 ff.                                                   |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Attempts have been made to characterize the different feet as slow or
rapid, solemn or light, and so on, but they are generally unsuccessful.
For though certain measures seem to be inherently unsuitable for
dignified themes, or for humorous subjects, there are always contrary
instances to be adduced, and it is dangerous to be dogmatic. Anapests
are said to be characteristically rapid, hurried, because they crowd
more syllables than iambs do into a line; but anapests are often
slow-moving, because there is frequent iambic substitution and because
many important words--monosyllables, for the most part--have to do duty
for light syllables metrically. Perfect anapests, like perfect dactyls,
are comparatively few in English.

Two-stress and 6-stress anapestic:

                  Canst thou say in thine heart
                    Thou hast seen with thine eyes
                  With what cunning of art
                    Thou wast wrought in what wise,
    By what force of what stuff thou wast shapen, and shown on my breast
        to the skies?
            SWINBURNE, Hertha.[41]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [41] This whole poem abounds in substitutions. See Shelley's |
  | The Cloud, above, pages 59 f., which may be regarded as 2-and|
  | 3-stress anapestic lines, though two 2-stress lines are      |
  | printed as one.                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Three-stress anapestic:

    If you go over desert and mountain,
      Far into the country of Sorrow,
      To-day and to-night and to-morrow,
    And maybe for months and for years;
      You shall come with a heart that is bursting
      For trouble and toiling and thirsting,
    You shall certainly come to the fountain
    At length,--to the Fountain of Tears.
        ARTHUR O'SHAUGHNESSY, The Fountain of Tears.

    Though the day of my destiny's over,
      And the star of my fate hath declined,
    Thy soft heart refused to discover
      The faults which so many could find;
    Though thy soul with my grief was acquainted,
      It shrunk not to share it with me,
    And the love which my spirit hath painted
      It never hath found but in _thee_.
          BYRON, Stanzas to Augusta.

Four-stress anapestic:

    The Assyrian came down like the wolf on the fold,
    And his cohorts were gleaming in purple and gold;
    And the sheen of their spears was like stars on the sea
    When the blue wave rolls nightly on deep Galilee.
        BYRON, The Destruction of Sennacherib.

Five-stress anapestic. This is a peculiar metre, usually felt to be
choppy and harsh. It has been said that no one can read Browning's Saul
and follow both metre and meaning at the same time:

    As I sang,--
            Oh, our manhood's prime vigour! No spirit feels waste,
    Not a muscle is stopped in its playing nor sinew unbraced.
    Oh, the wild joys of living! the leaping from rock up to rock,
    The strong rending of boughs from the fir-tree, the cool, silver shock
    Of the plunge in a pool's living water, the hunt of the bear, ...

Eight-stress anapestic. This is on the whole the longest line possible
in English.[42] It is really a _tour de force_.

  +-------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [42] Tennyson's To Virgil, though it has nine stresses in         |
  | each line and is therefore an exception to the statement          |
  | made above, page 69, is shorter in respect of the number of       |
  | syllables. There is, moreover, a poem, After Death, by Fanny      |
  | Parnell, consisting of fourteen 10-stress lines. The              |
  | cumbrousness of the rhythm is apparent in these two               |
  | specimens--which are rather better than the others--              |
  |                                                                   |
  |     Ah, the harpings and the salvos and the shoutings of thy      |
  |         exiled sons returning!                                    |
  |     I should hear, though dead and mouldered, and the grave-damps |
  |         should not chill my bosom's burning.                      |
  |                                                                   |
  | The whole of this poem may be found in Sir Edward T. Cook's More  |
  | Literary Recreations, p. 278.                                     |
  |                                                                   |
  +-------------------------------------------------------------------+

The trochaic line is generally stiff and thumping. It does not admit of
frequent substitutions, for many substitutions destroy the trochaic
effect. It usually comes to an abrupt close because feminine endings are
not easy or natural in English. Moreover, there are in the language so
many dissyllabic words of trochaic movement that the resulting frequent
coincidence of word and foot tends to produce monotony. Tennyson once
said that when he wanted to write a poem that would be popular he wrote
in trochaics. Certainly the stresses are more prominent in trochaic
verse than in iambic or even anapestic; and the untrained ear likes its
rhythms well marked.[43] The Locksley Hall poems are good examples:

    Comfort? comfort scorned of devils! this is truth the poet sings,
    That a sorrow's crown of sorrow is remembering happier things.
    Drug thy memories, lest thou learn it, lest thy heart be put to proof,
    In the dead, unhappy night, and when the rain is on the roof.

Notable is Tennyson's skill in this 8-stress line in avoiding the
natural break into 4 + 4. This break occurs regularly and is enforced by
the rime in Poe's The Raven. One of the most successful metrically of
purely trochaic poems is Browning's One Word More, a few lines of which
are quoted on page 70.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [43] By a series of experiments C. R. Squire found a natural |
  | preference for duple over triple rhythms (though the triple  |
  | rhythms seemed 'pleasanter'), and for trochaic and dactylic  |
  | over iambic and anapestic. (Am. Journal of Psychology, vol.  |
  | 12 (1901), p. 587.)                                          |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Four-stress trochaic.

    Shall I, wasting in despair,
    Die because a woman's fair?
    Or make pale my cheeks with care
    'Cause another's rosy are?

    Be she fairer than the day,
    Or the flow'ry meads in May,
      If she think not well of me,
      What care I how fair she be?
          WITHER, The Author's Resolution.

    Souls of Poets dead and gone,
    What Elysium have ye known,
    Happy field or mossy cavern,
    Choicer than the Mermaid Tavern?
        KEATS, Lines on the Mermaid Tavern.

Five-stress trochaic.

    Then the music touch'd the gates and died;
    Rose again from where it seem'd to fail,
    Storm'd in orbs of song, a growing gale;
    Till thronging in and in, to where they waited,
    As 'twere a hundred-throated nightingale,
    The strong tempestuous treble throbbed and palpitated;
    Ran into its giddiest whirl of sound,
    Caught the sparkles, and in circles,
    Purple gauzes, golden hazes, liquid mazes,
    Flung the torrent rainbow round.
        TENNYSON, The Vision of Sin.

(Note here the substitutions for special imitative effect.)

Shelley's To a Skylark is in trochaic metre of 3-stress and 6-stress
lines.

Dactylic lines are not common except in the imitations of the classical
hexameter. Hood's familiar Bridge of Sighs in 2-stress lines, and
Tennyson's still more familiar Charge of the Light Brigade (which is,
however, only partly dactylic) are good illustrations.

Iambic lines are by very far the most frequent in English verse. No
special examples need therefore be given except of the less usual
6-stress and 7-stress lines. On blank verse see pages 133 ff.

The 6-stress line is called the alexandrine (probably from the name of
an Old French poem in this metre). It is still the standard line in
classical French verse; but the French alexandrine differs from the
English, principally in having four stresses instead of six. In English
it is usually awkward when used for long stretches, and tends to split
into 3 + 3. Lowell called it "the droning old alexandrine." It was
employed for several long poems in Middle English; and certain of the
Elizabethans tried it: Surrey, Sidney, and Drayton--Drayton's Polyolbion
(1613) contains about 15,000 alexandrines. It has not commended itself
to modern poets, with one exception, for sustained work. Browning wrote
his Fifine at the Fair (1872) in this measure; and while he succeeded in
relieving it of some of its monotony, he only demonstrated again its
unfitness, in English, for continuous use. A peculiar musical effect is
obtained from it, however, by Mr. Siegfried Sassoon in his Picture-Show:

    And still they come and go: and this is all I know--
    That from the gloom I watch an endless picture-show,
    Where wild or listless faces flicker on their way,
    With glad or grievous hearts I'll never understand
    Because Time spins so fast, and they've no time to stay
    Beyond the moment's gesture of a lifted hand.

On the other hand, as the last line of the Spenserian and similar
stanzas the alexandrine has proved very melodious and effective, largely
by contrast with the shorter lines. A few isolated examples will
illustrate some of its powers, but of course the whole stanza should be
read together.

    And streames of purple bloud new die the verdant fields.
        SPENSER, Faerie Queen, I, 2, 17.

    Which from a sacred fountain welled forth alway.
        Ibid., I, 1, 34.

    Swinges the scaly horror of his folded tail.
    The wakeful trump of doom must thunder through the deep.
    With thousand echoes still prolongs each heavenly close.
        MILTON, On the Morning of Christ's Nativity.

    Dart follows dart; lance, lance; loud bellowings speak his woes.
        BYRON, Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, I, lxxvi.

    Where'er the surge may sweep, the tempest's breath prevail.
        Ibid., III, ii.

    As though a rose should shut, and be a bud again.
        KEATS, Eve of St. Agnes, xxvii.

    Countless and swift as leaves on autumn's tempest shed.
        SHELLEY, Revolt of Islam, I, iv.

    Month follow month with woe, and year wake year to sorrow.
        SHELLEY, Adonais, xxi.

    With sparkless ashes load an unlamented urn.
        Ibid., xl.

    Our sweetest songs are those that tell of saddest thought.
        SHELLEY, To a Skylark.

                                          The slender stream
    Along the cliff to fall and pause and fall did seem.
        TENNYSON, Lotos Eaters.

Alexandrines were occasionally in the eighteenth century (and more
frequently in the late seventeenth) inserted among heroic couplets for
variety and special effect, as in Pope's

    The huge round stone, resulting with a bound,
    Thunders impetuous down, and smokes along the ground.
        Odyssey, XI, 737-738.

But Pope himself condemned the 'needless alexandrine'

    That, like a wounded snake, drags its slow length along.
        Essay on Criticism, 357.

One of the oldest lines of modern English verse is the so-called
septenary (septenarius), having had a nearly continuous tradition from
the twelfth-century Poema Morale down (in its divided form) to the
present. It began as a single line of seven stresses or fourteen
syllables, and continued to be used as such through the Elizabethan
period, and sporadically even later.[44] But on account of its customary
pause after the fourth foot, it very early broke into two short lines of
four and three stresses each, and thus the septenary couplet became the
ballad stanza. For example,

    And even the lowly valleys joy to glitter in their sight
    When the unmeasur'd firmament bursts to disclose her light.
        CHAPMAN, Iliad, VIII.

is essentially the same metre, though printed differently, as

    The western wave was all aflame,
    The day was wellnigh done!
    Almost upon the western wave
    Rested the broad, bright sun.
        COLERIDGE, Ancient Mariner, Part III.

The more notable long poems in septenaries are Warner's Albion's England
(1586), Golding's translation of Ovid's Metamorphoses (1565, 1567), and
Chapman's translation of the Iliad (1598-1611).

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [44] Wordsworth and Mrs. Browning have written rimed         |
  | septenaries.                                                 |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+


2. THE STANZA

_Couplet._ The line unit is used sometimes singly and continuously, as
in blank verse, and sometimes in groups usually held together by rime.
These groups are called stanzas or strophes. The simplest stanza is,
therefore, the couplet rimed _aa_.[45] Couplets are either unequal or
equal in length.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [45] The usual and most convenient way of indicating         |
  | stanzaic structure is with small italic letters for the      |
  | rimes and either superior or inferior numbers for the number |
  | of stresses in each line. Thus Landor's Rose Aylmer:         |
  |                                                              |
  |     Ah, what avails the sceptred race!                       |
  |       Ah, what the form divine!                              |
  |     What every virtue, every grace!                          |
  |       Rose Aylmer, all were thine.                           |
  |                                                              |
  | is described as _a^{4}b^{3}a^{4}b^{3}_. The repetition of a  |
  | whole line is indicated by a capital letter. When all the    |
  | lines are of the same length, one exponent figure suffices,  |
  | as _abba^{4}_ for the In Memoriam stanza.                    |
  |                                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The only much-used unequal couplet is the combination, now
old-fashioned, of an alexandrine and a septenary, and called, from the
number of syllables, Poulter's Measure, because, says Gascoigne (1575),
"it gives xii. for one dozen and xiii. for another." Wyatt and Surrey
and Sidney wrote in it; the older drama employed it occasionally; Arthur
Brooke's Romeus and Juliet (1562) on which Shakespeare's play was based,
is in this measure. The following example is by Nicholas Grimald
(1519-62).

    What sweet relief the showers to thirsty plants we see,
    What dear delight the blooms to bees, my true love is to me!
    As fresh and lusty Ver foul Winter doth exceed--
    As morning bright, with scarlet sky, doth pass the evening's weed--
    As mellow pears above the crabs esteemed be--
    So doth my love surmount them all, whom yet I hap to see!

It survives chiefly in the S.M. (short measure) of the hymn books and
such stanzas as that used by Macaulay in his Horatius:

    From Egypt's bondage come,
      Where death and darkness reign,
    We seek our new and better home,
      Where we our rest shall gain.

       *       *       *       *       *

    When the goodman mends his armor,
      And trims his helmet's plume;
    When the goodwife's shuttle merrily
      Goes flashing through the loom;
    With weeping and with laughter
      Still is the story told,
    How well Horatius kept the bridge
      In the brave old days of old.

Other unequal couplets are found in Herrick's A Thanskgiving to God for
his House (_a^{4}a^{2}_) and Browning's Love among the Ruins
(_a^{6}a^{2}_).

The equal couplet is used both continuously and, more rarely except with
long lines, as a single stanza. Sometimes two or three couplets are
combined into a larger stanza. The usual forms of the couplet used
continuously are the 4-stress or short couplet ("octosyllabic") and the
5-stress or heroic couplet ("decasyllabic").

       *       *       *       *       *

_Short Couplet._ The short couplet in duple iambic-trochaic movement has
proved its worth by its long history and the variety of its uses. The
English borrowed it from the French octosyllabic verse, and employed it
chiefly for long narrative poems. Chaucer used it in his earlier work,
the Book of the Duchess, and the House of Fame; Butler in the
serio-comic Hudibras; Scott, Byron, Wordsworth, and Morris in their
Romantic narrative verse. For lyric purposes it was used by Shakespeare
and other dramatists, by Milton in L'Allegro and Il Penseroso, and since
then by most of the greater and lesser poets. But its effect, especially
in long poems, is often monotonous because of the rapid recurrence of
the rimes, and its powers are somewhat limited. Except under expert
handling it is likely to turn into a dog-trot, and it seems sometimes to
lack dignity where dignity is required. On the whole it is better for
swift movement, for the obvious reason that the line is short: the
frequent repetition of the unit, both line and couplet, produces the
effect of hurry.

Never has the short couplet revealed its flexibility to better advantage
than in Milton's L'Allegro and Il Penseroso and in Coleridge's
Christabel. In Christabel Coleridge believed he was inventing a new
prosodic principle, that of counting the stresses rather than the
syllables;[46] and though he erred with respect to the originality of
his principle, he succeeded in getting a freer movement than the couplet
had had since Chaucer. Some of the roughness of Chaucer's short couplets
is probably due to the imperfections of our texts, and some also to the
haste with which he wrote--it is in this metre that the fatal facility
of certain poets has proved the worst bane--but the Chaucerian couplet
stands as a prototype (though not literally a model) of the freer flow
of Byron's[47] and Morris's couplets, in contrast to those of Scott and
Wordsworth, which resemble the stricter, syllable-counting couplets of
Chaucer's friend Gower.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [46] See above, p. 66, n. 1.                                 |
  |                                                              |
  | [47] Byron follows now one model, now another. In Parisina   |
  | he consciously tried the metrical scheme of Christabel.      |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The chief drawbacks of the short couplet, besides monotony, are the
tendency to diffuseness of language and looseness of grammatical
structure (as in Chaucer and Scott, for instance), and rime-padding,
i. e., the insertion of phrases and sometimes even irrelevant ideas, for
the sake of the rime.

The chief sources of variety are substitution, pause, run-on lines, and
division. The first is very apparent in the much-quoted passage in
Christabel:

    The night is chill; the forest bare;
    Is it the wind that moaneth bleak?
    There is not wind enough in the air
    To move away the ringlet curl
    From the lovely lady's cheek--
    There is not wind enough to twirl
    The one red leaf, the last of its clan,
    That dances as often as dance it can,
    Hanging so light, and hanging so high,
    On the topmost twig that looks up at the sky.

The pause offers more difficulties for the poet, and more opportunities;
since the line is so short, and the rimes reinforce the regular metrical
pause at the end of the line, important grammatical pauses cannot well
occur in the middle of the line without danger of breaking the rhythm.
The logical pause must, therefore, usually coincide with the metrical
and thus emphasize unduly the line unit. Moreover, the quick return of
the rime sound causes the couplet itself to be felt as a unit and
produces what are called 'closed couplets,' in which the two lines
contain an independent idea. To avoid irksome uniformity in this regard
three devices are customary: to 'run-on' the meaning from one line to
the next, thus momentarily obscuring the metrical pause, to 'run-on' the
couplets themselves, and to divide the couplet so that the second verse
belongs to a new sentence or independent clause.

    And thus, when they appeared at last,
    And all my bonds aside were cast,
    These heavy walls to me had grown
    A heritage--and all my own!
    And half I felt as they were come 5
    To tear me from a second home.
    With spiders I had friendship made,
    And watched them in their sullen trade;
    Had seen the mice by moonlight play--
    And why should I feel less than they? 10
    We were all inmates of one place,
    And I, the monarch of each race,
    Had power to kill; yet, strange to tell!
    In quiet we had learned to dwell.
    My very chains and I grew friends, 15
    So much a long communion tends
    To make us what we are:--even I
    Regained my freedom with a sigh.
        BYRON, The Prisoner of Chillon.

In this passage, which is on the whole conservative and stiff in
movement, observe (1) how the pause in the middle of ll. 4, 13, and 17
helps to vary the measure; (2) how many of the verses end with a logical
as well as metrical pause; (3) how in ll. 3, 5, 16, and 17 the meaning
runs over without pause into the next lines; (4) how the first two
couplets and the last two are run together, whereas the third and fourth
are both closed and independent; and (5) how at ll. 9 and 10 the
couplet is divided. This last device is not very frequent in the
practice of any poet except Chaucer; it is well illustrated, however, in
these lines from Shelley's With a Guitar to Jane:

    All this it knows; but will not tell
    To those that cannot question well
    The Spirit that inhabits it.
    It talks according to the wit
    Of its companions; and no more ...

Two other means of varying the swing of the short couplet are to change
the order of the rimes (as in the example above from Christabel) or
introduce a third riming line (that is, to use triplets with the
couplets), and to intermingle shorter lines, as Coleridge does
occasionally in Christabel, and Byron at the beginning of The Prisoner
of Chillon:

    My hair is gray, but not with years,
          Nor grew it white
          In a single night,
    As men's have grown from sudden fears.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Heroic Couplet._ The 5-stress line, both rimed and unrimed, is the most
flexible and best adapted to all kinds of subjects that English
versification possesses. Its powers range through the tragedy and comedy
of Shakespeare, the dignity of the sonnet, and the grandeur of Milton,
to the satire of Pope and the informal conversational verse of Mr.
Robert Frost. The 4-stress line is too short, the 6-stress is too long
(when it does not split into two equal parts); the 5-stress seems to hit
the golden average. It is less inclined to 'go' by itself, and
therefore is suitable for slow movements; on the other hand, it is
easily divided by pauses and hence is easily relieved of monotony and
adjustable to almost all tempos.[48]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [48] It is no doubt significant that the rhythmic pulses     |
  | which come most naturally to us are in twos and threes and   |
  | their multiples; while even to beat time in fives requires a |
  | special effort. In music 5/8 or 5/4 time is extremely rare.  |
  | There is an example of the latter in Chopin's Sonata I (the  |
  | larghetto movement).                                         |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The earliest form, historically, of the 5-stress line in English was in
rimed couplets; the first poet to use the rimed couplet continuously (as
distinguished from occasional use in a stanza) was Chaucer.[49] Blank
verse is a modification of the couplet by the simple omission of the
rimes at the end.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [49] On the source and origin of the 5-stress couplet in     |
  | English, authorities are in disagreement. See Alden, English |
  | Verse, pp. 177 ff., and the references there given.          |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The history of the heroic couplet may be divided into two periods, that
of Chaucer and his followers, Gavin Douglas and Spenser, and that
beginning with Marlowe, Chapman, and other Elizabethans and continuing
down to the present. This division is peculiar, for it represents a
double curve of development, the one comparatively short, the other
long. Chaucer's couplet has all the marks of ease and freedom of a fully
matured medium: great variety in the pauses, run-on lines and couplets,
and divided couplets. (All the means of securing variety for the short
couplet, explained above, apply _a fortiori_ to the heroic line.)
Douglas, in large part, and Spenser pretty fully, adopted and preserved
this unfettered movement, though the former anticipates here and there
the neat balance of the Popian couplet. Then the measure seems to have
begun all over again, partly on account of an attack of
syllable-counting, with close formal recognition of the line unit and
the couplet unit, and gradually worked its way back to its original
flexibility.[50]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [50] Note Professor Woodberry's praise of the heroic couplet |
  | for its simple music, its suppleness, its power of forcing   |
  | brevity: "the best metrical form which intelligence, as      |
  | distinct from poetical feeling, can employ." (Makers of      |
  | Literature, p. 104.)                                         |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The following characteristic examples illustrate the chief varieties of
the couplet. (Again, they should be supplemented by the reading of
longer passages. Pope's couplet, in particular, with its perfection of
form according to a few well-marked formulas, reveals its great
weakness, monotony, only in the consecutive reading of several pages.)

    Whan that Aprille with his shoures soote
    The drought of Marche hath perced to the roote,
    And bathed every veyne in swich licour,
    Of which vertue engendred is the flour;
    Whan Zephyrus eek with his swete breeth
    Inspired hath in every holt and heeth
    The tendre croppes, and the yonge sonne
    Hath in the Ram his halfe cours y-ronne,
    And smale fowles maken melodye,
    That slepen al the night with open eye,
    So priketh hem nature in here corages;
    Than longen folk to gon on pilgrimages,
    And palmers for to seken straunge strondes,
    To feme halwes, kouthe in sondry londes;
    And specially, from every shires ende
    Of Engelond, to Caunterbury they wende,
    The holy blisful martir for to seeke,
    That hem hath holpen whan that they were seeke.
        CHAUCER, Canterbury Tales, Prologue.

    The Husbandman was meanly well content
    Triall to make of his endevourment;
    And, home him leading, lent to him the charge
    Of all his flocke, with libertie full large,
    Giving accompt of th' annuall increce
    Both of their lambes, and of their woolly fleece.
    Thus is this Ape become a shepheard swaine,
    And the false Foxe his dog (God give them paine!)
    For ere the yeare have halfe his course out-run,
    And doo returne from whence he first begun,
    They shall him make an ill accompt of thrift.
        SPENSER, Mother Hubberd's Tale.

    And in the midst a silver altar stood:
    There Hero, sacrificing turtles' blood,
    Kneel'd to the ground, veiling her eyelids close;
    And modestly they open'd as she rose:
    Thence flew Love's arrow with the golden head;
    And thus Leander was enamoured.
    Stone-still he stood, and evermore he gaz'd,
    Till with the fire, that from his countenance blaz'd,
    Relenting Hero's gentle heart was strook:
    Such force and virtue hath an amorous look.
    It lies not in our power to love or hate,
    For will in us is over-rul'd by fate.
        MARLOWE, Hero and Leander.

    But when the far-off isle he touch'd, he went
    Up from the blue sea to the continent,
    And reach'd the ample cavern of the Queen,
    Whom he found within; without seldom seen.
    A sun-like fire upon the hearth did flame;
    The matter precious, and divine the frame;
    Of cedar cleft and incense was the pile,
    That breathed an odour round about the isle.
    Herself was seated in an inner room,
    Whom sweetly sing he heard, and at her loom,
    About a curious web, whose yarn she threw
    In with a golden shuttle. A grove grew
    In endless spring about her cavern round,
    With odorous cypress, pines, and poplars crown'd.
        CHAPMAN, Odyssey, V.

Though Chapman sometimes uses the pause and run-on lines freely, the
regularity of the foot makes for a certain stiffness and inflexibility.

    She, she is gone; she's gone; when thou know'st this,
    What fragmentary rubbish this world is
    Thou know'st, and that it is not worth a thought;
    He honours it too much that thinks it nought.
    Think then, my soul, that death is but a groom,
    Which brings a taper to the outward room,
    Whence thou spiest first a little glimmering light,
    And after brings it nearer to thy sight;
    For such approaches doth heaven make in death.
        DONNE, Anatomy of the World.

Donne's metres were notoriously careless--or deliberately irregular.
They therefore stand somewhat out of place in the general trend of
development.

    O how I long my careless limbs to lay
    Under the plantain's shade, and all the day
    With amorous airs my fancy entertain;
    Invoke the Muses, and improve my vein!
    No passion there in my free breast should move,
    None but the sweet and best of passions, love!
    There while I sing, if gentle Love be by,
    That tunes my lute, and winds the strings so high;
    With the sweet sound of Sacharissa's name,
    I'll make the list'ning savages grow tame.
        WALLER, Battle of the Summer Islands.

Waller, though his lifetime (1605-87) embraces that of Milton, is the
natural precursor of the eighteenth century. His couplets are almost all
characteristic of eighteenth-century couplets, which seem to seek
perfection within themselves. The aim of Waller, Dryden, Pope, and
Johnson was primarily to exalt the couplet and extract from it all its
potentialities, not to obscure it by varied pauses and run-on lines.
Waller was praised by the best critics of his own and the following
generation for the great 'sweetness' and smoothness of his verse.

    Of these the false Achitophel was first;
    A name to all succeeding ages curst:
    For close designs and crooked counsels fit;
    Sagacious, bold, and turbulent of wit;
    Restless, unfix'd in principles and place;
    In pow'r unpleas'd, impatient of disgrace:
    A fiery soul which, working out its way,
    Fretted the pigmy body to decay,
    And o'er-informed the tenement of clay.
        DRYDEN, Absalom and Achitophel, Part I.

    All human things are subject to decay,
    And, when Fate summons, monarchs must obey.
    This Flecknoe found, who, like Augustus, young
    Was call'd to empire and had govern'd long;
    In prose and verse was own'd, without dispute,
    Through all the realms of Nonsense absolute.
    This aged prince, now flourishing in peace
    And blest with issue of a large increase,
    Worn out with business, did at length debate
    To settle the succession of the State.
        DRYDEN, MacFlecknoe.

It is interesting, from a metrical point of view, to compare Chaucer's
couplets with Dryden's where he is translating Chaucer, e. g., in the
Knight's Tale and Palamon and Arcite.

Between 1664 and 1678 it became the fashion, partly as a reaction
against the liberties of the late Elizabethan blank verse, and partly
under French influence, to write drama in heroic couplets. But the
undertaking soon proved abortive.

    Others for Language all their care express,
    And value books, as women men, for dress;
    Their praise is still,--the style is excellent;
    The sense, they humbly take upon content.
    Words are like leaves; and where they most abound,
    Much fruit of sense beneath is rarely found:
    False eloquence, like the prismatic glass,
    Its gaudy colours spreads on ev'ry place;
    The face of nature we no more survey,
    All glares alike, without distinction gay:
    But true expression, like th' unchanging sun,
    Clears and improves whate'er it shines upon;
    It gilds all objects, but it alters none.
        POPE, Essay on Criticism.

    Meantime the Grecians in a ring beheld
    The coursers bounding o'er the dusty field.
    The first who marked them was the Cretan king;
    High on a rising ground, above the ring,
    The monarch sat: from whence with sure survey
    He well observ'd the chief who led the way,
    And heard from far his animating cries,
    And saw the foremost steed with sharpen'd eyes.
        POPE, Iliad, XXIII.

Pope's couplets represent the acme of polish and metrical dexterity--a
perfect instrument for wit and satire.[51] Thus in the mock-heroic Rape
of the Lock these well-modeled couplets prove their mettle, but in the
translation of Homer their fatal limitations are easily apparent.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [51] See Pope's own analysis of his system of verse in a     |
  | letter to Cromwell, November 25, 1710.                       |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

    Sweet Auburn! loveliest village of the plain,
    Where health and plenty cheered the labouring swain,
    Where smiling spring its earliest visit paid,
    And parting summer's lingering blooms delayed:
    Dear lovely bowers of innocence and ease,
    Seats of my youth, when every sport could please,
    How often have I loiter'd o'er thy green,
    Where humble happiness endear'd each scene!
    How often have I paus'd on every charm,
    The shelter'd cot, the cultivated farm,
    The never-failing brook, the busy mill,
    The decent church that topt the neighboring hill,
    The hawthorn bush, with seats beneath the shade,
    For talking age and whispering lovers made....

    Ill fares the land to hastening ills a prey,
    Where wealth accumulates, and men decay:
    Princes and lords may flourish, or may fade;
    A breath can make them, as a breath has made:
    But a bold peasantry, a country's pride,
    When once destroy'd, can never be supplied.
        GOLDSMITH, The Deserted Village.

The departure from the petrified couplet was gradual and natural, and
influenced greatly by the simpler language and content of the verses.
These two specimens show Goldsmith writing in two manners, only a few
lines apart. Still freer are Cowper's couplets in his On the Receipt of
My Mother's Picture. Byron in English Bards and Scotch Reviewers (1809)
and Crabbe in his earlier work, still practised the eighteenth-century
couplet (in the Tales of the Hall, 1819, Crabbe varied it to a
considerable degree), but the new spirit of the Romantic Movement
leavened all the metrical forms, as it did the themes, of poetry.
Compare the following examples.

    One hope within two wills, one will beneath
    Two overshadowing minds, one life, one death,
    One heaven, one hell, one immortality,
    And one annihilation.
                        Woe is me!
    The winged words on which my soul would pierce
    Into the height of Love's rare universe
    Are chains of lead around its flight of fire--
    I pant, I sink, I tremble, I expire!
        SHELLEY, Epipsychidion.

    I rode one evening with Count Maddalo
    Upon the bank of land which breaks the flow
    Of Adria towards Venice: a bare strand
    Of hillocks, heaped from ever-shifting sand,
    Matted with thistles and amphibious weeds
    Such as from earth's embrace the salt ooze breeds,
    Is this; an uninhabited sea-side,
    Which the lone fisher, when his nets are dried,
    Abandons....
        SHELLEY, Julian and Maddalo.

    'Twas far too strange and wonderful for sadness;
    Sharpening, by degrees, his appetite
    To dive into the deepest. Dark, nor light,
    The region; nor bright, nor sombre wholly,
    But mingled up; a gleaming melancholy;
    A dusky empire and its diadems;
    One faint eternal eventide of gems.
    Aye, millions sparkled on a vein of gold,
    Along whose track the prince quick footsteps told,
    With all its lines abrupt and angular.
        KEATS, Endymion, II.

                    Ay, happiness
    Awaited me; the way life should be used
    Was to acquire, and deeds like you conduced
    To teach it by a self-revealment, deemed
    Life's very use, so long! Whatever seemed
    Progress to that, was pleasure; aught that stayed
    My reaching it--no pleasure. I have laid
    The ladder down; I climb not; still, aloft
    The platform stretches! Blisses strong and soft,
    I dared not entertain, elude me; yet
    Never of what they promised could I get
    A glimpse till now!
        BROWNING, Sordello, III.

                She thanked men,--good! but thanked
    Somehow--I know not how--as if she ranked
    My gift of a nine-hundred-years-old name
    With anybody's gift. Who'd stoop to blame
    This sort of trifling? Even had you skill
    In speech--(which I have not)--to make your will
    Quite clear to such an one, and say ...
        BROWNING, My Last Duchess.

    It hath been seen and yet it shall be seen
    That out of tender mouths God's praise hath been
    Made perfect, and with wood and simple string
    He hath played music sweet as shawm-playing
    To please himself with softness of all sound;
    And no small thing but hath been sometime found
    Full sweet of use, and no such humbleness
    But God hath bruised withal the sentences
    And evidence of wise men witnessing;
    No leaf that is so soft a hidden thing
    It never shall get sight of the great sun;
    The strength of ten has been the strength of one,
    And lowliness has waxed imperious.
        SWINBURNE, St. Dorothy.


_Three-Line Stanza_

Stanzas of three lines riming _aaa_ (called tercets or triplets) are not
very common. Familiar, however, is Herrick's Upon Julia's Clothes:

    Whenas in silks my Julia goes,
    Then, then, methinks, how sweetly flows
    That liquifaction of her clothes!

    Next, when I cast mine eyes, and see
    That brave vibration each way free;
    O how that glittering taketh me!

Other examples are: Threnos (in The Phœnix and the Turtle), Herbert's
Trinity Sunday, Quarles' Shortness of Life, Browning's A Toccata of
Galuppi's, Tennyson's The Two Voices, Swinburne's After a Reading, and
Clear the Way; and (with a simple refrain) Cowper's To Mary:

    The twentieth year is well-nigh past,
    Since first our sky was overcast;
    Ah, would that this might be the last!
                                  My Mary!

Crashaw's Wishes to his Supposed Mistress rimes _a^{2}a^{3}a^{4}_.

Tennyson's 'O Swallow, Swallow' in The Princess is in unrimed triplets.

On the terza rima see below, page 164.


_Four-Line Stanza: Quatrain_

The most important quatrains are the ballad stanza, riming
_a^{4}b^{3}c^{4}b^{3}_ or _a^{4}b^{3}a^{4}b^{3}_ (the Common Measure of
the hymnals), with the related Long Measure riming _abab^{4}_ or
_abcb^{4}_; the In Memoriam stanza _abba^{4}_; and the elegiac quatrain
_abab^{5}_. These are often combined into 8-and 12-line stanzas, as
_abab bcbc^{5}_ (called the Monk's Tale stanza), _abab cdcd_, etc.,
sometimes with alternating long and short lines. And these, as well as
longer stanzas, are frequently varied by the use of repetitions and
refrains.[52]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [52] For complete lists and examples of all the various      |
  | stanzaic forms, the larger works of Alden and Schipper       |
  | should be consulted.                                         |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The ballad stanza, with its frequent variations of internal rime
and additional verses is excellently illustrated by Coleridge's
Ancient Mariner. Similar is Tennyson's Sir Galahad, a 12-line stanza
of three quatrains, _a^{4}b^{3}a^{4}b^{3}cdc^{4}d^{3}efgf^{4}_. Another
common variation is that of Hood's The Dream of Eugene Aram, Wilde's
Ballad of Reading Gaol, and Rossetti's Blessed Damozel,
_a^{4}b^{3}c^{4}b^{3}d^{4}b^{3}_. The musical roughness of the old
ballads should be contrasted with the regularized modern imitations,
such as Longfellow's Wreck of the Hesperus. Better imitations are
Rossetti's Stratton Water and The King's Tragedy, Robert Buchanan's
Judas Iscariot, and W.B. Yeats's Father Gilligan. Sometimes a shorter
quatrain is printed as a long couplet and combined into larger stanzas,
as in Mr. Alfred Noyes's The Highwayman (which has an additional
variation in the inserted fourth and fifth lines):

    The wind was a torrent of darkness among the gusty trees,
    The moon was a ghostly galleon tossed upon cloudy seas,
    The road was a ribbon of moonlight over the purple moor,
    And the highwayman came riding--
        Riding--riding--
    The highwayman came riding, up to the old inn door.

The variations in Tennyson's The Revenge should be carefully studied.

The ballad stanza is closely similar to the _abab^{4}_ and _abcb^{4}_
quatrains, and (as in the Sir Galahad mentioned just above) the two are
sometimes united. All three were much used by Wordsworth and many minor
poets for lyrics as well as narratives; the result is often an
undignified tinkle that takes the popular ear and "makes the judicious
grieve." The stanzaic unit is so easily carried in one's mind and so
rapidly repeats itself, that there is little opportunity for the
necessary pleasing surprises. But that the measure is capable of a
simple expressive music is evident from such examples as Wordsworth's
'Lucy' poems. These stanzas, both alone and doubled (as in To Mary in
Heaven), were favorites with Burns.

A striking musical effect was obtained by Swinburne in Dolores by
shortening the last line of a double quatrain:

    Cold eyelids that hide like a jewel
      Hard eyes that grow soft for an hour;
    The heavy white limbs, and the cruel
      Red mouth like a venomous flower;
    When these are gone by with their glories,
      What shall rest of thee then, what remain,
    O mystic and sombre Dolores,
      Our Lady of Pain.

Similar interesting variations are Coleridge's Love, _aba^{4}b^{3}_ and
Wordsworth's The Solitary Reaper.

The In Memoriam stanza (_abba^{4})_ is named after Tennyson's poem
(though that was by no means its first use), because Tennyson gave it a
peculiar melody, and, partly for this reason and partly from the length
and subject of the poem, almost preëmpted it for elegiac purposes.[53]
Characteristic stanzas metrically are these:

    Calm and deep peace in this wide air,
      These leaves that redden to the fall;
      And in my heart, if calm at all,
    If any calm, a calm despair.

    And all we met was fair and good,
      And all was good that Time could bring,
      And all the secret of the Spring
    Moved in the chambers of the blood.

    Now fades the last long streak of snow,
      Now burgeons every maze of quick
      About the flowering squares, and thick
    By ashen roots the violets blow.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [53] On its origin and the twenty-five poems in it by        |
  | seventeen different poets, from Ben Jonson to Clough and     |
  | Rossetti, before the publication of In Memoriam, see E. P.   |
  | Morton in Modern Language Notes, 24 (1909), pp. 67 ff.       |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

One of the peculiarities of the stanza is the increased emphasis which
the rime of the third verse receives from its proximity to that of the
second; and this is noticeable both when there is a logical pause after
the third verse and when there is none:

    'Thou makest thine appeal to me:
      I bring to life, I bring to death:
      The spirit does but mean the breath:
    I know no more.' And he, shall he....

    I sometimes hold it half a sin
      To put in words the grief I feel;
      For words, like Nature, half reveal
    And half conceal the Soul within.

Run-on stanzas are very frequent; especially remarkable is the periodic
movement of the four stanzas of LXXXVI, leading up to the last line--

    A hundred spirits whisper 'Peace.'

"By the rhyme-scheme of the quatrain," says Corson, "the terminal
rhyme-emphasis of the stanza is reduced, the second and third verses
being the most closely braced by the rhyme. The stanza is thus admirably
adapted to the sweet continuity of flow, free from abrupt checks,
demanded by the spiritualized sorrow which it bears along. Alternate
rhyme would have wrought an entire change in the tone of the poem. To be
assured of this, one should read, aloud, of course, all the stanzas
whose first and second, or third and fourth, verses admit of being
transposed without affecting the sense. By such transposition, the
rhymes are made alternate, and the concluding rhymes more emphatic.
There are as many as ninety-one such stanzas.... The poem could not have
laid hold of so many hearts as it has, had the rhymes been alternate,
even if the thought-element had been the same."[54] Examples for this
experiment are:

    To-night the winds begin to rise
      And roar from yonder dropping day:
      The last read leaf is rolled away,
    The rooks are blown about the skies. XV, 1.

    I hold it true, whate'er befall;
      I feel it when I sorrow most;
      'Tis better to have loved and lost
    Than never to have loved at all. XXVII, 4.

Compare the slightly different effect of the same stanza printed as two
lines, in Wilde's The Sphinx:

    The river-horses in the slime trumpeted when they saw him come
    Odorous with Syrian galbanum and smeared with spikenard and with thyme.
    He came along the river bank like some tall galley argent-sailed,
    He strode across the waters, mailed in beauty, and the waters sank.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [54] H. Corson, Primer of English Verse, pp. 70 f.           |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The name 'elegiac stanza' for the _abab^{5}_ quatrain comes apparently
from its appropriate use by Gray in the Elegy Written in a Country
Churchyard, but it is not altogether fitting; for it is simply the
quatrain movement of the English sonnet, where no lament is intended,
and it was employed effectively by Dryden in his Annus Mirabilis, and
has been often employed since, without elegiac feeling. For examples
see the stanza from Gray, page 55, and the sonnets on pages 129 f. An
especially interesting modification is that of Tennyson's Palace of Art,
_a^{5}b^{4}a^{5}b^{3}_.


_Five-Line Stanza_

Five-line stanzas are formed in various ways, e. g., _aaaba_, _aabba_,
_aabab_, _abbba_, _ababa_, _ababb_, etc., in lines of three, four, five,
etc., stresses.


_Six-Line Stanza_

Six-line stanzas are formed by similar combinations; the most frequent
is the quatrain + couplet, called, from Shakespeare's poem, the Venus
and Adonis stanza, _ababcc^{5}_ (compare the end of the English sonnet
and the ottava rima).[55] Familiar examples are Wordsworth's To a
Skylark and his fine Laodamia.

    Since them art dead, lo! here I prophesy:
    Sorrow on love hereafter shall attend:
    It shall be waited on with jealousy,
    Find sweet beginning, but unsavoury end;
      Ne'er settled equally, but high or low;
      That all love's pleasure shall not match his woe.
          Venus and Adonis.

The same rimes with 4-stress verses are also common,[56] for example,
Wordsworth's

    I wandered lonely as a cloud
    That floats on high o'er vales and hills,
    When all at once I saw a crowd,
    A host, of golden daffodils;
    Beside the lake, beneath the trees,
    Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [55] Early examples may be conveniently found in the Oxford  |
  | Book of English Verse, Nos. 75, 96, 102, 108, 172.           |
  |                                                              |
  | [56] For early examples see again the Oxford Book of English |
  | Verse, Nos. 74, 140, 182, 184, 187.                          |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Another important 6-line stanza is the tail-rime or _rime couée_, a
stanza much used in the Middle English romances and chosen by Chaucer
for his parody, Sir Thopas. Harry Bailey, mine host of the Canterbury
pilgrims, called it 'doggerel rime.' The simple and probably normal form
is _aa^{4}b^{3}cc^{4}b^{3}_ or _aa^{4}b^{3}aa^{4}b^{3}_, which to save
space in the manuscripts was written thus:

    Listeth, lordes, in good entent,
                                    Of mirthe and of solas;
    And I wol telle verrayment
    Al of a knyght was fair and gent
                                    His name was sir Thopas.
    In bataille and in tourneyment,

Variations are extremely common: the _aaa^{4}b^{2}ccc^{4}b^{2}_
of Wordsworth's To the Daisy, _aaaa^{4}b^{2}ccc^{4}b^{3}_ of
Tennyson's Lady of Shalott, _aa^{3}b^{2}ccc^{3}b^{2}_ of S. F. Smith's
America, _aaa^{3}b^{2}ccc^{3}b^{2}_ of Drayton's Agincourt, and the
so-called Burns stanza, in which Burns wrote some fifty poems,
_aaa^{4}b^{2}a^{4}b^{2}_, e. g., To a Mouse and Address to the Deil.


_Seven-Line Stanza_

The most important 7-line stanza is the _rime royale_ or Chaucer (or
Troilus) stanza, _ababbcc^{5}_. In the Parlement of Foules, the Man of
Law's Tale, and Troilus and Criseyde, Chaucer made it a splendid vehicle
both for narrative and for reflective analysis, for humor, satire,
description, and all the gamut of emotions; in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries James I, Lydgate and Hoccleve, Henryson and Dunbar,
and Skelton, Hawes and Barclay employed it, largely in imitation of
Chaucer; Wyatt used it in his Vixi Puellis Nuper Idoneus; and
Shakespeare in The Rape of Lucrece. Since then it has not proved
attractive to the poets--though no reason for its disuse is
obvious--except Wordsworth (in his translations of Chaucer) and Morris,
Chaucer's latest disciple.

    And by the hond ful oft he wolde take
    This Pandarus, and into gardyn lede,
    And swich a feste, and swiche a proces make
    Hym of Criseyde, and of hire wommanhede,
    And of hire beaute, that, withouten drede,
    It was an heven his wordes for to here,
    And thanne he wolde synge in this manere.
        Troilus and Criseyde, Bk. III.

    So she, deep-drenched in a sea of care,
    Holds disputation with each thing she views,
    And to herself all sorrow doth compare;
    No object but her passion's strength renews;
    And as one shifts, another straight ensues:
    Sometime her grief is dumb and hath no words;
    Sometime 'tis mad and too much talk affords.
        Rape of Lucrece.

    Dreamer of dreams, born out of my due time,
    Why should I strive to set the crooked straight?
    Let it suffice me that my murmuring rhyme
    Beats with light wing against the ivory gate,
    Telling a tale not too importunate
    To those who in the sleepy region stay,
    Lulled by the singer of an empty day.
        MORRIS, Earthly Paradise.

In comparison with the formality of Shakespeare's and the evenness of
Morris's, the ease and smoothness of Chaucer's stanza are striking.
Wyatt's stanzas are musical in their way.


_Eight-Line Stanza_

Eight-line stanzas are variously formed--chiefly by the doubling of
quatrains, sometimes with different rimes, as _ababcdcd_, sometimes
preserving one or another or both rimes, as _ababbcbc_, _abcbdbeb_,
_ababacac_, _abababab_, etc. Other varieties are _abcdabcd_ (Rossetti)
and _aaabcccb_ (tail-rime), and _aabbccdd_.

One of the commonest 8-line stanzas is that imported from Italy and
called _ottava rima_, _abababcc_. It has been charged with tediousness,
and tedious it may become if not sedulously varied. It was introduced,
along with so much else from Italy, by Wyatt, and was then employed for
different purposes by Sidney, Spenser, Daniel, and others.[57] At the
close of the eighteenth century it enjoyed a rebirth. "It had already
been used by Harrington, Drayton, Fairfax (in his translation of Tasso's
Jerusalem Delivered), and ... in later times by Gay; and it had even
been used by Frere's contemporary, William Tennant; but to Frere belongs
the honour of giving it the special characteristics which Byron
afterwards popularized in Beppo and Don Juan.... Byron, taking up the
stanza with equal skill and greater genius, filled it with the vigour of
his personality, and made it a measure of his own, which it has ever
since been hazardous for inferior poets to attempt."[58] Byron had first
adopted the stanza in his translation of Pulci's Morgante Maggiore,
which is itself in _ottava rime_. Beppo was written in 1817, and Don
Juan begun in the next year. In 1819 the first four cantos of Don Juan
were published; in 1820 Keats published his Isabella, and Shelley wrote
his Witch of Atlas, both in the same metre.

    Those giant mountains inwardly were moved,
    But never made an outward change of place;
    Not so the mountain-giants--(as behoved
    A more alert and locomotive race),
    Hearing a clatter which they disapproved,
    They ran straight forward to besiege the place
    With a discordant universal yell,
    Like house-dogs howling at a dinner-bell.
        J. H. FRERE, The Monks and the Giants.

    To the kind of reader of our sober clime
      This way of writing will appear exotic;
    Pulci was sire of the half-serious rhyme,
      Who sang when chivalry was more Quixotic,
    And revell'd in the fancies of the time,
      True knights, chaste dames, huge giants, kings despotic,
    But all these, save the last, being obsolete,
    I chose a modern subject as more meet.
        BYRON, Don Juan, IV, vi.

    A lovely Lady garmented in light
      From her own beauty: deep her eyes as are
    Two openings of unfathomable night
      Seen through a temple's cloven roof; her hair
    Dark; the dim brain whirls dizzy with delight,
      Picturing her form. Her soft smiles shone afar;
    And her low voice was heard like love, and drew
    All living things towards this wonder new.
        SHELLEY, The Witch of Atlas.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [57] There are two _ottava rime_ in Lycidas, one at the      |
  | close of the Blind Mouths passage and one at the end of the  |
  | poem.                                                        |
  |                                                              |
  | [58] A. Dobson, in Ward's English Poets, vol. iv, p. 240.    |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+


_Nine-Line Stanza_

By far the most important of 9-line stanzas, and one of the finest of
all stanzas in English poetry, is the _ababbcbc^{5}c^{6}_ invented by
Spenser--a double quatrain of 5-stress lines plus an alexandrine. This
particular octave had been used by Chaucer in the Canterbury Tales, and
is sometimes referred to as the Monk's Tale stanza: the stroke of
metrical genius lay in adding the 'supplementary harmony' of the
alexandrine, by which the whole stanza climbs to a majestic close or
ebbs in a delightful decrescendo as the poet wills.[59] The long swing
of nine verses on three rimes, with the combined effect of the
interwoven rimes (_abab_ and _bcbc_) united by the couplet in the
middle, culminating in the unequal couplet at the close, the
extraordinary opportunity of balancing and contrasting the rime sounds,
and of almost infinitely varying the pauses--all these render the
Spenserian stanza incomparable for nearly every sort of poetic
expression.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [59] On the Spenserian stanza see especially Corson, pp. 87  |
  | ff. Lowell's characterization of Spenser's use of it is      |
  | interesting: "In the alexandrine, the melody of one stanza   |
  | seems forever longing and feeling forward after that which   |
  | is to follow.... In all this there is soothingness, indeed,  |
  | but no slumberous monotony; for Spenser was no mere metrist, |
  | but a great composer. By the variety of his pauses--now at   |
  | the close of the first or second foot, now of the third, and |
  | again of the fourth--he gives spirit and energy to a measure |
  | whose tendency it certainly is to become languorous" (Essay  |
  | on Spenser). See also Mackail's chapter on Spenser in        |
  | Springs of Helicon; and Shelley's praise in his Preface to   |
  | the Revolt of Islam: "I have adopted the stanza of Spenser   |
  | (a measure inexpressibly beautiful), not because I consider  |
  | it a finer model of poetical harmony than the blank verse of |
  | Shakespeare and Milton, but because in the latter there is   |
  | no shelter for mediocrity; you must either succeed or fail.  |
  | This perhaps an aspiring spirit should desire. But I was     |
  | enticed also by the brilliancy and magnificence of sound     |
  | which a mind that has been nourished upon musical thoughts   |
  | can produce by a just and harmonious arrangement of the      |
  | pauses of this measure."                                     |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

After the Faerie Queene, the chief poems in this metre are: Shenstone's
The Schoolmistress (1742), Thomson's The Castle of Indolence (1748),
Burns's The Cotter's Saturday Night (1786), Scott's Don Roderick
(1811), Byron's Childe Harold's Pilgrimage (1818 et seq.), Shelley's
Laon and Cythna (The Revolt of Islam) (1817, 1818), and Adonais (1821),
Keats's Eve of St. Agnes (1820), and the opening of Tennyson's Lotos
Eaters (1833).

From the following examples only a limited conception can be gained of
the stanza's varied capabilities. Long passages should be read
together--and read, for this purpose, with more attention to the sound
than to the meaning--in order that the peculiarities of handling of the
different poets may be felt.

    A gentle Knight was pricking on the plaine,
    Ycladd in mightie armes and silver shielde,
    Wherein old dints of deepe woundes did remaine,
    The cruell marks of many a bloody fielde;
    Yet armes till that time did he never wield.
    His angry steede did chide his foming bitt,
    As much disdayning to the curbe to yield:
    Full jolly knight he seemd, and faire did sitt,
    As one for knightly giusts and fierce encounters fitt.
        Faerie Queen, I, i, 1.

    With loftie eyes, halfe loth to looke so lowe,
    She thancked them in her disdainefull wise;
    Ne other grace vouchsafed them to showe
    Of Princesse worthy; scarse them bad arise.
    Her Lordes and Ladies all this while devise
    Themselves to setten forth to straungers sight:
    Some frounce their curled heare in courtly guise;
    Some prancke their ruffes; and others trimly dight
    Their gay attyre; each others greater pride does spight.
        Ibid., I, iv, 14.

    The whiles some one did chaunt this lovely lay:
    Ah! see, whoso fayre thing doest faine to see,
    In springing flowre the image of thy day.
    Ah! see the Virgin Rose, how sweetly shee
    Doth first peepe foorth with bashfull modestee,
    That fairer seemes the lesse ye see her may.
    Lo! see soone after how more bold and free
    Her bared bosome she doth broad display;
    Lo! see soone after how she fades and falls away.
        Faerie Queen, II, xii, 74.

    Or like the hell-borne Hydra, which they faine
    That great Alcides whilome overthrew,
    After that he had labourd long in vaine
    To crop his thousand heads, the which still new
    Forth budded, and in greater number grew.
    Such was the fury of this hellish Beast,
    Whitest Calidore him under him downe threw;
    Who nathemore his heavy load releast,
    But aye, the more he rag'd, the more his powre increast.
        Ibid., VI, xii, 32.

    O ruthful scene! when from a nook obscure
    His little sister did his peril see:
    All playful as she sate, she grows demure;
    She finds full soon her wonted spirits free,
    She meditates a prayer to set him free:
    Nor gentle pardon could this dame deny
    (If gentle pardons could with dames agree)
    To her sad grief that swells in either eye
    And wrings her so that all for pity she could die.
        SHENSTONE, The Schoolmistress.

    And hither Morpheus sent his kindest dreams,
    Raising a world of gayer tinct and grace;
    O'er which were shadowy cast Elysian gleams,
    That played, in waving lights, from place to place,
    And shed a roseate smile on nature's face.
    Not Titian's pencil e'er could so array,
    So fleece with clouds the pure ethereal space;
    Ne could it e'er such melting forms display,
    As loose on flowery beds all languishingly lay.
        JAMES THOMSON, The Castle of Indolence, I, xliv.

    The chearfu' supper done, wi' serious face,
    They, round the ingle, form a circle wide;
    The sire turns o'er, wi' patriarchal grace,
    The big ha'-Bible, ance his father's pride:
    His bonnet rev'rently is laid aside,
    His lyart haffets wearing thin an' bare;
    Those strains that once did sweet in Zion glide,
    He wales a portion with judicious care;
    And 'Let us worship God!' he says, with solemn air.
        BURNS, Cotter's Saturday Night.

    Now, where the swift Rhone cleaves his way between
    Heights which appear as lovers who have parted
    In hate, whose mining depths so intervene,
    That they can meet no more, though broken-hearted;
    Though in their souls, which thus each other thwarted,
    Love was the very root of the fond rage
    Which blighted their life's bloom, and then departed:
    Itself expired, but leaving them an age
    Of years all winters,--war within themselves to wage.
        BYRON, Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, III, xciv.

(Childe Harold begins with many deliberate imitations of Spenser's
language and style, but soon neglects them. Here perhaps more than in
any other metre the tone and subject of the poem determine the movement
of the stanza. The above is but one example of Byron's great variety.)

    The One remains, the many change and pass;
    Heaven's light forever shines, earth's shadows fly;
    Life, like a dome of many-colored glass,
    Stains the white radiance of eternity,
    Until Death tramples it to fragments.--Die,
    If thou wouldst be with them that thou dost seek!
    Follow where all is fled!--Rome's azure sky,
    Flowers, ruins, statues, music, words, are weak
    The glory they transfuse with fitting truth to speak.
        SHELLEY, Adonais, lii.

    The ancient Beadsman heard the prelude soft;
    And so it chanced, for many a door was wide,
    From hurry to and fro. Soon, up aloft,
    The silver, snarling trumpets 'gan to chide:
    The level chambers, ready with their pride,
    Were flowing to receive a thousand guests:
    The carvéd angels, ever eager-eyed,
    Stared, where upon their head the cornice rests,
    With hair blown back, and wings put cross-wise on their breasts.
        KEATS, Eve of St. Agnes, iv.

During the earlier half of the seventeenth century a small group of
poets, imitating Spenser both in substance and in external manner,
introduced a number of stanzas, some of them not to be admired, whose
chief characteristic is the alexandrine for a last line--e. g.,
_abababcc^{5}c^{6}_, _ababcc^{5}c^{6}_, _ababbcc^{5}c^{6}_, and
_ababbc^{5}c^{6}_ (which last is that of Milton's On the Death of a
Fair Infant, The Passion, and the introduction to On the Morning of
Christ's Nativity). Another modification is that of Milton's Ode
itself, _aa^{3}b^{5}cc^{3}b^{5}d^{4}d^{6}_. Matthew Prior attempted to
improve the Spenserian stanza in his Ode on the Battle of Ramillies
by a rime scheme (suggested perhaps by the English sonnet)
_ababcdcde^{5}e^{6}_--of which Dr. Johnson says: "He has altered the
stanza of Spenser, as a house is altered by building another house in
its place of a different form." Still farther from the Spenserian
original, but probably a development from it, is Shelley's To a Skylark
_abab^{3}b^{6}_ (mainly in falling rhythm); and an extension of this
last is Swinburne's Hertha (see above, page 81) _abab^{2}b^{6}_ in
triple rising rhythm.


_Fourteen-Line Stanza: Sonnet_

    A sonnet is a moment's monument,--
    Memorial from the Soul's eternity
    To one dead deathless hour. Look that it be,
    Whether for lustral rite or dire portent,
    Of its own arduous fulness reverent:
    Carve it in ivory or in ebony,
    As Day or Night may rule, and let Time see
    Its flowering crest impearled and orient.
    A sonnet is a coin: its face reveals
    The soul,--its converse, to what Power 'tis due:--
    Whether for tribute to the august appeals
    Of Life, or dower in Love's high retinue,
    It serve; or, 'mid the dark wharf's cavernous breath,
    In Charon's palm it pay the toll to Death.
        DANTE GABRIEL ROSETTI.

    The sonnet is a world, where feelings caught
    In webs of phantasy, combine and fuse
    Their kindred elements 'neath mystic dews
    Shed from the ether round man's dwelling wrought;
    Distilling heart's content, star-fragrance fraught
    With influences from breathing fires
    Of heaven in everlasting endless gyres
    Enfolding and encircling orbs of thought.
        JOHN ADDINGTON SYMONDS.

    A sonnet is a wave of melody:
    From heaving waters of the impassioned soul
    A billow of tidal music one and whole
    Flows, in the "octave"; then, returning free,
    Its ebbing surges in the "sestet" roll
    Back to the deeps of Life's tumultuous sea.
        THEODORE WATTS-DUNTON.

    It is the pure white diamond Dante brought
    To Beatrice; the sapphire Laura wore
    When Petrarch cut it sparkling out of thought;
    The ruby Shakespeare hewed from his heart's core;
    The dark, deep emerald that Rossetti wrought
    For his own soul, to wear for evermore.
        EUGENE LEE-HAMILTON.[60]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [60] See also the collection of Sonnets on the Sonnet,       |
  | edited by M. Russell, London and New York, 1898.             |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The only English stanza that can be said to rival the Spenserian in
artistic merit is the sonnet: but the two are for very different
purposes, the one being nearly always used in long, clearly connected
series, generally narrative, the other nearly always as an independent
poem. Even when sonnets are written in 'sequences,' the relation of the
individual sonnets to each other is rarely very close; the unity of the
whole sequence (as in Rossetti's House of Life, for example, or Mrs.
Browning's Sonnets from the Portuguese) is one merely of general tone
and subject. Some of Shakespeare's sonnets are bound together by an
intimate unity like stanzas of one poem; others are completely detached.
Occasionally a poem is composed of three or four sonnet-stanzas, as
Leigh Hunt's The Fish, the Man, and the Spirit, but even then each
sonnet remains an independent whole.

The word 'sonnet,' borrowed with the metrical form from Italy in the
late sixteenth century,[61] was at first used loosely for almost any
short poem on love not obviously a 'song'; but soon the term became
restricted to a poem of fourteen 5-stress iambic lines arranged
according to one of two definite rime schemes or their modifications.
These two rime schemes are the original Italian _abba abba cde cde_ and
the English _abab cdcd efef gg_.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [61] On the origin of the sonnet in Italy (Sicily) see the   |
  | references in Alden's English Verse, p. 267. Still a         |
  | standard work is C. Tomlinson's The Sonnet, London, 1874.    |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *

_Italian Sonnet._ The organization of the subject matter of an Italian
sonnet is (at least theoretically) as fixed as that of the rimes. The
whole should aim to convey without irrelevant detail a single thought or
feeling. The first quatrain, _abba_, should introduce the subject; the
second, _abba_, should develop it to a certain point, at which a pause
occurs; such is the octave. The sestet continues in the first tercet,
_cde_, the thought or feeling in a new direction or from a new point of
view, and in the second, _cde_, brings it to a full conclusion.[62] The
rime sounds of the octave and those of the sestet should be harmonious
but not closely similar.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [62] Elaborate rules for the sonnet are given by William     |
  | Sharp in the introduction to his Sonnets of the Century, and |
  | by Mark Pattison in the introduction to his edition of       |
  | Milton's sonnets. There is valuable matter in the            |
  | Introduction of J. S. Smart's The Sonnets of Milton,         |
  | Glasgow, 1921. Compare also the 'divisioni' of Dante's       |
  | sonnets in the Vita Nuova.                                   |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

It stands to reason that very few poets have enslaved themselves to such
an imperious master without assuming certain liberties. Very few sonnets
of any poetic value can be found conforming strictly to all these
requirements. But the general purport of the formal division may be seen
in Christina Rossetti's poignant "Remember"--

    Remember me when I am gone away,
      Gone far away into the silent land;
      When you no more can hold me by the hand,
    Nor I half turn to go, yet turning stay.

    Remember me when no more day by day
      You tell me of our future that you plann'd:
      Only remember me; you understand
    It will be late to counsel then or pray.

    Yet if you should forget me for a while
      And afterwards remember, do not grieve:
      For if the darkness and corruption leave

      A vestige of the thoughts that once I had,
    Better by far you should forget and smile
      Than that you should remember and be sad.

The first quatrain says: Remember me when I am gone and we can no longer
meet and part as in life. The second quatrain adds: when we can no
longer enjoy the companionship of mind, planning what might have been.
The sestet continues: Nevertheless, do not let the memory of me become a
burden, especially if you ever learn what was in my living thoughts.

Most sonnet writers, while regarding the form as in the abstract
something almost sacred, have felt free to mould it in some measure to
the immediate demands of their subject--not all, however, with the same
success.[63] For the sonnet demands perfection, a single flaw almost
cripples it; and few have the absolute command of language necessary to
forge a single idea without irrelevance and without omission according
to so strict a pattern. Those who are too subservient to the form weaken
their poetic thought; those who, like Wordsworth often, are inobedient
to the form, produce a poem which is imperfect because it is neither a
sonnet nor not a sonnet. Few have come as near the true balance as
Milton at his best. "A hundred Poets," says Sir William Watson,

    A hundred Poets bend proud necks to bear
      This yoke, this bondage. He alone could don
    His badges of subjection with the air
      Of one who puts a king's regalia on.

And yet Milton, while preserving the rime scheme, generally disregards
the thought divisions, and in half of his sonnets has the pause, not
after the eighth line but within the ninth. Commenting on this division
Wordsworth says: "Now it has struck me, that this is not done merely to
gratify the ear by variety and freedom of sound, but also to aid in
giving that pervading sense of intense unity in which the excellence of
the sonnet has always seemed to me mainly to consist. Instead of looking
at this composition as a piece of architecture, making a whole out of
three parts, I have been much in the habit of preferring the image of an
orbicular body--a sphere or dew-drop."

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [63] "In the production of a sonnet of triumphant success,   |
  | heart, head, and hand must be right." Corson, p. 145.        |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Such a close unity can easily be obtained from the Italian sonnet, as
hundreds of examples prove,--Milton's On his Blindness is a striking
case, with no full stop until the end of the fourteenth line,--but even
better for this object is the rime scheme invented by Spenser and used
in a hundred and twenty-one sonnets: _ababbcbccdcdee_. The Spenserian
sonnet, however, has found no favor with later poets.

Certain variations in the Italian form are regularly admitted as
legitimate. The quatrains must always rime _abba_, but the sestet may
rime _cdecde_ or _cdcdcd_ or _cdedce_ or _cdedec_, or almost any
arrangement of two or three rimes which does not end in a couplet. And
even this last caveat is sometimes disregarded by careful sonneteers. A
greater liberty is to vary the rimes of the octave to _abbaacca_. The
division of the sestet into two distinct tercets is very rarely
maintained; and that of the octave into quatrains is frequently
neglected with impunity. Thus the poet adjusts his theme to the strict
rules of the sonnet much as he adjusts the natural rhythm of language to
the strict forms of metre; the one inescapable requisite being that in
neither may he lose hold of the fundamental pattern. But there is this
difference, that the sonnet form is extraordinarily firm, and breaks if
forced very far from normal. _How_ far one may go can be determined only
in special cases, for "the mighty masters are a law unto themselves, and
the validity of their legislation will be attested and held against all
comers by the splendour of an unchallengeable success" (Pattison).

The early Italian sonnets in English, those of Wyatt, Surrey, and
Sidney, are very irregular: Sidney's nearly always end in a couplet and
rime the octave _abbaabba_ or _abababab_ or _ababbaba_. Sometimes he
uses such a scheme as _ababbababccbcc_. Wyatt has one rimed
_abbaaccacddcee_, and Surrey one _ababababababaa_.

Donne's Holy Sonnets (written about 1617, though not printed till 1633,
1635) were regular in form, and were practically the first English
sonnets not concerned with love. Milton followed this tradition, and
expanded it to further themes--his only successful poems in lighter mood
are sonnets--occasional and political subjects--

    ... in his hand
    The thing became a trumpet, whence he blew
    Soul-animating strains--alas, too few!

On the formal side Milton handled the sonnet, as has been said, with the
freedom of a master.

From the time of Milton's (1642-58) very few sonnets were written in
England till towards the end of the eighteenth century. Then the form
was revived, under the original impulse of the Wartons in the
mid-century, by Bowles, and given a new life by Wordsworth and Keats. In
1850 Mrs. Browning published her Sonnets from the Portuguese, and in
1870 and 1881 Rossetti his sonnet-sequence, The House of Life. The
latter contains on the whole the truest representatives of the Italian
model.

    The soote season, that bud and bloom forth brings,
    With green hath clad the hill and eke the vale:
    The nightingale with feathers new she sings;
    The turtle to her make hath told her tale.
    Summer is come, for every spray now springs:
    The hart hath hung his old head on the pale;
    The buck in brake his winter coat he flings;
    The fishes flete with new repaired scale.
    The adder all her slough away she slings;
    The swift swallow pursueth the flies smale;
    The busy bee her honey now she mings;
    Winter is worn that was the flowers' bale.
    And thus I see among these pleasant things
    Each care decays, and yet my sorrow springs.
        HENRY HOWARD, EARL OF SURREY.

    With how sad steps, O Moon, thou climb'st the skies!
    How silently, and with how wan a face!
    What, may it be that e'en in heavenly place
    That busy archer his sharp arrows tries!
    Sure, if that long-with-love-acquainted eyes
    Can judge of love, thou feelst a lover's case,
    I read it in thy looks; thy languish'd grace,
    To me, that feel the like, thy state descries.
    Then, e'en of fellowship, O Moon, tell me,
    Is constant love deem'd there but want of wit?
    Are beauties there as proud as here they be?
    Do they above love to be loved, and yet
    Those lovers scorn whom that love doth possess?
    Do they call virtue there, ungratefulness?
        SIR PHILLIP SIDNEY, Astrophel and Stella, xxxi.

    Death, be not proud, though some have called thee
    Mighty and dreadful, for thou art not so:
    For those whom thou think'st thou dost overthrow
    Die not, poor Death; nor yet canst thou kill me.
    From Rest and Sleep, which but thy picture be,
    Much pleasure, then from thee much more must flow;
    And soonest our best men with thee do go--
    Rest of their bones and souls' delivery!
    Thou'rt slave to fate, chance, kings, and desperate men,
    And dost with poison, war, and sickness dwell;
    And poppy or charms can make us sleep as well
    And better than thy stroke. Why swell'st thou then?
    One short sleep past, we wake eternally,
    And Death shall be no more: Death, thou shalt die!
        JOHN DONNE.

    Cyriack, this three-years-day these eyes, though clear
    To outward view of blemish or of spot,
    Bereft of light, their seeing have forgot;
    Not to their idle orbs doth sight appear
    Of sun, or moon, or star, throughout the year,
    Or man, or woman. Yet I argue not
    Against Heav'ns hand or will, nor bate one jot
    Or heart or hope; but still bear up, and steer
    Right onward. What supports me, dost thou ask?
    --The conscience, friend, to have lost them overpli'd
    In liberty's defence, my noble task,
    Of which all Europe rings from side to side.
    This thought might lead me through this world's vain mask,
    Content, though blind, had I no better guide.
        MILTON.

    Earth has not anything to show more fair:
    Dull would he be of soul who could pass by
    A sight so touching in its majesty:
    This City now doth like a garment wear
    The beauty of the morning; silent, bare,
    Ships, towers, domes, theatres, and temples lie
    Open unto the fields, and to the sky;
    All bright and glittering in the smokeless air.
    Never did sun more beautifully steep
    In his first splendour valley, rock, or hill;
    Ne'er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep!
    The river glideth at his own sweet will:
    Dear God! the very houses seem asleep;
    And all that mighty heart is lying still!
        WORDSWORTH, Upon Westminster Bridge.

    Go from me. Yet I feel that I shall stand
    Henceforward in thy shadow. Nevermore
    Alone upon the threshold of my door
    Of individual life shall I command
    The uses of my soul, nor lift my hand
    Serenely in the sunshine as before,
    Without the sense of that which I forbore--
    Thy touch upon the palm. The widest land
    Doom takes to part us, leaves thy heart in mine
    With pulses that beat double. What I do
    And what I dream include thee, as the wine
    Must taste of its own grapes. And when I sue
    God for myself, He hears that name of thine,
    And sees within my eyes the tears of two.
        E. B. BROWNING, Sonnets from the Portuguese.

    Of Adam's first wife, Lilith, it is told
    (The witch he loved before the gift of Eve),
    That, ere the snake's, her sweet tongue could deceive,
    And her enchanted hair was the first gold.
    And still she sits, young while the earth is old,
    And, subtly of herself contemplative,
    Draws men to watch the bright web she can weave,
    Till heart and body and life are in its hold.
    The rose and poppy are her flowers: for where
    Is he not found, O Lilith! whom shed scent
    And soft-shed kisses and soft sleep shall snare?
    Lo! as that youth's eyes burned at thine, so went
    Thy spell through him, and left his straight neck bent,
    And round his heart one strangling golden hair.
        D. G. ROSSETTI, Body's Beauty.

    I met a traveler from an antique land,
    Who said: Two vast and trunkless legs of stone
    Stand in the desert. Near them on the sand,
    Half sunk, a shatter'd visage lies, whose frown
    And wrinkled lip and sneer of cold command
    Tell that its sculptor well those passions read
    Which yet survive, stamp'd on these lifeless things,
    The hand that mock'd them and the heart that fed;
    And on the pedestal these words appear:
    "My name is Ozymandias, king of kings:
    Look on my works, ye mighty, and despair!"
    Nothing beside remains. Round the decay
    Of that colossal wreck, boundless and bare,
    The lone and level sands stretch far away.
        SHELLEY, Ozymandias.

Here the rime scheme is peculiarly irregular, and the result is hardly a
sonnet at all. Shelley's manuscript shows that the poem cost him a great
deal of trouble.

       *       *       *       *       *

_English Sonnet_. Out of the 'irregularities' and experiments of the
early English sonneteers there rapidly developed a new form based on an
entirely different principle of division, a series of three quatrains
_abab_, _cdcd_, _efef_, followed by a couplet _gg_. This looser
structure, simpler in music and in arrangement of subject matter, soon
became a favorite, was used by Surrey and by Sidney, and was adopted by
Shakespeare for his hundred and fifty-four sonnets[64]--hence it is
sometimes called the Shakespearian sonnet. "With this key," said
Wordsworth,

    Shakespeare unlocked his heart.

But a sonnet in the stricter sense this 14-line stanza of course is not;
for it does not aim to possess the balance, contrast, and functional
organization of the Italian stanza. It has qualities of its own,
however, which give it its own distinction; and, moreover, it is frankly
what many sonnets of the stricter form, without the justification of a
difficult and definitely organic structure, are: simply a poem of
fourteen lines. For many of Wordsworth's and most of Mrs. Browning's
sonnets, though they have the rime-scheme of the Italian, have the
simple thought arrangement of the English sonnet.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [64] Two of these are irregular, the 99th, with fifteen      |
  | lines (_ababacdcdefefgg_) and the 126th with twelve          |
  | (_aabbccddeeff_). Milton's On the Admirable Dramatick Poet,  |
  | W. Shakespear, still traditionally miscalled a sonnet,       |
  | resembles the latter, with its _aabbccddeeffgghh_ or eight   |
  | couplets. The 16-line stanza of Meredith's Modern Love       |
  | (_abbacddceffeghhg_) is sometimes loosely called a sonnet.   |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Not many examples are necessary. Some, like the first two below,
preserve the metrical division of the quatrains, with the couplet for an
epigrammatic summary; others more or less obscure the division.

Combinations of the two sonnet forms not infrequently occur (as in the
last example below), but they are not approved by the critics or the
theorists, and generally they miss the excellences of both forms,
however successful they may be in other respects.

    Leave me, O Love, which reachest but to dust,
    And thou, my mind, aspire to higher things!
    Grow rich in that which never taketh rust:
    Whatever fades, but fading pleasure brings.
    Draw in thy beams, and humble all thy might
    To that sweet yoke where lasting freedoms be;
    Which breaks the clouds and opens forth the light
    That doth both shine and give us sight to see.
    O take fast hold! let that light be thy guide
    In this small course which birth draws out to death,
    And think how evil becometh him to slide
    Who seeketh Heaven, and comes of heavenly breath.
    Then farewell, world! thy uttermost I see:
    Eternal Love, maintain thy life in me!
        SIR PHILIP SIDNEY.

    That time of year thou may'st in me behold
    When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
    Upon those boughs that shake against the cold--
    Bare ruined choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
    In me thou see'st the twilight of such day
    As after sunset fadeth in the west,
    Which by and by black night doth take away,
    Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
    In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire
    That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
    As the death-bed whereon it must expire,
    Consumed with that which it was nourished by.
    This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong
    To love that well which thou must leave ere long.
        SHAKESPEARE, Sonnet 73.

    Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,
    Pressed by these rebel powers that thee array,
    Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
    Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
    Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
    Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
    Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
    Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end?
    Then, soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss,
    And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
    Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
    Within be fed, without be rich no more;
    So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men;
    And Death once dead, there's no more dying then.
        SHAKESPEARE, Sonnet 146.

    When, in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes,
    I all alone beweep my outcast state,
    And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
    And look upon myself, and curse my fate,
    Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
    Featured like him, like him with friends possessed,
    Desiring this man's art and that man's scope,
    With what I most enjoy contented least;
    Yet in these thoughts myself almost despising,
    Haply I think on thee: and then my state,
    Like to the lark at break of day arising
    From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate:
    For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings
    That then I scorn to change my state with kings.
        SHAKESPEARE, Sonnet 29.

    O deep unlovely brooklet, moaning slow
    Through moorish fen in utter loneliness!
    The partridge cowers beside thy loamy flow
    In pulseful tremor, when with sudden press
    The huntsman fluskers through the rustled heather.
    In March thy sallow buds from vermeil shells
    Break satin-tinted, downy as the feather
    Of moss-chat, that among the purplish bells
    Breasts into fresh new life her three unborn.
    The plover hovers o'er thee, uttering clear
    And mournful-strange his human cry forlorn.
    While wearily, alone, and void of cheer,
    Thou guid'st thy nameless waters from the fen,
    To sleep unsunned in an untrampled glen.
        DAVID GRAY, To a Brooklet.

    If I should die, think only this of me:
    That there's some corner of a foreign field
    That is forever England. There shall be
    In that rich earth a richer dust concealed;
    A dust whom England bore, shaped, made aware,
    Gave, once, her flowers to love, her ways to roam,
    A body of England's, breathing English air,
    Washed by the rivers, blest by suns of home.
    And think, this heart, all evil shed away,
    A pulse in the eternal mind, no less
    Gives somewhere back the thoughts by England given;
    Her sights and sounds; dreams happy as her day;
    And laughter learnt of friends; and gentleness,
    In hearts at peace, under an English heaven.
        RUPERT BROOKE, The Soldier.[65]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [65] Quoted by permission of Dodd, Mead & Co., owners of the |
  | copy-right.                                                  |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+


_Complex Stanzas: the Ode_

Besides the stanzas described above, which are but the most familiar
or most important of the great variety of regular English stanzas,
there are others which, because they are peculiarly constructed or
not regularly repeated, may be called Complex. Such are, for
example, the 'trailing vine' stanzas of Spenser's Prothalamion
(_abba^{5}a^{3}bcbc^{5}dded^{5}ee^{3}ff^{5}_) and Epithalamion
(_ababc^{5}c^{3}dcde^{5}e^{3}fggf^{5}f^{4}hh^{5}_), and also the simpler
_ababcde^{5}c^{3}de^{5}_ of Keats' Ode to a Nightingale.

Many of these complex stanzaic forms, moreover, belong in the tradition
of the so-called Pindaric ode, imitated freely from the Greek choric
odes of Pindar. The closer imitations are in fixed though complex
stanzas regularly repeated, and are called Regular Pindarics. These have
first a strophe of undetermined length, then an antistrophe identical in
structure with the strophe, and then an epode, different in structure
from the strophe and antistrophe. The second strophe and second
antistrophe are identical metrically with the first, the second epode
with the first epode; and so on. The best examples in English are Ben
Jonson's On the Death of Sir H. Morrison, and Gray's Progress of Poesy
and The Bard.[66]

  +----------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [66]                                                                 |
  | The rime scheme of the Progress of Poesy is: strophe and antistrophe |
  | _a^{4}b^{5}b^{4}a^{5}cc^{4}d^{5}d^{4}e^{5}e^{4}f^{4}f^{6}_, epode    |
  | _aabb^{4}a^{3}ccdede^{4}fgfgh^{5}h^{6}_. The formula is three times  |
  | repeated. Note the unusual arrangement of parts in Collins' Ode to   |
  | Liberty and Shelley's Ode to Naples.                                 |
  +----------------------------------------------------------------------+

About the middle of the seventeenth century, Cowley, misunderstanding
the structure of Pindar's verse, invented another sort of Pindaric ode,
which is called Irregular because, as he himself explained, "the numbers
are various and irregular," and there was no formal stanzaic repetition.
The lines were long or short according as the thought-rhythm demanded
(or seemed to demand), and in respect to arrangement were not bound to
any formal pattern. This freedom, under skilful control, may well
produce felicitous results, but when not managed by poets of a strong
and sure rhythmic sense--as it was not by the many Cowleyan
imitators--it results merely in metrical license and amorphousness.
"That for which I think this inequality of number is chiefly to be
preferred," said Dr. Sprat, the first historian of the Royal Society,
intending no sarcasm, "is its affinity with prose." But this argument,
which is in part also that of the modern free-versifiers, is simply a
confusion of two functions, the verse function and the prose function.

But before very long Cowley's invention found a true master in Dryden,
whose To the Pious Memory of ... Mrs. Anne Killigrew (1686), Song for
St. Cecelia's Day (1687), and Alexander's Feast (1697) are justly
praised for their 'concerted music.' The example had in fact already
been set by a still greater master; for Milton with his early
experiments in unequal rimed lines (On Time and At a Solemn Music), his
incomparable success with the irregular placing of rimes in Lycidas, and
his choral effects both with and without rime in Samson Agonistes, had
shown what English could do under proper guidance. Then, after Dryden,
the regular Pindarics of Gray and certain of Collins' Odes helped to
carry on the tradition down to Coleridge's Dejection, Monody on the
Death of Chatterton, and Ode on the Departing Year, and its culmination
in Wordsworth's Intimations of Immortality ode (1807). After that, both
in time and in interest, come Shelley's Mont Blanc (1816) (which he
himself described as "an undisciplined overflowing of the soul") and
Tennyson's On the Death of the Duke of Wellington (1852) (which has at
least Tennyson's almost unfailing technical dexterity). The work of
Coventry Patmore in this kind of verse has not been generally approved.
This is partly because of the subjects on which he wrote and partly
because of his inability to compose lines of haunting melody--perhaps
his deliberate avoidance of them. But in certain poems like The Azalea
and The Toys the very intensity of the feeling both creates and sustains
and in the end justifies the 'irregular' metre.


3. BLANK VERSE

Perhaps three-fourths of the greatest English poetry is in the unrimed
5-stress line called blank verse--nearly all the Elizabethan drama,
Paradise Lost, some of the best of Keats and Shelley, Wordsworth's
Michael, The Prelude, The Excursion (the good with the bad!),
Tennyson's Princess and Idylls (notable poems of their age, though not
to be ranked with 'the greatest'), and Browning's The Ring and the Book,
together with most of the dramatic monologues. No other metrical form
has such an interesting history; no other form has manifested so great a
variety and adaptability for every kind of poetic thought and feeling.
These two facts alone--its bulk and its variety--would justify a much
fuller treatment than is possible here. But it will perhaps be
sufficient to follow rapidly in outline the development of blank verse,
with illustrations of the most significant stages, and then, in the
following chapter, to devote more attention to blank verse than to rimed
stanzas in the exposition of metrical harmonies and modulations.

The idea of writing unrimed verse was no doubt the most valuable result
to English poetry of the academic attempts, towards the end of the
sixteenth century, to write classical verse in English. It could be
pointed out triumphantly that all the splendid poetry of classical
antiquity--Homer and Lucretius and Virgil, Sappho and Catullus and
Horace and Ovid--had been independent of rime; and whatever might be the
disagreement on quantitative feet in English, it was impossible to deny
that English could successfully copy this element of the great classical
verse and recover, as Milton said, the ancient liberty "from the
troublesome and modern bondage of riming."

The movement had already begun in Italy with Trissino's Sophonisbe,
written in 1515, the first modern tragedy. It reached England in the
middle of the century with the influence of the Italian Renaissance
brought chiefly by Wyatt and Surrey. Surrey translated two books of the
Æneid (II and IV) into blank verse (published in 1557); Sackville and
Norton adopted it for the first English tragedy, Gorboduc (1565); and
then Gascoigne used it in his Steele Glas (1576) for general didactic
and satiric purposes. Thus the beginning was made, and it remained only
for the new form to justify itself by its children. Experiments
continued, with the first great achievement in Marlowe's Tamburlaine the
Great.

The early examples show plainly both the influence of the parent
couplet--for, as was said above, blank verse was written first as the
old couplet without rime--and the syllable-counting principle: the line
unit is prominent, there are comparatively few run-on lines or couplets,
and some of Surrey's verse, for example, though it has the ten syllables
then regarded as necessary, refuses to 'scan' according to more recent
practice because the stresses are wholly irregular. On the other hand,
there is often so great a regularity in coincidence of natural rhythm
and metrical pattern, reinforced by some awkward wrenches of the
conventional order of word and phrase, that the result is unpleasantly
stiff and formal.

    The Greeks' chieftains all irked with the war
    Wherein they wasted had so many years,
    And oft repuls'd by fatal destiny,
    A huge horse made, high raised like a hill,
    By the divine science of Minerva:
    Of cloven fir compacted were his ribs;
    For their return a feigned sacrifice:
    The fame whereof so wander'd it at point.
    In the dark bulk they clos'd bodies of men
    Chosen by lot, and did enstuff by stealth
    The hollow womb with armed soldiers.
      There stands in sight an isle, high Tenedon,
    Rich, and of fame, while Priam's kingdom stood;
    Now but a bay, and road, unsure for ship.
        SURREY, Second Book of Virgil's Æneid.

This is not so much monotonously regular as intolerably rough and
unsteady.

    For cares of kings, that rule as you have rul'd,
    For public wealth, and not for private joy,
    Do waste man's life and hasten crooked age,
    With furrowed face, and with enfeebled limbs,
    To draw on creeping death a swifter pace.
    They two, yet young, shall bear the parted reign
    With greater ease than one, now old, alone
    Can wield the whole, for whom much harder is
    With lessened strength the double weight to bear.
        Gorboduc, Act I, sc. ii.

    The Nightingale, whose happy noble hart,
    No dole can daunt, nor fearful force affright,
    Whose chereful voice, doth comfort saddest wights,
    When she hir self, hath little cause to sing,
    Whom lovers love, bicause she plaines their greves,
    She wraies their woes, and yet relieves their payne,
    Whom worthy mindes, alwayes esteemed much,
    And gravest yeares, have not disdainde hir notes:
    (Only that king proud Tereus by his name
    With murdring knife, did carve hir pleasant tong,
    To cover so, his own foule filthy fault)
    This worthy bird, hath taught my weary Muze,
    To sing a song, in spight of their despight,
    Which work my woe, withouten cause or crime ...
        The Steele Glas.

Note here the monotonous pauses, indicated by the original punctuation.

Marlowe, inheriting the defects of his predecessors, succeeded, by
virtue of his "plastic energy and power of harmonious modulation" in
recreating the measure. He found it "monotonous, monosyllabic, and
divided into five feet of tolerably regular alternate short and long [i.
e., unstressed and stressed]. He left it various in form and structure,
sometimes redundant by a syllable, sometimes deficient, enriched with
unexpected emphases and changes in the beat. He found no sequence or
attempt at periods; one line succeeded another with insipid regularity,
and all were made after the same model. He grouped his verse according
to the sense, obeying an internal law of melody, and allowing the
thought contained in his words to dominate their form. He did not force
his metre to preserve a fixed and unalterable type, but suffered it to
assume most variable modulations, the whole beauty of which depended
upon their perfect adaptation to the current of his ideal."[67] No metre
responds so readily and so completely to a poet's endowment of genius as
blank verse, and hence the secret of Marlowe's improvements over his
predecessors is his superior poetic gift. He seems to have felt and
thought and written with an enormous imaginative power; by making his
verse an organic expression of this power he achieved an almost new
medium, ranging in variety from the simplicity and pathos of--

    Mortimer! who talks of Mortimer,
    Who wounds me with the name of Mortimer,
    That bloody man?

to the "swelling bombast of bragging blank verse" (Thomas Nash's hostile
phrase) in Tamburlaine--

                      No! for I shall not die.
    See, where my slave, the ugly monster, Death,
    Shaking and quivering, pale and wan for fear,
    Stands aiming at me with his murdering dart,
    Who flies away at every glance I give,
    And, when I look away, comes stealing on.
    Villain, away, and hie thee to the field!
    I and mine army come to load thy back
    With souls of thousand mangled carcasses.
    Look, where he goes; but see, he comes again,
    Because I stay: Techelles, let us march
    And weary Death with bearing souls to hell.
        Part II, Act V, sc. iii.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [67] J. A. Symonds, Blank Verse, London, 1895, p. 23. (This  |
  | little volume contains a valuable, though incomplete and     |
  | somewhat extravagant, summary of the history of English      |
  | blank verse.)                                                |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

But even in Marlowe the 'mighty line' is still felt as the unit. All his
volubility, his extravagance, his passion, his occasional tenderness did
but develop the line to its fullest possibilities; the larger unit of
the long harmonious period or 'blank verse paragraph' is rare and
exceptional with him, though credit is due him for foreshadowing this
also:

    Now, lords, our loving friends and countrymen,
    Welcome to England all, with prosperous winds;
    Our kindest friends in Belgia have we left,
    To cope with friends at home; a heavy case
    When force to force is knit, and sword and glaive
    In civil broils make kin and countrymen
    Slaughter themselves in others, and their sides
    With their own weapons gored.
        Edward II, Act IV, sc. iv.

Shakespeare's blank verse is the supreme manifestation of the measure
for dramatic purposes. In his plays it modulates and adapts itself to
the changing emotions of every speaker, "from merely colloquial
dialogue to strains of impassioned soliloquy, from comic repartee to
tragic eloquence, from terse epigrams to elaborate descriptions." It is
customary to distinguish three 'periods' in Shakespeare's blank verse,
corresponding closely to his whole artistic development: first, the more
formal, 'single-moulded' line of the early plays; second, the perfect
freedom and mastery of the great tragedies; and, third, the daring
liberties, verging on license, of the later plays. These distinctions
have, of course, no more absolute value than all similar classifications
of impalpable modifications, but they at least suggest the underlying
truth that Shakespeare began as a beginner, and then, having mastered
the difficulties and subtleties of the form, treated it with the easy
familiarity of a master. To illustrate these developments adequately
would require pages of quotation; but one may compare the restricted
movement of such a passage as this from Two Gentlemen of Verona (III,
i)--

    Proteus, I thank thee for thine honest care;
    Which to requite, command me while I live.
    This love of theirs myself have often seen,
    Haply when they have judg'd me fast asleep,
    And oftentimes have purpos'd to forbid
    Sir Valentine her company and my court;
    But, fearing lest my jealous aim might err,
    And so unworthily disgrace the man,--
    A rashness that I ever yet have shunn'd,--
    I gave him gentle looks, thereby to find
    That which thyself hast now disclos'd to me.

with the fine modulations, fitting exactly the nuances of meaning in
this from Hamlet (III, iii)--

    May one be pardon'd and retain the offence?
    In the corrupted currents of this world
    Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice,
    And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
    Buys out the law. But 'tis not so above.
    There is no shuffling, there the action lies
    In his true nature; and we ourselves compell'd,
    Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
    To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
    Try what repentance can. What can it not?

or this from King Lear (II, iv)--

    You see me here, you gods, a poor old man,
    As full of grief as age; wretched in both!
    If it be you that stirs these daughters' hearts
    Against their father, fool me not so much
    To bear it tamely; touch me with noble anger,
    And let not women's weapons, water-drops,
    Stain my man's cheeks.

and also with the flowing, slightly 'irregular' lines of this from The
Tempest (II, i)--

                          But I feel not
    This deity in my bosom. Twenty consciences,
    That stand 'twixt me and Milan, candied be they
    And melt ere they molest! Here lies your brother,
    No better than the earth he lies upon
    If he were that which now he's like, that's dead;
    Whom I, with this obedient steel, three inches of it,
    Can lay to be for ever; whiles you, doing thus,
    To the perpetual wink for aye might put
    This ancient morsel, this Sir Prudence, who
    Should not upbraid our course.

The greater freedom of syncopation and substitution, of extra syllables
and unusual pauses, which characterizes Shakespeare's later blank verse,
became almost a norm with Beaumont and Fletcher, Shirley, Ford, and the
Jacobean dramatists. They often carried freedom to the extreme limit,
where an inch further would change verse into prose. They were capable,
to be sure, of more careful regular verse, and wrote it when the
occasion seemed to call for it; but partly from choice, and partly no
doubt from haste or indifference or both, they made a very free blank
verse their staple. Shakespeare had alternated prose and verse as the
subject or tone required; the later dramatists seemed to seek a verse
that might be, in a sense, midway between prose and verse. Thus they
avoided a necessity of frequent change, except a loosening or tightening
of the reins. To call this verse decadent is somewhat unjust. It is in
truth a special form which is certainly well justified for certain
subjects and occasions.

    Why how darst thou meet me again thou rebel,
    And knowst how thou hast used me thrice, thou rascal?
    Were there not waies enough to fly my vengeance,
    No hole nor vaults to hide thee from my fury,
    But thou must meet me face to face to kill thee?
    I would not seek thee to destroy thee willingly,
    But now thou comest to invite me,
    And comest upon me,
    How like a sheep-biting rogue taken i'th' manner,
    And ready for the halter dost thou look now!
    Thou hast a hanging look thou scurvy thing, hast ne'er a knife
    Nor ever a string to lead thee to Elysium?
        BEAUMONT and FLETCHER, Rule a Wife and Have a Wife, V, i.

    By this you find I am to Millaine neer
    Ally'd; but more to tempt your fury on
    My life, know 'twas my valiant father took
    Your brother prisoner, and presented him
    Where he receiv'd his death, my father that
    So oft hath humbled you in war, and made
    His victories triumph almost upon
    The ruines of your state.
        DAVENANT, Love and Honour, V, iii.

When Milton composed Comus in 1634 it was natural for him to model his
blank verse on the best of Shakespeare's and Ben Jonson's, rather than
on that of the contemporary playwrights; for his finer taste, his more
delicate ear, and his classical training and tendencies would at once
lead him to reject the metrical laxities of Ford, Shirley, Davenant, and
the other writers of 'broken down' blank verse. And though his language
shows great familiarity with the later plays of Shakespeare, especially
The Tempest, he admitted comparatively few of their metrical licenses
and followed in the main the versification of the Midsummer Night's
Dream and the earlier tragedies. There is generally a tendency to make
the line the unit--but the verse paragraph or stanza effect is also
present in nearly fully developed form, as witness the opening lines of
the poem--weak or feminine endings are not frequent, alexandrines very
few. The 'short fit of rhyming' (ll. 495 ff.), disapproved by Dr.
Johnson, would be explained partly by the tradition of the masque and
partly by the model of Shakespeare's comedies.

But the great Miltonic blank verse of Paradise Lost is not a copy of any
master; it is a development and a consummation of two influences, the
slow maturity of Milton's mind, deepened and broadened by the
Commonwealth controversies "not without dust and heat," and the exalted
sublimity of the yet unattempted theme of justifying God's management of
human and divine affairs. His maturity brought him his great familiarity
both in matter and in style with nearly all that was best in European
literature, and his peculiar subject, with only gods and angels (Adam
and Eve are scarcely human, even after the fall) for characters and
selected portions of eternity and infinity for time and place, gave him
the tendency to artificiality and strain to the outmost verges of
sublimity, and to extraordinary involution of phrase and idea--for all
of which he must have a suitable prosody. He chose blank verse when the
poetical fashion was for rime and described it, in words not altogether
clear, as consisting "only in apt numbers, fit quantity of syllables,
and the sense variously drawn out from one verse to another."[68] Apt
numbers, that is, appropriate rhythms, Milton's verse certainly has; but
it is the last item, the great variety of movements subordinating the
line-unit, and running-on of verses into longer periods, for which his
blank verse is famous. Every page of Paradise Lost contains examples;
some of the finest occur in the rhetorical display of the Pandemonic
Council in Book II. Note the position of the pauses in the following
passage, and then compare the specimens of early blank verse given
above.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [68] The main crux of this passage is "fit quantity of       |
  | syllables." _Quantity_ in such a context suggests syllabic   |
  | length; and one recalls the sonnet to Lawes--                |
  |                                                              |
  |                          not to scan                         |
  |     With Midas' ears, committing short and long.             |
  |                                                              |
  | But, on the other hand, Mr. Robert Bridges has made it       |
  | almost if not quite certain that Milton counted syllables,   |
  | and therefore the phrase would mean "ten syllables to a      |
  | line," proper allowance being made for elision. Since both   |
  | interpretations agree pretty well with Milton's practice,    |
  | one cannot be sure which he had in mind.                     |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

                    Or could we break our way
        By force, and at our heels all hell should rise
        With blackest insurrection, to confound
        Heaven's purest light, yet our great enemy
        All incorruptible would on his throne
        Sit unpolluted, and the ethereal mould
        Incapable of stain would soon expel
        Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire,
        Victorious.
            II, 134-142.

     On its formal side, what makes Milton's versification as unique as
     it is admirable, is the instinctive and yet prescient skill with
     which the pause is continuously varied so as to keep the whole
     metrical structure in movement. There are no dead lines. There are
     no jerks or stoppages. His movement may best be described by
     quoting a passage which, like many others, is at once a description
     and an instance. It is a

        Mystical dance, which yonder starry sphere
        Of planets and of fixt in all her wheels
        Resembles nearest, mazes intricate,
        Eccentric, intervolv'd, yet regular
        Then most, when most irregular they seem,
        And in their motions harmony divine.

     I ask the reader most particularly to notice that these six lines,
     like almost any short quotation that can be made from the poem, are
     broken from their context. They begin in the middle of a sentence,
     and end in the middle of a clause. The continuous periodic movement
     cannot be really shown by examples, just because it is continuous
     and periodic. If we except the speeches, each of which by the
     necessity of the case is more or less a definite and detachable
     unit, the periods flow into one another. Like the orbit of a
     planet, the movement of the verse never closes its ellipse and
     begins again. Each of the twelve books is a single organic
     rhythmical structure. But one cannot very well quote a whole book.

     Within that structure, the variation of pause and stress is
     similarly in continuous movement. As a general fact, this is
     instinctively felt in reading the poem; how rigorously the law of
     freedom is observed comes out even more surprisingly when brought
     to the test of figures. For movement of stress one instance may
     serve as a typical example. In Michael's description of the plagues
     of Egypt in the twelfth book, beginning--

        But first the lawless tyrant, who denies
        To know their God, or message to regard,
        Must be compelled by signs and judgments dire--

     the detailed roll of the plagues is all threaded on the word
     _must_. It recurs nine times, with studied and intricate variation
     of its place in the line: this is, taken by order, in the first,
     eighth, fifth, fourth, fifth, fifth, first, third, and fourth
     syllable. Again, as regards variation, in the whole ten thousand
     lines of the Paradise Lost there are less than five-and-twenty
     instances of the pause coming at the same point in the line for
     more than two lines consecutively. Facts like these are the formal
     index of what is the great organic principle of Milton's verse.
     That is, that like all organic structures, it is incalculable; it
     cannot be reduced to a formula.... His rhythm is perpetually
     integrating as it advances; and not only so, but at no point can
     its next movement be predicted, although tracing it backwards we
     can see how each phrase rises out of and carries on the rhythm of
     what was before it, how each comes in not only rightly, but as it
     seems inevitably. This secret he inherited from no English
     predecessor and transmitted to no follower.[69]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [69] J. W. Mackail, The Springs of Helicon, pp. 181 ff.      |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

One may surely say that Milton extracted from blank verse all its
possibilities of variety and movement so far as his subject matter
permitted. He is lyrical, dramatic, didactic, and of course epic, in
turn. He even showed that it is possible to imitate hollowly his own
"planetary wheelings"--as though the instruments kept on playing and the
music ceased.[70]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [70] Cf., for example. Paradise Regained, III, 68 ff.        |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Since Paradise Regained and Samson Agonistes, though various poets have
adapted it to their own uses, blank verse has shown only one significant
development, the conversational, or so-called 'talking,' style. In the
eighteenth century Milton's mannerisms dominated nearly all blank
verse, both for good and for evil. What freedom Thomson allowed himself
he got from Milton; most of Cowper's thin grandiosity he took from
Milton; and much also of Wordsworth's false and empty elaboration which
make the Prelude and Excursion so dull in places--the whole tribe of
verses of which

    And at the Hoop alighted, famous inn

is the pilloried example--came from the Miltonic tradition. Keats fell
partially into the error, but was wise enough to recognize it. Shelley,
with much of Milton's intensity and somewhat too of his sublimity, could
successfully follow the great stride and at the same time preserve his
own idiom. Tennyson, keeping both the freedom and as much of the
"continuous planetary movement" as was consistent with his themes,
softened the metre--weakened it, some will say--by his decorative
tendency and indulgence in only half-concealed virtuosity.[71] And the
famous Oxus ending of Arnold's Sohrab and Rustum is a studied
reproduction of the Miltonic music in a lower key. But it was Landor
who, taking a hint perhaps from Milton's unadorned didacticism of
Paradise Regained and also from the straightforward verse used on
occasion by the Elizabethan dramatists, showed the way to what has often
been called a strictly contemporary development of blank verse, the
talking style. Since this is less familiar than most of the phenomena
of blank verse, it will require fuller illustration.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [71] Browning's blank verse, like all his metres, is         |
  | typically Browningesque; instead of moulding his verse to    |
  | fit the idea perfectly, he too often effected the compromise |
  | between content and form by slighting the latter.            |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The uneven line which separates blank verse and prose is easily apparent
in such a passage as the following from Much Ado about Nothing (V, i)--

    _Leon._       Some haste, my lord!--well, fare you well, my lord:--
                  Are you so hasty now--Well, all is one.

    _D. Pedro._   Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.

    _Ant._        If he could right himself with quarrelling,
                  Some of us would lie low.

    _Claud._                               Who wrongs him?

    _Leon._       Marry, thou dost wrong me; thou dissembler, thou.--
                  Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword;
                  I fear thee not.

    _Claud._      Marry, beshrew my hand,
                  If it should give your age such cause of fear.
                  In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.

    _Leon._       Tush, tush, man! never fleer and jest at me;
                  I speak not like a dotard nor a fool;
                  As under privilege of age, to brag
                  What I have done being young, or what would do,
                  Were I not old. Know, Claudio, to thy heed,
                  Thou hast so wrong'd mine innocent child and me,
                  That I am forc'd to lay my reverence by,
                  And with gray hairs and bruise of many days,
                  Do challenge thee to trial of a man....

In the first part of this passage the language is the simple natural
expression of prose, yet so devised that it also fits the metrical
pattern. It is either prose or verse according to the way one reads it.
But in Leonardo's long speech (after the first line, which is
'irregular') the verse pattern becomes more and more prominent, until in
the last three lines it predominates over the natural utterance of the
words and produces a certain stiffness. Here the two different manners
stand side by side: a natural simplicity so great that the metrical
quality is almost obscured, beside a formality so obvious that the
feeling of natural expression is partly lost. Now Milton, and after him
Dryden and the eighteenth century, regarding poetry generally as a thing
apart, followed the latter sort; but when the Romantic Revival brought
poetry back to ordinary human life there reappeared, tentatively, of
course, a simpler blank verse in Thomson, Crabbe, Cowper, and
Wordsworth. A clear example is the opening of Landor's Iphigeneia and
Agamemnon--

    Iphigeneia, when she heard her doom
    At Aulis, and when all beside the King
    Had gone away, took his right hand, and said,
    "O father! I am young and very happy.
    I do not think the pious Calchas heard
    Distinctly what the Goddess spake. Old-age
    Obscures the senses. If my nurse, who knew
    My voice so well, sometimes misunderstood
    While I was resting on her knee both arms
    And hitting it to make her mind my words,
    And looking in her face, and she in mine,
    Might he not also hear one word amiss,
    Spoken from so far off, even from Olympus?"

Again, compare Mrs. Browning's Aurora Leigh--

                As it was, indeed,
    I felt a mother-want about the world,
    And still went seeking, like a bleating lamb
    Left out at night, in shutting up the fold,--
    As restless as a nest-deserted bird
    Grown chill through something being away, though what
    It knows not. I, Aurora Leigh, was born
    To make my father sadder, and myself
    Not overjoyous, truly. Women know
    The way to rear up children (to be just),
    They know a simple, merry, tender knack
    Of tying sashes, fitting baby-shoes,
    And stringing pretty words that make no sense,
    And kissing full sense into empty words.

These are from the metrical point of view nearly identical with Mr.
Robert Frost's talking verse, so often called a 'contribution' to verse
technique--

    Something there is that doesn't love a wall,
    That sends the frozen ground-swell under it,
    And spills the upper boulders in the sun;
    And makes gaps even two can pass abreast.
    The work of hunters is another thing:
    I have come after them and made repair
    Where they have left not one stone on stone,
    But they would have the rabbit out of hiding,
    To please the yelping dogs.
        R. FROST, Mending Wall.[72]

The obvious difficulty is to maintain dignity along with relaxation--a
feat which Mr. Frost and Mr. E. A. Robinson have occasionally
accomplished. And from this it is but a step to the extreme simplicity
of Miss Lowell's To Two Unknown Ladies--

    If either of you much attracted me
    We could fall back upon phenomena
    And make a pretty story out of psychic
    Balances, but not to be too broad
    In my discourtesy, nor prudish neither
    (Since, really, I can hardly quite suppose
    With all your ghostliness you follow me),
    I feel no such attraction. Or if one
    Bows to my sympathy for the briefest space,
    Snap--it is gone! And, worst of all to tell,
    What broke it is not in the least dislike
    But utter boredom.
    Now....

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [72] Mr. Frost in some of his later work permits himself     |
  | such laxness as--                                            |
  |                                                              |
  | Had beauties he had to point out to me at length             |
  | To insure their not being wasted on me.                      |
  |     The Axe-Helve.                                           |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Thus the wheel has come nearly full circle, but with a longer radius.
For just as blank verse developed from the early Elizabethan--and
pre-Elizabethan--strict formality to the laxity of the Jacobean
dramatists and found a true balance of freedom and restraint in Milton,
so from the monotonous eighteenth-century couplet (and it should be
recalled that in the beginning blank verse sprang from the couplet) it
has gradually enlarged its freedom into the extreme license from a
metrical point of view of its adopted cousin free-verse. Already,
moreover, there have been signs of a reaction against the extreme, and
the wheel is coming to an artistic balance again.


4. FREE-VERSE

Free-verse (or, as Miss Lowell prefers, 'unrhymed cadence') is a
hydra-headed phenomenon. It can never be adequately discussed; for when
one head is disposed of, two others appear in its place. Its origins are
involved in obscurity and--what is worse--ignorance; and its
practitioners and staunchest defenders are as variable in their points
of view as it itself is in its rhythmic impulses.[73]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [73] Strongly to be deprecated is the frequent confusion     |
  | not only of the different varieties of English free-verse,   |
  | but of the fundamentally distinct phenomena of free-verse as |
  | commonly understood and French _vers libre_. _Vers libre_    |
  | itself has many aspects, from the literally freer use of     |
  | rime and the mute-_e_ than the traditional French prosody    |
  | allowed and an escape from the old principle of              |
  | syllabification to what superficially corresponds with       |
  | English free-verse, that is, a substitution of prose for     |
  | verse; but only superficially, since the French language is  |
  | phonetically different from English, and its ordinary prose  |
  | has a naturally greater song potentiality. Since the         |
  | phenomena differ they should not be called by the same name. |
  | The English term 'free-verse' is wholly adequate.            |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Behind all the utterances of friend and foe seems to lie the ultimate
belief that the 'voluntary thraldom' of formal metrical patterns is a
monstrous error which can only be removed by unrestricted appreciation
and application of the natural rhythms of idea and of language. There is
in every thought, however simple or subtle, in every feeling, however
evanescent or profound, an inherent rhythm which is as a material body
to the thought's or emotion's soul. This native, inevitable rhythm--one
might call it the _rhythme juste_, the exact rhythm--is the only fit
expression for an intellectual or emotional idea; all others are foreign
to it, tyrannous usurpations, in a word, impossible substitutions for
it. To attempt, therefore, to twist these natural and exact rhythms to
the formal predetermined patterns of traditional versification is a
suicidal impertinence, foredoomed to failure.

Such a position has in theory much justice. It means briefly that the
basis of poetical form should not be the metrical pattern freely varied
yet always perceptible, but the natural organic rhythm of the ideas
expressed; that is, there should be no harmonized difference between
what have been explained above as thought rhythms, sound rhythms, and
metrical rhythms, but all three should be one original and indivisible
unit. This would make a combined thought-and-sound unit (breath group
and logical-emotional group) the foundation of verse, whereas this is
really the characteristic of prose as distinguished from verse. These
exact organic rhythms "differ from ordinary prose rhythms," says Miss
Lowell, "in being more curved, and containing more stress"; which,
though not very perspicuous, seems to mean that free-verse is more
carefully cadenced, or, in other words, more nearly metrical, than
ordinary prose. Perhaps it would be no injustice to the upholders of
free-verse in its best manifestations to say that, while metre requires
that beneath all variations the regular beat should never be missed,
free-verse requires as much rhythm (i. e., regularity) as is possible
without its becoming perceptible.

If this is true, or as near the manifold truth as one can get, then the
free-verse movement in English is mainly a return to the cadenced prose
of the seventeenth century with the additional trait of the appearance
of verse. This is an important addition, however. It involves a careful
recognition of what psychology calls the 'prose attitude' and the 'verse
attitude,' and also (as has been suggested above) the peculiar union of
prose with the spatial rhythm of verse. We read with ear and eye
together, though with varying proportions of emphasis on the one or the
other; for some 'vocalize' whatever they read, others read almost
entirely with the eye. Since it is the eye that takes the earlier and
quicker perception of printed language, we tend to judge by the
appearance of a page whether it contains prose or verse. Columns of
irregular but approximately equal line lengths, regular blocks of
printing regularly spaced and separated as stanzas, indentation of
every second or every third line--these at once announce that the page
contains verse. And they at the same time constitute an obvious spatial
rhythm to the eye, and prepare the attention of eye and ear and mind for
the approximate regularity of verse. Then, when so prepared, we
unconsciously organize as fully as possible any irregularities that
appear in the language and transform into actual verse the verse
potentialities which pervade our speech.

Some kinds of free-verse, however, do not, so far as one can see, aim to
be more than ordinary prose printed in segments more or less closely
corresponding with the phrase rhythm or normal sound rhythms of
language. It is then prose in actuality and verse in appearance--no
more.

On the justification of this peculiar amalgam there is little agreement.
No doubt for certain swift effects free-verse is the natural and most
serviceable medium. Many short poems in this irregular form are like
snapshots or like rapid sketches as compared with finished paintings.
But the ultimate æsthetic judgment must be precisely that of the
snapshot as compared with finished painting. Nature is always wrong,
says the paradox; art depends upon a deliberate selection of details and
structure. It balances freedom and restraint, variety and uniformity,
one against the other; and even when it appears spontaneous it is but
the result of an unconscious choice which is itself born of long
training or of the mysterious faculty divine. In very little of what at
present is called free-verse does art have a real place. It is all
freedom and variety, with almost no restraint and uniformity: all
stimulation and no repose. There is sometimes a rapid alternation of
verse rhythm and prose rhythm, which, in Bacon's phrase, may cleave but
not incorporate; they succeed each other but do not melt into each
other. Now and again, to be sure, this uncertainty, this very
irregularity, powerfully represents the thought and emotion of the poem;
but nevertheless there can be little doubt that except in the limited
field of instantaneous flashes the most adequate and pleasing medium is
the skilfully varied regularity of formal verse.[74]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [74] "In the effort to get rhyme, 'the rack of finest        |
  | wits,'" says a pseudonymous newspaper writer, "and in the    |
  | struggle, writhing, and agony of trying to get the wrong     |
  | words to say the right thing, one sometimes achieves the     |
  | impossible, or, rather, from the flame of frantic friction   |
  | (of 'Rhyming Dictionary' leaves) rises, phoenix-like,        |
  | another idea, somewhat like the first, its illegitimate      |
  | child, so to say, and thus more beautiful.                   |
  |                                                              |
  | "With vers libre one experiences the mortification one       |
  | sometimes feels in having roared out one's agony in          |
  | perfectly fit terms. With rhymed poetry one feels the        |
  | satisfaction of a wit who gives the nuance of his meaning by |
  | the raise of an eyebrow, the turn of a word."                |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The many kinds of free-verse are recognizable chiefly by the greater or
less feeling of metrical form lying behind them. For convenience they
may be distinguished, according as verse or prose predominates, as (1)
irregular unrimed metre, (2) very free blank verse, (3) unusual mingling
of metre and prose, a kind of recitative, and (4) mere prose printed as
verse, or what may be called free-verse _par excellence_. A few
illustrations will help to make clear the distinctions.

Of the first sort are the unrimed choruses in Milton's Samson Agonistes,
the metre of Southey's once-admired Thalaba and the Curse of Kehama,
and parts of Shelley's Queen Mab. Here the lines are irregular in length
(as in the 'irregular' Pindaric odes), but they are usually felt as
truly metrical, though they do not repeat a single pattern.

    This, this is he; softly a while;
    Let us not break in upon him.
    O change beyond report, thought, or belief!
    See how he lies at random, carelessly diffused,
    With languished head unpropt,
    As one past hope, abandoned,
    And by himself given over,
    In slavish habit, ill-fitted weeds
    O'er-worn and soiled.
    Or do mine eyes misrepresent? Can this be he,
    That heroic, that renowned,
    Irresistible Samson?...
        Samson Agonistes, 115-126.

        The Fairy waved her wand:
        Ahasuerus fled
    Fast as the shapes of mingled shade and mist
        That lurk in the glens of a twilight grove
        Flee from the morning beam:
        The matter of which dreams are made
        Not more endowed with actual life
        Than this phantasmal portraiture
        Of wandering human thought.
            Queen Mab, iii.

    Thou tyrannous over-mastering Spirit, Lucifer,
    Hear now thy guilt.
    The first in glory amongst us all wast thou;
    Nor did we grudge thee loyalty,
    When of old beneath thy leadership against Yahveh,
    And thereafter against the mild Galilean Godhead,
    We waged war for dominion over the minds of man.
    But perished now long since is the might of Yahveh;
    And his Son, a plaintive, impotent phantom, wails
    Over that faith, withering, corrupted, petrified,
    For which he died vainly.
        R. C. TREVELYAN, Lucifer Enchained.

    Green boughs stirring in slumber
    Sigh at the lost remembrance
    Of Aulon,
    Golden-thighed, in the heart of the forest.

    Here, where the dripping leaves
    Whisper of passing feet
    To the fragrant woodways,
    The moonlight floods the forsaken tangled boughs
    With loneliness
    For Melinna, gone from the evening.
        EDWARD J. O'BRIEN, Hellenica.

Very free blank verse, when taken in small excerpts, often seems devoid
of metrical regularity. The reason for this is that in long poems much
greater freedom is possible because the ear and the attention,
accustomed for longer periods to the formal pattern, hold it more easily
where it becomes faint. Examples of this approximation to prose have
been given above, pages 43, 44. The famous first lines of Paradise Lost,
if printed after the contemporary fashion of free-verse, would by very
few be recognized as blank verse; and the same is true of many passages
throughout the poem, and indeed throughout all long poems in blank
verse.

    Of Man's first disobedience
    And the fruit of that forbidden tree
    Whose mortal taste brought death into the world,
    And all our woe,
    With loss of Eden,
    Till one greater Man restore us
    And regain the blissful seat,
    Sing,
    Heavenly Muse,
    That on the secret top of Horeb
    Or of Sinai
    Didst inspire that shepherd ...

Among the finest free-verse in English are the Evening Voluntaries of
Henley.[75] In these poems clearly metrical lines (sometimes only parts
of lines) alternate with simple prose. The line length is now based on
phrasal rhythm, and at other times on no discoverable principle except
that of beginning a new line with some emphatic word.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [75] See a part of Margaritæ Sorori, page 43, above.         |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

    White fleets of cloud,
    Argosies heavy with fruitfulness,
    Sail the blue peacefully. Green flame the hedgerows.
    Blackbirds are bugling, and white in wet winds
    Sway the tall poplars.
    Pageants of colour and fragrance,
    Pass the sweet meadows, and viewless
    Walks the mild spirit of May,
    Visibly blessing the world.
        HENLEY, Pastoral.

    Have the gods then left us in our need
    Like base and common men?
    Were even the sweet grey eyes
    Of Artemis a lie,
    The speech of Hermes but a trick,
    The glory of Apollonian hair deceit?

    Desolate we move across a desolate land,
    The high gates closed,
    No answer to our prayer;
    Naught left save our integrity,
    No murmur against Fate
    Save that we are juster than the unjust gods,
    More pitiful than they.
        RICHARD ALDINGTON, Disdain.

Modern free-verse, or free-verse _par excellence_, which is mere prose
with the spatial rhythm of verse, has been skilfully written by various
contemporaries. Let a single example suffice. Such a bare but moving
situation as that of Miss Lowell's Fool's Money Bags could no doubt be
adequately presented in traditional metre, but perhaps not so directly
as in her 'curved' prose--

    Outside the long window,
    With his head on the stone sill,
    The dog is lying,
    Gazing at his Beloved.
    His eyes are wet and urgent,
    And his body is taut and shaking.
    It is cold on the terrace;
    A pale wind licks along the stone slabs,
    But the dog gazes through the glass
    And is content.

    The Beloved is writing a letter.
    Occasionally she speaks to the dog,
    But she is thinking of her writing.
    Does she, too, give her devotion to one
    Not worthy?[76]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [76] From Sword Blades and Poppy Seeds, by permission of     |
  | Houghton Mifflin Co.                                         |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

A good example of combined metre and confessed prose (not to be confused
with the mingling of verse and prose illustrated on the previous page)
with easy transitions from one form to the other may be seen in a poem
called Spring by Mr. Clement Wood. The rapid change from verse to prose
is, of course, familiar in Shakespeare and his fellow dramatists,
sometimes even in a single speech.


5. EXOTIC FORMS

As wide as are the possibilities of variety in native English verse, the
poets have endeavored to extend its boundaries by the annexation of
foreign prosodies from ancient Greece and Rome and from mediaeval
France. In absolute contrast to free-verse, which is the denial of
metrical formalism, this is the apotheosis of it. They admittedly place
form above content and are satisfied (for the most part) with the mere
exhilaration of dancing gracefully in chains.

A group of Elizabethan experimenters, among whom were Sidney and
Spenser, sought diligently to compose in the quantitative metres of the
classics; Puttenham, the author of one of the first English treatises on
the Art of Poetry (1589), declared that by "leisurable travail" one
might "easily and commodiously lead all those feet of the ancients into
our vulgar language"; but while they may have satisfied themselves
(Spenser certainly did not) these experimenters produced nothing of
genuine significance. The result was candidly anticipated by Ascham, who
said in the Schoolmaster (1570) that "_carmen exametrum_ doth rather
trot and hobble than run smoothly in our English tongue." Thomas Nash
confirms this opinion in his criticism of Stanyhurst's attempt to
translate Virgil into hexameters: "The hexameter verse I grant to be a
gentleman of an ancient house (so is many an English beggar); yet this
clime of ours he cannot thrive in. Our speech is too craggy for him to
set his plow in. He goes twitching and hopping in our language like a
man running upon quagmires, up the hill in one syllable and down the
dale in another, retaining no part of that stately smooth gait which he
vaunts himself with amongst the Greeks and Latins" (Four Letters
Confuted). Coleridge's judgment was the same:

    This is a galloping measure, a hop, and a trot, and a gallop.

Thereafter, apart from isolated attempts, efforts were abandoned until
the nineteenth century, when Southey, following William Taylor, who in
turn had been induced by Goethe's Hermann und Dorothea to try a new
principle of frankly substituting sentence stress or accent for length
of syllable, wrote his Vision of Judgment (1821). Out of this revised
experimenting came ultimately Longfellow's Evangeline (1847) and the
Courtship of Miles Standish (1858) and Clough's Bothie of
Tober-na-Vuolich (1848). These alone, not to mention the lesser
imitations, were enough to discredit the movement metrically. Meanwhile
Tennyson and Kingsley, followed later by William Watson, and still
enthusiastically by the present Poet Laureate, undertook to harmonize
syllabic length and stress by more or less occult processes. As a matter
of learned experiment and debate these problems have a certain academic
interest, but only the staunchest and (one may say) blindest adherents
find in them any practical importance.

The storm centre of all classical adaptations has been the dactylic
hexameter, the standard measure of Greek and Latin narrative poetry. The
most nearly successful English hexameters are probably those of
Kingsley's Andromeda (1858), which occupy a middle ground between the
purely accentual and the purely (so-called) quantitative experiments. An
example of this and one of Mr. Bridges' quantitative hexameters must
suffice. Though both have good qualities, neither approaches the melodic
variety and dignity of Homer and Virgil, or even Ovid.[77]

    Over the sea, past Crete, on the Syrian shore to the southward,
    Dwells in the well-tilled lowland a dark-haired Æthiop people,
    Skilful with needle and loom, and the arts of the dyer and carver,
    Skilful, but feeble of heart; for they know not the lords of Olympus,
    Lovers of men; neither broad-browed Zeus, nor Pallas Athené,
    Teacher of wisdom to heroes, bestower of might in the battle;
    Share not the cunning of Hermes, nor list to the songs of Apollo.
        Andromeda.

    Now in wintry delights, and long fireside meditation,
    'Twixt studies and routine paying due court to the Muses,
    My solace in solitude, when broken roads barricade me
    Mudbound, unvisited for months with my merry children,
    Grateful t'ward Providence, and heeding a slander against me
    Less than a rheum, think of me to-day, dear Lionel, and take
    This letter as some account of Will Stone's versification.
        R. BRIDGES, Wintry Delights.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [77] The advanced student should of course read carefully    |
  | the paper on "Classical Metres in English" by W. J. Stone in |
  | Bridges' Milton's Prosody (2d ed.), pp. 113 ff. Mr. Stone    |
  | regards the hexameters of Clough's Actæon and some specimen  |
  | verses by Spedding (the biographer of Bacon) as the best he  |
  | has seen.                                                    |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

After the hexameter the most frequently imitated metre is the Sapphic
strophe. Swinburne's Sapphics in Poems and Ballads are the best known;
but though they are finely musical they do not pretend to give more than
an echo of the Greek music.

    All the night sleep came not upon my eyelids,
    Shed not dew, nor shook nor unclosed a feather,
    Yet with lips shut close and with eyes of iron
      Stood and beheld me.

    Then to me so lying awake a vision
    Came without sleep over the seas and touched me,
    Softly touched mine eyelids and lips; and I too,
      Full of the vision,

    Saw the white implacable Aphrodite,
    Saw the hair unbound and the feet unsandalled
    Shine as fire of sunset on western waters;
      Saw the reluctant....

Both Tennyson and Swinburne tried the Catullan hendecasyllabics.
Tennyson's Milton, in alcaics, is famous, and has a well-marked Miltonic
sound, but little of the sound of Horace's alcaics. Admirable also are
the elegiac distichs of Watson's Hymn to the Sea--

    Man whose deeds, to the doer, come back as thine own exhalations
      Into thy bosom return, weepings of mountain and vale;
    Man with the cosmic fortunes and starry vicissitudes tangled,
      Chained to the wheel of the world, blind with the dust of its
        speed,
    Even as thou, O giant, whom trailed in the wake of her conquests
      Night's sweet despot draws, bound to her ivory car.

Of the French lyrical metres that have been imitated in English, mainly
for lighter themes, the _ballade_ and the _rondeau_ are the most
important. These and the _villanelle_, _triolet_, and _pantoum_ are not,
like imitations of classical forms, semi-learned attempts to do in
English what is foreign to the nature of the language, but games of
skill in phrasing and riming, wholly legitimate once their artificiality
is granted. For the impassioned overflowing of a sincere spirit they are
unfitted, but for grace, point, and delicate charm nothing could be
better devised; and when occasionally they are used for the expression
of genuine feeling, the unexpected union of lightness and seriousness
has a peculiarly poignant effect.

The _ballade_ in its commonest form consists of three 8-line stanzas
riming _ababbcbc_ and a 4-line stanza called 'envoy,' _bcbc_; the last
line of each stanza being repeated as a refrain, and the _a_, _b_, and
_c_ rimes throughout the poem being the same. The lines contain usually
either four or five stresses. The envoy is a sort of dedication,
addressed traditionally to a "Prince." Variations of all kinds occur,
encouraged by the difficulty of satisfying all the demands of the form.
Examples may be found (with an excellent introduction) in Gleeson
White's collection of Ballades and Rondeaus (Canterbury Poets), and
Andrew Lang's Ballades of Blue China.

_Rondeaus_ and _rondels_ (two forms of the same word) are written with
greater freedom of variation. Their organic principle is the use of the
first phrase or first line, twice repeated, as a refrain (R). The
commoner model in English is: _aabba_, _aabR_, _aabbaR_, in which the
first half of the first line constitutes the refrain. Another type rimes
_ABba_, _abAB_, _abbaAB_ (the capital letters indicating the lines
repeated). For examples see the reference above. Austin Dobson, Henley,
and Swinburne have written successfully in this form.

The _triolet_ is a sort of abbreviation of the second variety of
rondeau. Its lines are usually short and rime _ABaAabAB_.

The _villanelle_, in its normal form, consists of five 3-line stanzas
(_aba_) and a concluding 4-line stanza, all with but two rimes, the
first line, moreover, being repeated as the sixth, twelfth, and
eighteenth, the third line as the ninth, fifteenth, and nineteenth.

The _pantoum_ is of Eastern origin, but it came into English through the
French. It is extremely rare. It consists of a series of quatrains
_abab_, with the second and fourth lines of each stanza repeated
chainwise as the first and third of the next stanza. The closing stanza
completes the chain by taking as its second and fourth lines the first
and third of the first stanza.

From Italy have come, besides the _ottava rima_ and the sonnet, two
other metrical forms, the _sestina_ and the _terza rima_. The sestina is
composed of six 6-line stanzas and a final 3-line stanza. Instead of
rimes the end words of the lines of the first stanza are repeated in
this order 1.2.3.4.5.6. -- 6.1.5.2.4.3. -- 3.6.4.1.2.5. -- 5.3.2.6.1.4.
-- 4.5.1.3.6.2. -- 2.4.6.5.3.1. -- and the last stanza 5.3.1. with
2.4.6. in the middle of the lines. Gosse, Swinburne, and Kipling have
written sestinas; Swinburne one with the additional embellishment of
rime.

The _terza rima_ is the metre of Dante's Divine Comedy. The rimes are
_aba_, _bcb_, _cdc_, etc.... _yzy_, _zz_. It has not been very
successfully used in English, except in the stanzaic arrangement of
Shelley's Ode to the West Wind,--_aba_, _bcb_, _cdc_, _ded_, _ee_. Other
examples besides translations of Dante are short poems by Wyatt and
Sidney, Browning's The Statue and the Bust, and Shelley's unfinished The
Triumph of Life.




CHAPTER V

MELODY, HARMONY, AND MODULATION


The terms melody, harmony, and modulation, being borrowed from music,
are not to be applied too literally to the art of versification. They
represent metaphorically, however, certain important qualities of verse
which, with the exception of rime, cannot from their very impalpability
be formally explained, but can only be suggested and partially
described. They are not the determining and fundamental characteristics
of verse--those have already been discussed--but rather its sources of
incremental beauty, of richness and, subtle power. To draw an
illustration from another art, they add light and shadow, fullness,
roundness, depth of perspective, vividness, to what would else be simple
line-drawing.

The language of ordinary prose has its own melody and harmony, its own
sonorous rhythms, and its own delicate adjustments between sound and
meaning. All these natural beauties verse inherits from prose and then
adds the further beauties that result from the union of prose rhythms
and the formal patterns of verse. Some of these qualities which are the
peculiar enhancements of verse will now be examined.

       *       *       *       *       *

The simplest and most tangible of these is rime in its various forms.
Rime is, in its most general signification, the repetition, usually at
regulated intervals, of identical or closely similar sounds. According
to the circumstances of the identical or similar sounds, four varieties
are distinguishable: (1) _alliteration_, or initial rime, when the
sounds at the beginning of accented syllables agree, as _t_ale,
a_tt_une; (2) _consonance_, when the vowel sounds differ and the final
consonantal sounds agree, as ta_l_e, pu_ll_; (3) _assonance_, when the
vowel sounds agree and the consonants differ, as t_a_le, p_ai_n; and (4)
_rime proper_, when both the vowels and the final consonants agree, as
t_ale_, p_ale_.

Alliteration is a natural and obvious method of emphasis in English--and
often difficult to avoid rather than to obtain. Popular sayings--wind
and weather, time and tide, kith and kin, ever and aye, to have and to
hold--are fond of it for its own sake. The early English, German, and
Scandinavian prosodies made it a determining principle; and in the north
of England it survived well into the fifteenth century; but since then
it has been considered a too 'easy' kind of metrical ornament, one to be
used sparingly and only for very special effects. "Apt alliteration's
artful aid" is very well when it is apt and artful; but when some poets
in their simplicity have gone so far as to "hunt the letter to the
death," one cannot but condemn it, in John Burroughs' ironic phrase, as
a "leprosy of alliteration." Most of the poets, however, have made
skilful use of it, notably Tennyson and Swinburne, though the latter
frequently overdid it, as in--

    ... rusted sheaves
    Rain-rotten in rank lands.
        A Ballad of Death.

Very remarkable is the combination of rime and frequent alliteration in
Browning's Abt Vogler.

Analogous to alliteration and perhaps to be classed as a by-form of it
is the subtle use of the same sound in unstressed parts of neighboring
words, as in--

    Over the dark abyss, whose boi_l_ing gu_l_f
    Tame_l_y endured a bridge of wondrous _l_ength.
        Paradise Lost, II, 1027-28.

Consonance is very similar to this latter form of alliteration. Its use
is irregular and usually hidden. Note the alliteration and consonance in
Milton's line, both the _s_'s and the _n_'s--

    Through the soft silence of the list'ning night.

Assonance, like alliteration and consonance, occurs in modern verse
sporadically, almost accidentally, but with great frequency in all
languages. As a regular principle of verse (in place of rime) it is
characteristic of Spanish and of Old French; in English its deliberate
use is very rare--the best example is perhaps the song "Bright, O bright
Fedalma" in George Eliot's The Spanish Gypsy.

Minute analysis is tedious and unsatisfactory, often indeed misleading,
but a single example will perhaps suggest some of the ways in which
alliteration, consonance, and assonance are interwoven for harmonic
effects that, not being altogether obvious, are felt rather than
directly perceived. Similar experiments may be made by the reader with
other passages. The opening stanza of Gray's Elegy, quoted on page 55,
above, is remarkable for its smooth and quiet flow, symbolic of the
atmosphere described by the words. How is this 'atmosphere' produced? or
rather, what is there that produces in us this sense of appropriate
atmosphere? In the first place, the lines are 5-stress and have the
"long iambic roll," and the rimes are simple _abab_. Furthermore, the
coincidence of prose and verse rhythms is noticeable; there are only
three variations: _wind_ in the second line, which is too important to
occupy the metrically unstressed position, and _o'er_ in the second line
and the second _and_ in the fourth, which are not quite strong enough to
stand in the stressed position. By a sort of substitution or 'occult
balance' the weakness of _o'er_ is compensated by the slight overweight
of _wind_. And the weakness of _and_ is strengthened by the rhetorical
pause after _darkness_. A rough approximation in semi-musical notation
would give for the second line

    ◡ -- ◡ -- -- -- ◡ ◡ ◡ --

There is a syncopation by which -- -- and ◡◡ combine (the natural syllabic
length of _o'er_ helping considerably) without destroying the
fundamental rhythm. In the fourth line, instead of

    ◡ -- ◡ -- ◡ --

we have

      ◡  --   ◡  ‸ ◡  ◡  --
  ... to dark-ness  and to me,--

the pause being supported by the meaning as well as by the structure of
the verse. Alliteration is appropriately inconspicuous; it is limited to
_pl_owman ... _pl_ods and the conventional _w_eary _w_ay. The consonance
is significant. The most frequently repeated consonantal sounds are:
_l_ 10, _d_ 9, _r_[78] 8, _th_ 6, _n_ 6, and _w_ 5; that is, of the
seventy consonantal sounds (counting _th_ as one, _p_ and _l_ as two
sounds) in the stanza, thirty-five, or one-half, are the comparatively
soft sounds _l_, _r_, _th_, _n_, _w_. From the point of view of the
line, a tabulation shows two or more occurrences in each line of--

  1   --   TH   R   T   L
  2   --   TH   R       L   D
  3   --        R       L   D   P   M   W   H
  4   --        R   T   L   D                   N

That is, there is a kind of RTLD motif throughout the stanza. The
assonance is even more striking. The stressed vowel sounds (which are of
course the most important[79]) line by line are as follows:[80]

  ŭ^R ō ĕ ā ē
  ō ŭ^R ō ō ī
  au ō ŏ ī ē
  ī ŭ^R ā ī

Here the five ō-sounds and four ī-sounds and three ŭ^R-sounds are
noticeable.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [78] According to the commonest American pronunciation.      |
  |                                                              |
  | [79] The unaccented vowel sounds show the usual predominance |
  | of the obscure vowel e, with three occurrences of ĭ and ī.   |
  |                                                              |
  | [80] Reference to the text will identify the symbols.        |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Now while no one would dream of saying that such a mechanical
examination unlocks the mystery of this quatrain's music, it cannot be
denied that the predominance of some sounds (especially those that are
peculiarly suggestive) over others is significant. And certainly such a
tabulation reveals _parts_ of the mystery which are not plain even to
the trained eye and ear.

The origin of rime is much disputed, but it occurs, at least
sporadically, in the poetry of nearly all peoples, and is likely to have
been a spontaneous growth arising from a natural human pleasure in
similar sounds. "It lies deep in our human nature and satisfies an
universal need." It is an established phenomenon in Sanskrit and Persian
prosody, in Arabic, in Chinese, in Celtic, in Icelandic. Greek prosody,
and Latin, which was based upon Greek, rejected it, partly perhaps
because it was too simple an ornament for the highly cultivated Greek
taste, especially on account of the great frequency of similar
inflectional endings, and perhaps because it was not entirely consistent
with the quantitative principle.[81] In the _popular_ Latin verse,
however, which was accentual, rime is found; and when, before the fall
of the later Empire, quantity was gradually abandoned, rime returned as
a regular feature of Latin verse. From thence it passed into the Romance
languages--Provençal, Italian, French--where it was for a time rivalled
by assonance; and finally, under French influence after the Conquest, it
made its way into England. But it had not been unknown in earliest
English verse, though it occurred only here and there, as in Greek and
Latin.[82] And from the fact that rimes appear with greater frequency in
the later than in the earlier Anglo-Saxon verse, as the native poets
became more familiar with the rimed Latin hymns, one may feel sure that
it would have developed into a staple of English verse independently of
French influence. From the twelfth century until the introduction of
blank verse by the Elizabethans, practically all English verse, except
that which belongs to the Alliterative Revival (mainly in the north of
England) of the second half of the fourteenth century, was rimed.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [81] Rime occurs, however, here and there in Greek and Latin |
  | poetry, and is more frequent than perhaps we commonly        |
  | suppose.                                                     |
  |                                                              |
  | [82] In the 3182 lines of Beowulf, for example, there are    |
  | sixteen exact rimes and many more approximate rimes. There   |
  | is also in Anglo-Saxon the so-called Riming Poem, of         |
  | uncertain date, composed probably under Scandinavian         |
  | influence.                                                   |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

From the æsthetic point of view rime has been severely attacked and
faithfully defended. A lively controversy was waged at the end of the
sixteenth century between the Renaissance classicists, who of course
condemned it, and the native rimers, but was brought to a peaceful
conclusion by Samuel Daniels' A Defence of Rhyme in 1603. In a prefatory
note to the second edition of Paradise Lost, Milton delivered an
arrogant but ineffectual counterblast. Rime, he said, was "no necessary
adjunct or true ornament of poem or good verse, in longer works
especially, but the invention of a barbarous age, to set off wretched
matter and lame metre; graced indeed since by the use of some famous
modern poets, carried away by custom, but much to their own vexation,
hindrance, and constraint to express many things otherwise, and for the
most part worse, than else they would have expressed them."

The chief arguments against rime are those mentioned by Milton, its
tendency to conceal "wretched matter and lame metre," and the necessity
it often forces upon poets of either twisting unpleasantly what they
have to say or of adding irrelevant matter. Besides these there is also
what Cowper called "clock-work tintinnabulum"--mere empty jingle. But
all the arguments are double-edged. For although many inferior poets
have imposed for a while on readers and critics by the superficial
melody of rime alone, "wretched matter and lame metre" were never long
successfully concealed by it. And although, as Hobbes wrote, rime
"forces a man sometimes for the stopping of a chink to say something he
did never think," it is a fact nevertheless that the second thought,
induced by rime-necessity, "the rack of truest wits,"[83] is sometimes
if not better than the first, at least a worthy and handsome brother to
it. Whether rime be a hindrance, vexation, and constraint to the poet
depends almost wholly on his mastery of the technique of verse. It is
not always easier to write in unrimed measures, for, as Milton proudly
implied, good blank verse is the most difficult of all metres. And
although the jingle of like sounds may become tedious and mechanical if
unskilfully handled--"to all judicious ears trivial and of no true
musical delight," says Milton again--it has also proved a source of
richness and beauty of sound; and it should never be forgotten that in
the true æsthetic judgment of poetry sound plays a very important
part.[84]

   +--------------------------------------------------------------+
   | [83] See the whole of Ben Jonson's Fit of Rhyme against      |
   | Rhyme.                                                       |
   |                                                              |
   | [84] Compare Flaubert's extreme statement: "that a beautiful |
   | verse without meaning is superior to one that has meaning    |
   | but is less beautiful."                                      |
   +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The satisfaction which the ear receives from rime at the end of a verse
has been aptly compared to the pleasure we feel when a long arch of
melody returns to the dominant and then the tonic. More elaborate is
Oscar Wilde's praise of rime--"that exquisite echo which in the music's
hollow hill creates and answers its own voice; rhyme, which in the hands
of a real artist becomes not merely a material element of metrical
beauty, but a spiritual element of thought and passion also, waking a
new mood, it may be, or stirring a fresh train of ideas, or opening by
mere sweetness and suggestion of sound some golden door at which the
Imagination itself had knocked in vain; rhyme, which can turn man's
utterance into the speech of the gods; rhyme, the one chord we have
added to the Greek lyre."

The real problem in the arguments on rime is its fitness or unfitness in
particular kinds of poetry. No rules or laws can be formulated; men have
judged differently at different times; but it has been generally felt
that shorter poems, inasmuch as they are in a way the concentrated
essence of poetry, and must make their full impression almost
instantaneously, require all the advantages of the poetic art.
Tennyson's unrimed lyrics and Collins' Ode to Evening are unusual,
though successful, experiments. For long poems, however, there is not
this necessity of immediate effect. Here rime is sometimes a vexation,
sometimes not. Justification lies in special circumstances. The
classical French drama found it indispensable; English poetic drama gave
it a trial in the seventeenth century and rejected it. Narrative poems
which contain a large lyrical element, like the Faerie Queene and the
Eve of St. Agnes, are, all agree, enhanced by the rime. But no one would
now wish to have Paradise Lost in rimed verse, though it is clear from
the publisher's note in 1668 that many readers at the time were
'stumbled' because it was not. On the other hand, we feel that Chapman's
and Pope's Homer and Dryden's Virgil might have been better without
rimes. Once more, it lies with the poet--and with the poem--to justify
his use of rime or his refusal of it; if he is a good poet and his
judgment is not warped by local or temporary conditions there will
rarely be any doubt.

Rimes are called _masculine_ when they consist of one syllable, as
_cries: arise;_ _feminine_ when they consist of two or more syllables,
as _heedless: needless_, _beautiful: dutiful_. When both vowel and
following consonant agree the rime is called _perfect_, as _might:
right_, _solemn: column_. When the preceding consonant as well as the
vowel and following consonant agree the rime is called _identical_ or
_echo_ rime, as _reed: read_, _perfection: infection_, _ours: hours_.
When there is a difference either in the vowel sound or in the following
consonantal sound, that is, when assonance or consonance is substituted
for rime, the rime is usually said to be approximate or imperfect, as
_worth: forth_, _was: pass_, _gusht: dust_ (Coleridge). When the rime
words look alike but are pronounced differently, they are called _eye
rimes_, as _war: car_, _brow: glow_. Sometimes false rimes occur which
have no similarity of sound or appearance, but are more or less
sanctioned by earlier pronunciation or by custom, as _high: humanity_.
Sometimes also unaccented syllables are rimed with accented syllables,
as _burning: sing_.

Imperfect rimes of all sorts are used for various reasons. Compared with
some languages, English is not very rich in rime words; and for many
words which poets are prone to use, such as _love_, _God_, _heaven_,
etc., few available rimes exist. When good rimes are few, older
pronunciations are often resorted to, as the familiar _love: move_,
_blood: stood_, _north: forth._ In reading the older poets we find many
rimes which are now imperfect but were once entirely correct, as the
eighteenth century _fault: thought_, _join: shine_, _tea: way_. On the
other hand, the poet's carelessness or indifference is sometimes to
blame for approximate rimes, as Gray's _beech: stretch_ in the Elegy,
and his _relies: requires_, Blake's _lamb: name_ and _tomb: come_,
Coleridge's _forced: burst_, Whittier's notorious _pen: been_, etc. But
to dogmatize on a point like this is obviously very dangerous. Certain
poets, especially among the moderns, may be said to choose imperfect
rimes deliberately, both as a fresh means of securing variety and
avoiding the monotony of hackneyed rimes, and also as a means of subtly
suggesting the imperfection and futility of life. A few famous examples,
defensible and indefensible, are: Wordsworth's _robin: sobbing_,
_sullen: pulling_; Tennyson's _with her: together_, _valleys: lilies_;
Keats's _youths: soothe_, _pulse: culls_; Swinburne's _lose him: bosom:
blossom_. Keats and Rossetti are noted for their free use of approximate
rimes. The humorous rimes of Byron and Browning, among others, are of
course in a different category.

Feminine rimes have been frequently rejected as undignified. They are,
said Coleridge, "a lower species of wit"; and he instanced, not very
justly, the couplet of Smart:

    Tell me, thou son of great Cadwallader!
    Hast sent the hare? or hast thou swallowed her?[85]

But again the right justification is successful use, and no one will
deny that Swinburne's double and triple rimes have greatly enriched his
verse and revealed to others unused possibilities of metre. Such rimes
as _grey leaf: bay-leaf_ were practically a new thing in 1865.[86]

   +--------------------------------------------------------------+
   | [85] Triple rimes are naturally excellent for joco-serious   |
   | purposes, like the celebrated _intellectual: henpecked you   |
   | all_, _Timbuctoo: hymn book too_, _thin sand doubts: ins and |
   | outs_.                                                       |
   |                                                              |
   | [86] Swinburne, Dedication, 1865.                            |
   +--------------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *

Too evasive for explanatory analysis, almost too delicate and impalpable
even for descriptive comment, are many of the best musical effects of
fine poetry. The poet's ear and his sixth prosodic sense enable him to
make his verse a perfect vehicle of his meaning and emotion. He chooses
an appropriate stanza for his poem, discovers an unguessed power in some
common measure, makes the words hurry or deliberately holds them back,
varying the tempo with the spirit of the words, gives the pattern an
unusual twist when the idea is unusual, startles or soothes by the sound
as well as by the intellectual content of his lines--and accomplishes
all these metrical nuances, not with the whip-snapping of the
ring-master, but with the consummate art that conceals art. When his
prosodic effects are obvious they lose their power; we can see how the
trick is done and we do not marvel. But when we feel vaguely the
haunting quality of a melodious line or the perfect metrical rightness
of a phrase without knowing _why_ the melody haunts us or the phrase
just fits, then we both marvel and applaud; then the poet's gift, his
divine authorization, is patent, and we recognize his superiority with
awe.

Some of these effects have already been mentioned in the preceding
paragraphs; but besides the 'tone-color' of assonance and consonance and
rime proper there are also effects of pitch and of tempo and of
repetition, and imitative effects, more or less concrete and
explainable. It is true that many trained readers find subtleties of
sound and suggestiveness where others find none, and also that many find
rich beauties that the poet himself was not aware of and did not intend.
This latter case may be accounted for in two ways: sometimes a reader is
supersubtle and imagines embellishments that do not exist; and sometimes
the poet builds better than he knows. His intuition, or inspiration, or
whatever one chooses to call it, endows him with powers of whose
complete functioning he is not at the time conscious. As readers must
steer carefully between these two dangers, so also the poet has to avoid
on the one hand repelling us by the appearance of a metrical device and
on the other losing an effect which he intends but which may be too
delicate to be seen or felt. No one probably ever missed the simple
melody of Poe's

    The viol, the violet, and the vine;

or the imitative effectiveness of Swinburne's

    With lisp of leaves and ripple of rain;

and though these beauties are obvious they are for most tastes not too
obtrusive. But Tennyson's

    Low on the sand and loud on the stone

is not so obvious, and there is danger of its escaping notice. One hears
the line with increased pleasure after the imitation of sound is pointed
out; but only the trained ear catches it at first.

This correspondence of sound and sense is called _onomatopoeia_. It may
appear in a single word, as _buzz_, _whack_, _crackle_, _roar_, etc.; or
a combination of imitative words, as Tennyson's

    The moan of doves in immemorial elms,
    And murmuring of innumerable bees;

or a suggestive echo rather than direct imitation, as Shelley's

    Makes faint with too much sweet these heavy-wingèd thieves;

or a suggestion of motion rather than of sound, as Milton's sea-fish

                          huge of bulk,
    Wallowing unwieldy, enormous in their gait,

and the

    Leviathan, which God of all his works
    Created hugest that swim the ocean stream;

or an attempt to imitate the motion described, as Tennyson's picture of
Excalibur when Sir Bedivere hurls it into the lake--

                          The great brand
    Made lightnings in the splendour of the moon,
    And flashing round and round, whirled in an arch,
    Shot like a streamer of the northern morn;

and Swinburne's more simple

                          As a lamp
    Burns and bends all its blowing flame one way;

or even the correspondence of a harsh line and a harsh thought, as
Browning's famous

    Irks care the crop-full bird, frets doubt the maw-crammed beast?[87]

   +--------------------------------------------------------------+
   | [87] For an extreme example of mimicry, see Southey's        |
   | Lodore.                                                      |
   +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Sometimes there is obtained an effect of altered tempo; of which the
best illustration, though hackneyed, is still Pope's clever couplets in
the Essay on Criticism--

    When Ajax strives some rock's vast weight to throw,
    The line too labours, and the words move slow:
    Not so, when swift Camilla scours the plain,
    Flies o'er th' unbending corn, and skims along the main.[88]

   +--------------------------------------------------------------+
   | [88] Lines 370 ff. Dr. Johnson's comment on this last line is|
   | curious: "The swiftness of Camilla is rather contrasted than |
   | exemplified. Why the verse should be lengthened to express   |
   | speed, will not easily be discovered. In the dactyls, used   |
   | for that purpose by the ancients, two short syllables were   |
   | pronounced with such rapidity, as to be equal only to one    |
   | long; they, therefore, naturally exhibit the act of passing  |
   | through a long space in a short time. But the alexandrine,   |
   | by its pause in the midst, is a tardy and stately measure;   |
   | and the word 'unbending,' one of the most sluggish and slow  |
   | which our language affords, cannot much accelerate its       |
   | motion."                                                     |
   +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Examples of similar metrical skill may be found everywhere, especially
among the more conscious literary artists, such as Shelley, Tennyson,
Rossetti, Swinburne, and Browning, too. A few worth study follow:

    To-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow
    Creeps in this petty pace from day to day.
        SHAKESPEARE, Macbeth, V, v.

    To bellow through the vast and boundless deep.
        MILTON, Paradise Lost, I, 177.

                   ---- Mixt
    Confus'dly, and which thus must ever fight.
        Ibid., II, 913 f.

    So he with difficulty and labour hard
    Mov'd on, with difficulty and labour he.
        Paradise Lost, II, 1021 f.

    Yielded with coy submission, modest pride,
    And sweet reluctant amorous delay.
        Ibid., IV, 310 f.

    See how he lies at random, carelessly diffused,
    With languished head unpropt,
    As one past hope, abandoned,
    And by himself given over.
        MILTON, Samson Agonistes, 118 ff.

    With doubtful feet and wavering resolution.
        Ibid., 732

    Some rousing motions in me, which dispose
    To something extraordinary my thoughts.
        Ibid., 1382 f.

    And ten low words oft creep in one dull line.
        POPE, Essay on Criticism, 347.

    The broad and burning moon lingeringly arose.
        SHELLEY, The Sunset.

    Rugged and dark, winding among the springs.
        SHELLEY, Alastor, 88.

    Here, where precipitate Spring, with one light bound.
        LANDOR, Fiesolan Idyl.

    Hammering and clinking, chattering stony names.
        TENNYSON, The Princess, III, 361.

    Myriads of rivulets, hurrying through the lawn.
        Ibid., VII, 205.

    The league-long roller thundering on the reef.
        TENNYSON, Enoch Arden, 580.

    Then Philip standing up said falteringly.
        Ibid., 283.

    A long street climbs to one tall-tower'd hill.
        Ibid., 5.

    Clang battle-axe and clash brand.
        TENNYSON, The Coming of Arthur, 492.

    The blind wave feeling round his long sea-hall
    In silence.
        TENNYSON, Merlin and Vivien, 230 f.

    Immingled with heaven's azure waveringly.
        TENNYSON, Gareth, 914.

    The hoof of his horse slipt in the stream, the stream ...
        Ibid., 1020.

    The brooks of Eden mazily murmuring.
        TENNYSON, Milton.

    And in the throbbing engine room
    Leap the long rods of polished steel.
        OSCAR WILDE, La Mer.

Something has already been said above on the nature and effects of pitch
in spoken rhythm (pages 35 ff.). It is a constant factor of language,
but its usual function is special emphasis or intensification. By itself
it rarely dominates or determines the rhythm. And since the regular
determinants of spoken rhythm are time and stress, it follows of course
that pitch serves usually to reinforce these determinants.[89] But not
always; for not only does pitch sometimes clash with rhythmic stress,
but also it is sometimes a substitute for it. All three of these
functions--strengthening, opposing, and replacing stress--are operative
in verse.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [89] It is not to be understood, however, that the higher    |
  | the pitch the greater the emphasis; for the contrary is      |
  | often the case.                                              |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

In Shelley's line

    Laugh with an inextinguishable laughter,

a great deal of the effect is due to the combination of word accent and
emphatic pitch in the syllable-_ting_-, so that not merely the one word
but the one syllable dominates the whole verse. In such frequent
conflicts of stress as "on the blue surface," where the prose rhythm is
◡◡ ̷ ̷◡ while the verse pattern has ◡_̷◡_̷◡, the so-called hovering
accent (as it is usually described, with the theory that somehow the
normal quantity of stress is divided between _the_ and _blue_) is
properly a circumflex accent, which in other words means pitch.
Similarly in "If I were a dead leaf," the peculiar rhythm is to be
explained as a balance of pitch against stress. And in that metrically
notorious line of Tennyson's--

    Take your own time, Annie, take your own time.
        TENNYSON, Enoch Arden, 463.

the chief irregularity or dissonance is the clash of pitch against
stress in "own time." If the line read--

    So you're on time, Annie, so you're on time,

there would be an unusual arrangement of stresses and unstressed
syllables, a peculiar syncopation, but no great difficulty.[90] Much
simpler and clearer is the conflict of stress and pitch in such passages
as

    Pansies, lilies, kingcups, daisies,
    Let _them_ live upon _their_ praises.
        WORDSWORTH, To the Small Celandine.[91]

    _I_ only stirred in this black spot;
    _I_ only lived--_I_ only drew
    The accursèd breath of dungeon-dew.
        BYRON, Prisoner of Chillon.[92]

and Keats's

    Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard.

and Marvel's

    Annihilating all that's made
    To a green thought in a green shade.`

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [90] It is perhaps useless to debate about this line.        |
  | Whether one divides thus:                                    |
  |                                                              |
  |     _̷ ◡ | ◡ _̷ | _̷ ◡ | _̷ ◡ | ◡ _̷                          |
  |                                                              |
  | and says there is an 'inversion' in the first, third, and    |
  | fourth feet, or preferably thus:                             |
  |                                                              |
  |     ‸ _̷ | ◡[`] _̷ | ^ _̷ | ◡ _̷ | ◡[`] _̷                      |
  |                                                              |
  | the rhythm is extraordinary; and the added complexity of     |
  | 'own' puts it entirely _hors concours_. Compare with it,     |
  | however, Milton's                                            |
  |                                                              |
  |     Which but th' Omnipotent none could have foil'd.         |
  |         Paradise Lost, I, 273.                               |
  |                                                              |
  |     Not merely titular, since by degree.                     |
  |         Ibid., V, 774.                                       |
  |                                                              |
  | [91] The italics are not Wordsworth's.                       |
  |                                                              |
  | [92] Here the italics are the poet's.                        |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The most interesting, and the rarest, effect of pitch in verse is its
use as a substitute for stress. In the much-discussed first line of
Paradise Lost--

    Of man's first disobedience and the fruit,

there is a metrical stress on _dis_-of "disobedience." This is not so
much, however, an intensification of an already existent secondary
accent, as in, for example, Shelley's

    The eager hours and _un_reluctant years.
        Ode to Liberty, xi.

as the substitution of pitch for stress.[93] The adaptability of
language to metre appears very clearly in such a line as Paradise Lost,
III, 130--

    Self-tempted, self-deprav'd: Man falls deceiv'd,

in which the first compound shows a conflict of pitch and stress ('self'
having a pitch-accent, but occurring in an unstressed part of the line),
while the second shows pitch taking the place of stress. The whole line,
and indeed the whole passage, though not of high poetic value, is an
admirable illustration of the Miltonic freedom of substitution and
syncopation--pitch playing a very important rôle. One should read the
lines first as prose, with full emphasis on the expressive contrasts;
then merely as verse, beating out the metre regardless of the meaning;
finally, with mutual sacrifice and compromise between the two readings,
producing that exquisite adjustment which is the characteristic of good
verse. There is a similar example of pitch and stress in the familiar

    What recks it them? what need they? _They_ are sped.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [93] Some readers take the line thus:                        |
  |                                                              |
  |     ◡ _̷ _̷ ◡ ◡ _̷ ◡[`] ◡ ◡ _                                 |
  |                                                              |
  | with emphasis or pitch-accent on 'first'; in which case the  |
  | above explanation does not hold.                             |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Repetition is a rhetorical not a metrical device, though it is employed
with great effectiveness in verse as well as in prose:

    For Lycidas is dead, dead ere his prime,
    Young Lycidas ...

    The leaves they were crispèd and sere--
    The leaves they were withering and sere.

But a frequent kind of repetition which is truly a prosodic phenomenon
and which, though primarily an element of stanzaic form, has often an
effect analogous to those just described, is the refrain. This may vary
from the simple "My Mary" of Cowper's poem (see page 103, above) to the
elaboration of such a stanza as Rossetti's Sister Helen:

    "Why did you melt your waxen man,
                    Sister Helen?
    To-day is the third since you began."

    "The time was long, yet the time ran,
                    Little brother."
              (_O Mother, Mary Mother,
    Three days to-day, between Hell and Heaven!_)

in which the second, fifth, and sixth lines remain the same throughout
the forty-two stanzas, and the second half of the last line as well.

Besides the prosodic variations and subtleties so far discussed, there
are a great many peculiar rhythms, that is, unusual but harmonious
changes from the set metrical pattern, modulations, adjustments and
combinations of different melodies, which enormously en-rich the verse
of a poem. As in music the ear at length tires of the familiar harmonies
too often repeated, so the precise regularity of the metrical pattern
too closely followed becomes tedious and almost demands variety. To be
sure, a certain amount of variety results of necessity from the
continual adaptation of ordinary language to the requirements of verse;
but many of the examples of early heroic couplets and early blank verse
are enough to show that this natural variety is too slight to satisfy
the ear. The poet must exert a perpetual vigilance to prevent monotony.
But on the other hand, only the highly cultivated ear appreciates the
very unusual subtleties of rhythm, and the poet must therefore, unless
he is willing to deprive himself of ordinary human comprehension and
write esoterically for the "fit audience though few" (in Milton's proud
phrase), limit himself to reasonably intelligible modulations. "It is
very easy to see," says Mr. Robert Bridges, "how the far-sought effects
of the greatest master in any art may lie beyond the general taste. In
rhythm this is specially the case; while almost everybody has a natural
liking for the common fundamental rhythms, it is only after long
familiarity with them that the ear grows dissatisfied, and wishes them
to be broken; and there are very few persons indeed who take such a
natural delight in rhythm for its own sake that they can follow with
pleasure a learned rhythm which is very rich in variety, and the beauty
of which is its perpetual freedom to obey the sense and diction."[94]
Some examples of these finer rhythms, in addition to the particular
forms already given--rhythms not altogether 'learned,' but occasionally
far-sought and peculiarly delicate--may be profitably examined. One
should keep the metrical pattern constantly in mind as a test or
touchstone of the variations. To classify or arrange these illustrations
in special groups is difficult because so often the same line
exemplifies more than one sort of variation, but the following more or
less vague classes of modulation (substitution and syncopation) may be
differentiated, and other peculiarities mentioned in passing.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [94] Milton's Prosody, p. 30 (ed. 1901).                     |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The normal blank verse line calls for five stressed syllables and five
unstressed syllables; but when two light syllables are naturally and
easily uttered in the time of one, trisyllabic feet occur, sometimes
with and sometimes without special effect--

    And pointed out those arduous paths they trod.
        POPE, Essay on Criticism, I, 95.

    The cataracts blow their trumpets from the steep.
        WORDSWORTH, Immortality Ode.

    Departed from thee; and thou resembl'st now.
        MILTON, Paradise Lost, IV, 839.

    To quench the drouth of Phebus; which as they taste.
        MILTON, Comus, 66.

When this extra syllable comes at the end of the line it is more
noticeable; for if it is a weak syllable, it tends to give the line a
falling rhythm, and if it is a heavy syllable, it distinctly lengthens
the line, with a semi-alexandrine effect--

    Of rebel angels, by whose aid aspiring.
        MILTON, Paradise Lost, I, 38.

    Remember who dies with thee, and despise death.
        FLETCHER, Valentinian, V, i.

Sometimes there are two consecutive lines having such hypermetrical
syllables--

    Extolling patience as the truest fortitude;
    And to the bearing well of all calamities.
        MILTON, Samson Agonistes, 654 f.

Much more frequent, however, is the trisyllabic effect in which the
number of syllables of a line remains constant, that is, in the heroic
or 5-stress line does not exceed ten--

    Infinite wrath and infinite despair.
        MILTON, Paradise Lost, IV, 74.


    Suddenly flashed on her a wild desire.

    TENNYSON, Lancelot and Elaine, 355.

And the following line (Comus, 8) contains an extra syllable at the end,
one in the middle, and also a trisyllabic effect at the beginning--

    Strive to keep up a frail and feverish being.

This last phenomenon, the trisyllabic (or dactylic, or anapestic)
effect, is commonly described as an inversion--the 'rule' being given
that in certain parts of the line the iamb is _inverted_ and becomes a
trochee. This explanation is convenient, but it is open to the
objection of inaccuracy. It almost stands to reason that when a rising
rhythm is established the sudden reversal of it would produce a harsh
discordant effect, would practically destroy the rhythmic movement for
the time being. So it is in music, at any rate,[95] whereas it is not so
with these 'inverted feet' of verse. Therefore it seems more reasonable
to scan such a line as that of Tennyson thus:

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [95] The pronounced syncopations of ragtime partially        |
  | illustrate this.                                             |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

    ‸ Sud | denly flashed | on her | a wild | desire,

and the substitution is simply that of a triple rising (anapestic) for a
duple rising (iambic) rhythm in the same time. _Sud_-is a monosyllabic
foot, and the preceding rest is easily accounted for by the pause at the
end of the previous line. In fact, this phenomenon is nearly always in
immediate proximity to a pause either at the beginning of a line or in
the middle. Very common is the movement--

    Flashing thick flames, wheel within wheel withdrawn.
        MILTON, Paradise Lost, VI, 751.

    Thou on whose stream, 'mid the steep sky's commotion.
        SHELLEY, Ode to the West Wind.

    Or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer
    That leaves look pale, dreading the Winter's near.
        SHAKESPEARE, Sonnet 97.

Less simple are the following lines from Samson Agonistes--

    The mystery of God, given me under pledge.          378.

    With goodness principl'd not to reject.             760.

    The jealousy of love, powerful of sway.             791.

    To satisfy thy lust: love seeks to have love.       837.

Still more unusual are--

    Yet fell: remember and fear to transgress.
        Paradise Lost, VI, 912.

    Of thrones and mighty seraphim prostrate.
        Ibid., VI, 841.

But in the last example Milton's pronunciation would give the second
syllable of 'prostrate' a weak accent to support the metrical stress.
That he was willing to take the extreme risk, however, and actually
invert the rhythm of the last foot, appears from unequivocal instances
in Paradise Lost:

    Which of us who beholds the bright surface.
        VI, 472.

    Beyond all past example and future.
        X, 840.

In a short poem such lines as these last would presumably be
unthinkable; probably Milton counted on the length of Paradise Lost to
fix the rhythm so securely in the reader's ear that even this bold
departure from the normal would seem a welcome relief. But it is both
notable and certain that in a lyric measure the very same inversion does
not seem unpleasantly dissonant--

    I'm sittin' on the stile, Mary,
      Where we sat side by side
    On a bright May mornin' long ago,
      When first you were my bride.
    The corn was springin' fresh and green,
      And the lark sang loud and high,
    And the red was on your lip, Mary,
      And the love-light in your eye.
          LADY DUFFERIN, Lament of the Irish Emigrant.

Allied to this practice of inversion, or apparent inversion, are two
other phenomena: the deliberate violation of normal word-accent to fit
the metrical stress,[96] and an analogous violation of phrasal stress.
The former is not such an entirely arbitrary procedure as it might at
first seem; for at one period in the history of the language the accent
of many words (especially those of French origin) was uncertain. Chaucer
could say, without forcing, either _ná_ture, or na_túre_. The revival of
English poetry in the sixteenth century owed a great deal to Chaucerian
example, and thus a tradition of variable accent was accepted and became
practically a convention, not limited to those words in which it had
originally occurred. Parallels to Milton's "but extreme shift" (Comus,
273) are very frequent in Spenser and Shakespeare: the rhythm is not ◡
_̷ ◡ _̷ nor ◡ ◡ _̷ _̷ but a sort of compromise between the two. So in
Shelley's To a Skylark--

    In _profuse_ strains of unpremeditated art,

and in verse of all kinds.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [96] In the specific cases mentioned below, this phenomenon  |
  | is historically known as "recession of accent"; and it       |
  | sometimes occurs in non-metrical contexts. It is also very   |
  | similar to one of the aspects of pitch; see pages 181 f.,    |
  | above.                                                       |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The wrenching of accent for metrical purposes, moreover, is not confined
to the dissyllabic words which show the simple recession of accent. Some
poets, especially the moderns (among others, Rossetti and Swinburne)
have deliberately forced the word accent to conform to the metrical
pattern in a way that can scarcely be called adaptation or adjustment;
that is to say, the irregularities cannot successfully be 'organized' by
syncopation and substitution so as to produce a true rhythmic movement.
For example--

    But coloured leaves of latter rose-blossom,
    Stems of soft grass, some withered red and some
    Fair and fresh-blooded, and spoil splendider
    Of marigold and great spent sunflower.
        SWINBURNE, The Two Dreams.

So Keats has--

    The enchantment that afterwards befell.

Those whose taste sanctions such _outré_ effects probably find pleasure
in the strangeness and daring of the rhythm.

An analogous case to this distributed stress but with monosyllables
instead of polysyllabic words is the familiar line in Lycidas--

    The hungry sheep look up and are not fed.

One does not read: "but _are_ not _fed_" nor "but are _not fed"_ but
rather something midway between. This variation, common with all poets,
was a special favorite of Shelley's--

    To deck with their bright hues his withered hair.
    ... His eyes beheld
    Their own wan light through the reflected lines
    Of his thin hair, distinct in the dark depth
    Of that still fountain....
    Mingling its solemn song, whilst the broad river.
        Alastor.

The monosyllabic foot in which the unstressed element is missing offers
no difficulty. The familiar example of

    Break, break, break,

has been discussed above (pages 63 f.). Compare also Tennyson's Sweet
and Low; Fletcher's song--

    Lay a garland on my hearse
     Of the dismal yew;
    Maidens, willow branches bear;
     Say, I died true;

and Yeats's--

    We sat grown quiet at the name of love;
    We saw the last embers of daylight die.
        Adam's Curse.

Shelley has--

    And wild roses and ivy serpentine.
        The Question.

and Swinburne--

    Fragrance of pine-leaves and odorous breath.
        Song for the Centenary of Walter Savage Landor.

(where it would be absurd to make two syllables of "pine"), and a
debated but perfectly intelligible hexameter--

    Full-sailed, wide-winged, poised softly forever asway.

where the whole music of the line depends upon giving due time-emphasis
to "poised." There is one odd case, not to be made too much of because
one cannot be entirely sure of the text, in Shakespeare's Measure for
Measure, II, ii, of the omission of the stressed element of a foot--

    Than the soft myrtle; ‸ but man, proud man.

The versification of the whole play, however, is peculiar, and this
metrical anomaly may have been deliberate.

The older writers on versification, leaning heavily on the traditional
prosody of Greek and Latin, made much of the cæsura or pause, especially
in blank verse. As has already been frequently suggested, the varied
placing of the pause is one of the commonest means of avoiding monotony
and giving freedom and fluency to the verse, but it is often also a
means of fitting the verse to the meaning. Since the pause comes most
frequently near the middle of the line, when it occurs within the first
or the last foot there is some special emphasis intended, as in
Milton's--

    Before him, such as in their souls infix'd
    Plagues.
        Paradise Lost, VI, 837 f.

                          Last
    Rose as in dance the stately trees, and spread.
        Ibid., VII, 323 f.

For Milton these were rather bold and unusual. Later poets have made
them familiar, but no less effective. Note Swinburne's repeated use in
Atalanta in Calydon--

    His helmet as a windy and withering moon
    Seen through blown cloud and plume-like drift, when ships
    Drive, and men strive with all the sea, and oars
    Break, and the beaks dip under, drinking death.[97]

Except in these two places, however, there is seldom a very particular
effect sought. That there can be even a good deal of regularity without
stiffness or monotony is plain from a passage like Paradise Lost, II,
344 ff.[98] The presence of several pauses in a line produces a broken,
halting, retarded effect, as--

    Through wood, through waste, o'er hill, o'er dale, his roam.
        Paradise Lost, IV, 538.

and is admirably used by Milton in describing Satan's arduous flight
through Chaos--

    O'er bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
    With head, hands, wings, or feet, pursues his way,
    And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies.
        Paradise Lost, II, 948 ff.

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [97] Note also the spondaic effect in the second line, the   |
  | rime in the third, and the imitative movement in the fourth. |
  |                                                              |
  | [98] Here, dividing the lines into parts measured by the     |
  | number of syllables, the series is: 6+4, 6+4,--, 2+4+4, 6+4, |
  | 8+2, 6+4, 6+4, 6+4, 8+2, 8+2, etc.                           |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Theoretically each rhythmic stress is of equal force or strength, but in
verse there is the greatest variety, some stresses being so strong as to
dominate a whole line, others so light as hardly to be felt. Thus it
happens sometimes that in a 5-stress line there are actually only four
or three stresses: the rhythmic result being a syncopation of four or
three against five. Sometimes the word which contains the weak stress
receives unusual emphasis, as--

    Which if not victory is yet revenge.
        Paradise Lost, II, 105.

    Fall'n cherub, to be weak is miserable.
        Ibid., I, 157.

    Me miserable! which way shall I fly.
        Ibid., IV, 73.

    Low-seated she leans forward massively.
        THOMSON, City of Dreadful Night.

    Like earth's own voice lifted unconquerable.
        SHELLEY, Revolt of Islam, IX, 3.

Sometimes the emphasis seems distributed, as--

    As he our darkness, cannot we his light.
        Paradise Lost, II, 269.

    Passion and apathy and glory and shame.
        Ibid, II, 567.

    Eyeless in Gaza at the mill with slaves.
        Samson Agonistes, 41.

    Envy and calumny and hate and pain.
        SHELLEY, Adonais, xl.

And sometimes no special emphasis is apparent, as--

    Servile to all the skyey influences.
        SHAKESPEARE, Measure for Measure, III, i.

    Like a sad votarist in palmer's weed.
        MILTON, Comus, 189.

    Gorgons and hydras and chimæras dire.
        Paradise Lost, II, 628.

    But fooled by hope, men favor the deceit.
        DRYDEN.

    The friar hooded and the monarch crowned.
    By strangers honour'd and by strangers mourn'd.
        POPE.

    With forest branches and the trodden weed.
        KEATS.

The rhythm of the last four examples is very common in all English
verse. Occasionally the metre becomes almost ambiguous--according to its
metrical context the line may be either 4-stress or 5-stress, as--

    To the garden of bliss, thy seat prepar'd.
        Paradise Lost, VIII, 299.

    By the waters of life, where'er they sat.
        Ibid., IX, 79.

    In the visions of God. It was a hill.
        Ibid., XI, 377.

Three-stress lines in blank verse are less frequent, but the more
striking when they do occur. There is Shakespeare's famous--

    To-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow.

Milton's

                                Omnipotent,
    Immutable, immortal, infinite,
    Eternal King.
        Paradise Lost, III, 372 ff.

(where the heaping up of the polysyllabic epithets adds greatly to the
effect); and

    Of difficulty or danger could deter.
        Paradise Lost, II, 499.

    Of happiness and final misery.
        Ibid., II, 563.

    Abominable, inutterable, and worse.
        Ibid., II, 626.

    His ministers of vengeance and pursuit.
        Ibid., I, 170.

and Meredith's

    The army of unalterable law.
        Lucifer in Starlight.

and such lines as--

    Unrespited, unpitied, unreprieved.
        Paradise Lost, II, 185.

for which parallels may be found in several other poets before and after
Milton.

There is no reason why a metrically 5-stress line should not contain
only two prose stresses, but examples are of course rare. Such an
unusual rhythm would be seldom demanded. The phrase "acidulation of
perversity" might do, for it is easily modulated to the metrical form.
Occasionally, as in the last line of Christina Rossetti's sonnet quoted
on pages 120 f., a series of monosyllables with almost level inflection
will reduce the prose emphasis of a line and force attention on the
important words--

    Than that you should _remember_ and be _sad_.

A better example is Shelley's

    A sepulchre for its eternity.
        Epipsychidion, 173.

In direct contrast to these lines whose effectiveness springs from a
lack of the normal quantity of stress are those which are metrically
overweighted. A single stressed monosyllable, supported or unsupported
by a pause, may occupy the place of a whole rhythmic beat, or it may be
compressed to the value of a theoretically unstressed element. Thus
Milton's well-known line--

    Rocks, caves, lakes, fens, bogs, dens, and shades of death.
        Paradise Lost, II, 621.

might if it stood by itself equally well be taken as an 8-stress or as a
5-stress line; and obviously in a blank verse context it produces a very
marked retardation of the tempo. No one would dream of reading it in the
same space of time as the rapid line which just precedes it and to which
it stands in such striking contrast--

    O'er many a frozen, many a fiery Alp.

Similar are--

    Light-armed, or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift or slow.
        Paradise Lost, II, 902.

    Stains the dead, blank, cold air with a warm shade.
        SHELLEY, Epipsychidion, 92.

    Of waves, flowers, clouds, woods, rocks, and all that we
    Read in their smiles, and call reality.
        Ibid., 511 f.

    We have lov'd, prais'd, pitied, crown'd, and done thee wrong.
        SWINBURNE, On the Cliffs.

For extreme examples of the accelerandos and ritenutos which our
metrical ear seems willing to accept easily, one might compare two
4-stress lines by contemporary poets--

    In the mystery of life.
        ROBERT BRIDGES.

    On the highest peak of the tired gray world.
        SARA TEASDALE.

or Swinburne's--

    The four boards of the coffin lid
    Heard all the dead man did....

    The dead man asked of them:
    "Is the green land stained brown with flame?"
        After Death.

These few general classifications by no means exhaust the possibilities
of metrical variations and adjustments. In a real sense, every line is
rhythmically different from every other line; but many of these
differences are subjective, that is, they are determined by the
individual training, tastes, habits, of each reader, his familiarity
with few or many poets, the physical constitution of his organs of
hearing, even the temporary mood in which he reads. The actual,
objective peculiarities of a line are always significant, if the poet is
a true master, but such is the variableness of experience and of life
itself that unless we possess the poet's understanding and his
sensitiveness--or can cultivate them--we lose a certain part of the
significance. For one person, therefore, to dogmatize is both
impertinent and misleading: the following specimens of peculiar rhythm
are accordingly left without special comment. Some of them have long
been bones of contention among prosodists; some of them are almost
self-explanatory, others are subtle and difficult (and must be felt
rather than explained), others have perhaps only their unusualness to
recommend them to one's attention. In every case, however, they should
be studied both in their metrical context and by themselves. They should
be approached not only as technical problems in the accommodation of
natural speech emphasis to the formal patterns of verse, but also--and
this is the more important point of view--as adjustments in the second
degree, adjustments of the prose-and-verse harmonies to the fullest
expressiveness of which language is capable. It is a common observation
that emotional language tends of itself to become rhythmical; the
emotional and highly wrought language of poetry requires the restraint
of verse as a standard by which its rhythms may be more powerfully
realized and its significant deviations therefrom measured. And it is
almost a constant 'law' that the more acute or profound the emotion, the
more complex is the rhythm which gives it fit and adequate expression in
words. 'Complex' does not necessarily mean arcane or supersubtle or
_recherché_. On the contrary, simplification (though not simplicity) is
one of the characteristics of the best and greatest art. But to simplify
beyond a certain point the various entangled implications of a poignant
emotion is merely to rob it of some of its fundamental qualities. Nor is
it childish to reason that a peculiar or extraordinary idea is most
naturally expressed by a peculiar or extraordinary rhythm. Argument
aside, it is an observable and verifiable fact.

    That we may so suffice his vengeful ire.
        MILTON, Paradise Lost, I, 148.

    A mind not to be changed by time or place.
        Ibid., I, 253.

    Behold me then, me for him, life for life.
        Ibid., III, 236.

    Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man.
        Ibid., III, 316.

    As from blest voices, uttering joy, Heav'n rung.
        Ibid., III, 347.

    Infinite wrath and infinite despair.
        Ibid., IV, 74.

    Raphael, the sociable spirit, that deign'd.
        Ibid., V, 221.

    Of truth, in word mightier than they in arms.
        Ibid., VI, 32.

    Before thy fellows, ambitious to win.
        Ibid., VI, 160.

    On me already lost, me than thyself
    More miserable. Both have sinned; but thou
    Against God only; I against God and thee.
        Ibid., N, 929 ff.

    O miserable mankind, to what fall.
        Ibid., XI, 500.

    And made him bow to the gods of his wives.
        Paradise Regained, II, 171.

    Hail, Son of the Most High, heir of both worlds.
        Ibid., IV, 633.

    Wilt thou then serve the Philistines with that gift?
        Samson Agonistes, 576.

    Thea! Thea! Thea! where is Saturn?
        KEATS, Hyperion, I, 134.

    When night makes a weird sound of its own stillness.
        SHELLEY, Alastor, 30

    Yielding one only response, at each pause.
        SHELLEY, Alastor, 564.

    Touch, mingle, are transfigured; ever still
    Burning, yet ever inconsumable.
        SHELLEY, Epipsychidion, 578 f.

    Lies to God, lies to man, every way lies.
        BROWNING, The Ring and the Book, IV, 216.

    'Do I live, am I dead?' Peace, peace seems all.
        BROWNING, The Bishop Orders his Tomb.

    Good strong thick stupefying incense-smoke.
        Ibid.

    I cry 'Life!' 'Death,' he groans, 'our better life!'
        BROWNING, Aristophanes' Apology, 1953.

    Setebos, Setebos, and Setebos.
        BROWNING, Caliban upon Setebos.

    Even to the last dip of the vanishing sail.
        TENNYSON, Enoch Arden, 244.

    Saying gently, Annie, when I spoke to you.
        Ibid., 445.

    Palpitated, her hand shook, and we heard.
        TENNYSON, The Princess, IV, 389.

    Bearing all down, in thy precipitancy.
        TENNYSON, Gareth, 8.

    First as in fear, step after step, she stole
    Down the long tower stairs, hesitating.
        TENNYSON, Lancelot and Elaine, 342 f.

This from Surrey's Æneid, because of its early date:

    He with his hands strave to unloose the knots.

These two from Elizabethan drama--hundreds of interesting lines may be
culled from this source, but the field is to be trodden with caution
because of the uncertainties of the texts; though we quote 'Hamlet' we
cannot be sure we are quoting Shakespeare, and in such a matter as this
_certainty_ is indispensable--

    Do more than this in sport.--Father, father.
        King Lear, II, i.

    Cover her face; mine eyes dazzle; she died young.
        WEBSTER, Duchess of Malfi, IV, ii.

And finally, three examples from Samson Agonistes of interwoven tunes, a
sort of counterpoint of two melodies sounding simultaneously--

    My griefs not only pain me
    As a lingering disease,
    But, finding no redress, ferment and rage.
        617 ff.

                          To boast
    Again in safety what thou would'st have done
    To Samson, but shalt never see Gath more.
        1127 ff.

                          Force with force
    Is well ejected when the conqueror can.
        1206 f.

    He all their ammunition
    And feats of war defeats,
    With plain heroic magnitude of mind.
        1277 ff.

Stevenson compared the writer of verse with a juggler who cleverly keeps
several balls in the air at one time. The comparison is suggestive, but
is true only so far as it indicates the difficulty of the operation for
those who are not jugglers. The juggler does not devote conscious
attention to each individual ball. He has learned to keep them all
moving at once, and when he starts them they go _of their own accord_.
Now and then, by conscious effort, he shoots one higher than the
others--but there is no need to labor the illustration. The technique of
versification is a mechanical thing to be learned like any mechanical
thing. The poet learns it--in sundry different ways, to be sure--and
when he has mastered it he is no more conscious of its complex details
while he is composing than the pianist is conscious of his ten fingers
while he is interpreting a Chopin concerto. There is a feeling, an idea,
a poetic conception, which demands expression in words. The compound of
direct intellectual activity and of automatic responses from a reservoir
of intuitions long since filled by practice and experience no poet has
ever been able to analyze--much less a psychologist who is not a poet.
Often the best ideas, the best phrases, the perfect harmony of thought
and expression _emerge_ spontaneously; sometimes they have to be sought,
diligently and laboriously sought.

"When one studies a prosody or a metrical form," says M. Verrier, "one
may well ask if these alliterations, these assonances, these
consonances, these rimes, these rhythmic movements, these metres, which
one coldly describes in technical terms--if they actually produce the
designated effects and especially if the poet 'thought of all that.' So
it is when an amateur opens a scientific treatise on music and learns by
what series of chords one modulates from one key to another, or even how
the chord of the dominant seventh is resolved to the tonic in its
fundamental form.... That the poet has not 'thought of all that' is
evident, but not in the ordinary sense. When the illiterate countryman
makes use of the subjunctive, he is not aware that a subjunctive exists,
still less that one uses it for historical and logical and also perhaps
for emotional reasons. But the subjunctive exists nevertheless, and the
reasons too."[99]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [99] Verrier, vol. i, p. 134.                                |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

The analogy is helpful, though not altogether persuasive. There is the
familiar story of Browning's reply to the puzzled admirer: "Madam, I
have no idea what I meant when I wrote those lines." So much for warning
to the oversedulous. But if I honestly find and feel a marvelous
rhythmic effect where Robert Browning did not plan one, then such effect
certainly exists--for me, at least, and for all whom I can persuade of
its presence. On the other hand, there is a potent warning in the
following exuberance:

     But the thought of the king and his villainies stings him into rage
     again, and the rhythm slowly rises on three secondary stresses--

                      or ere this
        I should have fatted all the region kites
        With this slave's offal.

     The last phrase twists and writhes through a series of secondary
     stresses with an intensity of hatred and bitterness that takes
     shape in a following series of peculiar falling rhythm waves, each
     one of which has a foam-covered crest 'white as the bitten lip of
     hate.' This rhythm, curling, hissing, tense, topful of venom,
     Alecto's serpents coiling and twisting through it, makes one of the
     most awful passages in all English poetry--

                          Bloody, bawdy villain!
        Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!

     and culminates in Hamlet's cry

        O vengeance!

     which, with its peculiar sustained falling close, vibrates through
     the rest of the verse.[100]

  +--------------------------------------------------------------+
  | [100] Mark H. Liddell, An Introduction to the Scientific     |
  | Study of English Poetry, New York, 1901, pp. 291 f.          |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------+

Professional prosodists doubt and dispute one another with the zeal and
confidence of metaphysicians and editors of classical texts. They are
all blind guides--perhaps even the present one!--if followed slavishly.
There is only one means (a threefold unity) to the right understanding
of the metrical element in poetry: a knowledge of the simple facts of
metrical form, a careful scrutiny of the existent phenomena of ordinary
language rhythms, and a study of the ways in which the best poets have
fitted the one to the other with the most satisfying and most moving
results.




GLOSSARIAL INDEX

     A few terms not mentioned in the text are included here for the
     sake of completeness.


ACCENT, the greater emphasis placed, in normal speech, on one syllable
of a work as compared with the other syllables, 6, 34 f., 37 f. _See
also_ STRESS; it is convenient to distinguish the two terms, but they
are sometimes used interchangeably.

ACEPHALOUS, headless; used to describe a line which lacks the unstressed
element of the first foot. _See_ TRUNCATION.

ALEXANDRINE, a 6-stress iambic line, 85 ff. 88.

ALLITERATION, repetition of the same or closely similar sounds at the
beginning of neighboring words or accented syllables (occasionally also
unaccented syllables); sometimes called _Initial Rime_, 166.

AMPHIBRACH, a classical foot, ◡--◡, 51.

ANACRUSIS, one or more extra syllables at the beginning of a line, 71.

ANAPEST, a foot consisting of two unstresses and a stress, ◡◡_̷, 38, 51,
70, 80 ff.

ANTISTROPHE, the counter-turn, or stanza answering to the first, of a
Pindaric Ode, 131.

ARSIS, a confusing term sometimes borrowed from classical prosody for
the stressed element of a foot; the unstressed element is called
_Thesis_.

ASSONANCE, the repetition, in final syllables, of the same vowel sound
followed by a different consonantal sound, 166 f. _See_ RIME.


BALLAD METRE (Common Measure, C. M. of the Hymnals), the stanza
_a^{4}b^{3}a^{4}b^{3}_, but admitting certain variations, 87, 103.

BALLADE, a formal metrical scheme of three stanzas riming _ababbcbC_
with an Envoi _bcbC_, keeping the same rimes throughout, and the last
line of each stanza (_C_) being the same. The lines are usually
5-stress, 163.

BLANK VERSE, unrimed 5-stress lines used continuously, 94, 133 ff., ch.
V passim; the 'single-moulded' line, 135 f.; Marlow's, 137 f.;
Shakespeare's, 138 ff., later dramatic, 140 f.; Milton's, 142 ff.;
conversational, 147 ff.


CAESURA, the classical term for a pause, usually grammatical and
extra-metrical (i. e. not reckoned in the time scheme). When it follows
an accented syllable it is called _masculine_; when it follows an
unaccented syllable it is _feminine_; when it occurs within a line it is
called _medial_; when it occurs after an 'extra' unstressed syllable it
is called _epic_ (though as frequent in drama as in epic), as--

    And earth's base built on stubble. | But come, let's on.
        MILTON, Comus, l. 509

CATALEXIS; _see_ TRUNCATION.

CHORIAMB, a classical foot, --◡◡--, 51.

COMMON MEASURE (C. M.), the regular _Ballad Metre_, 103 f.

CONSONANCE, specifically, in metrics, a form of incomplete rime in which
the consonantal sounds agree but the vowel sounds differ, 166 f. _See_
RIME.

COÖRDINATION, the agreement or coincidence of the natural prose rhythm
with the metrical (rhythmical) pattern; the process of making them
agree, 17 f.

COUPLET, a group of two lines riming _aa_, 88; _closed_ couplet, one
which contains an independent clause or sentence and does not run on
into the next of the series, 91 f.; _heroic_ couplet, one of 5-stress
lines, usually iambic (called also _pentameter_ couplet), 89, 93 ff.;
_short_ couplet, one of 4-stress iambic or trochaic lines (also called
_octosyllabic_ couplet), 89 ff.


DACTYL, a foot consisting of a stress followed by two unstresses, _̷◡◡,
38, 51, 70, 84.

DECASYLLABLE, a 5-stress (pentameter) line; a term used properly only of
syllable-counting metres such as the French.

DISTICH, couplet; usually in classical prosody the elegiac couplet of a
hexameter and a pentameter, 162.

DOGGEREL, any rough irregular metre.

DUPLE RHYTHM, a rhythm of two beats (though corresponding generally to ¾
time in music), one stress and one unstress, _̷◡ or ◡_̷.

DURATION, the length of time occupied by the enunciation of
speech-sounds, and therefore an element in all language rhythm, 5. _See
also_ TIME.


ELEGIAC STANZA, the quatrain _abab^{5}_, 103, 107 f.

ELISION, the omission or crowding out of unstressed words or unaccented
syllables to make the metre smoother; a term belonging to classical
prosody and inappropriate in English prosody except where
syllable-counting verse is concerned. Various forms of Elision are
called Syncope, Synizesis, and Synalœpha.

END-STOPPED LINE, one with a full or strong grammatical pause at the
end.

ENJAMBEMENT, a French term ('long stride') for the continuation of the
sense from one line (or couplet) to the next without a grammatical
pause, 62, 92; opposite of End-stopping. _See_ OVERFLOW; RUN-ON LINE.

EPODE, the third (sixth, ninth) stanza of a Pindaric ode, 131.


FEMININE ENDING, an extra unstressed syllable at the end of an iambic or
anapestic line, 71.

FOOT, the smallest metrical unit of rhythm, composed of a stressed
element and one or more unstressed elements (or a pause), 49 ff.

FREE-VERSE, irregular rhythms, not conforming to a fixed metrical
pattern, 150 ff.


HEADLESS LINE, acephalous; and _see_ TRUNCATION.

HENDECASYLLABLE, a 5-stress line with feminine ending, thus making
ordinarily eleven syllables; usually referring to a special metre used
by Catullus and others (as in Tennyson's imitation, 'O you chorus of
indolent reviewers'), 162.

HEROIC LINE, a 5-stress iambic line.

HEXAMETER, _classical_ or _dactylic_, the standard line of Greek and
Latin poetry, composed of six feet, the fifth of which is nearly always
a dactyl, the sixth a spondee or trochee, the rest either dactyls or
spondees; imitated in English with more or less success by substituting
stress for quantity, 159 ff.

HIATUS, unexpected absence of elision.

HOLD, pause on a word or syllable, 62 f.

HOVERING ACCENT, a term sometimes used for the coordination of the
metrical rhythm ◡_̷◡_̷ with the prose rhythm ◡◡_̷_̷ as in "and serene
air" (Comus, l. 4); the accent is thought of as 'hovering' over the
first syllable of _serene_, 182.

HYPERMETRIC, used of a syllable which is not reckoned or expected in the
regular metrical pattern.


IAMB, _Iambus_, a foot consisting of an unstress and a stress, ◡_̷, 38,
51, 69, 84 ff.

IN MEMORIAM STANZA, a quatrain riming _abba^{4}_, 103, 105 ff.

INVERSION, the substitution of a trochee for an iamb or of a dactyl for
an anapest (or vice versa), 51, 187 ff.; a misleading term; see
SUBSTITUTION.


LENGTH, the comparative duration of the enunciation of syllables, 33 f.
In classical prosody syllables were regarded by convention as either
'long' or 'short' (a 'long' being theoretically equal to two 'shorts'),
and this usage has been sometimes (not successfully, and yet not
entirely without reason) super-imposed upon English verse.

LINE, a metrical division composed of one or more feet and either used
continuously or combined in stanzas, 52 f., 69 ff. _See_ VERSE (1).

LOUDNESS, the comparative strength or volume of a sound, 6.

LONG MEASURE (L. M. of the Hymnals) the quatrain riming _abab^{4}_ or
_abcb^{4}_, 103.


METRE, a regular, artificial, rhythmic pattern, the formal basis of
versification.


OCTOSYLLABLE, an 8-syllable or 4-stress line. _See_ DECASYLLABLE.

OCTAVE, a stanza of eight lines; especially the two quatrains of an
Italian sonnet, 120.

ODE, a kind of exalted lyric poem, not strictly a metrical term but
often used as such to describe the simple stanzaic structure of the
'Horatian' ode or the complex system of strophe, antistrophe and epode
of the 'Pindaric' ode, 131 ff.

ONOMATOPOEIA, primarily a rhetorical figure but of much wider
application, covering all cases from single words to phrases and lines
of verse in which there is agreement, by echo or suggestions, between
the sound of the words and their meaning; as a metrical term, the
agreement of the verse rhythm with the idea expressed, 177 ff.

OTTAVA RIMA, the stanza (of Italian origin) riming _abababcc^{5}_, 111
f.

OVERFLOW, the running over of the parts of a sentence from one line to
the next without a pause at the end of the line, 62. _See_ ENJAMBEMENT,
RUN-ON.


PAEON, a classical foot, --◡◡◡, 51, 76 ff.

PAUSE, (1) _logical_ or _grammatical_, that which separates the formal
parts of a sentence, 61, 63; (2) _rhythmical_, that which separates the
breath-groups of spoken sentences, 61 ff.; (3) _metrical_, (_a_) that
which separates the parts of a metrical pattern, as at the end of a
line, 62, and also (_b_) that which takes the place of an unstressed
element of a foot, being equivalent to the rest in music (indicated by
the sign ‸), 62 ff.

PENTAMETER, a 5-stress line, 52. (This term is well established, but
open to objection.)

PHRASE, a group of words held together either by their meaning (or
content) or by their sound, 32 f; 37 ff.

PINDARIC, _see_ ODE.

PITCH, the characteristic of a sound dependent upon its number of
vibrations per second; (usually indicated by its place in the musical
scale; high or 'acute,' low or 'grave'); 5 f., 35 ff.; sometimes
functions in verse for emphasis or for stress, 8, 35 ff., 181 ff.

POULTER'S MEASURE, an old-fashioned couplet, composed of an alexandrine
and a septenary, _a^{6}a^{7}_, 88 f.

PROSE, _Characteristic_, prose with natural and varied rhythms, 23 ff.;
_Cadenced_, prose with carefully sought rhythmic movements, 27 ff.;
_Metrical_, a hybrid of prose and verse, 29 ff.

PYRRHIC, a classical foot, ◡◡, 51.


QUANTITY, the length of a syllable; established by convention in
classical prosody; in English prosody very uncertain but always present.
_See_ Length.

QUATRAIN, a stanza of four lines, 103 ff.


REFRAIN, a line or part of a line repeated according to the metrical
pattern, 184 f.; the term _repetend_ is occasionally used.

REST, _see_ PAUSE (3, _b_).

RHYTHM, regular arrangement or repetition of varied parts, _see_ ch. I,
ch. II, and passim; _objective_, having external concrete existence, 3
ff.; _subjective_, felt by the individual, 3, 12 ff.;  _spatial_, in
which the units are spaces, 4; _temporal_, in which the units are
periods of time, 4 ff.; _rising_, beginning with the stressed element,
38; _falling_, beginning with the unstressed element, 38; _duple_,
having a stress and one unstressed element (syllable), 38; _triple_,
having a stress and two unstressed elements (syllables), 38.

RIME, repetition of the same sound (or sounds) usually at the end of the
line, 165 ff.; _Masculine_, when the repeated sound consists of one
stressed syllable; _Feminine_, when a stressed + one or more unstressed
syllables; _Triple_, when a stressed + two unstressed syllables; _Echo_
or _Identical_, when the preceding consonantal sound also agrees;
_Eye-rime_, when the words agree in spelling but not in pronunciation,
174. As distinct from end-rime, there is _Internal_ or _Leonine_ rime,
which occurs within the line (sometimes merely a matter of printing).
_See also_ ASSONANCE, CONSONANCE.

RIME COUÉE, _see_ TAIL-RIME STANZA.

RIME-ROYAL, a stanza borrowed by Chaucer from the French, _ababbcc^{5}_;
also called _Troilus stanza_, _Chaucer stanza_, 109 f.

RONDEAU, RONDEL, French metrical forms characterized by the repetition
of the first phrase or lines twice as a refrain, e. g. _aabba aabR
aabbaR_ (R being the first phrase of the first line), or _ABba abAB
abbaAB_ (the capitals indicating the whole lines repeated), 163.

RUN-ON LINE, one in which the sense runs over into the following line
without a grammatical pause, 62, 92. _See_ ENJAMBEMENT; OVERFLOW.


SAPPHIC, a 4-line stanza used by Sappho (and Catullus and Horace) and
often imitated in English; the pattern is --◡ | --◡ | --◡◡ | --◡ | --◡
thrice repeated, then --◡◡ | --◡, 161 f.

SEPTENARY, SEPTENARIUS (fourteener), the old 14-syllable or 7-stress
iambic line, later split up into the Ballad metre, 87; and used also
with the alexandrine in the Poulter's Measure.

SESTET, a group of six lines, especially the last six of an Italian
sonnet, 120.

SESTINA, an elaborate metrical form consisting of six 6-line stanzas and
a 3-line stanza with repetition of the same end-words in different order
instead of rime, 164.

SHORT MEASURE (S. M. of the Hymnals), the Poulter's Measure broken into
a quatrain: _ab^{3}a^{4}b^{3}, ab^{3}c^{4}b^{3}_, 89.

SONNET, 118 ff., (1) _Italian_, a 14-line stanza composed of two
quatrains riming _abba_ and two tercets riming _cde cde_ (_cde dee_,
etc.), 120 ff.; (2) _English_, 14-line stanza of three quatrains riming
_abab cdcd efef_, and a closing couplet _gg_, 127 ff. There are also
mixed forms and many variations.

SPENSERIAN STANZA, a 9-line stanza riming _ababbcbc^{5}c^{6}_; the final
alexandrine is the characteristic feature, 85 f., 112 ff.  Several
variations were used in the seventeenth century consisting of shorter
lines with a closing alexandrine, 117.

SPONDEE, a classical prosody a foot of two long syllables; in English
prosody a foot of two 'long' or accented or stressed words or syllables,
51.

STANZA, a group of lines arranged according to a special pattern,
usually marked by rimes, 53, 88 ff.; _see also_ Verse (3).

STRESS, the comparative emphasis which distinguishes a sound from others
not so strongly or plainly emphasized, 34 f., 37 f., 56 f., 65 f. Then
by UNSTRESS or no stress is meant absence or comparative weakness of
emphasis. _Stress_ is used in this book for rhythmic and metrical
emphasis; _see_ ACCENT.

STROPHE, same as Stanza, 53; in the Pindaric ode, the first (fourth,
etc.) stanza, 131.

SUBSTITUTION (1) replacing one rhythmic unit by its temporal equivalent,
as an iamb by an anapest or by a trochee, etc., 20; called also
_Inversion_ (_q.v._) of the foot; (2) the use of pitch or duration
(pause) for a stress or unstress, 20, 181 ff.

SYLLABLE, the smallest and simplest unit of speech-sound, 32 f.;
sometimes used as a metrical unit, 49.

SYNCOPATION, the union, or perception of the union, of two or more
rhythmic patterns, 18 ff.


TAIL-RIME STANZA, one usually of six lines riming
_aa^{4}b^{3}cc^{4}b^{3}_, but with many variations (e. g. the Burns
stanza, _aaa^{4}b^{2}a^{4}b^{2})_, the general type being a combination
of long lines in groups with single short lines, 109.

TAILED SONNET, a sonnet with a tail (coda), or addition. About the only
one in English is Milton's On the New Forcers of Conscience: the rimes
are _abba abba cde dec^{5} c^{3}ff^{5}f^{3}gg^{5}_.

TERCET, a group of three lines, especially in the sestet of the Italian
sonnet, 102, 120.

TERZA RIMA, an Italian rime scheme _aba bcb cdc_ ... _yzy zz_; rarely
used in English, but triumphantly (in stanzas) in Shelley's Ode to the
West Wind, 164.

TETRAMETER, a classical term (four 'measures' or eight feet) incorrectly
used for the English 4-stress line, 52.

THESIS, _see_ ARSIS.

TIME, an inevitable element in English verse (as well as prose), but not
the sole basis, 56 ff.

TONE-COLOR, TONE QUALITY, 'timbre,' the characteristic of a sound
determined by the number of partial tones (overtones), as richness,
sweetness, thinness, stridency; hence sometimes applied to the musical
quality of a verse or phrase, 6 and note, 177.

TRIBRACH, a classical foot, ◡◡◡, 51.

TRIMETER, a classical term (three 'measures' or six feet) incorrectly
used for the English 3-stress line, 52.

TRIOLET, a French metrical form, mainly for light themes, riming
_ABaAabAB_(the capitals indicating repeated lines) and usually with
short lines, 163.

TRIPLET, _a_ group of three lines, especially when rimed _aaa_, 101 f.
_See also_ TERCET.

TROCHEE, a foot consisting of a stress and an unstress, _̷◡, 38, 51, 70,
82 ff.

TRUNCATION, omission of the final unstressed element of a line, usually
in the trochaic metres, 76; also called _Catalexis_ (the opposite of
which, the non-omission of this element, is _Acatalexis_). _Initial
Truncation_ is the omission of the first unstressed element of a line,
usually in the iambic metres, thus making a _Headless_ verse.


UNSTRESS, the element of a rhythmic unit which is without emphasis or
has a relatively weak emphasis.


VERSE, (1) a metrical line, 52; (2) collectively, for metre, metrical
form; (3) commonly in England, and in America in the churches, used for
Stanza.

VILLANELLE, a French verse form of nineteen lines on three rimes,
certain lines being repeated at fixed intervals, 163 f.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Principles of English Versification, by 
Paull Franklin Baum

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ENGLISH VERSIFICATION ***

***** This file should be named 21342-0.txt or 21342-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/3/4/21342/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, LN Yaddanapudi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
