Project Gutenberg's Personal Experiences of S. O. Susag, by S. O. Susag

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Personal Experiences of S. O. Susag

Author: S. O. Susag

Release Date: December, 2004 [EBook #7038]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on February 26, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PERSONAL EXPERIENCES ***




The eBooks was produced by Joel Erickson <joel@oneporpoise.com>,
Charles Franks <charlz@lvcablemodem.com>, and
Juliet Sutherland <juliet.sutherland@verizon.ne





PERSONAL EXPERIENCES

of

S. O. SUSAG

By S. O. SUSAG

Minneapolis, Minnesota [Illustration: (S. O. Susag, his wife and children,
taken about 1898)]



FOREWORD

This book of a few of my experiences is written to show how the pioneer
ministers worked, and how the Lord worked with them through his Holy
Spirit. One outstanding fact in those days, when even though their training
was limited, was their burning passion for souls shown in labors, fasting
and prayer, and a heaven-born conviction and zeal for the truth. The Holy
Spirit had revealed to them an unshaken faith in the Word of God; a faith
that would not waver in the most trying and, to man, surprisingly
unreasonable cases. My prayers are that this book will bring faith and
encouragement to many a soul who is seeking God for help when all other
help has failed.

I should not have waited so long before doing this writing, for because of
that waiting the incidents are not written in the order which they should
have been, and so many have been forgotten. Since many have indicated an
interest in my experiences, may this book as it goes forth in Jesus' name
bring honor and glory to God.

--The Author Year 1948



PUBLISHER'S PREFACE

Ever since this book was first published for the author, S. O. Susag, by
the Standard Printing Company, Guthrie, Oklahoma, in the year of 1948, it
has been in steady demand. These many testimonies of outstanding answers to
prayer have been an inspiration of faith to many people, and they will
continue to be an encouragement to every earnest and honest seeker for an
increase of faith in God's precious promises. "Jesus Christ the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever." Hebrews 13:8.

In contemplation of printing this fourth edition, the undersigned publisher
contacted S. O. Susag's daughter, Mrs. Art Rustand (Goldie Susag), and
requested further information about her late father. In February, 1976, she
relayed the following notes of interest to the reader:

"My father was born in Steinkjer, Norway, on March 28, 1862. He came from
Norway to Minneapolis, Minnesota, and was in the store business for a
while. In 1892, they moved to Paynesville, Minnesota, where they engaged in
farming. After they moved to the farm he was converted, and in the year of
1895 he received his call from God to the ministry of the Word. He traveled
as a missionary to the Scandinavian countries for many years. He also
served as pastor in Grand Forks, N. D., and as an evangelist for years. In
fact, at the time of his death, which was in Culbertson, Montana, when he
was 90 years of age, he was traveling around holding services. His death
was attributed to his age. He was up and around until three days prior to
his passing. At the time of his death he made his home with his second wife
in Medicine Lake, Montana. He died on July 8, 1952, and was buried beside
his first wife (my mother) at the Church of God Cemetery near Wendell,
Minnesota."

--Lawrence D. Pruitt Guthrie, Oklahoma, March 8, 1976

"And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not; I will lead them
in paths that they have not known; I will make darkness light before them,
and crooked things straight. These things will I do unto them and not
forsake them." (Isa. 42:16). This Scripture seems to fit into my life's
experiences.

I was born in Norway. My parents were Lutherans. When I was two years of
age an incident occurred which I have never forgotten. It was this: My
Grandmother on my mother's side--a very godly woman--used to visit us at
least once a month.

On the occasion to which I refer, as she was about to leave us, Grandmother
said to my mother, "Ellen, I would like to speak to you 'under four eyes'
(that is to say, privately). Does the child understand anything that is
said?" Her reply was, "No, he doesn't understand." Then Grandmother
proceeded to say, "I have been wondering what would be the best way to pass
out of this world without being a trouble to anyone, and the Lord has shown
me that someday I shall lie down as usual to go to sleep and wake up in
glory and this may be the last time that I shall see you; so now, my
daughter, I feel constrained to urge you to seek the Lord." Again she said,
"I am sure the Lord has shown me that I shall go that way." Four years
later she went to glory just that way.

My parents had not given their hearts to God, yet they taught us to live
right. The only religious services we ever attended were those held once a
month in a country chapel. Other Sundays we would sing together in our home
and father would read a sermon to us out of a book.

We would then repeat the Lord's prayer and sing another song.

One afternoon, when I was two and a half years old, a number of we children
were invited to a neighbor's for lunch and play. As we passed the pantry
window on our way in, we saw a number of dishes filled with nice red
berries. One youngster suggested that we help ourselves to the berries, and
this we did. After a few mouthfuls I began to scream and ran home. Mother,
hearing my screams, rushed out to meet me and, picking me up in her arms,
asked me where I was hurt. I couldn't tell her but kept screaming. Finally
mother began to chide and shaking me, said, "Tell me where you are hurt."
Still I could not speak, then mother fell upon her knees and cried, "Lord,
my child is dying in my arms and I cannot find what is the matter with
him." I was then able to speak and tell her the cause of my trouble.
Putting my hand over my heart I said that I was having pain there and not
in my stomach. Mother questioned me as to whether the lady had given us the
berries, and I told her, "No," that we had helped ourselves to them. She
said, "I will tell you how to get rid of your pain: Go and tell the lady
what you have done and giving her your hand ask her to forgive you, and I
am sure the pain will leave you." Mother went with me and when I confessed
to the lady she took me up in her arms and wept with me. After confessing
the pain all disappeared.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I was about eleven years of age it seemed that a voice was continually
speaking to me and saying, "You ought to be a better boy; I want you for a
preacher." I did not understand at the time that it was the Holy Ghost
speaking to me. Mother often wept over me and said, "Child, O child, what
shall I do with you! You make me more trouble than all the other eight
children put together."

At the age of fifteen I was confirmed and at the following preaching
service I was supposed to participate in taking the Lord's supper (as was
the custom of the church). Before that service I went out into the woods to
pray. I asked the Lord to forgive me for partaking of the Lord's supper,
for to refrain from taking it would bring disgrace upon my family.

From that time on, the Lord continued to talk to me, saying, "You ought to
be a better young man." It seemed as though I could not be better at home
in Norway so I determined to sail for America.

I had been in America about a year and a half when I met a distant relative
who was thought to be lost in this country, because his family had not
heard from him for two or three years. He invited me to go into a saloon
with him and have a glass of beer. We went in, and also played several
games of pool.

In the meantime I took off my coat and hung it on the back of a chair. In
the inside pocket of my coat I had my billfold containing about one hundred
dollars, all the money I had, and also my valuable papers. When I went to
reach for my money my billfold was gone. The saloon keeper seemed to know
what had taken place and handed me five dollars. I had no work as there was
none to be found. It was the custom in those days for the saloons to give a
free lunch with a glass of beer. I went at noon every day and bought a
glass of beer so I could have the free lunch that went with it. I lived
that way for about two months.

During the late winter I got a job at night work, which consisted of
pushing loads of stone in a wheelbarrow for the building of the Stone Arch
Bridge over the St. Anthony Falls on the Mississippi River for the Great
Northern Railway Company. The planks upon which we had to walk became very
slippery and on one trip the man ahead of me slipped back in the wheel of
my wheelbarrow upon which I had a large stone. The force of his fall threw
both stone and wheelbarrow into the river. The man behind me, seeing what
was happening, flung himself face down over his wheelbarrow, and in the
dark, grabbed me as I was going over the plank into the river. He caught me
by one of my arms and held me until help came and I was pulled out. I was
hanging from his hands about fifty to seventy-five feet above the river.

After that experience I could not make myself walk those planks anymore, so
I was again out of work and so terribly discouraged. A few nights later I
walked onto the Tenth Avenue bridge intending to jump off into the river to
end it all. As I took hold of the railing someone from behind me called out
and said, "When you jump, your troubles will begin." I looked, to see the
man who had spoken but there was no one on the bridge. The way he spoke had
sent a chill through me. It was after eleven o'clock at night and I seemed
to realize that it was the Lord who had spoken to me.

After sometime in America I found that I was still the the same young man
as before in Norway. It seemed that I was unable to do better. Thinking to
improve matters, I decided to go to school and study for the ministry.
After two semesters in the college certain things happened which turned me
into an infidel. I quit school, went into business and got married. Soon
after I contracted tuberculosis of the lungs, and the doctor said there was
no help for me, as both my lungs were like soup. During the depression of
1892 I lost all I had. In my sinful condition I called on God and He healed
me.

We then moved to the farm and one afternoon a young man came to our home
and asked me to attend a service with him that evening. In answer to my
query as to what kind of service it was to be, he informed me that two
women evangelists were conducting the meeting. I replied that I was not in
favor of women preachers but I would go with him as I was not afraid the
women would hurt me. As a matter of fact, it was through these women that I
was partly awakened spiritually, but did not yet give up my infidelity.

One evening I was very tired and sleepy and went to bed at precisely nine
o'clock. I went to sleep at once and had a dream. I dreamed that I had
become a minister of the gospel and that I was traveling all over the
United States and Canada, as well as in a number of European countries.
Hundreds of souls were turning to the Lord in the meetings and many
healings and miracles were performed. It would take a long life to
accomplish all that I saw done in my dream. I awakened and felt so
refreshed and rested, that I thought it was morning and put on the light
but found I had been in bed JUST TEN MINUTES! I did not sleep anymore that
night but spent the time in meditating on my dream which convinced me that
there must be within the human body a positive something that would
continue to live forever and my infidelity vanished.

A few months later (March 12, 1895), the Lord spoke peace to my wife and me
at the same time in our own home, and called us into the ministry. He
brought us out of darkness through three visions and showed us the evil of
all sectarian division. All this was giving us light on the beautiful
Church of God without our having heard any preaching on the subject, nor
did we know anyone who believed as we did.

We commenced preaching at once and our first convert was a lady who was
saved in our home. (Sister Hendricks, now Myhre, who is a minister). Our
first case of healing was when the Lord healed me of blood poisoning in my
left arm, caused from the scratch of a rusty nail. I caught cold in it and
it swelled so fast that when I got into the house I could not get my
clothes off and they had to be cut off with scissors. My wife and a young
brother prayed for me, but I did not get immediate relief. My entire arm
turned blue and yellow and soon my sides began to turn the same way. I had
read in the Bible that the sick were to be anointed with oil. The young
brother anointed me accordingly, and the swelling began to go down
immediately, insomuch that the next morning there was no symptom of any
thing wrong whatever.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next experience of healing was of the restoring of my hearing to my
right ear. My wife had gone to services and I stayed home to take care of
the children. I had laid down beside them to get them to sleep and had
dropped off to sleep myself, and dreamed that I saw Jesus standing beside
the bed. He said to me, "Do you know John Pederson?" "Yes," I replied, "he
is my neighbor." And Jesus said, "Isn't he a blacksmith and does he not
make sleighs? And," he continued, "if he were to make one for you and you
were to break it, wouldn't he fix it for you?" "Why, certainly," I replied.
"Well," Jesus continued, "I made your ear in the first place and don't you
think I can fix it?" "Yes," I said. Then He stepped up to me and touched my
ear with two fingers and I jumped out of bed and MY HEARING WAS PERFECT! I
shouted glory to God.

       *       *       *       *       *

The youngest of our twin boys, who was nearly five years of age, was taken
with double pneumonia and suddenly passed away. My mother-in-law prepared
him for burial. As I was preparing to drive to town to get a permit from
the doctor to bury the little one, the Lord said to me as I was on my way
to the barn to get the team, "Why do you not go back and pray again?" I
immediately turned around and went to the little corpse and laying my hands
on him prayed and wept, and after a little while he came to life. He was
not only alive, but also perfectly well. When I knelt down to pray my
family did not dare to speak to me; they thought I had lost my mind.

About three years later our baby daughter, some ten months old, was sick
and I was planning to leave home on Friday expecting to be gone over
Sunday. The little one grew steadily worse and at eleven o'clock on Sunday
night she passed away. There was great consternation in the family. The
oldest boy fainted when his grandmother laid her out. After everything had
quieted down and all had retired, except my wife who remained up, she went
to the little body, held it in her arms as she knelt beside the bed until
she was tired, then, laying the baby on the bed and laying her hands on it,
prayed until life came back into it. When I returned Monday the child was
as well as ever. In both cases grandmother prepared them for burial.

A little while after this experience the twins were out in the barn feeding
the horses. Somehow in their actions one boy accidently stuck the tine of
the pitchfork right into the eyeball of the other boy. Wife hearing their
screams, ran out and brought them into the house. She washed the blood from
the injured eye and laid the boy on the bed; then she and the twin brother
laid their hands on him and prayed the prayer of faith. He went to sleep
and slept untill morning, and all that remained on the eyeball was a small
white spot in the center which disappeared after a day or two, and his
sight was not in the least impaired.

       *       *       *       *       *

A similar case happened at Bruce, South Dakota, while I was pastor at
Brookings and White. The little three year old daughter of Brother and
Sister Hi Tellinghuisen was playing in the yard with an old rusty sewing
machine oil can. She fell on it, the spout striking right into the center
of one eyeball. She was taken at once to a physician who ordered her to be
taken without delay to a specialist to have the eyeball removed. The
parents then called me over the telephone to come at once. When I arrived
and saw the eye, it looked to me like a dried up prune stone. I anointed
the child, but could find no words to utter in prayer. I could only groan,
but the Lord witnessed to the healing. (I think this took place on Saturday
at 11 o'clock a.m. and the next day, Sunday, she was brought to the
services perfectly well.) (At this writing she is teaching school).

       *       *       *       *       *

On March the 20th, 1904, wife was taken with quick consumption. Her fever
was so high that she was delirious. As long as I remained beside her
praying, she would be rational but as soon as I ceased praying her mind
would wander. Over a week later, on Saturday, Brothers O. T. Ring and Carl
Forsberg came to visit us. We then had agreement in prayer for the healing
of my wife, and from that time on her mind was clear, yet she continued to
go down. A number prayed for her but she grew weaker and weaker, until in
the month of August. When the neighbors would come in to visit her, they
would say to me on leaving, outside of the house, "We are sorry to say it,
but we do not expect to see your wife alive again."

One day she said to me, "We have done everything we know to do except to
send to Brother E. E. Byrum for an anointed handkerchief." I asked, "Do you
want me to send for one?" to which she assented, and I sent for one. We
received it by mail August the 23rd at 1 o'clock. I placed the handkerchief
upon her and kneeling beside her laid my hands on her and prayed. She was
so weak that it seemd as if she would pass away before I could remove my
hands, so I soon said "Amen." She remarked, "This does not look very
encouraging, does it?" I answered, "No, it does not." Then she drew one of
her hands from under the covers and said, "Do you believe that any flesh is
ever coming to these hands?" "Dear," I answered, "I do not know." Then she
said, "I believe that it will happen." I asked, "Why do you believe it?"
She told me that a scripture had come to her while I was praying. She said
that it was the one about Naaman: "His flesh came again like the flesh of a
little child and he was clean." 2 Kings 5:14.

Two hours later she was perfectly well, but weak, of course.

       *       *       *       *       *

On one occasion I received an urgent call to come to Norway Lake to pray
for Mrs. John Evenson who was ill with tuberculosis. While on my way there
I battled with devils, it seemed as though my buggy was full of devils,
whispering to me and saying, "You are going to be arrested and put in
jail." However, after driving sixteen miles, the Lord assured me that He
was going to raise Sister Everson up, even if she were dead when I got
there.

As I drove into the driveway I saw a number of men by the barn. It was the
Constable and others. Jumping out of the buggy, I proceeded to unhook my
team when Mr. Everson appeared, and said, "The hired man will take the
team; come along with me." We went into the house and into the room where
the sick woman was. Mr. Everson sat down in a chair beside the bed, taking
his watch out, he then took his wife's hand in his to count the pulse. She
was unconscious. I spoke to her two or three times but she did not hear me.
I knelt down and asked the Lord to restore her to consciousness. Then I
arose and spoke to her again. After a bit she opened her eyes and I said,
"Brother Susag is here. What do you want him to do for you?" She replied,
"I want you to anoint me and pray for me." I immediately proceeded to do as
she requested, following which she sat up in bed and asked for something to
eat.

The constable, with others, was waiting outside the house to arrest me if
the woman had died. Mr. Everson went out to them and they asked him how
things were going. He told them that before I prayed for her, her pulse was
124, and when I took my hands off, her pulse was 82--which is normal!

Thirteen years later she was taken sick again. Mr. Everson, not being
saved, called for the doctor they had previously employed. The doctor
refused to come, saying that Mrs. Everson "had lived for thirteen years on
something more than human. I can do nothing for her. If she has faith, she
can live another thirteen years." Then they telephoned me. I drove two
miles in my automobile and was taken seriously ill and had to return home
and go to bed. I was very sick for two days. Mrs. Everson died in the
meantime, and I was well.

On one occasion Brother C.H. Tubbs and myself held a meeting at Bowbells,
N. Dakota and a number of people were saved. We were to have a baptismal
service. It was the month of February and we would have to go three miles
to the nearest lake in which to baptize the candidates. There was no place
there for the changing of clothes and it was slow traveling as we rode in a
lumber wagon. Sister Stolsy, who wanted to be baptized, had been in poor
health for five years and had a baby five weeks old. The Constable, on
hearing of it, came to us and said, "If you put that woman through that
hole in the ice, I'll be there with a warrant for your arrest." So Bro.
Tubbs said, "We better go see Sister Stolsy," which we did. He said,
"Sister, it does not look reasonable for you in your condition to be
baptized." She wept and said, "I have wanted to be baptized for some time
and now that I have the opportunity I am denied the privilege." Then I said
to her, "Sister Stolsy, save your tears for something else. I will baptize
you if I have to spend the remainder of my life behind the bars," and she
was baptized. The constable witnessed the baptizing and saw that when she
came out of the water she looked the very picture of health. Three days
later the constable and his wife were baptized in the self-same place.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have baptized hundreds of people from Canada to San Antonio, Texas; from
the Atlantic coast to the Pacific, in every month of the year, in the lakes
of Norway, Sweden and Denmark as well as in the North Sea, in all kinds of
weather--once in the Red River at Grand Forks, N. Dakota, in a snow storm
in zero weather, and I have never yet heard of one person having taken cold
from being baptized, but on the other hand, MANY HAVE BEEN HEALED!

It pays to obey the commandments of the Lord. While I was pastor in Grand
Forks, N. D., from December, 1919 to November, 1925, I baptized over two
hundred persons.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once in company with Thomas Nelson, C.H. Tubbs and my wife, we held a tent
meeting in the country northwest of Colfax, Wisconsin. Several people were
saved and some were healed. This stirred up great opposition so that on a
couple of nights an angry mob was on the spot throwing stones, sticks and
lumber and bottles on the tent, demanding that we come out and they would
cut me to pieces. One night a minister of that community was in the tent,
and as he saw the stones come rolling through the tent, he became badly
frightened and said to me, "This is worse than in a heathen land." "Yes," I
replied, "but are they not your people?" He said, "Yes," and then getting
down on his hands and knees crawled out the back way from under the tent
and escaped to the woods.

The reason for this unseemly tumult was because I had preached that baptism
was by immersion and other truths. The situation was that two grown young
people, the son and daughter of a minister in the community, were among
those who were to be baptized. But the fact that there was no water nearby
in which they could be immersed seemed to give the opposing element great
satisfaction. However, we continued to advertise that there would be
baptismal services on the coming Saturday afternoon. Friday night it rained
heavily and near the tent there was a low place covered with green grass
where the water settled and the water was deep enough in which to baptize
the new converts.

This goes to prove that the Lord's resources are limitless. The next Sunday
night, being the last night of the meeting, after all had left the tent
except Bro. Tubbs and myself, and as I was not making any move towards
leaving the tent Brother Tubbs asked me whether I was not going home. I
answered, "No, those people who threatened to cut me to pieces are coming
back to pull the tent down and I want to be here when they come, but you go
on home; I want to be here alone." But he said, "No, I will not leave you."

It was about a hundred rods or more to the house where we were staying and
there was no other house near by. We put out the lights and sat waiting. A
number of times Bro. Tubbs urged that we go home, declaring that no one
would come, but at almost midnight a plank was thrown on the tent and out
ran Brother Tubbs for home; and then just as I was coming out of the tent a
big plank was thrown on me, striking my right shoulder and also hit my
head. It might have been quite serious but that I was wearing a stiff derby
hat at the time. As it was, I was almost knocked out.

I said to them--there were between fifty and seventy of them, "Just a
minute men, I am alone here; please do not destroy the tent; it has no
feelings. Take me and cut me in pieces as you said you wanted to do. If I
have done anything wrong I am willing to suffer for it." This I said as I
walked slowly toward them, "But if it is because I have preached the Word
of God to you folks and you do not receive it, you will meet it at the
judgment bar of God," and I continued to walk toward them. They said, "Do
not come so near." "Are you afraid of me?" I asked as I continued preaching
to them. Then they commenced backing up. Finally, it seemed I had no more
to say. One man said, "Give us more of that." At this point Brother Tubbs
appeared with eight of the brethren, whereupon the crowd turned and ran for
their rigs and vanished into the darkness.

About eighteen months later I held another meeting in this same community
and the attendance was very good. A number of the same people who had
claimed that they wanted to cut me to pieces were also there. Eight souls
had gotten saved and the attendance was increasing. All of a sudden, as I
was closing the service, the Spirit of the Lord said to me, "This is your
last service here. You will leave in the morning on the 4 o'clock train for
Grand Meadows, Minn." Saint and sinner alike, said, "You can't close now;
look at the manifest interest and the growing attendance!" "But," I said,
"the Lord tells me to close." They insisted that it could not be that they
all were wrong and I the only one that was right. So I consented to stay,
but had I but left on that morning train I would have escaped the terrible
storm that swept over that part of the country. As it was, I could neither
get away nor continue the meeting. On the farm where I was staying they had
to have a rope extended between the house and the barn for two days in
order to find the way from one building to the other.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had held a number of revivals for Brother Millar of Racine, Wisconsin.
One time, in this connection, I had a dream that I saw a pasture with green
grass and beautiful sparkling water running through it and as nice a flock
of sheep as I ever saw were feeding in it. But in this beautiful pasture
that should have been utilized for good pasture. I felt impressed to tell
Bro. Millar of my experience so wrote him of what I had seen in my dream.
In his prompt reply he said, "You had better come with your 'stump-pulling
machine' and pull them out."

Some time later, on a very hot Sunday at noon I arrived in Racine, all
tired and worked out. I asked Bro. Millar whether there was to be an
afternoon service. I understood him to say, "No, there would not be." I
said to him, "I want no lunch so please take me to my room." And this he
did. I undressed immediately and was soon fast asleep, but before long I
felt my bed being shaken and heard someone speaking to me but it seemed I
just could not wake up. The shaking increased and I heard a voice saying,
"Brother Susag, Brother Susag." I looked up and there was Brother Millar!
He said, "Why, Brother Susag, have you undressed? The chapel is full of
people who are waiting for you to come and preach." I told him I had
understood him to say that there would be no afternoon service, that he
should go back and that I would follow as quickly as possible.

I had no message. I opened my Bible and from Genesis to Revelation the
Scriptures did not seem to mean anything to me. I prayed and still no
message. Then coming down stairs I met Sister Anna Hanson who was just
starting for the service. I said to her, "Please give me a text to preach
on." She said, "O you will have a text." I told her I was in earnest, that
I could not think of a single text in the whole Bible that meant anything
to me, that I was too worn out to think. Sister Hanson then said, "I have
often wished I might hear you preach on the first text I ever heard you
preach on and that was in Chicago. The text was, 'The Lord weigheth the
spirits.'" Then the Lord opened my understanding and I had a text. At the
close of the service Sister Hanson walked ahead of me to the parsonage and
into the kitchen where Sister Millar was. She asked, "How was the service?"
Sister Hanson answered, "The right message for the right people at the
right time." Sister Millar said, "Well, praise the Lord!" and when Bro.
Millar came in he said, "Praise the Lord," and jumped and shouted and said
that every stump had been pulled--twenty-two of them!

While this meeting was in progress Brother Tiffany Flint from Milwaukee
came down and asked me to come and hold a two weeks' meeting for him, but I
had no open dates. In those days I was, at times, booked ahead as many as
forty-two meetings, so I had to refuse him. But he urged, "Won't you come
just a few days?" So I promised to go for three nights. When I arrived he
said, "I have something to tell you: I have three persons here needing
spiritual help." I replied, "Tell me nothing, on the train the Lord gave me
three texts, one for each night, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, which I
am going to preach on." It happened that each text fitted each one of the
three mentioned persons and each one came to service on the very night his
particular text was preached on, and received his special benefit.

I am relating all these incidents because I have always believed in the
leadership of the Holy Spirit; and now, after these fifty years of work in
the ministry I am more firmly grounded in that belief than ever.

Some time later I held another meeting for Brother Millar. One afternoon,
as I sat studying, the Lord said to me, "Here is your text; you go down to
street so and so, such and such a number and preach at 2:30 this
afternoon." After lunch I said to Brother Millar, "Let us take a walk." On
coming out I said, "Is there a street in the city of such a name," stating
the name the Lord had given me? He said, "I think so; what of it?" I told
him that the Lord had given me a text to go down there and preach at 2:30.
Bro. Millar then said, "We will take a street car and go down there and
see, but I will tell you that if there is a chapel at that number you will
not get an opporunity to preach there." We boarded the street car and the
motor-man directed us to the street, and as we approached the given number
we found a chapel and a meeting in progress. We went in and sat in the back
seat. The singing had just stopped and the evangelist took his Bible and
went to the pulpit. Bro. Millar smiled and hung his head, looking at me out
of the corner of his eye, as much as to say, "I thought so." But I was
pretty sober. I took my watch out of my pocket and held it in my hand and
after the evangelist had given out his text and had spoken just seven
minutes, he closed his Bible and said, "This is queer; I cannot speak this
afternoon," and turning to the pastor, asked him whether he had the
message. The pastor replied, "Why no, I haven't even my Bible with me."
Then, looking over the audience, the evangelist said, "There must be
someone here who has the message." Pointing to me, he said, "Haven't you
got the message?" I answered, "Yes." "Then come on up here," he rejoined,
"and take the pulpit."

On taking the pulpit I promptly explained just how it was we happened to be
there at that particular time and proceeded to preach the sermon the Lord
had given me to preach. I announced our services and everybody seemed to be
well pleased with the sermon. I was not acquainted with any person in the
audience, nor did any one know me as far as I knew. A little later a number
of them attended our services and eight of them were saved and took their
stand for the truth.

       *       *       *       *       *

At one time I received a series of letters from a leader in a certain
Church of God congregation in which the writer earnestly pleaded that I
come and hold a meeting for him.

He said that the Lord had revealed to him that I could be a great blessing
to him and his congregation. I had never been to the place nor did I know
anyone in the congregation that I was aware of. After giving the matter due
consideration I felt that I should go, and wrote the pastor to that effect.
On the day I was planning to leave I received a letter from the brother,
upon the reading of which I began to tremble like a leaf--something I had
never experienced before. I was standing on the floor reading the letter.
Wife ran up to me and asked me if I was sick or whether there was anything
wrong. She took the letter and read it, and said, "There is nothing wrong
with that letter." "No," I said, "but I have a feeling that if I go I will
meet something I have never met before." Wife answered, "Don't let the
devil scare you now; you go, and I will pray for you."

On arriving in the city, as I stepped off the train, a man came up to me
and said, "Are you Brother Susag? I am Brother X--; I have come to meet
you. We certainly are glad that you have come, but I am sorry to have to
tell you that our group is split into two congregations." I quickly reached
to take my suitcase out of his hand, and said to him, "I'm going right back
home; I'm too small a man to attempt to tackle anything like that." But he
said, "No, you cannot go, for we have been praying for you to come and the
Lord has shown us that you are the man to help us out." "All right," I
said, "on one condition I'll stay. Take me to a hotel, and you inform both
parties that I will only stay on condition that all meet together in one
chapel and that no one tell me anything about the trouble, for if the Word
of God will not make you one, I surely cannot do so." "But," said he, "you
surely need to know something about how matters stand." "No," I replied,
"the Lord knows it all and He also knows what messages to give me from time
to time." "Very well," he said, "I'll take you out in the country three
miles to an old couple who knows nothing of the trouble."

Three days later at three o'clock in the afternoon, the brother came to see
me and informed me that my proposition had been accepted; the group had
agreed to the conditions. I preached for eleven days and let them do their
own altar work and the eleventh night there was but one congregation and
all was peace and harmony. For the first eleven days of the meeting there
was not one outsider in any of the services but on the very next night the
chapel was filled, and there were seven ministers of the city present in
the audience.

       *       *       *       *       *

An Assembly meeting was being planned, soon to be held in Chicago, at the
74th Street Church of God and the brethren in charge wrote to the ministers
of the Scandinavian Publishing work in St. Paul Park, Minnesota, requesting
them to provide an evangelist who should preach in the Scandinavian
languages--either Thomas Nelson, Emil Krutz or S. O. Susag. Brother Krutz
and I were holding a meeting at Hereford, Minn. at the time. We received a
letter from St. Paul Park asking us to pray to find out which one of the
three of us was to go. Then Brother Krutz said to me, "I know you know who
is to go; tell me who it is." But I answered him, that he should go find
out from the same source from which I had found out. He left me and after
two hours returned and said, "It was a little hard for me to find out
because I wanted to go so badly myself, but the Lord showed me that you
were the one to go."

On my way I stopped at St. Paul Park and met Brother D. O. Teasley from New
York. He said to me, "So you are on your way to the Assembly in Chicago." I
said, "Yes, if Brother Nelson is not going." "Why," he said, "he is not
going. When I stopped in Chicago the congregation was praying the Lord to
send you." God works at both ends.

We held the Scandinavian services at the Assembly up stairs in the
Missionary Home. After five days' meeting, quite a few were saved, while
down in the English services in the chapel where there were thirty-three
ministers, none were being saved. Brother Reardon, hearing of our good
services, asked me whether I preached in English, "Yes," I replied, "in my
broken way." "Why, then," he said, "do you not ask the Lord for a message
to preach down in the chapel?" I answered, telling him the Lord had already
given me three messages but someone else gets to the pulpit before me.
(This was the time for the free-for-all in the pulpit). Brother Reardon
said, "Come with me," and he took me upstairs into a room where a group of
the leading ministers were assembled and said to them, "Here is the man who
is holding up the success of the meeting." I said, "How is that possible
when I cannot even get into the pulpit? Somebody rushes in ahead of me, and
one who did so was not saved." To this they said, "We have already attended
to that person," and told me that I had better get another message from the
Lord, but I said, "No." Then they said, "Will you preach it if the Lord
gives you another message?" I said, "I will, if I can get into the pulpit
and you will pray for me."

The second day following, the Lord gave me another message. My text was the
last clause of the second verse of Proverbs 16: "... the Lord weigheth the
spirits." After I had spoken a few minutes Brother Cole spoke up and said,
"Please stop a minute, Bro. Susag, do not talk so fast; we do not
understand a word you say." I said, "Please pray for me." Then again,
realizing I was going quite fast, I stopped, when Sister Cole said, "Do not
stop now, go ahead, Bro. Susag, we can understand you well enough." I
seemed to be full of the Holy Ghost which seemed to be pressing me on. When
I said, "Amen" there were forty-two at the altar crying for mercy.

Listen folks, this was not because of my good preaching, for they could not
understand me, but they understood when the Holy Ghost spoke. When I went
to the altar to pray with the seekers a man came running on his hands and
feet, barking like a dog. He was taken out to another room to be prayed
for. He was helped, and the devils were cast out.

After the altar service was over I asked Brothers Reardon and Ebel to go
with me to the basement. As soon as we got there I fell on my face to the
floor weeping, and saying to the brothers, "I need help, I am in serious
trouble. It seems as though devils were tearing my very body to pieces."
Thank God for good brothers who are able to help a person in time of need.
Brother Reardon said to me, "Get up quick, Bro. Susag, don't lie there and
cry for the devil." But I said, "You don't know what trouble I am in." But
they said to me, "There is nothing the matter with you. Get up and rebuke
the devil, get up and sit on that chair and we will talk to you." Then Bro.
Reardon said, "The Lord used you to break the spell in the meeting and
there were seven possessed with devils at the altar. The devil became
enraged at you and was determined to ruin you." Then I resisted the devil
and was free.

We will soon find out when we let the Holy Ghost have His way with us there
are seemingly two equally great powers in the world. But thank God, we also
find that He is the Omnipotent Ruler over all things.

Brother Tubbs and I once held a meeting at Portland, North Dakota. The wife
of the man with whom we stayed professed to be saved and one of the saints.
Her husband, as far as I knew, made no profession but was a very fine man
and one of the leading business men of the town.

One day, as we were looking through the bookcase, we found a lot of fine
looking books of Russellite teaching. We asked the sister who had bought
them. She told us that she had bought them--"had bought over a hundred
dollars' worth of those good books." We informed her that they were
unsound, that they taught erroneous doctrine and should not be read nor
handed to anyone.

Our taking this stand made things look as though we would be without a
place to stay. But that evening the Lord changed the situation. The
two-year-old child of this couple was suddenly taken violently ill. The
mother asked us to pray for the boy. Bro. Tubbs plainly told her that the
Lord would not heal her boy as long as she had those books in the house.
When we were just starting to go to the service that evening, the father,
who was holding the child in a blanket in his arms, said to us, "Will you
guarantee healing to my child if I place it in your hands? Otherwise I
shall have to get a doctor before it is too late." Bro. Tubbs answered, "We
can guarantee nothing," and we started for the service.

Bro. Tubbs was already outside the door of the house when the mother of the
child said pleadingly, "Won't you pray?" The Holy Ghost came upon me and I
said, "Yes, on one condition, if you will promise to take all those books
over to the meeting place tomorrow and burn them up before the eyes of the
audience, I'll pray and guarantee healing for your child." She said, "I
won't do that; they are good books and cost $100." "All right," I said, and
stepped out of the door. The father said, "Just a minute," and then to his
wife he said, "Isn't the life of our child worth more than one hundred
dollars?" She said, "But they are good books." He replied, "The ministers
say they are no good. I know nothing about them, whether they are good or
not, but I do know one thing that my child's life is worth more than one
hundred dollars." "All right, then, I'll do it," she said.

I stepped back in the room, threw my hat on the floor, went over and laid
my hands on the child and prayed the prayer of faith and the Lord healed
the child instantly, and the books went up in smoke the next day.

I have seen bookcases and book shelves in many homes that need just such a
purge in order that the glory of God may dwell in the home, and sometimes
even in the churches.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the years 1915-16 I spent almost thirteen months in Denmark helping the
few faithful workers there to raise up eight congregations and many books
were burned during the time.

One old mother in Israel, when she heard of the books being burned, said,
"I've got only one book and it's a good one." She brought it to me and
said, "If you say this is not good, my salvation goes too." I asked her if
I might mark with a pencil in her book and she said I could. After reading
it a while I laid it aside having marked it here and there. She asked me
what I thought of her book. Not to discourage her, I said, "There are some
good things in that book." She took it and began to find the places which I
had marked, finally closed the book and said, "This book is no good; the
Bible says thus and so and the book speaks to the contrary." Then she said,
"Why have I been blessed many times when reading this book?" I answered,
"Because you were honest and did not know any better."

We pioneer ministers had many things to meet. On getting home one time, I
found that a runaway team had pulled our windmill down so that we had to
have a new one. The well was 204 feet and was hard to pump. After we got
the new one, a neighbor came over and said to my son, Oswald, "See, your
father has been out preaching and so you are able to have a new windmill."
Yes, he had been gone seven weeks and he was eleven cents short on his
expenses. The following year I was gone nine months and five days and I
fared real well--I had $76.76 above my expenses that time.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sometimes I got to thinking about little Charlie Brown, who I believe was
about eleven years old at the time. When his father asked him if he got
tired, he said, "Yes, I get tired of this walking preaching." So they went
into a grove and prayed and his father said to him, "We will go to the next
town and you preach on some street corner and if no one gets saved, we will
quit and if some get saved we will keep on. What do you think of that?"
Young Charlie agreed to that and a number of souls did get saved. Now
"young Charlie" is Editor in Chief of the Gospel Trumpet.

Then it was empty pocketbooks, empty stomachs and sore feet, but that did
not stop the preaching. Yes, in those days it was souls we were after, and
not money and honor.

       *       *       *       *       *

I did not have a new suit for sixteen years; wife had only one new dress in
eighteen years. Although we lived on a farm we could not eat butter. We had
to sell that in order to be able to buy more necessary things.

One year wife and the children were raising twenty-two hogs while I was out
preaching in the gospel field, and we had a payment of $500 to make on our
home, or move. When I arrived home in the fall wife met me with tears in
her eyes as she told me that the hogs were all ready for the market when
the price dropped from $6.00 per hundred weight to $2.75. "And," she
continued, "the only reason I can find for it is that we have not given
enough." "But," I replied, "I feel that we have given enough: Our gross
income has been a little over $500.00." She then brought two pencils and
two pieces of paper and said to me, "Come on." We knelt down and asked the
Lord to bring to our minds what we had given, and in our check-up we found
we had given $252.50. Then, almost scaring me, my wife, with tears
streaming down her face, lifted her hand toward heaven, and said, "Lord, we
have done our duty and you will have to pay our bills."

Two days later the cattle buyer came back and said that if he could get our
hogs he would have enough for two railroad carloads. I told him he could
not have them at that price. He said, "They are the nicest looking hogs I
ever saw and if I can get them to mix in with the others I may get top
price for all." "And," he added, "I will give you the old price: Six
dollars ($6.00) per hundred weight." To which I replied, "They are yours."

One of our neighbors had twenty-two hogs born the same week as ours. The
day they were brought into town people said, "Susag's hogs are the nicest,
but P----'s hogs will weigh 1,000 pounds more than his." They weighed them
and found that our hogs weighed almost eleven hundred pounds more than
P----'s. They took them off the scales twice to examine the scales to see
whether they were correct, but the hogs held their weight, almost eleven
hundred pounds more than the neighbor's hogs. So once more, the Lord
honored his faithful, humble people. There was enough money for the $500
payment and some to spare.

Two years later we had another $500 payment to meet, and when we started to
seed in the spring, I said to the twins, "Let us kneel down right here in
the field and ask God to give us a large enough crop to pay the notes which
will be due in the fall." That year crops, generally, were very poor,
average wheat being from 2-1/2 to 3-1/2 bushels to the acre (of screenings,
or Number Four, as it is called). But the Lord gave us eighteen bushels to
the acre on one piece and on the other, twenty-two bushels to the acre of
Number One wheat. One old lady said, "I can't understand such a thing--only
a fence between."

       *       *       *       *       *

One time I had a dream of a scene taking place in the chapel at St. Paul
Park, Minn. Brother Nelson, who had just finished his sermon, was standing
by the pulpit with his left elbow on the pulpit and his hand on his chin,
looking at the audience. Then I saw a woman, about two-thirds down the
aisle, get up and shake her fist toward Bro. Nelson. The Lord said to me,
"Do you see that woman?" I answered, "Yes." "You see she is not right with
me in shaking her fist at my servant?" "Yes," I said, "I can see that."
Then the scene changed in my dream. I was sitting on a chair right between
the dining room and the front room at the Workers' Home of the Scandinavian
Publishing Company, and there was a minister sitting behind me leaning his
hands on the back of my chair. This minister I had met once before, and the
Lord said to me, "You had better look out for that man; he is not right
with me. He will get you into trouble."

Some days later I received a telephone message to come to St. Paul Park,
Minn. at once. I went accordingly. On my arrival I found services were
going on in the Workers' Home and very soon I was sitting exactly as I saw
myself sitting in my dream. All of a sudden I saw the woman I had seen in
my dream coming in from the kitchen. I had never seen her before, nor had I
ever heard of her, but recognized her from the dream. Then I almost got
scared. What if that preacher was sitting behind me resting his hands on
the back of my chair, I thought. What's up, anyhow? I did not dare to look
back to see!

The brethren asked me to preach, and when I got up and faced the audience,
sure enough, there sat the very minister I had seen in my dream! I spoke on
the twenty-third Psalm. I'm generally long winded in the pulpit but this
time I cut it short. When I closed, Bro. Nelson said, "Is that all you are
going to give us?" And I said, "Yes."

"Old men shall have dreams and young men shall see visions."

When the service was over, Brother O. T. Ring came to me and said, "Please
come into our room; we want to see you a little." On going into the room I
found that the ministry were there, along with this minister and woman,
also some of the leading workers. Brother Nelson said, "We are having a
little difficulty and we felt that we should call for you. You have had a
lot of experience and we thought that possibly you could be a help to us."
Then I got up and asked whether I might tell my dream. After I had told it
I said, "If this fits, then you let me out." "Yes, it fits," he said.

A number of years later Brother J. S. Lane was to be the evangelist at the
South Dakota State Camp Meeting. We met and introduced ourselves. Brother
Lane said,

"Brother Susag, I stopped at Clinton, Iowa, and a sister said to me, are
you going up to South Dakota and Minnesota? Then you'll meet a minister
that I am afraid of. His name is Susag; the Lord speaks to him whether he
is asleep or awake, but I have forgotten her name." I said, her name is so
and so. "Yes," he said. That was about twenty years after the dream.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a wonderful experience the Lord gave me after the baptism of Sister
Swenvorg and the wonderful healing of her eyes, and also the wonderful
glory the Lord sent upon her with the persecution that came with it. That
evening in the service the Lord blessed me so much I had to put both hands
over my heart and had to ask the Lord to stop, as my human body could not
stand any more pressure. This happened in Lukken, Denmark.

       *       *       *       *       *

I once went to hold a meeting in Bro. William Gustafson's grove three miles
north of Belgrade, Minnesota. The brother met me at the station and said he
had quite a lot of business to do in town so I could stay at that station
until he got through and then he would come and get me. But as quite a long
time passed and he did not come I walked over to a store and asked them if
they knew Mr. Gustafson and they said they did. Then I asked if they knew
whether he was still in town. To which they replied that he had gone home
quite a while ago. So I had to take my grips and walk out to his place, as
the meeting was set and I was to stay in his home. I held the meeting and
some souls were saved, but I never said a word to Mr. Gustafson about his
leaving me in town. I thought that the good Lord could speak to him better
than I could. The Lord gave me grace to treat him as nicely as though
nothing had happened. When the meeting ended I had to walk back to town
again.

At the next year's state camp meeting he came to me and said, "Can we go
over into the timber?" Of course I said, "Yes." On our way over he told me
that a would-be preacher had talked to him about me, accusing me of many
things but that he had found out that they were not true. Then he asked me
to forgive him and he also asked the Lord to forgive him, as he had lied to
me.

It is too bad that such things happen, as a finer brother than Brother
Gustafson there never was.

Then Brother Gustafson told me that the Lord spoke to him telling him he
should have given ten dollars to me for that meeting, but now the Lord
tells him it is to be fifty, and he wrote me out a check for that amount.

       *       *       *       *       *

A WONDERFUL INCIDENT

Father Brewster, as he was commonly called, of Hereford, Minnesota, was
taken sick and was sick for some time. If I am correctly informed, he was
89 years of age. For a number of days it was thought that he was dead but
the doctor said that he was still living, but he might go almost any time,
and the family sent for me to come and conduct the funeral services. He had
been in a coma for eight days. On arriving I found that the doctors had not
yet pronounced him dead. I went into the bedroom where he lay and stood
looking at him for a few minutes, meditating on the many good times we had
had together in the Lord. Finally I fell on my knees and began to pray.
Suddenly he called out in a loud voice, "Praise the Lord, Brother Susag."
He never moved a hand or a finger, all that he moved was his lips and the
next day he passed away. He had not spoken a word for eight days.

       *       *       *       *       *

One year when I was the evangelist at the S. Dakota State camp meeting, I
mentioned one day in my sermon that I was very busy and had received enough
calls since I had come to the camp meeting to keep me going for two years.
After the service Brother Geselbeck, the elder of the church, came to me
and said, "Let us go down to the car," which we did. He began by saying,
"I've always had confidence in you, Brother Susag, but today in something
you said, I thought you went too far, so I decided to speak to you at once
as I did not want to lose my confidence in you." I said, "Thank you, that's
fine, brother; what was it I said?" "You said that you had received enough
calls since you had been at the meeting to keep you going for two years,
and this is only the third day!" "Did I say that?" I asked. "Maybe I said
too much, but we will see I have the letters here in my pocket and they are
addressed to Arlington, Route 1, South Dakota." So we took the letters and
read them and found that if I were to hold meetings at each place as long
as they stated in the letters it would have taken me twenty-six months.
Bro. Geselbeck then said, "I knew you were a busy man, but I never knew you
were that busy, and I am glad that I spoke to you!" Yes, if we would all do
that way when something is in question it would avoid a whole lot of
misunderstanding.

       *       *       *       *       *

I once had a cancer on my upper lip and one day I met Dr. Sandven on the
street of my home town. He stopped and said to me, "You had better come
over to the hospital and we will burn that thing out or else you will have
something." I replied, "I've got something already." "Yes," he said, "but
we may be able to burn it out yet." "Well," I said, "I believe I will wait
on my own Doctor a little while yet." "All right," he said, "if you don't
get rid of it, come over and we will try to help you."

A few days after this I went to Erie, North Dakota to hold a tent meeting
for Sister Bertha Gaulke who was the pastor of the church there. We had
prayer often, but for two nights the pain was so intense it seemed as
though the roots of the cancer were going into my nose and up into my left
eye. The third night I was weeping and praying and finally I went to sleep,
and in my sleep the Lord said to me, "Wake up and take hold of the cancer;
I have heard your prayers and it will come out." I woke up and did as the
Lord directed, and out it came, roots and all!

I have had (and still do have) many dreams. The Bible says, that "... old
men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions." (Joel 2:28).

       *       *       *       *       *

During the time I was pastor in Grand Forks I needed a fountain pen.
Sisters Hulda and Louise Werstlein gave me five dollars to get a pen, to be
my Christmas present. I sent to my son, who was agent for such things, and
he got me a $7.50 Waterman pen for the five dollars. After the Minnesota
State camp meeting, Sister Moon of Canbee, Minnesota asked me to take her
and her two children home. On reaching Montevideo I met Brother Thomas
Nelson who said he would like to have a long talk with me. I told him that
he could take Sister Moon and the children and myself and we could talk
then as we went back and forth, which we did, but when I arrived home my
pen was gone!

I wrote to the pastor at Montevideo asking him to look in Brother Nelson's
car and around in the grass where the car had stood, thinking the pen might
have fallen out of his car when I took my coat out of his car and put in in
mine. About a week later I got a card saying there was no pen to be found
anywhere.

A few nights later I had a dream. I saw my pen. It was standing up against
a small willow in a bunch of grass in the road ditch; it was very dusty.

Some days after this, as I was on my way to town going north, I passed the
road going west which I had been on when I lost my pen. The Lord said, "Why
don't you go and get your pen?" I laughed to myself, but kept on driving
and again the Lord said, "Why don't you get your pen; why don't you get
your pen?" Finally I had to turn back, and as I did so I said to myself,
"This is a trip that I'll never tell anyone about, starting out for 136
miles to look for a pen in a road ditch!"

After going a mile and three quarters I saw to my left a little willow
sticking up just like the one I saw in my dream. I stopped the car and went
to look, and there stood my pen just as it was in my dream.

We might ask how it got there. The only answer I can give is that I must
have had my coat over the front seat of the car and the coat must have
fallen down, and when I reached for it while the car was going the pen must
have fallen out of my coat pocket in the dark.

       *       *       *       *       *

A WONDERFUL INCIDENT

I had arrived home on Saturday, and Sunday I went to the service. The
pastor said, "Now I know why I haven't a message today," and turning to me
he said, "You speak for me." But I said, "No, I did not bring my Bible
along." "Well," someone said, "we can let you have a Bible." I said,
"Soneone else must have the message." There were two other ministers there,
but neither had a message. Finally wife said, "Husband, I get a number of
letters and here's one that reads like this, 'Dear Sister Susag: You should
have been in our service last night. We had a wonderful message and a
wonderful service. Several were saved, and do you know who preached for us?
Your husband preached for us.'" Then she said, "Why don't you give us a
message like that at home?" And they all said, "That's right."

Then I got a text. I looked at my watch and it was eleven o'clock. I knew
the pastor had to be home at 12:30, but I forgot all about it, and not a
person moved, not even the little children, while I preached. When I quit I
thought it would be around 12:10 or 12:15, but on looking at my watch it
was 3:15 in the afternoon. I had preached for four hours and fifteen
minutes and the pastor and audience declared there must be something wrong
with our watches! It seemed as if we must have been pretty close to the
third heaven!

       *       *       *       *       *

On one occasion while I was in Europe I visited at my wife's request, a
cousin of hers who had been ill and confined to her bed for twenty-one
years. She had become bedfast when she was nineteen. When I first visited
her, as she did not understand anything about divine healing, she got quite
peeved at the instructions I gave her. However her father, my wife's uncle,
got gloriously saved. Two weeks later I got a letter from the woman asking
me to come again and I went. Then she repented and turned to the Lord. I
prayed for her and the Lord raised her up.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once in a city called Stavanger, Norway, I was asked to come and pray for a
sister who was in the last stages of tuberculosis of the lungs. As some of
the people over there teach that it is witchcraft to heal by the word of
God and prayer, a mob had gathered to stone me, and the folks called me and
asked me not to anoint and pray for fear the people might do me bodily
harm. I told them that I was not any better than the apostles or any other
of God's ministers, and if that was to be my lot I would be willing to die
for the gospel's sake.

I anointed and prayed for the woman and the Lord raised her up to the great
astonishment of the people and no bodily harm came to me.

I met her twin sister several years later who said she had been well ever
since, healthy and strong.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1916 while in Denmark I contracted tuberculosis of the throat and head.
I got so weak that while holding a meeting in company with Brother Carl
Forsberg out from Pandrup, Denmark, one evening before the service started
I was suffering so intensely that I went out into the cow barn, sat down on
a milk stool coughing and spitting, praying and weeping until I was so weak
that I was unable to get up when I tried to do so. Time for meeting came,
and the folks did not know what had become of me, so a Brother Madson, a
big strong man, went out to look for me. When he found me he picked me up
and carried me in, laid me on the lounge and the saints prayed for me, and
I got strength to get up and preach. We closed the services that evening.
Brother Forsberg returned to Sweden and I to my headquarters at Hjoring. I
went to a specialist and asked him to write me a permit so that I could
return to America. After he had examined me he said that he could not give
me the permit as I would not be permitted to go aboard ship in the
condition I was in. He said, "You would not live until you got there if you
did start." I told him that I would like to be with my folks when I leave
this world. He replied, "I don't blame you but it can't be done."

Then I got a letter from Brother and Sister Johnson of Jotta, Sweden,
saying that "Brother Forsberg had come home saying that it looked as though
the Lord was through with Brother Susag, he was no near gone. Wife and I
agreed in prayer and the Lord says He is going to heal you and that you are
going to preach to us here many times."

The following Sunday we had services in Hjoring at eleven o'clock, although
I did not seem to be able to stand up, but I thought I might just as well
go to heaven from the pulpit as to go from the bed, if I was going to die
anyway. After I had been speaking about fifteen minutes I quit, as the pain
got so intense in my throat I could hardly speak above a whisper, and the
audience could not hear me. I went up stairs in the chapel where I had my
room, and I lay down on the bed suffering intensely.

Outside my door was a tree and a little bird hopped onto a branch and began
to sing. (I do not know the name of the bird, but the species was like the
birds that used to come to our grove at home in Minnesota and sing. But I
had never before heard one in my travels in Europe). I turned to the bird
and said, "Did my heavenly Father send you from Minnesota to Denmark to
sing for me when I was so troubled?" And the more I would speak to him the
more he would flap his wings and sing and sing until I could forget my pain
and had to laugh aloud. It was nearly four o'clock and that was the time
for the next service. I got up and got ready for the service, and when I
came into the pulpil to preach, to my surprise, I was perfectly healed and
could speak as loud as ever without pain.

The next morning I went to the specialist and asked him to examine me again
to see if I could go home if I wanted to. After examining me he said, "Man,
O man, what have you done? There is not a T. B. germ about you--you can go
or stay as you please." I told him I had done nothing, but that the people
of God had been praying for me, the results of which was a great surprise
to the doctor. This is the way the Lord deals with his unworthy, humble
children that trust and obey Him.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have generally observed a rule of not eating my evening meal until after
the evening service. One evening in Sweden I ate a little fish out of a can
that had been standing open for some time. After eating a little of the
fish I remembered that the can had been standing open and did not eat any
more. About a half an hour after I had retired and gone to sleep, I woke up
feeling deathly sick with ptomaine poisoning. It seemed as if I was to be
taken out of this world. All through the night Brother Forsberg, Sister
Bettie Miller and others kept praying for me and the next day my life
seemed to hang on a thread, but at five o'clock that evening we got the
victory and I was perfectly healed, and able to speak in the service that
night.

Some years afterwards while at Camp meeting at Anderson, Ind. I was
poisoned in about the same manner. A number of brethren prayed for me
without my getting any relief. Finally, Brother George Green, now pastor at
Hanford, California, a true yoke-fellow of mine who loved me dearly, broke
down and wept and had compassion on me and prayed a short prayer of faith
and rebuked the devil and the sickness, and I was healed instantly. The
Bible says of Jesus, "He had compassion on the people and healed all that
came unto him."

       *       *       *       *       *

On one ocassion in 1933 I was not feeling very well. I was on my way to
California and stopped in Minneapolis where my three boys live. When they
saw that I was not well, they were determined to take me to a doctor and
have me examined. He ordered me to a hospital where five doctors took six
x-rays. After taking the x-rays, the doctors asked me, "What do you think
you have?" I said, "The same as you think." They said, "What do we think?"
"Cancer!" I said. "No," they said. I said, "Why do you lie, you said it was
cancer and a bad one." They said, "Do you understand Latin?" I said, "I
understand that much." In the evening the doctor called my son Clarence and
said to him, "Shall I tell your dad what the matter is with him, or will
you?" He answered, "It doesn't matter who tells him, as he is ready to live
or to die; we want to know the worst." The doctor said, "It is the worst.
Bring him to my office tomorrow at three o'clock." I heard the five doctors
talking the case over between themselves, stating the position of the
cancer.

On coming to the office the next day the doctor said, "I have good news for
you, Reverend, you have no cancer." I asked him, "When did you lie to me,
yesterday or today?" He said, "Neither, the picture clearly shows cancer.
They forgot to take your food test so you had to go back to the hospital to
have it taken and in the food test there was no cancer." The doctor asked,
"What did you do, once a cancer but none now?" I said, "I did like a little
story we ministers have about a little boy and his sister. They were out
playing, and at eleven o'clock Mary was hungry and went in to ask mother
for a slice of bread, but mother said, it is soon time for lunch, go out
and play now, until lunch is ready. Then Freddy went in and asked for bread
and he came out with a slice of bread with butter on it. Then Mary said,
'What did you do to get it?' 'I cried for it,' answered Freddy," so did I.

The Lord made them forget to take the food test at first in order to verify
the miracle.

       *       *       *       *       *

One day I was plowing, since I had asked the boys to let me plow for the
exercise it gave me. It was about ten o'clock in the morning and I had
stopped and gotten off the gang plow to let the horses rest and stood
looking south in the field when I saw six or eight feet before me dear
Brother A. G. Ahrendt standing and smiling at me, just as real as if he
were there in the flesh. "Brother Ahrendt is leaving Grand Forks by my
orders," the Lord said to me. "If by your orders he is leaving there,
amen," I replied. I then turned to get on the plow when on the other side
of the plow there stood a lady minister and the Lord said, "Some are
contemplating getting her as the pastor and that will be the ruination of
the work in Grand Forks." (Not because there was anything wrong with her as
a minister but because she would not fit in the place). The vision
disappeared and I went to plowing.

Two or three days later I became so burdened about Grand Forks that I was
almost sick, so I wrote to Brother Ahrendt and asked if anything was wrong
or anyone sick, for I was so burdened. I expected an answer right away, but
didn't get it, so wrote again and still no answer. The next week I wrote
for the third time telling them that I was going through Grand Forks on my
way to Raab for a meeting, and would be in Grand Forks and they could
arrange a meeting for me over Friday night, Saturday and Sunday if he
wanted me. Then a letter came from Sister Ahrendt saying her husband was
away and that they were leaving Grand Forks.

Sunday afternoon, when in Grand Forks, I went by invitation to Brother Lars
Olson's home and there met the four leaders of the congregation: August
Shave, Bertha Gaulke, Lars Olson and Sister Johnstone. They told me that
they had been talking of sending for me; Bro. Shave had proposed sending me
the money for carfare, but Bro. Olson said, "No, we won't do that; we will
ask the Lord to send him here and we will pay his expenses when he comes."
These prayers going up from the dear ones in Grand Forks was what made the
Lord burden my heart before I went there.

They then begged me to be their pastor, and I finally consented to come and
stay with them for a month or three months or until they could get a
pastor. I stayed with them for almost five years.

       *       *       *       *       *

While holding a meeting in company with Brother Renbeck in a school house
out in the country between Kelly and Manville, N. Dakota and staying in the
home of Bro. and Sister Holman, one afternoon as I was praying the Lord
gave me a message on the judgments of God, and what would happen, even in
this world, if people reject the Word of God. The Lord said to me, "They
will close the school house." Then I asked Brother Holman if we should
close the services tonight, where shall we go if we continue them? He said,
"We surely are not going to close the services tonight; we will continue at
the school house." I said, "The school house will be closed to us tonight."
To which he answered, "Who said so?" I told him that the Lord had told me.
Brother Holman then said, "You are a good Brother, but this time you are
mistaken, for they would not dare close the school house because three of
the saints' families are the biggest taxpayers in the district."

At the beginning of the service that evening, Brother Renbeck got up and
commenced to preach on the subject, "The Church as a House." After speaking
for about ten minutes, he sat down and said, "This is not the message for
tonight." We knelt down and prayed asking the Lord to give a message, and
the Lord said, "I have given you a message." I said, "Lord, that is too
strong," but the Lord answered, "It is the message for this people."

The school house was large and it was filled. It was said that there were
two or three congressmen in the crowd. I got up and spoke for an hour and
fifteen minutes on the message the Lord had given me and when I was through
I said, "Shall we close the services now, or has anyone a place to offer so
we can continue the meeting, as I understand that the school house is
closed against us?" The clerk of the school board (who with his family were
professors of religion) went over to Bro. Holman and asked him who had told
Susag that the school house was to be closed. The Board had only met just
before meeting and decided to close. Brother Holman replied that Brother
Susag told him that afternoon that the Lord had told him that they were
going to close. The man went back to his seat. Then I said, "Is it true or
not that the school house is to be closed?" Brother Holman answered, "It is
true."

One man in the audience sat on the front edge of the bench so deeply
interested in the service that his mouth would be wide open, and after the
meeting was over he stuck a five dollar bill in my hand and said that the
meeting had been worth that to him.

A man in the audience, who was an infidel, said, "I own a store building in
Mechinoch, a few miles away, that these two preachers may have as long as
they please, if some one can furnish a stove and wood to warm up the
building." The stove and wood were promptly furnished, and we went there
accordingly, and continued our services.

I am sorry to say that many who heard the Word of God preached in that
school house rejected it and became real outlaws. The family of the school
board clerk lost their salvation and two of their sons, who had previously
professed salvation, became bootleggers.

At the store building a number of people got saved. One man sat in the back
seat every evening and left as soon as the preaching was over. I saw that
he was under conviction and one evening I got to him before he had left,
and I asked him if he did not want to get saved and he told me, "Yes."
While praying with him I felt a hand on my shoulder and a man said to me,
"Brother Susag, Brother Susag, never mind this man; there are thirty-three
at the altar and this man has not been sober in fourteen years." I said,
"If he has not been sober for fourteen years he surely needs salvation and
I will stay with him until he gets saved." And I did; and as far as I know
he remained a true Christian and lived the life.

The first revival meeting we ever had in our neighborhood was held in our
own house. The house 16 x 24, two rooms down stairs and one room upstairs.
As many as thirty-eight slept in the house; the women and children slept
upstairs and the men downstairs. There was one bed in which the children
slept and the women slept on the floor as did the men downstairs. People
were saved, sanctified and healed. It was salvation the people wanted in
those days.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our first camp meeting was held in a tent a mile and three-quarters from
our home. Warning was sent around the neighborhood for the people to lock
their chicken coops as the camp meeting was being financed only by two poor
men, who were giving free meals to all who came.

We had a wonderful meeting; many souls were saved and sanctified and devils
were cast out, some were healed. We had some very straight preaching as we
had some very fiery ministers who preached; such as, Brother and Sister C.
M. Tubbs and the Brothers Enos and Elihu Key, Brother Thomas Nelson and
Brother Tilgut.

The country around was stirred and people tried everything in their power
to hinder the meeting. Some business men of our own home town (Paynesville)
hired a team and borrowed a three or four-seated platform buggy from the
implement Company and placed a small cannon on it, drove to within a few
rods of the gospel tent and fired the cannon. The chairman of the town
Board came to me and wanted me to have them arrested. But I said, "No, let
them go."

The Lord "fined" them for us: As they were shooting off the cannon the
horses took fright and ran away into the timber, smashing up the new buggy
and tearing the harness to pieces. That saved us the court proceedings.

       *       *       *       *       *

The second camp meeting I was in, among the saints, was at Grand Forks, N.
Dakota. I was called there especially to preach in the Scandinavian
language as well as to help in the English preaching. When the first
evening service was over every one who had no place to sleep was to stand
outside the tabernacle near the big oak tree. One by one they got their
place to sleep. Finally I was left standing all alone in the dark. No one
offered me a place so I walked around among the trees. The camp meeting was
held in the timber along the banks of the Red River. While I was looking
for a place to lie down and rest, a man came running toward me and said,
"Don't you have a place to sleep?" I said, "No." He said, "You go to that
covered wagon over there and you'll find a place." As I approached the
wagon I saw six feet sticking out of the wagon, almost to the knees, so
there was no room for me.

I went back to the tent and shoved three or four planks together. These
planks had been used for seats. I put my suit case down for a pillow and
there I slept that night and during the rest of the meeting. When I would
get a little cold in the night I would get up and walk around a bit. A few
days later Oluf Erickson from Belgrade, Minnesota, who had gotten saved in
one of our meetings at home, asked me where I was sleeping. I said, "I have
a good place; another brother and I have a very fine tent with a bed in
it." "Oh yes," he said, "I know where you sleep; you sleep in the
minister's tent." "Yes," I said, "it's a minister's tent all right." But he
didn't give up until he found out the truth. He then said, "My, my, had no
one offered you a place to stay, and you are one of the evangelists?" I
said, "Yes." Then he said, "Well then, I'll come and sleep with you."

In those days it was: "All for Jesus and souls" and not for personal
comfort. We had a wonderful time together in the Lord. We also had a
wonderful camp meeting in seeing scores of souls saved and many miracles
done by the power of God.

Sister Renbeck, who had been bed fast for a long time, was carried in on a
cot and the prayer of faith was offered. Brother E. E. Byrum took her by
the hand and commanded her to arise in the name of Jesus. She arose and
went running around the tent lifting her hands and praising God. I heard
three men talking about it afterwards saying, "I wonder if that is real!
She surely looked poorly and puny, but you can't tell." Another man said,
"I wish my wife had been here; if it had been her we would have known it
was real." (She had been sick for a long while.)

       *       *       *       *       *

While my first meeting in Grand Forks was in progress, Brother Renbeck came
to me with the request that I would pray over a matter he had on his mind,
and that was that after the meeting was over he and I might go together to
hold a meeting at Whitten, Minnesota. I promised to pray over the matter
and that at the close of the meeting we would talk it over together. And,
accordingly, at the end of the meeting I prayed earnestly to get the mind
of the Lord as to where He wanted me to go.

When Brother Renbeck asked me what I had gotten from the Lord in regard to
the matter I replied by asking whether there were places in North Dakota by
names of Kelly, Grafton and St. Thomas, "Yes," he said, "there are; what of
it?" I replied that the Lord told me I was going to those places. He told
me that just before the meeting here, he had come from those very places
and there would be no use in going. I told him I was going to follow the
leading of the Lord and go, that he could stay here until I came back when
we would go to Whitten. But he declared if I was going he would go, too.

That trip proved to be the beginning of a wonderful work of God. Many
people were saved and many healings and miracles were wrought by the Spirit
of the Lord. In our visiting, the first house we entered at eleven a.m. an
elderly sister, ninety years of age, was sanctified and her husband,
ninety-three years old, was saved before twelve o'clock that day. This
shows that Brother Renbeck had laid a good foundation in these places,
preparing the way for the wonderful evangelistic trips that followed.
Neither of us ever went to Whitten.

While at Grafton, N. Dakota, Brother Renbeck and I had the experience of
holding a number of meetings in private homes. Interest increased and so
did our problems.

One day we wanted to telephone to Brother C. H. Tubbs at Grand Forks. We
went to a telephone office and were told that the cost of a message would
be twenty-five cents. We counted up our change and between us found that we
had only twenty-four cents, and so we had to leave the office disappointed.
Out on the side walk we stood facing each other, one of us said, "Wasn't it
too bad that we didn't have another penny?" I was standing with my back to
the street when I heard the Lord say to me, "Turn around, a penny is lying
right behind you." I turned around and there it was. I picked it up and we
sent the message, but Brother Tubbs was not at home.

There was an old retired Methodist minister attending our meetings right
along, declaring that divine healing died away with the departure of the
Apostles. The next Sunday seven women were saved, one of whom was a young
lady which had a stiff arm and crooked to such an extent that she could
neither dress nor undress herself without assistance. She was prayed for
and I asked her if she believed that the Lord would straighten out her arm
and she replied, "Yes," but did not move it. I happened to be looking at
the old minister and it seemed to be written all over his face: "Just as I
expected." At the beginning of the evening service we gave opportunity for
testimony and this young lady was all on fire to testify. She said, "I love
Jesus and Jesus loves me, and He makes my arm well;" and then she raised
her arm and waved it in all directions. The old minister bowed his head to
his knees.

The next day we were called to the home of a young lady who was suffering
from inflamatory rheumatism. Her entire body was stiff; her legs were
crossed below her knees and her arms were crossed over her breast and were
immovable, except that she could move her hands slightly and also her head
a little. The doctor was coming twice every day to give her a morphine
injection to ease the pain or she would make a disturbance by screaming at
the top of her voice.

When we first visited her, Brother Renbeck began immediately to talk to her
about salvation, for he thought that she must be saved before she could be
healed. However, we did not seem able to get any spiritual help to her at
all. So the next day before going to see her I asked Brother Renbeck
whether people have to be saved before they can be healed. He said that he
did not know. I then mentioned the fact of the ten lepers being healed and
that only one returned to give glory to God; and, moreover, that I believe
if we would pray for her the Lord would heal her and that God would get
glory out of it some way. "All right," he said, "you talk to her today."

We went in to her room and I said to her "Martha, do you believe that God
will heal you if we pray for you?" "Yes, the Lord healed Miss B. all
right." I then said, "Are you willing to throw out all your medicine
bottles and never go back to them again, even if the pain should return?"
She called her father in and asked him to take the medicine bottles and
smash them up. He went out and brought in a bushel basket and gathering
them up, took them out and smashed them into pieces. Then we anointed her
and prayed and while we were still praying she stretched out her hands and
her feet. When we removed our hands she wrapped the sheet around her,
jumped out of bed and ran around the house.

About six or eight months later while I was holding a meeting in Grand
Forks, one evening a young lady of about nineteen years of age came into
the service carrying her younger sister, nine years of age, who could not
walk. I went right to them and asked where they were from and why they had
come. The young lady told me they were from Grafton. She said, "I have not
been well for a year, and about two years ago my sister, with some other
children, was playing on the roof of an old shed and she either jumped or
fell down, her heel struck a stone and her limb became withered. We have
been to many specialists and none of them could help her. We heard that the
two healers that healed Martha Gaulbright were here and we have come to be
healed." I told her those men were no healers; that it was the Lord who
healed Martha. "Well," she said, "the ministers, then." I asked her if Miss
Gaulbright was still well? She answered, "She has never been sick since."

I told the young lady that only one of the ministers was here. The next day
Brother Emil Krutz came and we prayed for a large number of the sick, (39
in all), however, before we got through praying the two girls were gone. On
inquiring whether anyone knew where they had gone, I was told they had
either gone to the Hotel or to the Great Northern Railway station. I rushed
to the station two blocks away as I was anxious to find out whether they
had been healed, but I knew neither their names nor their address. When I
got to the station I inquired about the train to Grafton to find the train
was just pulling out.

The next summer on coming to the North Dakota State Camp meeting at Grand
Forks, I was two days late having come from the South Dakota camp meeting,
a little girl came running toward me as I was coming on the grounds,
saying, "Praise the Lord, Brother Susag." I said, "Amen, who are you?" She
said, "Don't you know me?" I said, "No, I see so many little girls and they
all look alike to me." She said, "I'm the little girl who came to Grand
Forks last winter and could not walk." I set my grip down and wept for joy,
and said, "Please tell me, sister, when you commenced to walk." She
replied, "My sister carried me to the train in Grand Forks; when we got to
Grafton my short, dried up leg was just as long and as natural as the other
one, so I walked home. Now mother is here at the meeting to get saved."

       *       *       *       *       *

At one of the camp meetings at St. Paul Park as I was coming back from the
baptismal service that we had in the river, I saw a young lady across the
street walking with crutches, one limb seemingly, just hanging helpless. I
felt sorry for her and went across the street and spoke to her. I asked her
if she had been hurt or had had an accident.

She did not answer me at all. I said, "Do not be afraid of me. I am a
minister; I am sorry for you and am anxious to know what your trouble is."
Then she said, "I have tuberculosis of the leg, there are seven holes in
it. I am just out of the Sanitarium at Saint Paul. They tell me that they
can do nothing for me." I said, "Too bad, I am sorry for you." Then I asked
her if she were a Christian; she broke down and wept. "Indeed, too bad," I
said, "A young lady in that condition and yet not a Christian." Then I
said, looking toward the camp grounds, "Do you see that tent over there? We
are holding services in it and if you will come to the service tonight and
get saved, God will heal you." She then left me and I went over to the
tent.

She came to the service that night and when the altar call was given she
went forward to seek salvation. When the altar service was over she was
still there on her knees. Brother C. H. Tubbs had been instructing her and
he said to her, "You can go and sit down now." But she pointed at me and
said, "That man said that if I got saved that I could get healed too."
Brother Tubbs said "alright" and went over to her with his oil vial and let
a drop fall on her forehead. She dropped her crutches and ran down the
aisles before we could pray, but the strength of her limb did not seem to
hold out. So she came back to the altar and prayer was offered, but she was
unable to use her limb.

Her mother was there. They lived in St. Paul and as it was some little
distance to the station and the time was drawing near for the departure of
the train, the mother said to her, "Take your crutches and let us go." But
she answered, "Mother, I'll never touch those crutches anymore." "But if
you can not walk, what are you going to do?"

Two young ladies helped her to the station and her mother carried the
crutches. Two months after the camp meeting I went to Saint Paul Park and I
met this same young lady, Sister Davis, as she came walking along as spry
as any young lady. I said to her, "When did you get your healing and start
walking?" She answered, "When we got to Saint Paul I got up and walked home
and was well!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Brother Emil Krutz and I were called to pray for Grandma Dahl who was ill
with double pneumonia. There were eight saints in the room and I heard one
ask another, "How old is Grandma?" The reply was, "Seventy-seven years
old," to which someone answered, "If I were that old I would not care to
get well."

We anointed and prayed for the sick woman but she showed no signs of life
or of getting any help. Brother Krutz looked at me and said, "The Lord
heard prayer." We went into another room and closed the door, Brother Krutz
said to me, "You go in there and send the folks out." We went back into the
room and asked visitors to kindly step out of the room; then locking the
door we again offered prayer. When we took our hands off this time the
sister sat up in bed and said, "Call my daughter, Mrs. Umden, and tell her
to bring me something to eat, I am so hungry." She was perfectly well and
lived several years longer.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a year or more I was having pain in my liver. I was prayed for a number
of times but did not even get relief and my body kept swelling up until I
could hardly wear my clothes. The Ministry advised me to go to a specialist
and find out what the trouble was and said then if I were healed God would
get more glory out of it, so I went to the specialist.

The doctor said that it was not cancer, but worse still, it was enlargement
of the spleen. He then said, "Dear man, there is no remedy for your
trouble; I can only make a harness that you can wear suspended from your
shoulders to help support your stomach, which will be some relief."

When I got home I told wife what the doctor had said and that I had made my
last trip in the ministry. She looked at me and said, "No, you are not
going to die." "Well," I replied, "I have been in this world fifty-six
years and that is a long time, so if the Lord sees fit to take me I will be
satisfied." She went out of the room and when she returned I saw she was
crying and lifting her right hand' she said, "You are not going to die."
"How do you know," I asked? "The saints will not give you up," she
answered.

A short while after this I was thinking that I would like to go to
Arlington, South Dakota, now called Badger, before I died. I had raised up
that congregation and they were very kind and dear to me. So I dropped
Brother Gesselbeck a card asking him to meet me at Estaline on a certain
date. Estaline was thirteen miles from Brother Gesselbeck's home. I arrived
at Estaline about 6 a.m., but there was no Brother Gesselbeck there! I
walked to a restaurant across the street and asked if any one knew Brother
Gesselbeck. Yes, they knew him and why was I inquiring? I then told them my
plight, that I was expecting him to be there to meet me. "Well," the man
said, "Mr. Gesselbeck is an honest man and if he had gotten your card he
would have been here, but yesterday was Washington's birthday, a holiday,
and he will not get your card until after five o'clock this evening!"

Well, here I was in a bad predicament--no money to go back home, no
telephone out there and so ill that I could not walk over a block or two at
one time. I was wearing my heavy winter clothes beside a heavy dog-skin fur
coat. I left my grip at the restaurant and, walking across the street,
found a long pole and started out on a thirteen mile hike. I would walk a
little and then sit down, and even lie down a while and rest in the snow,
and wept and prayed.

It was about five-thirty in the afternoon when I reached Brother
Geselbeck's pasture. It had taken me over eleven hour to walk the thirteen
miles. I was praying and weeping when I saw Brother Geselbeck coming from
his mail box with my card. He looked up and saw me, then lifting his hand
with the card in it, shook his head as if to say, "Poor Brother Susag!" In
order to prove to him that I was not dead yet, I threw away my pole and
jumped as high as I could and when I came down I was perfectly healed and
the swelling was all gone! I had thought that this would be my last trip to
Brother Geselbeck's, but I have made many since then.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once I was holding a meeting in North Dakota about ten miles in the country
north of Denbeg. The morning after the meeting closed, I woke up and lay
awake a while, then fell asleep again and I had a dream. I dreamed that I
saw Brother and Sister Gaulke driving on the highway south of Grand Forks.
Suddenly I saw the car go up in the air amidst a cloud of dust. Some folks
came and took Sister Gaulke out of the wreck and laid her on a blanket,
then a big black blanket came up between me and Brother Gaulke and the
wreck. When I awakened it was just fifteen minutes past seven. It made such
a vivid impression on me that I said to the family with whom I was staying,
"I will not leave here until the mail carrier comes; I expect a telegram."
I then told them my dream. They went with me to the mail box a mile from
the farm, and when the mail carrier came, he had brought me a message from
Mrs. Johnston telling what had happened at exactly the hour I was having my
dream, and asking me to come at once, so instead of going to my next
appointment I went at once to Grand Forks. On my arrival at the hospital
when Sister Gaulke saw me, she said, "Of all the angels in heaven, how did
you get here?" Sister Gaulke recovered but her husband lingered a few days
and then went home to glory.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had a dream one time while I was in Europe about my second son who was
working in a store in Superior, Wisconsin. I saw him go to a music store
and buy a special instrument. I woke up and couldn't go back to sleep
again, so got up and wrote to him, telling him that it was all right that
he bought the instrument, for I knew he was interested in music, but I
asked him to please not join an ungodly band as it might lead him into
temptation and into bad things which would "bring down his daddy's gray
hairs with sorrow to the grave."

He wrote back and thanked me for my letter but never mentioned a word about
the instrument. A few days later I came home from Europe and he had
resigned his position and gotten another one. His grips and trunk were
brought to the house. The family were anxious to see what he had in them
for he had been gone several years, so when they finally got to the big
trunk he lifted his hand and looking at his mother and the rest, said
hesitatingly, "I don't know, now...." His mother said, "Clarence, have you
got something in your trunk you do not want us to see?" He answered, "Daddy
knows." I said to him, "It is all right, Clarence; I am sure you obeyed my
admonition." He opened the trunk and there was a new violin! Then he told
us that when he was buying the violin he had intended to join an orchestra,
but when he got home from the store with his violin there was daddy's
letter. This fulfilled the Scripture that "Before they call I will answer
and while they are yet speaking I will hear."

       *       *       *       *       *

Another time before I went to Europe there was a little difference or
misunderstanding between two ministers, and some other ministers were
called on to help get the misunderstanding out of the way, which we did,
and everything was fine. They were good ministers and I loved them dearly.
They had both been a blessing to me. A year later I dreamed that the
brother mostly to blame got up early one morning and traveled three hundred
miles by train to see the other brother, and on seeing him treated him very
unmercifully. I dreamed this at two o'clock in the morning and could not
sleep any more, so got up and wrote this brother a kind letter telling him
of my dream and that the Lord had shown me that he was now greatly to
blame. I advised him that if the dream did not fit to destroy the letter
and to resist the enemy, and also that I was praying for him. On coming
back to America I learned that the dream did fit exactly as to the time,
both date and hour, in which his unmerciful action took place.

       *       *       *       *       *

While at the Anderson Camp Meeting one year, I dreamed that I saw the
ministers of the Church of God within a large enclosure, walls four square,
high and very beautiful. I was standing just inside the door, and on the
outside of the door stood one of the leading ministers among us. He had
gotten into some false doctrine, and he and his wife had built a little
shanty just outside the walls near the entrance, where they had twelve to
twenty ministers with them. The room was so small that they all had to
stand up.

The brother was talking to me trying his best to get me to join his group
and accept his doctrine. Then as I looked up the street, to my left as it
were, I saw a troop of cavalrymen mounted on white horses and dressed in
white uniforms, coming toward me. The troop was so long it seemed almost as
though there was no end to it. An officer, who was riding on the side, said
to me, "You stay in there with the rest of them and you will be protected."
Then they went to the shanty, a little hut made of unpainted lumber, and
smashed it up, scattering all the men inside. Then the clock struck two.

At the minister's meeting in the morning I asked if I might tell my dream
and, consent being granted, I told my dream. After I had told it, Bro. E.
E. Byrum got up and said, "I can interpret the brother's dream: We were
dealing with this brother and sister until two o'clock this morning, and we
found it to be an ungodly spirit and doctrine. I warn everyone to stay away
from it." The couple left us and never came back again.

Brother George W. Green and I once came from Pit, a little town in northern
Minnesota. On our way to Grand Forks we stopped at a town by the name of
Steiner, the home of the Koglin family. Quite a number of people were in
the house when we arrived. Grandma had had several strokes and the family
had been looking for my address, as they were expecting she would die and
wanted me to come and conduct her funeral services. We asked if we might
see her and they told us we could. We went into the bedroom and prayed for
her and the Lord healed her. If I remember correctly, she lived for over
ten years longer.

       *       *       *       *       *

At one time I was holding a meeting in a school house near Warren,
Minnesota. I was staying with a family named Keutzer, three miles from the
school house. In the afternoon previous to the evening service I was
praying, and wrestling with the devil. I asked the brother to start at
least an hour ahead of time to go to the meeting or else give me a lantern
and I would walk over. He asked me why, and I told him that the devil was
mad at me and will not let me ride--that when I get in the car, it will
stop.

The brother laughed at me and said, "I have a new Oldsmobile car," and they
would not let me have a lantern, but when they were ready to go I got the
lantern and told them to go on and tell the folks that I would be coming as
fast as I could. But the brother said, "Get in the car." I didn't want to,
but he took hold of me and almost forced me into the car. I got in and it
ran for a rod or two and then stopped. I jumped out of the car, took the
lantern and ran. After a while they caught up with me and stopped for me to
get in, saying that if I didn't, they would not go. This happened several
times. I would get in the car, it would run a rod or two and stop. Finally
I ran away from them and walked all the way to the school house and they
arrived after I got there. We were so late the people were just getting
ready to leave, as it was nearly nine o'clock.

We all went into the school house and went on with the service. We found
afterwards why the devil opposed me and did not want me there. There was a
bootlegger in the audience, who, when hearing me relate the experience, got
to thinking about it, became convicted and got saved. When we were leaving
to go home, Brother Keutzer asked me how I was going to get home; was I
going to walk? "No," I said, "I am going to ride and we will have no
trouble with the car." The devil had lost his hold on that bootlegger and
we had no further trouble with the car.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first time I was called to the Koglin home to hold services was in
winter and very cold. The address given me was Thief River Falls, but did
not state the number of the rural route, so there was no way for me to get
to their place that evening, and I had only enough money to take me to
Steiner, which was my destination. I asked at the depot whether I could
stay there, but they said "No," because they closed up over night. So I
left my grips there and went out to see what I could find, for there was no
one in the city that I knew. I saw a light in a chapel and went in,
thinking I might get an opportunity to testify, and that someone might
invite me home with them. I got a chance to testify all right, but no one
invited me to go home with them. I walked around the city and went into a
restaurant, sat down and got warmed up. But soon they closed.

I kept walking the streets to keep warm, and after a while a man caught up
with me and said, "Well, some one else is out walking in this cold weather,
twenty below." I agreed that it was surely cold. He asked me whether I
lived there, and I told him that my home was in Paynesville,

Minnesota. Then he said, "What is your name?" I told him, "S. O. Susag,"
and he then replied, "I used to know a man by that name who was in the
grocery business on Franklin and Minnehaha in Minneapolis." He turned to me
in the darkness and said, "I am Erickson of the firm of Rudda and Erickson
that used to be on Cedar Avenue in Minneapolis."

It turned out that he was a good friend of years ago, so he soon found out
why I was there. He asked me whether I had a hotel room yet. I told him,
no, that I was just looking around. Nevertheless, he offered me money to
pay for a room at the hotel. I refused it, but he insisted, saying, "If our
spare room was empty I would have taken you to my home, but we have friends
from North Dakota visiting us today, but you come to our home for breakfast
in the morning before you take the train." He never knew what a blessing he
was to me in the hour of my great need.

       *       *       *       *       *

SPEAKING IN TONGUES

At the State Camp meeting at Wilmar, Minnesota, I was asked to preach in
Scandinavian as there were some sixty elderly Scandivanian people who did
not understand the English language. I agreed to do so. As soon as I had
begun to preach the whole camp came in to listen. When the service was over
people asked why Brother Susag did not preach in Scandinavian in the
afternoon. Brother Ring told them that he had done so. However, they
insisted that I had spoken in English, since the whole camp, they said, had
come in and heard me preach in English. The fact is: I had spoken in
Scandinavian and the Lord interpreted it to them in English.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FUR COAT

At one time I was in great need of a fur coat, for the winters are very
cold in the northern states and Canada. So I set my heart on having a
fur-lined coat listed in the Sears Roebuck catalogue for $57.25. I asked
the Lord if I could have it and He answered, "Yes."

Shortly after this matter had been decided, a brother came to me and said,
"You need a fur coat and here are ten dollars to start toward it." Others
wrote sending money specifying that it was for a fur coat until I had
$36.50. Then a whole year passed and nothing came. The following November I
went to Rice Lake, Wisconsin to hold a meeting for Bro. E. G. Ahrendt. It
was very cold and there was lots of snow. On my arrival Brother Ahrendt
said to me, "Haven't you got a fur coat, Brother Susag?" I answered, "Yes."
He said, "Why don't you wear it this cold weather?" I answered, "I have it
by faith--have had it for a year and a half and have $36.50 laid by for it
that was given me towards buying a coat, but the price is $57.25." Then
Bro. Ahrendt went upstairs and was gone for a long time. When he came down
again, he said, "Brother Susag, before you leave here you are going to have
a fur coat." I said, "Is that faith or presumption?" To which he replied,
"If it isn't faith, I have never had faith." I said, "Praise the Lord; good
for you and good for me."

When the meeting was over Brother Ahrendt said, "Did you get the fur coat?"
I told him, "No." He then asked me where I was going tomorrow night from
here, and I told him that I was going ten miles out in the country to a
little meeting house for a service. He said, "I'll go with you."

After the service that night Brother Ahrendt again asked, "Did you get your
fur coat?" I said, "No." Upon, which he inquired where I was going that
evening. I told him that a family had invited me to their home and had
offered to take me to another railroad over which I would be able to reach
home sooner. Brother Ahrendt declared that he was going with me until he
saw my last foot safe in the train, "and," he said, "if you haven't got the
fur coat by then I'll not know what to think of myself or my faith." (By
way of explanation would say here, that the offerings I received went for
my general expenses; the money for my fur coat was to come from other
sources. The Lord had promised me the fur coat.)

That night I had a dream. I woke up about three o'clock in the morning, and
as I stirred a little, Brother Ahrendt whispered, "Are you awake?" I told
him I was. "Did you have a dream?" he asked. I answered, "Yes, a woman came
to me and gave me four bills!" "The fur coat! the fur coat!" he excitedly
said. We got so happy that we couldn't sleep any more and we shouted,
"Glory to God!" We made so much noise that we disturbed the folks down
stairs, and when we went down they said, "What is the matter with you
brethren making so much noise?" We told them we were so happy that we could
not help ourselves.

After a while the sister asked me to come out into the kitchen. She gave me
a chair and I sat down. She at once began to unburden her mind and said,
"Did you understand when I spoke to you at the campmeeting at St. Paul Park
three or four years ago that I was intending to give you some money for
your trip to Europe?" I answered, "Yes, I thought so." "But" she said, "you
said you had the fare." "Yes," I answered, "I had it by faith." Then in
surprise, she asked, "But didn't you have the money in your possession?
Weren't you then already on your way to Europe?"

"I was on my way to Europe," I answered, "but did not have all my
fare--only by faith."

She then told me that she had been sick for about two years. She said, "I
have been prayed for often, and have received some help, yet I gradually
got worse. Finally," she said, "I got desperate about it and said to the
Lord, 'What's the matter with me anyway; I cannot get well and I cannot
die?' Then the Lord said, 'Do you know the Brother you intended to give
some money before he went to Europe?' I said, 'Yes, in a way, but he's back
now.' The Lord said, 'That does not make any difference; how much was it?'
'Fifteen dollars,' was my answer. 'That's right,' the Lord said, 'but there
is ten dollars interest on that now.' 'I'll give it to him the first time I
see him,' I said. Then I was prayed for and healed at once." Having said
this, she handed me the money, "Here it is," and it was four bills! I took
it and commenced to shout the glory of God. In came Bro. Ahrendt and I held
up the four bills for him to see. He shouted, "The fur coat, the fur coat!"
Then I related my experience to her of my praying for a fur coat and said
to her, "If you had given me the money when I came back from Europe I would
not have had to suffer cold for about a winter and a half." The sister was
healed and blessed, and I was kept warm for many a day inside that fur
coat.

       *       *       *       *       *

A number of years ago I was called to go to Wales, North Dakota, to hold a
meeting at Brother Paul Garber's home, which was a Great Northern box car.
The weather was very cold, the temperature being twenty degrees below zero.
After the first evening service a woman came to me and said, "I am the
sheriff's wife and I want you to come home with me. I cannot allow you to
stay here." I went with her and the next day we got the Methodist church in
which to hold our services.

More than half the people who attended the services were Catholics. On the
last evening as I was going out of the church, the butcher of the town
shook hands with me, putting three silver dollars in my hand and said, "You
come back soon."

I surely had a fine stay with the sheriff and his wife, and the day I was
leaving the sheriff was at the depot with a delegation representing the
business men of the town saying to me, "We wish you would come back soon."
I said to them, "What's your reason for wanting me to come back soon, since
the butcher was the only business man of the city who came out to my
meeting?" "When you come back," they said, "we will all come to your
services, because many people have come and paid up their old bills and
made good their outlawed notes since you have been here." I am sorry that I
never had the opportunity of going back there again.

A number of the saints at Wales moved to Grand Forks, N. Dakota, and were a
great blessing and an asset to that congregation. Later on, sixty-three
adults and children moved to Benton Harbor, Michigan, and I understand that
an English and a German congregation was started at that place through
their efforts.

       *       *       *       *       *

One time Brother Renbeck and I went to Bro. Bahr's to pray for Willie, a
son of theirs, who had the scarlet fever, and after we had prayed I felt
that I should stay a little longer. I lay down on the lounge and fell
asleep. All of a sudden Sister Bahr called and said, "I believe Willie is
dying," and when I laid my hands on him he was so hot that the heat seemed
to go right through my whole body. I kept on rebuking the sickness and the
devil, but it didn't seem to help any.

I prayed, "Lord, heal this boy to Thy glory. If no other way, I am willing
to take this sickness upon myself, just so you get the glory of healing the
boy." In a few minutes he was sound asleep, perfectly healed! But I felt as
though I was sore all over my body. When I went out into the cold winter
weather the cold would smart what seemed to be sores on my face, and when I
got to the chapel to preach I felt ashamed to get up before the audience
because I thought the folks would see the sores on my face, although I knew
it was an imposition of the devil. When I got into the pulpit I told the
people how I felt, and asked them to pray, and immediately the feeling left
me. I learned the lesson not to be willing to take a devil's sickness in
order to get people healed.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 1942 as I was coming from the West coast to Wolf Point, Montana, I took
the bus thirty-eight miles from there where another road turns off to go to
my son's place, a mile and a half off the highway. It had snowed quite a
bit and was somewhat stormy, but I thought I could make it. However, I had
not walked far until I had to throw my grips into the ditch and tried to go
on, but the snow was so deep I could not make it walking. My only way was
to lie down in the road and roll. I kept that up quite a while, and when I
got tired I would just lie and rest. After I had gotten a quarter of a mile
I was so worn out that it seemed as though there was no hope for me. I
rolled over to a fence post and stood up and tied myself to it, thinking
that if I did freeze to death folks would be able to find my body. After I
had been standing quite a while praying, I felt as though I was getting my
strength again, so I loosened myself from the fence post and started to
roll again and then tried to walk on my knees, but that would not do. The
snow was too loose--I went down. Toward evening I had reached the highest
spot from which I could be seen from my son's house. He was coming from the
barn and happened to see me, and then quickly came to meet me and very soon
led me safely to his home. So the Lord had mercy on me once more.

       *       *       *       *       *

One time I received a telegram from Brother Fortner of Brookings, S. Dakota
asking me to come at once. I arrived there late in the evening and found
that their son, Clarence, was seriously ill at the hospital in Huron,
eighty-three miles from Brookings. The folks thought we had better wait
until the following morning to go. Brother and Sister Fortner, another son,
and the pastor all went with me in my car.

Clarence had been saved but had gotten away from the Lord. On our trip from
Brookings, on the highway we drove eighty miles an hour and the pastor
said, "Brother Susag, you do not need to go so fast." I thought that I
would slacken down but the car was still going eighty miles; the pastor
called again, "Brother Susag, you need not go so fast." I said nothing but
felt rather sad that I was hurting the pastor's feelings, but still I was
going eighty. Finally the pastor spoke sternly, "Brother Susag, you don't
need to go that fast." I felt sad, but said nothing, yet in spite of myself
and the pastor, I was still going eighty miles an hour.

On arriving at the hospital the young man said, "I have gotten back to the
Lord and this morning at three o'clock He said to me that at nine o'clock
Brother Susag would be here to take you home." He had the clock standing on
the chair and it was just nine o'clock when we arrived! The pastor walked
out. (This occurred before the laws governing speed went into effect, but
law or no law, the Lord wanted me there at nine o'clock.)

       *       *       *       *       *

GETTING IN TROUBLE FOR OBEYING THE WORD OF GOD

A brother minister got the idea in his mind that wife and I were covetous,
but we did not at the time realize to what extent it had affected him.
Previous to his leaving the state he brought the matter before the body of
ministers so as to have them deal with us. The ministers told him that they
had not seen any indication of coveteousness in Brother and Sister Susag,
and then asked him what proof he had for thinking so. He answered, "They do
not give enough." (Our custom was never to tell anyone what we gave,
because the Bible says, "Let not your left hand know what your right hand
doeth.")

We were called before the Ministerial Assembly and the matter was taken up.
The brethren said that they had not seen any indication of coveteousness in
us and all the brother had against us was that we hadn't been giving
enough, and, said they, "After thinking it over, neither did we know what
you were giving." To which I replied, "If I'm coveteous, I'm the one that
ought to know it, so won't you brethren, please help me out?" This is what
they suggested: "You tell us how much you give and then we can compare." I
answered, "If I tell you how much I give, won't it be fair for you folks to
tell how much you give?" Whereupon the chairman replied, "Yes, that will be
fair; I know you cannot give as much as me since my income is larger; but
you and Bro. A---- should give about the same amount." So they all told
what they had given for the year. I then added the amounts and found the
total, and getting my grip, took out of it receipts for what wife and I had
given and asked the brethren to add them up. Then I requested them to add
up what the seven ministers had given and, to the great surprise of all of
us, they found that wife and I had given $22.50 more than all seven
ministers together. This was one of the "all things" in my life.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I was the evangelist at a certain State Camp meeting, a lady, who had
only been to our services that morning, got saved at that Sunday morning
service, and having to leave the meeting right away, wanted to be baptized
before going. Three sisters came to me in protest, and said, "You are not
going to baptize that woman with all those rings on, are you?" I answered,
"Please leave that sister and her rings alone." To which they replied, "If
you baptize that woman with all those rings, we will never have confidence
in you again." I answered, "I'm very sorry, but let's pray about it; you go
over in the timber in that direction and I will go over in this direction
in the timber and pray and prepare for the baptizing."

As the woman, who was to be baptized, stepped into the water, she
exclaimed, "Oh!" as if something was hurting her, then stripping the rings
off her fingers she threw them into the sand, never more to put them back
on her fingers.

In response to an urgent call to come to St. Paul Park I forthwith prepared
to go, although not knowing the reason I was summoned. When ready to start,
at the request of my wife, I consented to take along a rag carpet which she
had made for the Old People's Home out there. I put the carpet into a sack
and checked it to St. Paul, rechecking it from there to St. Paul Park. The
baggage man asked me whether I had a trunk or a grip. I informed him I had
a sack. In answer to his inquiry as to what was in it, I told him,
"Clothing." While riding on the next train the devil said to me, "You're a
pretty nice preacher; you lied to the baggage man; instead of telling him
clothing was in the sack you should have said it was cloth or rag carpet."
"Well," I said, "I can make that right on my return trip." On my arrival at
the Park I found that Brother Krutz had lost his mind. When I met him he
did not know me. I went to praying and tried to talk to him and after a
while he knew me. He said, "Brother Susag, Brother Susag, you are pure
gold, pure gold." Then looking at me intently, pointing his finger at my
heart, he said, "What do I see, a tiny spot?" No--doubt the enemy wanted to
hinder me in praying for him. The incident bothered me a little bit, so I
went out into the woods and the Lord showed me that it was just an
imposition of the devil to bother me. Brother Krutz was prayed for and the
Lord healed him and the next Sunday he preached.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRAYING FOR EGGS AND KEROSENE

Brother Ahrendt and I were holding some meetings in the locality between
Bertha and Hewitt, Minnesota. We were staying in a log house--just the two
of us. We ran out of kerosene, and were also out of money. Brother A----
took the can and started to walk to Hewitt--a distance of six or seven
miles--in the snow, hoping to meet some brethren who would ask him why he
was carrying that can--but he met no one. He went to the post office, got
the mail and concluded that he would have to go back without the kerosene;
however, on opening one of the letters a dime dropped out. He immediately
went to the store, bought the kerosene and returned home.

One evening Brother Ahrendt said to me, "Brother Susag, I'm hungry for some
eggs; let's pray the Lord to send us some eggs." I replied, "How can we
expect to get eggs out here? I haven't seen any chickens around here, nor
in the bush where I have been." "Well," he said, "the Lord can bring them
from somewhere." That evening on our returning from service we found
something setting on the table covered with a newspaper. Brother Ahrendt
lifted the paper and found a tiny basket with five eggs in it! I said, "You
get three of them; you prayed and had faith while I only said, amen."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE READING ON THE SIGN POST CHANGED(?)

One day Bro. Ahrendt was out advertising the meeting. His last call was at
a schoolhouse, and from there he wanted to go to Bertha intending to take a
short cut through the brush to the highway. On coming to the highway, he
saw a signpost pointing in the direction he was going, which read, "One
mile to Hewitt." "Well," he thought, "what won't boys do changing the road
signs?" He walked on a few steps and saw a little town not far away, then
he realized that he had been going north while he thought he was going
south. The boys had not done any harm. He was mistaken in his sense of
direction.

One year Brother H. A. Sherwood was the evangelist at the Minnesota State
Camp meeting which was held at Saint Cloud. A large, roomy church building
was used for the services. The heat was record-breaking that year, and on
one of the hottest afternoons when Brother Sherwood was expecting to preach
as usual, the heat was so intense that he was physically unequal to the
occasion, and so it came about that at Brother Sherwood's urgent request,
Brother Allison F. Barnard (who, with Mrs. Barnard, was attending the
meeting) consented to preach in his stead that afternoon.

As Bro. Barnard came into the pulpit the Holy Spirit came upon him and upon
the whole congregation in such a way and in such measure as I had never
seen in any service. The heat in the chapel moderated at once, but outside
it was as hot as ever. It was as though the dear man was "out of the body"
and there was no trouble at the altar of prayer for seeking souls to
receive their heart's desire. They prayed through! So, again, the Scripture
was fulfilled, "Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith the
Lord of hosts."

       *       *       *       *       *

Speaking of Brother Sherwood, I loved that big little man in the Lord. On
one occasion he was the campmeeting evangelist at Morden, Manitoba, Canada.
The Lord used him mightily and when the meeting was over it was arranged
that wife and I should take him with us in our car to Grand Forks, North
Dakota. It started to rain and did really pour down. The first forty-five
miles the roads were nothing but black gumbo, and we used eight gallons of
gas driving that forty-five miles.

Brother Sherwood sat in the back seat, praying all the time that we would
not get stuck in the mud nor slide down into the ditch, and when we reached
the gravel road in North Dakota he said, "Brother Susag, will you stop
awhile so we can have a thanksgiving meeting right here, that the Lord has
heard prayer and protected our lives!" And that is what we did. Brother
Sherwood then said, "Bro. Susag, will you accept an admonition from a
younger man than yourself?" I answered, "Any time, Brother." And he said,
"This is the second worst automobile ride I ever had in all my life. Will
you promise me never again to start out driving when the road is as bad as
this?" My reply was: "Hello! Hello! Hello! Who is this? Brother Sherwood?
What do you want? Your wife sick? What, dying? Yes, I'm starting out right
away; I'm coming as fast as I can." Whereupon Brother Sherwood reached out
his hand and said, "Brother Susag, forgive me; how quick a man can be to
ask a promise of a man without thinking!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Once I was called to attend a meeting north of St. Cloud, Minnesota. There
were about thirteen ministers there. It was among a people who were called,
"The Free." Some three of their leading brethren had heard the Truth, and
they were the ones who had sent for me to come. The ministers and the
majority of the people were opposed to our teachings. When the offering was
divided among the ministry, those three brethren, who were on the board,
gave me $38.00.

But after I had taken the money I could not keep it on my person. I tried
my best, but even when in my overcoat pocket the money burned me, so I gave
it back to the brethren. A brother was going to drive me to the nearest
railroad station, and when I had taken my seat in the buggy ready to go to
town, these three brethren came and gave me fifteen dollars, saying, "We
have given much more in the offering than that," and they felt that the
fifteen dollars would not burn me. So I took the money and thanked them for
it and we went on our way to town. As I put the money in my pocket it still
burned me. I had to take it out again and lay it on the bottom of the
buggy. I told the driver to take it back and return it to the brethren. He
said, "They will not know what to do with it now that the meeting is
ended." I told him of a young minister who was sick and in need--to take
the money to him. I was needing the money badly, even the $38.00, as I was
without money to pay my way home.

As we crossed the railway track coming into the town near the depot, I
asked the man to let me off. As I was walking up to the station a man, whom
I did not know, came along beside me and pressed a five dollar bill into my
hand, and that was enough to take me home! A number of people took their
stand for the truth in that meeting.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LORD STILL HEARS PRAYER

At a Ministers' Meeting at Tulare, California, in 1945, while the noon
lunch was being served, I was sitting in the chapel with my head bowed on
the chair in front of me, praying for a certain amount of money, not
expecting any money at that meeting. Soon I felt the confidence that the
Lord had heard prayer and dismissed the matter from my mind. A few minutes
later a man came and sat down beside me and said, "Say, how do you get your
expenses; do you get a salary for traveling around this way?" I answered,
"No, I have no salary; I pay my expenses as the Lord puts it into the
hearts of the brethren to give to me." "Well," he said, "the Lord told me
to come over and give you this."

And he handed me the very amount I had been asking the Lord for!

       *       *       *       *       *

Brother Renbeck and I were holding a meeting out near Kellys, North Dakota.
After the service one afternoon I saw Brother Renbeck sitting in a corner
of the room weeping. I went over to him and asked him what was the trouble.
He said, "I am weeping because there were not more sinners in the meeting
to get saved, for if there had been more there, more would have been
saved." To which I replied, "Keep on weeping."

       *       *       *       *       *

MY FIRST EXPERIENCE IN DEALING WITH DEVIL POSSESSION

Another time we were holding meetings near and in Fosston, Minnesota. It
was said of us that "those preachers are of the devil." One evening a man
came to the meeting who had blood poisoning in one of his knees. In getting
to the meeting he used a long pole to help support himself. He wanted to
see those preachers who were "of the devil." When he arrived the room was
full and there being no chair for him to sit on, I gave him mine. When we
knelt down to pray I laid my hands on his knee and asked the Lord to heal
him and he was healed instantly.

A few nights later a man came to the service who was possessed with devils.
He was frothing at the mouth and acting like a madman. As I took hold of
him and laid my hands on him we almost wrestled. I commanded the devils to
come out of him, and I told the Lord I would never let Him go until He
delivered the man, and he was finally delivered by the Spirit of the Lord.
Although it was winter time I was as wet as though I had been dipped in the
river. While the struggle was going on all the people ran out of the room.
But the man was fully delivered and then he was saved.

       *       *       *       *       *

In another of our meetings a sister got saved and received light on
baptism. She had a little baby girl and her husband wanted to have the
child sprinkled, as that was his faith. The mother was to carry the baby
forward to receive this rite, but she objected and said, "No, I cannot do
that; but if you care to, you may do so, for she is as much yours as she is
mine." But the husband would not consent to do that. Well, she didn't know
what to do and went to Brother and Sister Anton Nelson for advice. Brother
Nelson said, "Let us ask the Lord about it." After they had prayed about
it, Brother Nelson said to the sister, "You go and carry the baby and we
will come along and pray for you and it will all come out all right."

At the Sunday service that the baby was to receive this rite, there were
seven children in all being subjected to this ceremony. The minister came
to this sister and said, "What is the name of the child?" The sister
answered, "Anna Marie." Then the minister said, "Anna Marie, do you forsake
the devil and all his works? Do you believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and
will you upon this faith be baptized?" (The mother was supposed to answer,
"Yes.") The sister answered nothing. So he read his ritual once more and
again no response. So after asking the question the third time, he said,
"Anna Marie, don't you answer?" At this, the father of the child called out
from the audience, and stamping his feet, said, "Come on, wife, that's
enough!"

You will remember reading at the beginning of this book I told of how my
mother, when I was a child, used to say to me, "Child, O child! You are
more trouble to me than all the other eight children put together!" And
yet, after I had been away in America for twenty-four years, when I went
back home, the very first day my mother had me sit facing her not more than
about four feet away and I listened to her telling me stories about the
most wonderful boy I had ever heard of. After about two hours of this
pleasant entertainment I smiled and said to her, "I have recollections of a
mother who used to weep over this same boy and say, 'O child, what shall I
do with you, you are more trouble to me than all the other eight children
together.'" "O Ja," she said, "but you were the best boy anyhow." I am
fairly good in arithmetic, but that is a problem I have not solved yet.

       *       *       *       *       *

PREACHING ON WORLDLINESS

While conducting a revival meeting at Grand Forks, North Dakota, I preached
one afternoon on the subject of worldliness. An attorney and his wife from
Langdon, North Dakota were staying in the city to attend the meeting. After
hearing this sermon the wife would not attend the services any more. At the
close of the Sunday afternoon service, two days later, the attorney came to
me and said, "The Holy Spirit was in the meeting this afternoon, wasn't
He?" I replied that He was, and he continued, "Every sinner present was
saved and something happened to me that I never remember having experienced
before. I cried like a child!"

I asked him why his wife had quit coming to the meeting. In reply he asked,
"Has Sister Hansen told you anything about us and our home?" I said, "Yes,
you once gave a minister twenty-two-hundred pieces of money, they were all
pennies. You did a good thing. This is all Sister Hansen ever told me about
you folks. I have heard nothing whatever about you."

He referred to the sermon on worldliness and said, "In your talk, you
practically, set a price on everything we have in the home, such as
curtains, carpets, furniture and the range; and you illustrated it this
way: 'Supposing a person could buy a suitable range for $42.50 but seeing
another, just the same kind only with nickel-plated trimmings, for $82.00
and he would choose the latter, wouldn't that be called the pride of the
eye?' And that is just the kind of range we have! and my wife could not see
it that way." She thought that Sister Hansen had told me and did not get
that out of her mind and was finally lost, the husband said.

I was preaching under the leading of the Holy Spirit and in what I said I
had no one in mind in using that illustration, but was simply trying to
show that such money could be used to better purpose and that sometimes
when folks yielded to the temptation to take the finer appearing article
they might be going beyond their means.

       *       *       *       *       *

One Sunday morning when I was pastor in Grand Forks and had just gotten
through preaching a man came rushing up to the pulpit and said in a rough
voice, "Who told you all about me?" I put out my hand and said, "My name is
Susag, what is your name?" He answered, "You stood before this audience
this morning and told them everything I have ever done!" I answered, "Dear
man, I don't know you, nor have I ever heard of you, what is your name?" He
looked around, then turned and out he ran! I never saw the man again.

Some years ago when in Norway, Morris Johnson and I held a meeting on a
large farm in Roleg in Numedahl. A large crowd was out at the first
service. We knelt down to pray and while we were praying I heard a great
commotion and when we rose from our knees we found that two thirds of the
people were gone. The foreman of the King's highway was in the audience and
he had said when he came out there, that those preachers were too fanatical
and if he had had his gun along and had shot them, he would have done the
Lord a good favor. However, I do not think that in his heart he meant as
bad as it sounded, for some time later he invited us to his home and
treated us with much courtesy and kindness. A number were saved and
baptized and quite a nice little congregation was raised up at that place.

       *       *       *       *       *

While we were at Sanes, Norway, Brother Morris Johnson was very sick and
one evening when we arrived at our stopping place he rolled onto the bed
with his clothes on, exhausted. He had been bleeding from the lungs and was
so weak that I could hardly get him home. We wept and prayed and finally I
said to him, "Morris, can't you get out of bed and kneel down with me and
pray?" "I might," he said, "but I think the bed is the best place for me."
However, he got down and said a few words and then rolled back into bed
again. He wasn't able to undress all night and I was afraid to go to sleep
for fear that he might leave me most any time during the night.

In the morning he seemed to be somewhat rested and I said to him, "Brother
Morris, we must try and get down to Sister Svenson's and get you some meat
broth." (Sister S. had a delicatessen store, and Morris hadn't eaten
anything for a couple of days) but he said, "I am unable to get down there
nor can I eat anything." "But," I said, "You've got to get down there even
if I have to carry you there on my back. You'll have to eat or I will be
having to bury you somewhere among the rocks in Norway." He got up and I
put my arm around him and, as luck would have it the road was down hill. We
had to stop and rest several times but we got there and the Lord must have
impressed Sister Svenson for she had some broth all ready made, but as she
was preparing to serve it the trouble in his lungs began again and he went
to the wash room. I fell prostrate on the floor crying to God for help for
him. Suddenly I realized I had received faith for him and called to him,
"Morris, the bleeding stops, now!" And it did. And from that time on he
recovered rapidly. (When I think of that dear brother and the plight he was
in, it brings tears to my eyes, even now).

       *       *       *       *       *

A WONDERFUL MEETING AT STAVANGER

A telephone call came to Sr. Svenson from two ministers at Stavanger
requesting the two American evangelists to come to them. We accepted the
call and Sr. Svenson's daughter and Bro. Fjield went with us. How the
ministers came to locate us at Sr. Svenson's I never knew, as neither of us
had ever been at Stavanger. The names of the two ministers calling us were
Johnson and Jornsen of the Christian church. We called first at Brother
Johnson's where we were warmly welcomed. They told us that they had heard
of us and had been earnestly praying for the Lord to send us to them and
that they were glad we were there: "You are here in answer to prayer," they
said, and then opening a door into another room informed us that there was
our bedroom. They showed the dining room, saying, as they did so, "Anytime
that you are hungry, come here and eat." To all this kind welcoming my
response was, "This really seems to me to be like too much of an open door
in face of the fact that you do not know us nor do we know you, perhaps we
had better go in and have prayer together and some consultation about the
matter. After we had had prayer they related the following:

"We belong to the Christian Church; formerly there were two hundred members
of us or more, but two years ago a 'Tongues speaker,' an ex-Baptist
minister, came to this city and as he seemed to be earnest and sincere we
were sorry he was not getting a single opportunity to speak, so decided to
give him the privilege to speak once in our chapel, and that was once too
often! At the meeting, I [Bro. Johnson] was sitting on the platform with
him, and Brother Jornsen, who weighed two hundred and sixty pounds, was
standing in the aisle holding on to the back of a chair on which a man was
sitting, as the chapel was packed. After the preacher had spoken ten or
fifteen mintues seven women were lying on the floor in a trance.

"We took a stand against the spirit that was working and, talk about power!
The chapel wall on one side cracked (the evidence of which was still to be
seen)." Brother Jornsen said, "I took a stand against it with all my soul
but nevertheless my feet went from under me and I was thrown to the floor
and my jaws were just jabbering." "This continued eight days and nights
until we finally got the victory over it and the preacher took over two
hundred of the congregation with him, leaving us but nine persons, we two
ministers make the total number eleven. And if you go with us to the
service tonight there will be thirteen of us and we will have services,
Sunday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, and" they added, "you must preach
only until nine o'clock, the services start at eight fifteen. Don't let any
women testify nor any pentecostals!

"Now," I said, "I will give you our proposition, we will go with you
tonight and tomorrow you can advertize in the two city daily papers that
two American evangelists are here to hold services every night including
Saturday and three services on Sunday, all next week until Friday and then
we will see how things go." "That will not do," they said, "No one will
come out Saturday night nor Monday or Tuesday nights." "Well," I said, "you
can let us have the key and if no one comes Brother Johnson and I can go
inside and have prayer. Upon this condition we can stay, and if not, we
will take our grips and go."

To which they replied, "You can't go, for the Lord has shown us that you
are to hold a meeting for us." The next night there were about two hundred
in the congregation and some ten minutes before nine o'clock eight persons
started to get ready to leave; I was still speaking, so paused and said,
"Just a minute, please: We have just come from Denmark where we preached as
long as the Lord would lead, until nine or ten o'clock. Now if you have to
go home you are welcome to go, but if it's simply your custom to leave a
meeting at a certain time whether or not the service is over, we are going
to pray the Lord to break up such a custom." Six of the persons sat down
again and two left. Saturday night the chapel was full and Sunday night
quite a number were saved. The meeting continued almost four weeks and
souls were getting saved right along.

One day we had a baptizing service between two boat houses in the North sea
and after I had baptized all the candidates, a fisherman, who owned one of
the boat houses, came out and asked me whether I would not baptize him. On
my inquiry as to his being saved, he told me this: "I was saved three years
ago but have never before met folks with whom I believed the Lord was
working, but today as I witnessed this service I was convinced that the
Holy Ghost was with you folks." I baptized him and never saw him again.
After that we were not allowed to baptize from the shore but had to take
the folks out in a boat and baptize them from a rock in the North sea.

Following that incident we were invited to a sea Captain's home, to be
there at 9:30, the next morning. The house was the most finely finished
house I had even been in. When we arrived in the morning we found it was
full of people of the upper class, the men with their silk hats and the
women equally distinctive in their dress. Some of the company were saved
and some fifteen more were saved that morning.

The lady of the house and her six sisters had a brother who was an old sea
captain and was sick. We were told he was an infidel and would have nothing
to do with preachers, that if any happened to come into his house he
ordered them out. His seven sisters were praying earnestly for him and they
felt that we could be a help to him. Their plan was to set a day when they
would all go and visit him and if the weather was fine we were to come by
and they would be on the porch talking to him. We were to pass along on the
other side of the street and when they saw us they were to call "Good
morning" and invite us over and introduce us to their brother, he was not
to know that we were preachers. The plan was successful and after talking
awhile Captain Parsons invited us into the house.

On coming into the room we noticed that the walls were hung with pictures
of ships, thirty-eight steamers. He said he had been seaman on each one of
them and captain on several. So he took us for a trip around the world.

Finally he came to the last one, a very large ship, but it looked, like a
rusty, broken-to-pieces tin can, its masts, smokestacks and bridges had
evidently been blown or swept off. We were awed by the sight and said,
"This looks bad." "Yes," he said, "that was the trying hour of my life, it
was in a typhoon off the coast of Sidney, Australia. This is how it looked
when we were towed in." Then I looked at my watch and found we had been
talking for two hours and feeling that it was time for us to leave I said
to him, "We are two ministers and generally when we make a call, before
leaving we sing, read some Scripture and have prayer. Would you grant us
that privilege here?" He said, "I see no reason why you should not do so."

We, accordingly, sang, read a Scripture lesson and had prayer, after which
we said to our host, "We have certainly had a pleasant visit and enjoyed
the trip around the world with you immensely, and now there is one sailing
trip left for you to take. For all these other trips no doubt you made
suitable preparation. What about this one; are you ready to meet your Maker
in peace?" "No," he said, "The Lord doesn't have such bad men as me." But
we told him that was just the kind He came to save. He said, "Boys, boys,
you don't know what bad men seamen are." We tried to talk to him, but to no
avail. So we thanked him and said Goodbye. As we left he said, "Boys, boys,
come back soon."

The next day we heard that he was poorly and the Board of Health had
ordered that no one shake hands with him as his case was not yet diagnosed.
We continued to visit him, instructing him and praying with him. On one of
these occasions on leaving him we both made a good mistake. We broke down
and wept. Morris speaking to me in English said, "I love this man's soul
like my own father's and wouldn't lay a straw in the way of his getting
saved; I would like to shake his hand, but may not." "As far as I am
concerned," I said, "I wouldn't be afraid to take his hand in both mine,
but for the sake of the public we cannot do it; but he is a man of
understanding, we will go and explain to him and I'm sure it will be all
right." Later, as we were leaving, he said, "Be sure to come back soon."

The next day I was called out to an Island and Brother Morris went over
alone to see him. He was up and apparently pretty well and he said to
Morris, "Young man, you had better speak English. I understand your English
better than I do your Norwegian." Now you can see that the mistake the day
before was a good one. That day he got gloriously saved and the next day he
was up and around happy and praising the Lord, at two o'clock in the
afternoon he lay down to rest and went home to glory. On account of his
salvation we were asked to speak to the students at the mission college.

Here at Stavanger a good congregation was raised up and Brother Mortensen
became pastor, he was a tailor by trade and also was the owner of a fine
clothing store. They got the chapel the revival was held in, in 1911, in
1922. I went through and they expected me to remain for a three weeks
meeting to preach on Church of God doctrine. I was supposed to be there on
Sunday, but did not arrive until Monday. They had advertised for three
services for Sunday, and between fifteen hundred and two thousand were
present for each service. I was unable to remain for the three weeks
meeting as I was traveling through on a special mission for the Missionary
Board and the boat left the next morning. Speaking of the truth, this would
have been the greatest opportunity that Norway will have for years to come
and perhaps ever.

Brother Mortensen said, "O how sad--this all happened because of a crooked
preacher that Brother Susag had to take back to America." Brother Mortensen
raised up a number of congregations on the West coast, and in 1937 the old
chapel at Stavanger was razed and a new and larger chapel was erected in
its place.

       *       *       *       *       *

MY WIFE HEALED OF CANCER

Some years ago my wife had a sore on her left cheek. Dr. Morgan examined it
and pronounced it cancer. She was prayed for and the third day after there
was no sign of cancer.

A little later a growth started on her right side just above the hip. It
grew until it was twenty-two inches long, sixteen inches by the body and
fourteen inches around at the end of it. It finally developed into cancer.
She was prayed for often but seemingly was not helped, the odor from it was
horrible. We went to the Anderson Camp meeting. On the day especially set
apart for the healing of the sick, and seats at that particular meeting
were so arranged that for each sick person there were three preachers to
pray for him or her. My wife came up and sat down on the chair next to the
one where I was offering prayer, and after prayer had been offered for her,
I heard one of the ministers say to her, "Sister Susag, do you believe the
Lord heals you?" She answered, "By faith I am healed." And the minister
said, "Yes, by faith, is right." From that time the cancer began to fall to
pieces.

On the way home I asked her what it was that gave her the faith for
healing. She said, "I don't know; when I went onto the platform I wanted
Brother and Sister Byrutn to pray for me, and could have gotten on their
chair, but there came a young lady who looked as though she might be in the
last stages of tuberculosis, to such an extent was she affected that she
had to be supported by a sister, one on each side of her when she attempted
to walk, and I saw she was in greater need than I was, and, too, she was a
young woman. I was willing for anyone to pray for me, and if I were healed
or not it would be all right." I replied, "that is where you gained the
victory."

This happened in the latter part of June and around the first of October
there was nothing left but a red spot about the size of a dollar to show
where the cancer had been. Just before we went to Anderson, a neighbor lady
wanted to see the cancer and the sight of it made her so sick she was in
bed for two days. And through it all my wife never once complained.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the last evening of a meeting I was holding in Whittier, California, a
man came to me telling me of a sick lady who wanted me to come and pray for
her. I consented to do so but told the man I must go quickly as a brother
was coming very soon to take me to Los Angeles. On arriving at the bedside
of the sick woman I asked her what her trouble was. She told me she had a
cancer on her left breast and side, and that having to lie on the one side
all the time she became very sick and sore. I prayed the prayer of faith
for her and left immediately.

One year later I received a letter from her. She wrote, "It is just a year
ago tonight since I sent for you to come and pray for me. As you prayed for
me it was as though an electric shock went through me and after you left I
turned over on my left side and went to sleep and slept all night and in
the morning when I woke up I was perfectly healed. I have waited a year
before writing, to see whether any symptoms returned, but none ever did."

In one of my meetings while I was pastor at Grand Forks I felt impressed to
speak to a young man, Tom Perkins, a World War I veteran. I went down into
the audience to speak to him, and told him he ought to seek the Lord that
night as something was going to happen. He said, "Do you think so?" I said,
"No, I don't think so, I know so." But he said, "Not tonight." That was
Sunday, and on Wednesday afternoon as I was going down DeMeres Avenue he
came out of a clothing store with a friend of his, I said, "How do you do"
to him and passed on in front of him, but as I was passing him the Lord
said to me, "Go back and speak to Tom." I at once turned back to him and
said, "Tom, listen to me; you ought to seek the Lord. Let us go back in the
store and settle it with the Lord." But he said, "No." I said, "It is very
important." He said as before, "Do you think so?" And again I answered, "I
don't think so, I know so." He took it very nicely but refused to make any
move toward seeking the Lord. Two days later, the following Friday, he went
to Minneapolis and on Sunday afternoon he was crushed to death between two
street cars. Would it not be well for people to heed the warnings of God's
servants and His Spirit?

The pastor of the Scandinavian Free church at Brookings, South Dakota, one
time sent for me to come to pray for a sister who was a member of his
congregation and had been sick in bed for some six months. I preached there
several times and then announced that I was going to pray for the sick
sister at three o'clock the next day, and asked all those who had faith to
be present and those who did not have faith to stay away, preachers and
all. Only one person was there--an elderly Baptist sister from Huron-Sister
Shall. The prayer of faith was offered and Sister Johnson was healed and
was present at the service that evening.

One Sunday morning wife and I with two sisters drove to Westlake for the
forenoon service which was held in the home of Brother and Sister Hans
Myhre. After service wife came to me and said that Sister Myhre wanted us
to stay for lunch. But I said, "No, we cannot stay for lunch, the Lord
wants us to go home right away." On hearing this, Sister Myhre came to me
and said, "You have got to stay for lunch." I answered, "Sister, we can't
stay for the Lord told me to go home." She said, "And then the sisters will
not get anything to eat either. Why do you have to go?" I said, "I don't
know, only that the Lord says, go home." "Brother Susag, you are stubborn,"
the sister insisted.

We drove home. Wife went upstairs to change her dress, ready to get lunch.
I sat on a chair meditating on what had taken place. I said to myself, "Are
you stubborn? Why did you come home?" Just then the telephone rang. I
answered and a voice said, "Is this Rev. Susag?" "Yes," I said. "Hold the
line, long distance calling you," he informed me. After a short pause a
voice said, "This is Anna Anderson of Brookings, S. D. Do you remember
promising Grandma H., when you were pastor here, that you would officiate
at her funeral? She died this morning and is to be buried on Tuesday. Can
you come?" I told her I would come. As I turned from the telephone wife
came into the room and I said to her, "Now I know why I had to come home so
quickly, for if they had not gotten in touch with me now, I couldn't reach
there in time for the funeral." She said, "Sometimes you are a little
queer, but I have committed you to the Lord and things always come out all
right."

       *       *       *       *       *

When Brother August Christofersen of Norway Lake, Minnesota, was down with
double pneumonia I was sent for to come and pray for him. I went and prayed
for him and the Lord raised him up. I stayed for three days, went home and
in three or four days received a phone call to come back. I asked whether
he was sick. They answered, "No, but he wants to see you." I was able to
get a ride almost to his place, and walked the rest of the way. On nearing
his home I turned in to a grove I had to pass and kneeled down to pray for
the brother. The Lord said to me, "You do not need to pray for him now; he
is home with me." On coming toward the house his brother came out to meet
me, and I said to him, "So Brother August is home with the Lord!" He said,
"How did you know?" I said, "The Lord told me over in the grove."

       *       *       *       *       *

While I was in Denmark I was invited to come to a certain town with which I
was entirely unacquainted. Finally when I found time to go I went without
writing to announce my coming. On arriving in the city I found I had
forgotten both the name and address of my friends. I walked back and forth
on the depot platform, racking my brain, as it were, to come across the
needed address, but I just could not remember it. A man spoke to me and
said, "You seem to be in deep meditation, or in trouble of some kind." I
said, "I surely am." To which he replied, "Sometimes we get into such a
fix; do you suppose I could be of any help to you?" But I answered, "I
don't suppose you can." However, I told him my trouble. He laughed and
said, "Surely you are in bad fix; can't you think of anything?" "The only
thing I can think of," I said, "is that they are the parents of Mrs. Anna
Nelson of Kaas, Denmark." "Well," he said, "you haven't struck it so bad
after all--I am her father!"

When I was pastor in Grand Forks we had in the congregation a mother in
Israel, a German sister who could not speak English. One Sunday evening the
Lord had blessed in a spiritual way. Mother Calm said to Brother Shave, "I
can preach Bro. Susag's sermon in German now." (I had preached in English.)
Bro. Shave said, "You can't do it." But she said, "I can." At that, Brother
Shave raised his voice and said, "Everybody wait a little while." And, sure
enough, Sister Calm preached my sermon, the Germans said, "almost to a
word."

       *       *       *       *       *

At the St. Paul Camp meeting one time, Sister Aamot came to me telling me
she had lost a five dollar bill, over which she was feeling very badly. Her
husband was not saved. She wanted me to pray that the Lord would help her
find it. She told me she thought she had lost it on her way coming from the
Old People's Home to the tabernacle. It had been blowing pretty hard that
day and she had the bill in her handkerchief.

I went out into the timber to pray, and how the wind did blow! After I had
been earnestly praying that the Lord would help me to find the bill for her
and was getting up from my knees, on looking down into the leaves, lo,
there, between my knees, was the five dollar bill! And the sister had no
difficulty in proving that it was her five dollar bill.

       *       *       *       *       *

While still in Denmark, one time Brother Morris Johnson and I were holding
a meeting on a farm. As we saw a large, fine looking man coming toward the
meeting place, Morris said, "Let's go behind the barn and pray God Almighty
to convict and save that man this afternoon." And the Lord honored our
faith and really saved the man that afternoon.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was holding a meeting in Albert Lee, Minnesota and from there was
intending to go to Greenwood, Wisconsin. I looked at my time-table to find
out what the railroad fare would be and I figured it to be thirteen
dollars, so asked the Lord to give me thirteen dollars that evening. At the
close of the service someone put some money in my pocket and I began to
thank the Lord for thirteen dollars. The devil said, "You haven't got
thirteen dollars in your pocket," but I said I had. He said, "Just feel in
your pocket and you will find there is hardly anything there, or take it
out and count it and you will see." I told him that I would neither feel in
my pocket nor count the money for him, and that I had thirteen dollars.

When I got to my room I knelt down and thanked the Lord for thirteen
dollars, and then took the money out of my pocket and counted it and found
I had $13.05. On buying my ticket the next day it cost $13.05! I had made a
mistake in my figuring, but the Lord knew the exact fare.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the meeting at Greenwood I went out inviting folks to the services.
One day I came to a farm house where the man of the house was ill in bed
with tuberculosis of the spine. I told him that I was a minister and also,
that I believed in Divine healing. When he heard this, he said, "You are
the very man the Lord has sent to me that I may be healed." I said, "I do
not know about that; however, I will pray for you. I am impressed of the
Lord not to anoint you. I will be back on Friday afternoon, and in the
meantime will pray the Lord to show me what to do." With this arrangement
the sick man was satisfied. It was now dusk, and on reaching my room in the
house where I stayed, I knelt down beside a chair to pray for him. As I did
so, a cow and three sheep stood right before me. I did this four times, and
as soon as I would get on my knees here were the cow and three sheep
between me and God, so to speak. So I gave up trying for that time, but the
next day at ten o'clock I went in to pray for him again in broad daylight.
But as I did so, the cow and the sheep were there before me.

On the appointed Friday I went to see him again. He inquired at once what
the Lord had made known to me about him. I told him the Lord had shown me
something but that I did not understand what it meant. He was anxious to
hear what it was, and I related the vision I had had. He said, "I perceive
that the Lord has sent you to be a help to me," and continuing, went on to
say, "We used to live in Iowa on a good sized farm and we were well-to-do
financially. I was very much interested in spiritual work, even to printing
and sending out a number of tracts. But it seemed that my poor soul was
clinging to the worldly thing too much. I was troubled about it, off and
on. However, your vision means that if I only had a cow and three
sheep--which we have--if my soul is clinging to them I can never enter
heaven." "Surely," he said, "the Lord has sent you to help me. Please pray
that I get right with God; that is the main thing." The dear man bitterly
repented and became very happy. The third day following this event he went
home to glory.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had promised that after this meeting I would go to hold a meeting at
Dallas, Wisconsin, but the Lord impressed me to go home. Knowing no reason
for going home, I bought my ticket only to a certain station where I would
have to change if I went to Dallas, thinking that maybe my feelings would
change before I got there. But there was no change in my feelings when we
got there, so I bought a ticket to St. Paul and from there got a ticket to
Hawick, Minnesota, which is just three miles from my home.

On the street in Hawick, I met a young brother who exclaimed when he saw
me, "Oh, so you got our postal card?" I replied, "I did not get any postal
card." Then he said, "But you got the telegram?" I told him I had not
received any telegram either. "Well, then," said he, "how did you happen to
come home?" I told him that the Lord wanted me to come home, and then asked
him what the trouble was. He told me that my wife was very sick, near to
dying. Then he very kindly said he would take me out home. On arriving home
wife said, "I knew you were coming; I asked the Lord to send you." She was
suffering from an internal malady from which the nurse had told her she
could not recover, and so made up her mind that she was going to die.

Right at this time we received a letter from Brothers Nelson and Niles
requesting me to come and hold a tent meeting for them in San Antonio and
that I should bring my tent with me to hold the meeting in. Of course, I
felt I could not go and wrote them to that effect. Meanwhile, wife had
persuaded me that she was going to die, and being in poor circumstances, I
said to her, "You will not hold it against me, if when you die, I sell out
and take a homestead and so get out of debt, will you?" And her reply was,
"When I am dead you can do what you please."

Just about that time we got a letter from the Brothers Nelson and Niles
telling us they had been praying and the Lord had showed them that Sister
Susag was not going to die. On hearing this, wife said, "The good brethren
do not know any better; I am going to die." (And I was thinking so, too, as
she was getting no help.) More and more I was thinking about the homestead;
but wife told me I had better go to Texas. It seemed almost impossible to
get anyone to come and stay with her and the children, yet she would say,
"We will get along some way and you had better go or else souls will be
lost. If I should pass away before you get back you know where I am going
and if you keep true to the Lord we will meet in glory."

But I did not feel as though I could go and leave her that way. A couple of
nights after I had had this conversation with her I had a dream. I saw a
little table standing beside my bed on which was a kerosene lamp. The light
was just about to go out. It would light up a little and then go down till
it looked as though it was just ready to quit burning. I saw Jesus standing
on the other side of the table with a sad look on his face, pointing to the
lamp and saying, "Your lamp is about to go out." And I awoke from my dream
and jumped out of bed, ran into the next room and said to my wife, "On
Tuesday morning, I leave for Texas whether you are living or dying." To
which she replied, "Praise the Lord for your decision."

The Lord miraculously sent a good sister to our home from Washington. She
arrived the morning I was leaving for Texas. When she discovered the
circumstances, and that wife was sick, she said, "Now I know why the Lord
sent me here, and I'm here to stay until Sister Susag is well."

So I went to San Antonio. This was in the year 1902. At one place where I
had to change trains on the way, I took my grip and walked out on the
platform toward the train I was to take. There I stood and did not get on
the train, and the train pulled out without me. I walked back to the depot,
and the agent asked me whether I had intended to take that train and why I
did not get on it. I simply told him I didn't know why. "Well," he said,
"you fool, you will now have to wait four hours and take a slow train." (I
understood a little later why I was held back from boarding that train.
Only forty-five miles out it became derailed and some forty passengers were
seriously injured and, if my memory is correct, some were killed.)

When the tent meeting was over at San Antonio, Bro. Nelson left with me and
we were expecting to stop over in Hamilton and Kingston, Mo. to hold some
services. As we came closer to the first place Bro. Nelson said, "Here the
saints are well-to-do people." So, I thought, if they are well-to-do we
will not need to spend our time asking God for our car fare, for they well
know that preachers need car fare. The congregation rented a room for us
about a couple of blocks from the depot and we ate our meals in the
different homes.

After the meeting had closed and we had gone to our room at eleven p. m.,
Brother Nelson asked me whether I had received money for our car fare. I
told him I had not; that I thought he had received it all, since he had
been there before. But he hadn't received any. We then decided we had
better see whether we had enough money to take us to the next place.
Brother Nelson had enough for his fare and eight cents over; I was lacking
two dollars. We were to leave on the four-thirty train in the morning, and
now we had to pray the Lord to get us the two dollars!

As for me, I was not acquainted in the city and did not know where to go to
raise a penny. We prayed until two o'clock, then I said to Brother Nelson,
"We do not need to pray any longer; the Lord says He will attend to it." We
went to bed for about an hour and a half. We went to the depot and Brother
Nelson bought his ticket, then I ordered mine and put what money I had in
the window of the ticket office. While the agent was counting the money, a
man came running very fast into the waiting room and stuck his left hand
right in front of my nose through the ticket window and left two dollars
there, then turned and went out so fast that I had no chance to thank him.
Brother Nelson looked at the man, and then asked me whether I knew him, but
I had never seen him before, nor had Brother Nelson. The lesson I learned
from this incident was that it is better to depend upon the Lord than on
well-to-do saints.

       *       *       *       *       *

On arriving home I told wife of the incident. She at once asked me whether
I was sure it was a man who brought the two dollars. I said, "To me he
looked like an angel, and he would have looked so to you if you had been in
a like fix."

       *       *       *       *       *

ANSWERS TO PRAYER

Once, when home for two or three days I was suffering pain in the region of
my heart. At every beat it would seem to say, "Kelly, Kelly, Kelly." (Kelly
was a place in North Dakota, about 260 miles from home. There were a few
saints in the community who might be needing help). I was very sick and I
told my wife how badly I was feeling. She said, "Perhaps the Lord wants you
to go to Kelly." The next day the pain was still bothering me, so I sat
down and wrote to O. O. Holman and said, "I am sick; if the pain in my
heart does not soon stop I will be at your station Sunday at ten o'clock."
This was in the month of August, the busy season for farmers. The pain did
not stop, so I started out. When I had gone about one hundred miles from
home the pain left me.

Having to change trains at Grand Forks and there being no train for Kelly
until the next morning, I decided to go and stay over night with Brother C.
H. Tubbs. At the parsonage I met Brother Newell, a minister, Brother Shave
and Brother Niles, deacons of the congregation there, and a sister who was
visiting.

They all exclaimed in surprise at seeing me appear at that time of the year
and wanted to know the reason for my being there. I really felt sheepish
about telling them. Kelly was only fifteen miles from Grand Forks and they
had not heard of there being any serious trouble there.

After I had told them how I happened to be going to Kelly, Brother Tubbs
turned to his wife and said, "Mary, you preach tomorrow; I want to go along
with Bro. Susag and see what is going on." His wife said, "Charles, I am
going along, too." Then to Bro. Newell he said, "You take the morning
service tomorrow," but he also declined as he, too, wanted to go with us.
And Bro. Shave made the same reply; he wanted to go to Kelly. But when Bro.
Niles was asked to preach at the morning service, he kindly consented to
take charge. In the morning I started out for Kelly with three ministers,
one deacon and one sister accompanying me.

I am generally quite talkative, but I did not do much talking those fifteen
miles, wondering what the people would think if, when getting there, we
should find nothing unusual the matter. When the train stopped at the
station I waited for all the folks to get off first. As I looked out of the
window I saw Brother Holman standing on the platform weeping, looking at
the people as they got off the train. Then I came. I went to him and asked
him why he was weeping. He said, "We have been praying the Lord to send you
to us and today I started for the station, confident that I would either
meet you in person or that I would get a letter," and taking the letter
from his pocket and holding it up, said, "and here I have both!" Then he
told me that his wife was very ill, possibly dying, and that they had been
praying the Lord to send me to them.

It was three miles out to their home in the country and Bro. Holman had
only a one-seated buggy, so the two sisters drove and we preachers walked.

The good Lord heard prayer and healed Sister Holman. Also, an old lady of
ninety years of age was baptized at this time.

       *       *       *       *       *

On another occasion I was asked to come to Grand Forks to hold a revival
meeting. On my arrival there I found that the pastor was having trouble
with his eyes so that he had to stay at home in a dark room. Services
started Friday night and it seemed that the whole congregation had become
cooled off. This was made clear to me, so I preached three sermons--one on
Friday night and two on Saturday. But it looked as though the condition
grew worse instead of better as a result of my preaching.

Saturday night I had a dream. I dreamed that the Lord had sent me there to
gather the sheep back that had wandered into a man's field and were
tramping the grain down. Then I picked up one stone and threw it at them to
try to get them back. I picked up another stone, and then threw the third
one. They seemed now to be frightened worse than ever. This discouraged me
and I said to the Lord, "What shall I do?" He said, "Speak gently to them."

Then I went into the field myself and called "Sheep! Sheep!" to them, and
they began to gather together and it wasn't long before I had a nice bunch
of sheep up on the highway. I asked the Lord why it was I couldn't get them
together without my going into the field myself, for I preached His word to
them. "Yes," He said, "you preached My Word to them, but it was the way you
preached it." So Sunday I made my confession to the congregation and
weeping, asked their forgiveness, and every one was brought back to the
Lord, and a few sinners who were in the audience were also saved.

Through the week of services thirty-eight persons came from different
states and Canada for healing--and there were some very serious cases. The
night before the day we had set apart for the praying for the sick, I
prayed from eleven o'clock that night until four o'clock in the morning in
a dark room. When I got up from my knees the Lord stood before me and made
it clear to me that He was going to heal every one of those who had been
prayed for.

After all were healed and it was time for the services to close, a little
nine year old girl came and sat on the altar bench. I went to her and said,
"What do you want, Sophie?" In reply she said that she had seen how the
Lord had healed the eyes of Sister Hobert and that now she wanted the Lord
to heal her and set her eyes straight. (Her eyes were badly crossed).

On returning to the city some eight months later, I was invited to take
supper with Brother and Sister Amondson, Sophie's parents. They had a
number of children who came around me, and I wanted to know where the
little girl was whose eyes were crossed and for whom I prayed several
months before. A little girl spoke up and said, "Don't you know me? I am
Sophie." I then asked her to tell me about her healing.

She told me that she was prayed for on that Friday night, and the following
Monday she was starting out to school without her glasses and her mother,
who was not saved, seeing her without her glasses, said, "Sophie, don't
forget to wear your glasses!" Sophie answered, "Mother, I was prayed for at
the revival meeting Friday night and I do not need my glasses." Her mother
said, "Nonsense, come and get your glasses." But Sophie ran away to school!

That forenoon the teacher asked Sophie to read, and when she got up she
said, "Sophie, haven't you your glasses with you?" (She knew Sophie had not
been able to read without her glasses.) Sophie answered, lifting her hand,
"Teacher, I was prayed for at the revival meeting Friday night and I do not
need my glasses!" and her eyes were straight!

A number of years later I met Sophie with her little girl. She was a lovely
looking woman and was happily married.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was baptizing a number of people in the North Sea, outside of Lokken,
Denmark, among whom was Sister Swenborg, from Tiste, whose eyes were so
crossed that she could not help herself at all without wearing her glasses.
A big crowd was there, mocking and throwing sand at the saints. I had just
baptized Sister Swenborg, and as she was coming out of the sea I heard a
shout going up from the saints. They told me that as the sister was coming
out of the water with lifted hands and looking up to heaven praising God, a
halo of glory was shining around her head--and her eyes were straightened
and she was a changed woman from that time. The mob stopped their mocking
on seeing this demonstration.

After the service the next Sunday at Tiste, Sister Swenborg made the
request that everybody meet her the next Tuesday afternoon at two-thirty
o'clock at the boat landing as she had something of interest to tell them.

A big crowd gathered on Tuesday afternoon, and the sister climbed up on a
large box holding her glasses in her hand and said to the people, "You all
know me and my parents who live about six miles east of town. Before I was
big enough to wear glasses it was necessary either for me to have someone
lead me or to pull me in a little wagon or sleigh. I was saved recently in
a meeting held by Bro. Morris C. Johnson and last week I went to Lokken and
was baptized, and as I came out of the water my eyes were straightened.
Here are my glasses," she said, holding them up and telling what they had
cost, "Here they go! I don't need them anymore!" and into the sea they
went. Then, opening her hand bag she took out a needle and said, "This is
the finest needle on the market," and took thread and threaded it before
the eyes of the astonished crowd.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a number of years I had suffered with appendicitis and during a meeting
I was holding in company with Bro. Carl Arbeiter at Plum Coolie, Canada, I
had a severe attack which lasted two days and two nights. The third night I
was so tired and worn out that I went to sleep in spite of the pain. I woke
up hearing myself say, "Don't stick that knife into me." The appendix was
swollen to about the size of a small hen's egg, and I felt it was going to
burst. There was no time to get anyone to come and pray so I laid my own
hands on my body and said, "Lord God Almighty, if you do not help me now I
am gone." It burst, making a noise like the shot from a small shotgun. I
then turned over to my other side and went to sleep at once and have never
experienced any bad effects nor had any attacks since. In relating this
experience to three doctors later, two of them laughed and made fun of me,
but the third one said, "Hold on, hold on; this man has never lied to me
yet." He said it could have burst into the intestines, the poison passing
out the natural way. And if not, the Lord God could take care of him!

       *       *       *       *       *

Once I had a stroke. Half the left side of my body down to my knees was
affected. I could not sit up, neither could I lie down. I stood on my knees
beside the sofa for two weeks. I was prayed for several times but was not
healed. And I was to start a revival meeting at Hereford, Minn. the
Thursday of the second week that I was sick.

Sister Hedricks came over often and prayed for me. When on the second
Friday she came and I was no better, she asked me whether I had sent to
Anderson and to the Scandinavian Publishing Company at St. Paul Park to
have them pray for me. On telling her I had not done so and explaining to
her that I had no faith for my own healing, I said, "I could pray for your
healing if you were sick, but I have no faith for myself, and I have always
preached that when folks were saved they should have faith to pray for
their own healing, so I do not want to bother the folks to pray for me."
"Well," she said, "aren't you humble enough to tell them that you have no
faith for yourself?" I answered, "All right, you pray for me and I will
think it over." The next day I asked wife to write to these two places, and
when she had written and sealed the two letters I was instantly healed!
Wife sent the letters.

After getting healed I decided to go to the revival meeting at Hereford,
but there was no train going there until Monday and it was in the month of
November and very cold. And it was at the time when the automobile first
came into use. One family in the congregation at Hereford had a Ford
furnished with a top and side curtains, another family had a Buick (called
a gentleman's car), and it had no top nor even a windshield on it.

I found out later that the owning of these cars had caused some little
friction in the congregation. In fact, some had said that nobody could have
one of those machines and still be a Christian. But they had decided to
leave the matter until the time Brother Susag should come and he would help
them out.

When we were leaving my home to drive to town to take the train for there,
it was really cold. I said to my wife, "Let's go back in the house and ask
the Lord to send a man to meet me at Elbow Lake, with a car having a top on
it and side curtains"--for I was still very weak. On arriving at Elbow Lake
I went to the post office and wrote a card home--I would have had to change
trains there if no one had come to meet me--and as I came out of the post
office I saw a man across the street--walking in the direction I was going.
He looked at me and I looked at him, wondering, then he came running across
the street and exclaimed, "Now I know why I came to town today! I am here
to drive you to the meeting. I had left my car in town to have a little
work done on it, not intending to use it until after the meeting."

Then he went on to say, "We live six miles from town, and this morning as I
was working around the barn the Lord said to me, 'You go to town and get
your car.' My wife said, 'John, leave that car alone; don't go to town.'
But I told her that the Lord said, 'You go and get the car.' And I came as
fast as I could get here."

He took me to the service. Bro. E. G. Masters was preaching, and when he
had finished speaking he asked me to come to the pulpit and tell how the
Lord had healed me and how it was that I managed to get to the service. I
related the whole story, telling how I had prayed for someone to meet me
who had a. car having a top to it and side curtains to keep out the cold. I
then added that I was so glad the Lord had lots of cars; that as for me, I
never expected to have a car of my own for I did not think that I would
ever be able to afford anything like that. That settled the car difficulty
in the congregation--and I was entirely ignorant of the fact of there
having been any trouble! Today I am using my ninth car.

That meeting was a real success. Brother Masters, for a number of evenings,
had offered a brand new eighteen dollar Bible to any preacher, professor,
presiding elder or bishop that could come into the pulpit and prove that we
were not preaching the Bible. He gave them five minutes to come to the
front. One family belonging to a certain denomination sent for their bishop
and he came. After the service was over and the family had taken the bishop
to their home, they asked him why he did not get up and prove that we were
not preaching the truth so as to get the Bible. The good man answered,
"After those two men were finished speaking there was nothing to say. They
preached the Bible." Brother Masters spoke on the "White Horse of Calvary"
and used the blackboard to illustrate his meaning.

       *       *       *       *       *

Brother Peter Peterson of Hoboken, New Jersey and I held some meetings
together up in a newly settled district of northern Minnesota. Our offering
for two weeks services was one round fifty-cent piece.

While there we had a call to go to the insane asylum, at Fergus Falls,
Minnesota to pray for a Brother Weegan who had lost his mind. After
entering the institution we were locked in the cell with him and on bended
knees with our hands uplifted toward heaven, we began to pray and all of a
sudden he was restored to his right mind. We knocked on the door to have
the attendant came and let us out. As we were going out of the door Brother
Weegan pushed his head between us and the attendant and said to the man,
"You might just as well let me out, too, for I am as rational as these two
preachers now, and I will not hurt you any more."

Then I asked the attendant whether there was a man in the place by the name
of John Lukesen of Irving, Minnesota, and he told me there was such a man
there. I told him we had ten minutes to spare and asked him whether we
could go in and see him without first having to go to the superintendent's
office for permission. The man lifted his hands and said, "You can see
anyone in this institution since this one man has received help from you."

He then proceeded to give us information about the one we wanted to see. He
said, "When Mr. Lukesen first came here we had to have him in a padded cell
and he got so bad that we had to tie him to his cot and now he is like a
wild cat and nothing but skin and bones; he won't be long for this world."

When he opened the door to the cell, there I saw my neighbor lying on his
cot and he surely did look like a wild cat, as the man had said! The
compassion of the Lord Jesus came upon me and I lifted my hands toward
heaven and called aloud to him, "John Lukesen, the Lord Jesus Christ, whom
I serve, makes you well!" And he was well! Shortly after this, he was sent
home.

We planned to go from there to Hereford, Minnesota. At Evansville where we
had to change trains, we inquired of the station agent when the train for
Hereford would be leaving. We were informed that there would be no train
leaving for that place before Thursday at three o'clock. We were told that
only two trains a week went from there to Hereford and this was Tuesday--a
long time to wait!

Brother Peterson said, "Let us go out and pray." After we had prayed we
returned to the depot and asked the agent when the train for Hereford would
be leaving. He answered gruffly, "I told you Thursday afternoon at three
o'clock." "All right," said Brother Peterson, "Let us go out and pray."
After praying we went back the second time and asked the agent the same
question; and this time he was really gruff. And he surely informed us that
there would be no train leaving before Thursday afternoon at three o'clock.
Again, Brother Peterson said, "All right, let us go out and pray."

We went out once more into the grove to pray and Brother Peterson did the
praying: "Lord, the President can get a special pullman train any time he
wants it and he is only the president of the United States; and here are
we, Brother Susag and I, Thy ambassadors. We are not asking Thee for a
pullman car--we will be satisfied with an old caboose--the distance is only
30 miles; so Lord, won't you please talk to the agent?" We both said AMEN.

On returning to the agent for the third time, Brother Peterson said to him,
"When will that train be ready for Hereford?" In a very mild tone he
replied, "I have been thinking about it and I will shove a few box cars and
a caboose together and send you fellows out." And we both said, "Thank you,
sir." And so the Lord answered prayer and sent us home on a special train!

When wife and I got saved, my brothers and families and wives quit writing
to us, and in four years we seldom heard from them. One evening a letter
came from my sister-in-law telling us that my brother had lost his reason
and had been sent to the insane asylum at St. Peter, Minnesota, and asking
me to come at once. Not having any money on hand to go with, I went to a
near neighbor and showed him the letter and asked him if he would loan me
fifteen dollars so that I could go to Minneapolis and also to St. Peter. He
told me that he would do that even if I were not able to pay him back. The
next day I went to Minneapolis to my sister-in-law and her five children.
Jerome, the oldest boy, seven years of age, said, "Uncle, are you going to
bring Daddy home?" I said, "Son, I cannot bring your Daddy home, but Jesus
Christ whom I serve will bring him home."

My sister-in-law related how it all happened. She went for her pastor and
my brother-in-law, a professor in the Lutheran college. When they came
Jerome said to them, "Won't you pray like Uncle Swen does?" They had
evidently talked about our praying even though they did not write to us.
After they had gone his wife had to let my brother out-doors and he ran
four blocks without a thread of clothing on--until a policeman captured
him.

I went to St. Peter, and Dr. Tumbleson, the president of the institution,
refused to let me see my brother. I told him that I must see him; that as a
minister of the gospel I had a right to go where a doctor could go. But he
still refused and called in two other doctors who said to me, "Your brother
is not only insane but is seriously ill and we do not expect him to leave
this institution alive." To which I replied, "Then so much the more do I
have to see him; and if you continue to refuse to let me see him you will
have two Susags in this institution, for I will stay until you grant me the
right to see my brother." Finally relenting, they sent for a man to take me
to see my poor brother.

As I entered the cell in which he was confined my brother did not know me.
He was walking around the room more like an animal than like a man. I knelt
down in the middle of the floor and prayed. After a while he came and put
his hand on my shoulder and said, "Swen, how does it come that you are
here?" I said, "I have come to help you, Mike." "Thank you, I am glad you
have come; something got into my head and I lost my mind. How is my
family?" I told him they were all well and had sent their greetings to him.
Then the man who had brought me in took hold of me and ordered me out.

But I was satisfied. This was the 22nd of March and I fasted from one meal
every day for seventeen days and some days I would touch neither water nor
food telling the Lord I had promised Mike's wife and his children that I
was going to bring the husband and daddy home; and, "Jesus, I will give you
no rest until you do so."

On the eighth of April during morning worship the Spirit of the Lord
revealed to me that the Lord had heard our prayer and that my brother was
perfectly well! I jumped up from my knees and ran around the house shouting
the glory of God. Wife thought, "Here is another crazy Susag," but Brother
Enos Key, of Red Key, Indiana (who had come to hold a meeting) was with us
and he said, "Praise God, Brother Susag has the victory!" And three days
later I received a letter from Doctor Tumbleson giving us the good news
that on the eighth day of April the nurse went to take food to my brother
and found him perfectly well in mind and body. And that he was doing
bookkeeping for the institution and could come home any time only for the
customary red tape it would take a few days before he could come. In a
short time he was home and well.

       *       *       *       *       *

On one occasion when I was holding a meeting at the fishing town of
Sookden, Denmark, a great storm arose. As is the custom in fishing towns,
boats put out to sea at high tide for better fishing conditions; forty-two
had gone from here about two o'clock in the night. Toward morning the storm
broke and on into the forenoon it became very fierce. Some of the older
people were telling of a similar storm they remembered of some forty years
before when thirty-eight boats went out and such a storm blew up. If I
remember correctly, not one boat returned.

In those days there were no motor boats. They were all sailboats, generally
three men to a boat. This time, however, they had gasoline motors on the
boats and from twelve o'clock until three o'clock one boat after the other
returned, some of them full of water, barely getting to shore. Forturnately
the wind was blowing toward the shore or they might not have made a safe
landing.

I was staying at the home of Brother Morton Petersen. He and his crew had
not returned as yet. It seemed that most of the population of the town was
standing on the hills looking for his return. I heard someone say to his
wife, "Marie, do you expect Morton to return?" She answered, "He has been
out so many times and has come back, and I expect him back this time." He
generally went farther out than any of the fishermen because the farther
out the fish were supposed to be larger and better.

We stood out there for two hours or more. About five o'clock someone said,
"I see a dark spot out there." A little later someone else shouted, "I see
a spot, too!" And then we began to see the spot more and more often, and at
last they came safely to land--and not a bucket of water in the boat.

On our way home I asked Brother Petersen how he had gotten along. He said,
"When we realized the storm was on hand we packed up our fishing lines and
I ordered my partner to take care of the motor and I myself took charge of
the rudder. My partner was a saved man but we had a boy who was not saved.
I ordered him to be ready to dip out the water if any got in the boat."

I asked him whether they did much talking during that terrible storm and he
said, "No, I was praying all the time that we might reach land safely,
because the young man with us was not saved and he was the sole support of
his widowed mother, his father and one or two brothers having gone down
somewhere in the North Sea not so long ago. We were getting along very
well--for the Lord helped me steer the boat right--but the worst that we
had to meet was just before we landed--there were three sandbars we had to
cross. If the waves struck us just right we would get over, but if not, we
would get stuck in the sandbars, and there would be no help for us. When we
came to the first one a big wave carried us safely over the sandbar. I said
'Thank God, we are over the first one;' and so it was with the other two;
and each time I said, 'Thank God for taking us over, and too, for not
letting the water get into our boat.'"

A week later I embarked on the steamer Olaf Barger, sailing from
Fredriksen, Denmark, to Sweden. As I was going on board the boat the
Captain came to me and asked whether I could spare him a few minutes before
we landed in Sweden, as he wished to have a talk with me. When we got so
far that we could begin to see the rocky coast of Sweden he came to me and
began his narrative. He said, pointing ahead, "You see that three-mast
schooner standing upon that rock?" I said, "Yes, I see it." "You remember
the awful storm we had a week ago today. We were just coming out from
Gottenburg to return to Denmark--an hour's sailing--and the schooner called
for help but we were unable to even help ourselves so that we could not
possibly help them. They were blown upon the rocks, but the people were
saved." Then he pointed to the left to two big rocks, and continued, "And
right there was a small steamer in trouble. They, too, called for help but
we could not give it and they went down.

"We now saw that it would be impossible for us to reach Denmark and were
fortunate in managing to turn the ship's course back toward Gottenburg. I
tied myself to the bridge with an inch rope. Down into the waves we went
and I said to myself, 'We have seen the sun for the last time.' But we came
up and went down again many, many times. Then I did something I had never
in all my life done before--I am sixty-five years old--I prayed the Lord to
save my ship and all that were sailing with me. Along in the afternoon I
found myself calling on God for salvation of my soul, and the Lord did save
me and finally brought my ship, and those sailing with me, safely into the
harbor at nine o'clock that evening, it having taken us nine hours to do
one hour's sailing.

"Knowing that you were a minister of the gospel I wanted to tell you the
story that you might perhaps tell it to others."

How longsuffering and merciful is the Son of God toward the children of men
that when they repent and turn to Him, HE FORGIVES THEM.

       *       *       *       *       *

One time when I arrived home from one of my evangelistic tours I found that
my two young sons who were twins, eleven years of age, had been cutting
hay. It was all raked and rowed up ready for hauling, and they were
rejoicing that I had come as they were counting on me to help them haul and
stack the hay. They said, "Dad, tomorrow you will have to help us." I said,
"All right, we will have to get up early to get it done as I am leaving the
following day to start another meeting."

The next morning we started out. We had to drive eighty rods south on the
road, then we turned another eighty rods east to the hay meadow. Just as I
began to pitch the hay up in the rack the boys exclaimed, "Dad, it's
raining." "Yes," I said, and stuck my pitchfork in the ground, threw my hat
beside it and said, "Let's pray." I said to the Lord, "This hay is yours;
this farm is yours and I am your servant. This hay must be hauled today as
I leave tomorrow to minister unto the people, so please, at least keep the
rain off the hay meadow and off the road where we have to drive. Amen."

I went to pitching hay again; it was just pouring down all around us as far
as we could see across the fence and west of the road. The only spots where
it did not rain was where we were working and on the road we were driving.
It rained all day, and it did not just rain--it poured! We hauled hay all
day, until a little after six o'clock I slid off the stack in the yard and
then the rain just poured down. I said to the boys, "The Lord surely heard
prayer." They said, "Yes, He did," and we thanked the Lord.

After I had left the next day, our neighbor came over and seeing the stack
asked the boys when they stacked that hay. They told him, "Yesterday, Daddy
was home." (There was a distance of about twenty rods between his house and
ours). He said, "That is impossible. I took a rest all day for the rain
just poured down and I could not do anything." He thought it must have been
the day before that we hauled and stacked the hay. But the boys told him
that "Daddy prayed and it did not rain on our hay meadow, nor on the road
where we were driving." This man was greatly astonished at hearing this.

       *       *       *       *       *

One afternoon, about three o'clock, the renters on our place came running
in great excitement into wife's room and said, "Mrs. Susag, a cyclone is
coming." She went out with them and it was dark. There was a wood pile
about three or four rods south of our houses and parts of our neighbors
buildings south of us were blowing through our pasture and wood from the
wood pile began to go up in the air. Wife lifted her hands toward heaven
facing the storm and cried, "Lord God, don't let that storm strike our
dwelling." The cyclone turned right square to the east several rods and
then turned square again to the north-east of the buildings. When it got
beyond our buildings it turned west and when it got just in line with the
direction from which it came, it turned north again, rooting up big trees
and damaging the neighbor's buildings; but not a thing on our premises was
disturbed.

The spout of the cyclone dug a ditch several feet deep in some places. Once
more God's Word was verified: "Call and I will answer."

       *       *       *       *       *

GLUTTONOUS MAN WITH DYSPEPSIA

At a meeting we were holding, Brother Tubbs, Brother Enos Key and myself
was asked to fast and pray for a man weighing from 250 to 260 pounds and
calling himself a saint!

We fasted, accordingly, and went after service Sunday noon to pray for him.
We were still fasting, but he sat up to the table and ate a big chicken
dinner and when he had finished eating he said, "Now you can pray for me."
Bro. Tubbs said, "No, we are not going to pray for you. We have been
fasting for you, and still haven't eaten, and you have sat up to the table
and eaten as much as we three preachers, together, could eat. Goodbye!" And
out we went.

       *       *       *       *       *

CASTING OUT DEVILS

At a meeting in Chicago there was a woman possessed with devils, and wanted
to be delivered. Seven ministers, four men and three sisters, were working
with her for over an hour but without apparent success. We tried to lay our
hands on her but the devils in her would kick our hands away. Big knots
came out on her body, on her shoulders and neck the size of a good sized
apple. Then we ministers withdrew for a consultation among ourselves--to
see whether the hindering cause in casting these devils out, lay in us,
among ourselves--to be assured of complete unity and agreement in our
midst: And we found that there was perfect unity. That being the case, we
said, "We must have the victory, the evil spirits must go." We went back to
the woman and worked, prayed and rebuked the enemy for nearly three hours,
all to no avail.

Then one brother said, "There must be someone in the chapel sympathizing
with her." We began a search looking everywhere to find where the trouble
was and behind some folding doors in the prayer room we found a man.
Brother Knight said to him, "What are you doing here?" He said, "Can't I
stay here?" But he was told to leave forthwith and he went. We then locked
the doors of the chapel and in a few minutes the woman was delivered.

She was obliged to go home as her husband went to work at four o'clock in
the morning, but he came back the next day and was gloriously saved.

Another case of demon possession happened in Grand Forks. During a meeting
we were holding there, a man came to the service who formerly had taken his
stand with the church, coming out of a certain denomination, but before
long he returned to it again. When he came to the meeting we were holding
he was possessed. In one of the services Brother Krutz and I attempted to
lay hands on him: He was kneeling at the altar with his back to the pulpit
and he was taken up bodily and thrown upon the rostrum against the wall
behind the pulpit. I ran after him and the devil said to me, "Now, it will
go with you as it did with the seven sons of Sceva." I rebuked the devil
and when I got to the man he turned over on his back and slid, head first,
off the rostrum toward the seats, knocking his head against the seats until
it seemed as though his skull would surely be broken.

I called for help. Eight brothers came and held him so that he would not
get hurt. We laid hands on him and commanded the evil spirits to come out
of him but they did not come. Then I asked them, "What is your name?" The
answer was, "Salvation Army devil." Then in the name of the Lord Jesus we
commanded the Salvation Army devil to come out of him. And when they went
out it was with such a horrible scream that many women jumped up on their
seats in fright and the man's shirt was torn and blood was running from his
mouth and he fell on the floor as though he were dead. We let him lie there
a little while, then, laying our hands on him, prayed and he came to. This
man repented, made his confession and was saved.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bro. Drysdale of Grand Forks, who had a stiff knee, was prayed for several
times, but got no help. However, in this meeting his limb became so
limbered up that he could run up and down the steps like a young man. He
got so happy that he forgot his cane and went home without it. On getting
home he discovered he had left his cane behind and ran back to the chapel
to get it, but when he got hold of his cane, his limb was as bad as ever.

When I was in Minneapolis with Brother E. G. Masters, a lady came to us to
be prayed for. She was walking with two canes. She was prayed for and the
Lord healed her. And she got around like a young woman. She went home
forgetting to take her two canes--and they were beautiful canes! She came
back to get them, but when she got hold of them she was just as crippled as
ever, and no praying helped her.

       *       *       *       *       *

One time I was asked by the congregation at Rice Lake, Wisconsin, to come
and hold a meeting for them. And I felt that the Lord wanted me to do so. I
wrote the pastor there about it four times a year for two years, but he did
not want me. However the Lord said, "You go," and I went. On my arrival at
Rice Lake, I found the pastor sick in bed.

I said to him, "Well, I'm here now; the Lord told me to come." He told me
the chapel was open and that I should go ahead. I started that meeting with
eight to twelve school children and two women coming to the services,
keeping on for two weeks. Many times the devil said to me, "So you thought
the Lord sent you, didn't you? Now you see!"

The last Sunday night, to cap the climax, the children came around me and
said, "Reverend, aren't you going to close the services?" I asked, "Do you
want them to close?" They said they did. I asked them the reason and they
said, "We like your preaching so much better than our pastors, but we go to
school and we get so tired from coming every night." Then I said to them,
"Children, your reason is very good. But what do you think of this
proposition: that we announce services for Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday
evenings, and if no more come we will close the meeting and you tell your
folks about it?" The children thought it would be fine.

The next night, Monday, two more women came and they came the next night
too, and one of them (if not both of them) got saved. But what happened the
next two evenings is erased from my memory, but Friday evening when I came
to open the door for the service, there were more people than there was
room in the chapel to accommodate them. So they stood around on boxes and
ladders outside the windows. Fifty-two were at the altar for salvation in
the last three weeks--I was there five weeks in all. The last Saturday I
went to the pastors home and said to him, "I have come to pray for you. You
are going to get healed today so you can attend the service tomorrow. But
you will have to come early or you will not be able to get into your own
pulpit." He broke down and cried and said, "I haven't a pair of decent
trousers to wear to stand before such a big audience." I said, "I have two
pairs, thank God, I will give you one pair." I prayed for him and he was
healed.

At a later time Brother Masters and I held another meeting there. One
evening a couple came in a little late and sat down in the back seat. This
was the first time they had attended the service and they got under
conviction, but they got out before we could get to speak to them. They
came the next evening and slipped out again before we could get to them.
They did not come any more. We began to inquire around to find out their
names and where they lived. Yes, we were informed, he was a real estate
agent, and they never go to church anywhere. We went to their home and had
a fine visit with them one afternoon for about two hours. They were nice
folks. Brother Masters said, "We have not seen you out to the services any
more since the second time you were there."

"Well," they said, we are not in the habit of going to any meetings, but we
enjoyed the beautiful singing so much the first night that we decided we
would go again the next evening. We didn't want to be late, so I decided to
milk our cow after service. After coming home from the service I took my
lantern, as we have not any light in the barn and hung it up on a nail on
the studding and went to milking. As the milk began to run I heard a noise
like a shot and the lantern went out, leaving me in total darkness. When I
went to examine what had happened, it appeared that I had been so disturbed
in my mind over what I heard at the services that I had made a mistake and
had hung the milk pail up instead of the lantern, and when the milk
dropped, it fell on the lantern-globe and broke it."

"Well," we said, "you are coming to the services again?" But they answered,
"We surely are not. If two services can affect us to such an extent as
nearly cause us to lose our minds we will never go back again. We only go
to the funeral services of our neighbors."

       *       *       *       *       *

At one time when I was in Denmark, I was in dire need of a considerable sum
of money. I prayed earnestly over the matter and one day as I went to put
my hat on my head it seemed to be too small. I took it off and looked on
the inside of it to be sure it was mine and in feeling around, on the
inside of the sweat band I found the very amount of money I needed.

       *       *       *       *       *

While still in Denmark, I needed an overcoat. I went to a clothing store
and picked out one. There were a few alterations to be made and I was to
get it in two or three days, but I had no money and did not know from where
any was coming. This was Friday and Sunday evening after service a number
of saints went passed my door and one sister threw a folded bill on to my
table. She said, "Brother Susag, you need an overcoat. Here is a little to
help on it." I thanked her and looked at the bill and found it was a
hundred crown bill--more than seven crowns over the cost of the overcoat.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once when I was in Grand Forks holding a meeting, my oldest son wrote me
that a man to whom I owed $27.50 needed $20.00 and that if I could pay the
twenty he would give $7.50. Between the forenoon service and that of the
afternoon, I stayed in the church to pray and just before the next service
was to begin a number of people came in and stood beside the stove warming
themselves. An elderly woman from South Dakota put out her hand to me and
said, "Praise the Lord, Brother Susag," and putting a crumpled bill into my
hand, said, "This is for you." I thanked her and went behind the pulpit and
thanked the Lord for twenty dollars and when I looked at it, it was twenty
dollars.

The next day, between morning and afternoon services, I took a walk and on
my way I passed a fruit stand. As I looked into the window of it I saw some
delicious red apples, and Oh, how I wished I had three of them. I went back
three times and looked at them, but I had no money. I went back to the
chapel and the same old sister that had given me the twenty dollars the day
before, handed me a little paper bag and in it, to my happy surprise, were
three of those delicious apples that I had wanted.

One time when I was in Denmark, I wanted to go from Hjoremg to Lokkum. I
did not have the money for my carfare but stood up against a pillar in the
station praying the Lord to send it. As it was getting near train time it
looked as though it were not coming when suddenly a lady whom I knew--she
was not saved--came into the depot and crossed right over to me and handed
me a five crown bill. This lady had heard me often tell of the Lord hearing
prayer, but she did not believe that it was all true. I took it hastily,
ran for the ticket window, purchased my ticket and was just in time to
catch the train. When I came back, this lady came to the services and when
I saw her I asked her whether I had thanked her for the bill she had given
me at the depot. She said, "No, you didn't have time. When I came in to the
depot and saw you standing there, something said to me, 'He's praying for
carfare; go, give him five crowns,' and when I gave it to you I saw tears
in your eyes and when I got home I knelt down and asked the Lord to save me
and He did." Then she said, "You were praying for carfare, weren't you?" I
assured her I surely was. "God moves in a mysterious way, His wonders to
perform."

       *       *       *       *       *

At the first Camp meeting we held, I went to the bank and borrowed ten
dollars to divide among the ministers, and one day the Lord said to me,
"Give Elihu Key five dollars."

I couldn't understand so went to wife and told her about it; she said, "If
the Lord told you to give Brother Key five dollars, you had better give it
to him; he must be needing it badly." So the next day I crumpled a five
dollar bill up and stuck it in his hand. He said, "Thank you," and into the
brush he went--and I went after him, crawling on my hands and knees so he
would not see me--quite close up to him. He fell on his knees, crying and
thanking the Lord for the five dollars and for the man who gave it to him
and asking the Lord to bless him a hundred-fold according to His word. Then
down the hill he ran to the Post Office and sent it to his family. This I
learned later from his brother. The family was in great need.

       *       *       *       *       *

On one occasion a payment of $245.00 had to be made on the contracts on our
home--to save the contract from lapsing. I did not have the money. I tried
every possible way to borrow it from different banks, and failing that, I
tried to get it from some of the brethren. The last one I approached surely
capped the climax. He assured me that he had the money and could loan it to
me, but he said that he might just as well throw the money on the manure
pile, for, he said, "You can never pay for the place anyhow, and the
quicker you leave it the better."

I went home, and after praying for three days the Lord said the name "Torp"
to me. The only one I knew of that name was a banker in Willmer, our county
seat, whom I had met once--he hardly knew me nor I him. Anyway, I went to
him and told him my trouble, to which he responded by saying that he could
not loan me any money; that I was out of the district for him to loan on
chattel mortgages; that I would either have to get it at Paynesville,
Atwater or New London. I told him that I had already applied at those
places but could not obtain the loan. Then Mr. Torp asked me what security
I was able to give, to which I replied that the security I had would not be
worth fifty dollars, but that I had a strong back and two strong arms and a
good will and that we would like to stay on the hill a little longer if it
were at all possible. He said, "Such things will go a long way." He sat
there silent for a minute or two, then he said, "I'll think the matter over
and you come back after dinner." A lump got into my throat so that I could
not even say, "Thank you."

I walked down into the railroad yards, found a place between two box cars
and prayed for nearly an hour and a half-back and forth I went praying that
the Lord would "speak to the dear man and make his heart tender toward this
poor man and his family." I went back to the bank and the good man met me.
He invited me into his office, and when we were seated he said, "I have
thought the matter over and I am going to loan you the money; now what
security have you to offer?" I said, "I have a bay colt, a couple of
calves, an old wagon I paid seven dollars for, and some other little
trinkets." "Well," he said, "the colt as it grows will increase in
price--good horses at that time were only worth about fifty dollars--and
the calves also will increase in value. How long a time do you want?" I
told him I thought eight months. Then he told me that their charge for such
loans was 12%, but that he would let me have it for 8%.

Three weeks before the note came due I went to see him. My purpose in going
was in regard to the loan. "Well," he said, "it is not due yet; we have not
sent you a notice." I told him that I was wanting to know whether he would
extend the time on the note. He asked me whether I had anything at all to
pay on it. I told him I had only $50.00 and the interest. To which he
replied, "That's fine." It took me two years instead of eight months to pay
off the loan; but I was always on hand ahead of time to get the extension.
When I made the last payment he gave me one dollar.

I went to see this banker some years later, and I asked him what it was
that had made him so kind to me. Tears came into his eyes, but he did not
answer--and my eyes were moist as well. He turned and from a drawer took
out a small tract in which was an account of his boyhood life and
experiences. His father died when he was eleven years old. He took a job as
ship boy on board a ship and went through untold hardships to help support
his mother and his six brothers and sisters. When he was about seventeen he
came to America and located in Wisconsin.

When the Civil War was on a certain rich man came to him with an offer of
several hundred dollars if he would act as substitute for his son in the
army--which offer, however, he refused. Some time later he became
acquainted with a family in which were seven children who were very good to
him. One day word came that the father, who was a soldier, was killed in
action and that the oldest boy was to be taken to fill his father's place.
Whereupon young Torp stepped up to the boy and said, "You go home and take
care of your mother and the family and I will go in your place--free of
charge." The Lord was good to him and protected him; very soon he was
promoted to the rank of an officer--and so the booklet continued, telling
of his life's experiences.

These two incidents remind me, by way of contrast, of the story of another
banker and of the way he dealt with a poor man who was in debt to him. When
not prepared to meet the payments on his note the poor man would ask for an
extension of time. Finally the banker became impatient and refused to grant
any further time extension. The poor man begged for mercy--that he would
allow him more time. "All right," said the banker, "I have a glass eye; it
is such a good one that people cannot tell which one it is; if you can tell
which one, I will extend the loan." Looking carefully at the eyes the man
said, "It is the left one." "Yes," said the other, "how could you tell?"
The man said, "I could tell that eye was more sympathetic than the good
one." It is said of Jesus that he "learned obedience through the things
that he suffered"--and so with us, we learn how to have sympathy according
to how we suffer.

       *       *       *       *       *

My first experience of being healed of cancer of the stomach was while I
was in Grand Forks in 1922 after that Doctor Weatherstein had examined me
and said there was nothing that could be done for me. I was taken to the
Werstlein's home where I was staying, and Brother Shave, Sister Gaulke and
Sister Johnstone were sent for. They came, and when they saw me as I lay on
the lounge, they fell on their knees weeping and calling on God. All at
once they arose, and with Sister Werstlein, laid their hands on me and
rebuked the devil and the cancer, and I was instantly healed!

In the fall of 1936 I had a number of calls to go to the West Coast, but I
did not feel that I could leave unless wife had someone to stay with her.
However, she insisted that I should go, saying she was able to take care of
herself, but I hesitated about going so far away and applied for a job as
an automobile adjuster paying $50 a week and commission. I had everything
signed up on Friday, and I was to go to work the following Tuesday. On
Sunday the cancer returned again for the third time--the blood running from
me and I was very sick. Wife said--not in an unkind way--"Good enough for
you." I said, "I know what you are going to say." "Yes," she went on, "but
I will check up on you. Do you remember what Brother Dorrity said to you
when you were ordained? 'This is not for a day, nor for a week, nor for a
month or a year, but for your lifetime,' and you are not dead yet!" To
which I replied, suffering and weeping, "All right, you come and pray for
me." She came and prayed and I was instantly healed. Needless to say, I did
not take the job.

This took place the Sunday before Thanksgiving. On Thanksgiving day we were
to go by invitation to Willmar to dinner and in the evening we were to
attend service and I was to preach. That was the last automobile trip my
wife ever took with me.

In the same year we were living on our little farm. On December the first,
as I was going to town, wife made out a little list of things she wanted me
to buy, but in spite of the list I forgot two of the items I was to
get--and they were never purchased for they were never needed. On Monday
the 8th I said to her, "Perhaps I had better go to town and get those two
articles," but she said, "Never mind, we will wait until someone else goes
in."

Being clerk of the district school board and her brother the chairman, when
he came over, they talked over some business matters and other affairs that
evening. The next morning she got up early. I saw a light in her room and I
asked her whether she was getting up. She said she was; so I thought I had
better go down and stir up the fire. When she came down she said, "If you
want a job you can get breakfast ready." I answered, "Okay, what do you
want to eat?" She said, "A glass of milk, a slice of toast and a soft
cooked egg." Then she said, "I suppose you want oatmeal!" I said, "Sure."

After breakfast we had our morning worship and then she went to read and
write. After I had washed the dishes I said, "I am going to town to get
those two articles." To which she replied, "It is up to you. No hurry about
it." I went out to the garage to get the car and found I had a flat tire,
so I went back into the house and said, "It is cold out there and there is
a flat tire." She said, "Never mind."

About eleven o'clock she put her hands up to her ears and said, "I have
such pain around my ears." Then she went over to the sofa and lay down, but
the pain grew worse. I went to her and knelt down; we prayed and she was
instantly made well.

At noon I fixed a little lunch, after which I said, "Now I will go and fix
the tire and go to town." She laughed and said, "So now you are going to be
a man again."

I jacked up the car but could not turn any of the bolts on the wheel. I
walked to the neighbor's and borrowed a coal chisel but still I could not
move a bolt even with the hammer and chisel. All at once I heard a rattle
as though someone was dying. It startled me. I threw down the hammer and
chisel, and ran for the house like a wild man, jerking open one door after
another, and slamming them as I went. When I opened the last one, there I
saw wife sitting in the rocker reading, and she laughed. I raised my hands
and said to her, "You are not dead yet!" She answered, "I should say not! I
was wondering what kind of a cowboy had come rattling through the house!"

Then I told her that I could not get the wheel off. After a few minutes she
said, "Uncle Carl [her brother] said to me, 'Martha, why don't you take a
rest? You are always so busy and you don't have to keep going like that,'
so now I am going up stairs to take a rest. You come with me and carry my
Bible and a few other things." So I went with her. After I had tucked her
in bed I asked her if she was resting comfortably now. She said, "Yes," and
looking up at me with a smile, she said, as though she was about to tell me
a secret, "And now..."--and she was dead! I raised my hands and said, "O
Mama, you are not leaving me, are you?" But there she lay smiling.

I called the doctor and in a few minutes the house was full of people. The
first one to come was Sister Hansen. She said, "Brother Susag, Sister Susag
is not dead--she lies there smiling!" But she was gone. She had been
praying for about two years that she might go that way, and her prayer was
answered. (I got a neighbor young man to come and see what he could do with
the car. He had no trouble in turning the bolts and was able to fix it very
easily.) The feeling I had that I could not leave my wife to go to the West
Coast to hold meetings proved to have been quite in order.

       *       *       *       *       *

On one of my trips I had to change trains at Grand Forks, and having a
little time to spare I walked down a certain street of the city and met
Brother John Sonden who was standing outside of a doctor's office. He was
surprised to see me, but I explained that I was just passing through in
making my train connections. He said he was waiting for his son, Brent, who
was up in the office consulting the doctor about his health. He wished so
much that I could talk to the boy. At his request I went and met him as he
was coming out of the consulting room.

He informed me that the doctor had told him he had heart trouble, but as he
did not know what kind, he wanted him to go to the hospital for a week when
he thought he would be able to locate the ailment. After hearing what he
had to say, I said to him, "I'll tell you what your trouble is and how you
feel when you are sitting on the gang plow, plowing: You feel you are going
to fall off in front of the plow and get killed and that makes you nervous
and sick." He said, "Yes sir, that is exactly how I feel." I then said to
him, "I can tell you the cure for it: Go home, and falling on your knees,
confess your sins to God and call on Him. for salvation. I will be agreed
in prayer and I guarantee you will be well--and now, goodbye, Brent, I must
run to catch my train."

A year later when driving past his farm with Brother Holman, I saw a man
out in the field and asked Brother Holman whether that was Brent Sonden. He
said it was, and out of the car I got and ran over to him in the field
saying, "Praise the Lord, Brent--did you follow the advice I gave you a
year ago?" He answered, "Yes, and I have never had that feeling again since
the Lord saved me."

       *       *       *       *       *

At one time I went to Hereford, Minnesota to preach for Brother George
Green while he went on a trip to Iowa. At the Sunday morning service I
learned that Elder Larson had met with an automobile accident the night
before, breaking his left arm in two places and had been taken to the
hospital at Barrett. His father phoned me that he would call for me and
take me with him to the hospital.

On our arrival there, we found three doctors on the spot ready to amputate
the arm--they were to take it off between the shoulder and the elbow. But I
protested, saying, "That arm is not going to be amputated; those bones have
to be set; for if you take the arm off you can never put it back again."
But the doctors objected, "That is all we can do." I replied, "If Doctor
Phelon of Paynesville had been at home I would have called for him to come
and he would have fixed those bones in a jiffy." They replied, "We know him
and he is no better than we are."

They turned to the father and said, "Are you going to listen to us or to
this old foggy preacher?" "Well," he answered, "The old minister knows
something too." At this, two of the doctors picked up their instruments and
left. The one remaining said to me, "What are you going to do?" I said, "I
am going to Hereford to preach tonight, after which I'll come back and take
the young man with me on the train to Minneapolis." "But," he said,
"gangrene may set in." I told him that I would pray God Almighty to keep
that away. Then he asked me whether I was going alone with the boy, and I
told him I was. He said that I was a brave man, but I answered, "No, it is
not that I am brave, but that young man would give anything to have his two
arms." Then the doctor said, "How would it be if I were to go with you?" I
told him that it would be fine. When we were on the train he asked me where
I was going to take the young man when we got to Minneapolis. I told him I
hadn't thought of that, but in a city of 500,000 people there must be a
doctor capable of setting bones. If not, I said, "I'll do it myself." "All
right," replied the doctor, "We'll take him to the Fairview Hospital; I
know a doctor there who is good at setting bones. His name is Seversen."
And this we decided to do.

It was early when we arrived in the city, so we first had breakfast, after
which I was introduced to Dr. Seversen. I said to him, "So you are the
doctor who is going to set the bones in that arm?" But he said, "It can't
be done; the arm will have to be amputated." I said, "That suggestion has
been made to me before, and that arm is not going to come off." While we
were talking several other doctors had come in--some thirteen or fourteen
in all. They said. "We will show you the Xray pictures"--hoping to convince
me that I was wrong. But I answered, "Xray pictures or no Xray pictures,
that arm is not going to be amputated." However, they protested and argued
that gangrene would set in--if it had not already done so. I said, "I will
ask God Almighty to not let that happen." Then turning to the doctors, I
said, "Shame on you doctors; if you cannot do it, I can, only I have no
license...." And to Dr. Seversen I said, "Will you do it? Tell me quick,
for if you will not, I will take him away from here." The doctor replied,
"I will."

I said to Dr. Seversen, "I would like to go along with you to see whether
you know how to do it." Eight doctors were also present. While the doctor
was drilling a hole in the protruding bone, red blood spurted out of it,
and I said, "Praise the Lord!" One of the doctors standing by said, "How do
you know fhat that looks good?" I made no reply, but looked at him with a
grin.

During his stay in the hospital I visited the young man from time to time.
One day I asked the doctor how he was getting along with Elder, and he
answered, "Getting along good only the sore doesn't quit running as rapidly
as I would like to have it." Then I ventured, "Have you looked at his
back?" He asked, "Tuberculosis of the spine?" I replied, "You had better
look."

The next time I was there he said, "There is no tuberculosis about him now;
he is well, when did he have it?" Then I told him that five years previous
to this time, when a lad of fourteen, he was sick and I prayed for him and
the Lord healed him. (Dr. Seversen did a good job on that young man's arm
and the Lord did the finishing.) Mr. Larson has a good strong arm today and
is employed in a service station in Elbow Lake, Minnesota.

Two years later I visited Dr. Seversen. When he saw me, he stuck both arms
up and said, "Here comes the man with the iron nerve." I answered him, "No,
here comes the man with a little good common sense and faith in God
Almighty." "Yes," he said, "common sense, but I thought it could not be
done, when it was in such a mess and had been broken so long." I answered
him, "Yes, but a good arm is better than an iron hook on it." He said,
"Indeed, but I did not think it could be done." (I have nothing against
doctors, but the Lord can do what men cannot do.)

       *       *       *       *       *

One time Brother and Sister George Larson's three sons were stricken at the
same time with infantile paralysis. Herman was 21 and the twins 18 years. A
specialist was called and he brought two doctors with him. He pronounced
the cases as very serious, especially Norman who was stricken in the head,
and they did not think there was any hope for him. They said it would be a
good thing if he would die, for if he lived, he would be crazy. They sent
for me. Sister Larson was then pastor of a congregation in Hereford, Minn.
They had been praying and we prayed again, and the Lord finished the job
and healed all three. Often people say, "It was not so serious and may not
have been what they said it was," but this time the devil got fooled. The
young man had been going to the University of Minnesota where they had been
tapping some blood from them for medical science purposes to use to heal
others stricken in the same manner; so medical science acknowledge they had
the real thing.

At one of the camp meetings at Hereford, Ole Torgesen got very much under
conviction and went home to repair a thrashing machine engine. It did not
want to start and he got angry and swore at it. Starting suddenly, the fly
wheel struck his left hand and breaking a number of bones. He went to the
doctor and had the bones set and the hand taped and the arm strapped to his
body. Then he came back to the meeting and wanted to be saved. He repented,
and the Lord accepted him. While he was still on his knees he looked up and
said, "I hear you men believe in divine healing, and I want to be prayed
for that the Lord will heal my hand." So Brother C. H. Tubbs and myself
prayed the prayer of faith and he began to unloose his arm and take off the
bandage. While he was doing so, the saints were shouting the praises of
God. Others told him not to take the bandage off and got angry as he
continued removing them. Finally he took off the cotton and cleaned off the
iodine and the taping. After doing so, he lifted his arm slowly to move his
fingers. Finally he put his hand up and moved his fingers freely, and his
hand was healed to the glory of God. Next day we had baptismal services and
I asked him if he wanted to be baptized. He said he did, but thought his
wife would be saved, too, so wished that both could be baptized together. I
said, "All right."

Next day in the morning service she got saved. She was the daughter of a
lay minister of a certain denomination who did not believe in baptism by
immersion. She asked me if they could be baptized right away. I told her
that just as soon as the service was over we would go immediately to the
pool. She did not want her parents to know what she was doing, so we kept
it quiet, but when we started for the pool, the prairie seemed to be alive
with people on horse back and in all kinds of rigs, coming from all
directions.

They were blowing horns and making music on circle saws. So when we got to
the pool, the banks were covered with people more than in the baptismal
service before. While we were singing, I heard the sister say to her
husband, "There they come!" It was her father and mother. They came over to
them and I said, "Don't say a word to them." The preacher went after them
in a great way. Finally the daughter put her arms around his neck, and
said, "Daddy, don't go at it this way, please. We are saved now and want to
obey the commandments of the Lord." "All right," he said, "You are old
enough to know what you are doing." "But this man..." running at me and
shaking his fist in my face, and I thought I surely would get a good
licking when I said nothing and did not move. He cooled down, and said,
"This is a poor man. We better take up a collection for him," and walked
away. While I was baptizing the two and a Methodist minister's son, stones
and sticks flew in plenty around me but none hit me.

One evening three young men cut the rope of the tent and were caught. When
they learned they could get seven years in State prison, and we did not
prosecute them--that ended all the disturbance at that place.

       *       *       *       *       *

At one time I was holding a revival meeting at Plum Coulee, Canada. One
evening there was conviction upon a number of people. I was just going to
close my sermon and make the altar call, and the devil said, "Now you
swear." It shocked me so, I had to stop for a minute and conviction ceased.
Then I had to start preaching again. The devil once more said, "Now you
swear." I rebuked him and went ahead and made the altar call, and those
under conviction came forward and received help.

       *       *       *       *       *

MAN FEAR

I was called at one time to Grand Forks to help in a meeting. Coming there,
I saw two or three large, tall ministers whom I had never seen before. I
was scared to preach before them, so when we had prayer that evening, I
prayed the Lord to deliver me from man fear. The committee asked me to
speak that evening and the Lord blessed and gave me victory. Next day one
of those good ministers came to me and said, "I want to talk to you. I was
so blessed before you came, but since you came, I was afraid of you and my
blessing all left. I wonder if you can help me?" "I can," I said. "When I
came last night, upon seeing you and Brother H., I got so scared I wished I
was not here, so I prayed and it left me and then the devil jumped on you."

This made me think of a Swedish song which says in part:

  "Menisko frygtens didlige snaror har bringat
  Mangen en man paafald."

Which means in English:

  "The fear of man the deadly snares
  Has brought many a man to fall."

In a case like this it may not mean so much, but in many cases good
ministers have failed to preach the truth because of the fear of man. What
a disaster for themselves and for hundreds of souls!

One Sunday morning I spoke in a chapel for a brother pastor. When the
service was over he came to me and in a very tired tone, he said, "Did you
mean me this morning?" I answered, "Dear Brother, I surely did not mean
you." He said, "Well," and walked away still tired. I did not go for lunch
but remained in the chapel and wept and prayed that I might not be a trial
to my dear brethren. I said, "I will not go into the pulpit again until you
give me more wisdom," but when the afternoon meeting time came, no one else
had a message, and I had to go into the pulpit again. The Lord blessed in a
wonderful way, and a number of souls got saved. After the service the good
pastor came to me and said, "Will you forgive me? You did not mean me this
morning."

       *       *       *       *       *

HOW THE LORD LEADS

Once on my way to Platte, South Dakota, I got lost. I was driving slowly
trying to think of where I had gotten off my route--when suddenly a man in
a field on a tractor waved me to stop. He climbed over the fence, and here
it was Brother Walter Ratzlaf. He said, "How come you are here?" I
answered, "I'm lost." "Turn around," he answered, "and we will drive down
to the house."

Going to the house, there was a young lady I had known in North Dakota. He
introduced her to me as his wife. The last time I had seen them, they were
in North Dakota. Both of them were now members of the committee for the
young people's convention of North Dakota, which was to convene the
following Friday, Saturday and Sunday. George W. Green of Bertha, Minnesota
was to have been the guest speaker, but they had just gotten a telegram
from him saying that he could not be there. Brother Ratzlaf said, "The Lord
must have sent you here. Could you be our guest speaker?" I answered, "Yes,
if you want me. I am on my way home, and Brother Green was expecting to
meet me at my place, and I was planning on taking him from my home on to
the convention." Again, I could see how the Lord directed many times,
unbeknowns to me.

A lady brought her sister who was in the last stages of tuberculosis to the
camp meeting at Saint Paul Park, Minn. Wife and I prayed for the sick woman
and she was instantly healed. So they insisted that I go to their place and
hold them a meeting. I was very busy, so it was sometime before I could go.
Finally they wrote asking how much I wanted to hold the meeting. I wrote
that my carfare round trip was to be $26.50, and I thought I ought to have
that much. They answered that they would give me that much, and that much
more. I went and started the meeting on Friday evening. The folks I was to
stay with lived six miles in the country and we secured the Methodist
Church in town for the services. We had two services on Saturday, three on
Sunday, two Monday and two Tuesday. Tuesday night they left me in the
church. I had coal enough to keep me warm. As I had no money to go to the
hotel, the next morning I walked out to their place in the loose snow,
arriving about dinner time. I had dinner and that evening they took me to
the meeting and left me again. I have no recollection of how I got away
from there. It seems to me a family in town, who knew some of my relatives,
kept me for a day or two. My carfare, which I still have coming from them
as well as the rest, is the only meeting I had held in 52 years on which I
had set a price. A brother belonging to another denomination who often
attended the services and who was an agent for the Furges Kalls Woolen
Mills, Minnesota, whom I met some years later, asked me, "Did you ever get
any money from that meeting?" I replied, "I have it all coming," so he gave
me five dollars and a pair of seven dollar trousers. That experience was
one of the "all things." This was the only time I ever set any price on my
ministry.

PRAYER CHANGES THINGS

Brother Masters and I were holding meeting in Hereford, Minnesota. Brother
Masters was doing most of the preaching, and I was exhorting and giving the
invitations. One evening after he finished preaching, I dismissed the
meeting immediately. As we were going to our room between eleven and
twelve, he asked, "Why did you not give the altar call tonight?" Then he
added, "You did right, but what was the reason?" I answered, "Too much
Masters." He replied, "The Lord help me!" and on his knees he went. He
stayed there until between three and four o'clock in the morning. The next
night I did not need to give an altar call, for the people flocked to the
altar of their own accord.

       *       *       *       *       *

MY FIRST PREACHING TRIP

I was standing in a wagon driving home from Hawick, Minnesota. The Lord
spoke to me and said, "I want you to go to Belgrade next Sunday and
preach." I replied, "I do not know what to preach." The Lord answered, "You
go and open your mouth wide, and I will fill it." I argued that I did not
have the money to go. He answered, "I'll tend to that."

When I arrived home from Hawick, there was a letter from an old brother
about 80 years of age living at Norway Lake, Minn. He said, "The Lord has
been telling me that you ought to go to Belgrade and hold them a meeting,
and I am sending you the carfare." So I went.

Another time I was holding a meeting north of Belgrade and staying with
Brother and Sister Andrew Larson. The night before leaving that locality I
dreamed that when I came to Belgrade, I saw a man go into the depot just
ahead of me, and as he stepped away from the ticket window he said, "Ha,
ha, ha, I may as well go home then, since there is no train until three
o'clock this afternoon."

Brother Larson was to take me to the depot early in the morning, and it was
cold. When telling them my dream they laughed, and we all laughed. They
said, "It can't be that bad."

It was about six miles to town and riding in an open buggy, I got cold, and
when we got within about a quarter mile from town, I said, "You had better
let me out here and I will walk and get warmed up." So he did. When I
arrived at the depot a man walked in just ahead of me, and when he turned
from the window, he said, "Ha, ha, ha, I might just as well go home since
there will be no trains until three o'clock this afternoon."

I walked up to the ticket window and said, "How come the train is so late?"
He said, "An old freight train ran off the track and they will have to
clean up before the passenger train can come through." I did not wait, but
walked home--a distance of twenty miles.

       *       *       *       *       *

At one time I held a meeting in what was known as Clark school house,
fifteen miles south of Cohasset, Minnesota. After the last Sunday morning
service, I said, "If there is anyone who will take me to Cohasset after
service tonight, my heavenly Father will give him a hundred fold in this
life, and eternal life in the world to come." So going down to the door
after service to shake hands with the folks, there stood a nice-looking
young man who had not been out to the services before. He said, "I'll take
you to town tonight." I said, "All right, thank you," and out he went.
After a while Brother Goodell, the elder, came and said, "I'll take you to
town." I said, "You are too late. You lost your pay this time." He said,
"Who is going to take you?" I answered, "The young man who stood by the
door when I got there." He thought a while, then he said, "Oh, that was
Henry Garber; that will never do. He is not saved. He drinks a little,
dances, plays cards and likely smokes." Then he added, "I'l take you. The
road is bad" (and it surely was). I answered him, "If he is like that he
needs the pay." "Well," he said, "He may not come. Aren't you afraid to go
with him?" "No," I said.

He came, and it took us quite a while to get there on account of the road.
We talked farming, dancing, drinking, love and salvation. Getting to town,
it was still an hour and a half before the train would arrive. He said,
"Wouldn't it be good to have a little lunch now?" I said, "That would be
fine." "Alright," he said, "you order what you want." "Aren't you going to
have some?" I asked; but he said, "no." After lunch he said, "How about a
little ice cream now." "Fine," I said.

There were quite a number of young folks in the restaurant and while I was
eating he was talking to the young people telling them he had been to two
services that day and he added, "They were two of the best sermons I have
ever heard in my life." They called out in a chorus, "Henry, Henry, have
you sworn off?" Then they asked, "Who preached?" He answered, "Reverend
Susag over here."

After I got through eating, he introduced me to all those young people.
Then I said, "You had better get me to the depot now, and start for home;
the road is so bad." "Well," he said, "I will not start back until you are
on the train." And so he did; and when he put my grips on the train, he
said, "Good by," and as he shook hands with me he left $3.00 in my hand. As
he was leaving me he said,

"When--" but he never finished what he started to say. No doubt he meant to
say, "When you pray remember me." I did not hear of him, nor see him for
two or three years. Going to Milwaukee one Sunday to hold services for
Brother Flint, a young man came to me in the chapel and said, "Praise the
Lord Brother Susag." I said, "Amen." I looked at him and he said, "Do you
know me?" I answered, "Yes, I have met you somewhere, but I don't remember
where." "Think of Cohasset, Minnesota," he answered. I slapped him on the
shoulder and said, "Henry, when did you get saved?" "Driving home that
night," he said; "thinking how you treated me, almost a stranger, you spoke
to me like a father--with such good understanding of everything and you
called me brother and I got broken up, and going to my room on the farm, I
knelt by my bed and repented and the Lord saved me. It was so good and the
Lord made me so happy. I went to see my parents who lived six miles out of
Milwaukee, Wisconsin." They all became members of the congregation in
Milwaukee, and Henry became a much loved and respected member of the
congregation in Grand Rapids, Minnesota, and for many years one of the
leaders and finally went home to his reward.

One time I was holding a meeting in the neighborhood where a young man
lived who was one of our first converts, and he attended my services. One
day he asked me if I would go home with him. I said, "Yes." On the way, he
stopped me and said, "Have you got grace enough?" I answered, "I think so."
Finally we got near his home, and in a little grove he stopped me again and
he repeated, "Have you got grace enough?" I answered again, "I think so,
but if you think I need more, let us pray that the Lord will give me all
that I need." We knelt down in the grove there and prayed. Coming into the
house he introduced me to his mother, a fine looking lady. We sat down and
had a friendly chat, and before I knew it, I said, "Praise the Lord."

"Oh," she said, "You are one of them are you?" Then she gave me a real
tongue lashing. This was because several of her sons and daughters had
gotten saved, and they were very much persecuted because they left their
church. Sometimes when she would find Olaf on his knees praying, she would
grab him by the hair and pull him around in the house.

Finally her husband came in, and she introduced me to him.

"Susag," he said, "are you the husband of that witch over near Paynesville
or Hawick, that goes singing and fingering on the strings on that box,
getting people to weep and taking them away from their parents?" (Wife
played a harp when she sang.) "You get out of this house as fast as your
feet can carry you."

I took my hat and started for the door, and as I came near, he stood there
with his hatchet in his hand and said, "If you come nearer, I will smash
your head," and lifted the hatchet. I realized the man was so angry he did
not know what he was saying, so I went back and sat down. "Say, Mr.
Erickson," I said, "sit down, and let me tell you how the Lord saved us."
"Alright," he answered. His wife said, "Get him out, get him out!" Then he
answered, "Let him speak out of his heart. It is the first time he has ever
been in our house." "No," she said, "Get him out." "No, no, wife, be
quiet." And he sat down and I related how the Lord convicted wife and I.
(We used to be of the same faith as they were.) When I had told them our
experience, he came over and put his hand on my shoulder, and said, "You
can stay with us over night, but don't say anything about your religion."

I thanked him and said, "We have services tonight, and I have to be going."

Later on Brother Peter Peterson of Foboken, New Jersey and myself held a
meeting in that neighborhood and went and called on Mr. Erickson, and had a
very pleasant visit with him. Brother Peterson had been a rough seaman and
he told him of his life, and how the Lord had convicted and saved him. That
seemed to impress him.

Years later Olaf bought the farm and his parents moved to another house.
One morning Mr. Erickson did not come in for breakfast, and his wife went
to his bedroom to see what was the matter. There he was on his knees by the
bed praying. The first time she had ever seen him doing so in that
position. He got up and said, "yes, I am coming." She went back to the
kitchen, but still he did not come; so she went back to call him. Again he
was on his knees by the bed. She said, "Aren't you coming husband. The
breakfast is getting cold." He answered again, "Yes, I'm coming." But he
did not come yet. She went back the third time, and on his knees he was,
and this time he was dead. No doubt the man had been calling upon God, and
the Bible says, "Whosoever calleth on the name of the Lord shall be saved."
Hundreds of prayers had gone up for those folks. After his death Mrs.
Erickson went to stay with her oldest daughter at Westlake, Minnesota.
After being there for some time she took very sick, and she said to her
daughter, "Will you send for the preacher?" Yes, she said, "What is his
address?" (thinking she wanted her own pastor). "No," she said, "I want
your pastor, Brother Susag." I went and at the end of three days, she got
gloriously saved and got well. Later on she took sick again and passed on,
and because I was in Europe at the time, my wife conducted the funeral
service. What looks hopeless with man can be changed by prayer.

       *       *       *       *       *

At one time when Olae Christaphersen was selling books in the country
between Grove City and Litchfield, Minnesota, he came to a home where quite
a number were weeping and he asked why they were so sad. The lady of the
house replied, "Our daughter, a young lady, is in the bedroom dying, and
husband has gone to town to get the coffin, as she stinks already." (Those
days they took the coffin to the homes sometimes). He inquired if he could
see her, and she said, yes. After standing looking at her a while, he knelt
and laid his hands on her and prayed the prayer of faith, and the Lord
raised her up. Years later he was selling books in N. Dakota. He came to a
nice farm home and knocking at the door a fine looking lady opened the
door. Surprising him, she said, "Come in." Unused to such courtesy, he
hesitated a moment, and she said again, "Come in, I know you. I am the lady
you prayed for down by Litchfield, Minnesota, whose father had gone to the
undertaker to arrange for the funeral. I am married and this is my home."

       *       *       *       *       *

At one time a sister-in-law of Olae Christaphersen, Bastine Christaphersen,
was in childbirth. The midwife said the child could not be born without
medical help. Her husband started for Wilmer to get the doctor. At seven
o'clock she began to get blue and lost consciousness. They sent for Brother
Olae. When he came, he looked at his sister-in-law and walked out into the
woodshed, and there among the split wood he knelt down and prayed. A number
of times they called for him to come in, but he did not answer. About
twelve o'clock he came hurrying in and laid his hands on his sister-in-law
and said, "I command in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ that this child
be born, and that my sister-in-law be made well." Immediately the child was
born, and all was well. In a few minutes the doctor arrived and he said it
was a wonderful miracle.

       *       *       *       *       *

HEALED AFTER RUNNING A RUSTY NAIL THROUGH THE FOOT

One time my wife stepped on a rusty nail, running it through the shoe sole
and her foot. The next morning Brother Christaphersen came and she asked
him to make her a crutch, since I was in Europe at the time. She had to
walk with her knee on a chair and he said he would. He went out and in a
few minutes he came back and said, "The Lord does not want me to make you a
crutch. Let us pray the Lord to heal you." They prayed and she was healed
at once.

       *       *       *       *       *

HEALED OF LOCKJAW

I had my collar bone broken three times; the third time I was in North
Dakota holding meetings. It was during July and very hot, being around 85
to 90 degrees in the shade. I was staying with Brother and Sister E. Olson
and lockjaw set in. I took chills until they moved me into the kitchen and
had the stove red hot. Even then I could hardly quit chilling. I battled
with the devil and the pain for a whole day, and finally got the victory.
Bless His name.

HEALED OF BROKEN LEG

One time I was plowing and was thrown off the seat onto the plow in such a
way that my leg caught between the bars and I was thrown with my weight on
my leg, breaking it near the ankle and splitting the bone nearly to the
knee. The end of the broken bone protruded under the skin near the knee.
The neighbor hearing my scream, phoned to my home, and the folks came and
took me home. We sent for Sister Hendricks, (now Sister Mayhre). She and
wife prayed for me and as they prayed the bone moved back into its place
and the next day I was well as ever and able to go about my business.

       *       *       *       *       *

MAN SAVED AND HEALED

At one time while I was pastor in Grand Forks, a young man came who had
been on crutches for four years. (He was partially paralyzed, and unable to
bear his weight on his limbs.) He came at the time of the State camp
meeting. He had written to Brother E. E. Byrum to come and pray for him,
and he was bringing the answer he had gotten from Brother Byrum which said,
"I haven't time to come and furthermore it is so far and expenses would be
so great and since the Dakota State Camp meeting convenes in a few days,
you might be able to get someone to take you down there. Brother Susag will
be there and he does the same kind of work that I do. He will pray with
you, and instruct you how to get saved and healed."

He came and went through the entire camp meeting without receiving the
faith he needed to get saved and healed, but he remained another day and I
had time to more thoroughly instruct him. He did get saved and was
perfectly healed.

A DOCTOR'S DAUGHTER HEALED

I was asked at one time to come to a certain city to preach for a certain
denomination for a couple of weeks, which I did. On coming I found that I
was to stay with a certain doctor who had a daughter five years old. One
afternoon she was sitting talking with me and I found her almost as smart
as a high school girl. Toward evening I said to her, "Honey, you are sick."
She shrugged her shoulders and said, "I'll be all right in the morning."
But she became seriously ill that evening, insomuch that the next day her
father sent for another doctor, a nurse and a lady to help. About three
o'clock the third morning the doctor came up into my room and made a
confession which he needed not to have made. Then he said, "I've come to my
wit's end; I know of no help for the child. But would you please pray for
her? But pray right away, as she may pass away any time." I began to pray
right away. I put on my clothes and ran down stairs, praying all the while.
When I got down stairs everything was quiet, and when the doctor met me, he
said, "Less than three minutes after you commenced to pray my daughter went
to sleep, and I believe when she wakes up she will be well." She slept
until four in the afternoon. When she awakened, she said, "I want to get up
and dress." The doctor said, "No, honey, you can't do that; you have been
awful sick. You will have to stay in bed and be quiet until you get
stronger." She said, "Where is Brother Susag?" He said, "Do you want to see
him?" She said, yes, so they called me and I said, "Praise the Lord,
honey." She said, "Can't I dress?" "Sure, you can dress," I said, and so
they dressed her. Then she said, "Now I want to get up and run." Again the
doctor said, "You can't do that." She said, "Brother Susag, can't I run?" I
said, "Sure, you can run," and out of the bed she went, but she stumbled
against the wall, and the doctor went to catch her. She said, "Don't touch
me. If I need help, Brother Susag can help me." Then through the house she
ran with the father, mother and nurse after her. I was standing in the
middle of the room praising God. Finally she stopped and faced her father
and said, "Can't I run, daddy?" He said, "Sure you can, honey."

Her father came and put his arms around my neck weeping and said, "You
saved the life of my child." I answered, "No, I didn't." He said, "Who did
then?" I said, "You made a humble confession and asked one of the Lord's
servants to pray, and the Lord honored your faith and healed her." "Yes,"
he said, "but if you hadn't been here she would have been dead now."

A humble confession is a sure stepping stone to faith.

       *       *       *       *       *

HEALED OF PARALYSIS

Not long ago the Lord said to me. "You go to such and such a church
tonight," which I did. After service was over, a man who had been paralyzed
from his waist down for a long time, asked me to pray for him. The prayer
of faith was offered and he was instantly healed. To corroborate the above,
will say that later I met a minister of another denomination who knew the
case and he said that this man had retained his healing.

       *       *       *       *       *

DELIVERED FROM A SINKING SHIP

I wish to rewrite an incident given in Brother E. E. Byrum's book,
"Startling Incidents and Experiences in the Christian Life." As it was
given to him verbally, and I did not see the manuscript to correct it after
it was written. But on reading the article in his book, I discovered that
he had forgotten some of the facts. I am rewriting it here, praying that it
may prove a blessing.

For the glory of God I desire to relate some incidents connected with my
trips to Scandinavia in the years 1904-05. While I was engaged in
evangelistic work in North Dakota in the fall of 1904, the brethren in New
York City wrote me about making them a visit. After praying earnestly for
the Lord to make known his will in the matter, I decided to go, and felt
that if I went to New York I also ought to make a trip across the Atlantic
to Norway to see my parents and relatives whom I had not seen for
twenty-four years.

In the latter part of November it was made very clear to me by the Holy
Spirit that I should go, and about the middle of December I left my home
for New York City. On the 24th of December my wife took so seriously ill
that she was not expected to live. She had faith that the Lord would raise
her up, but the children were much distressed, fearing that their mother
was going to die, and knowing that their father was on his way to a foreign
land, not intending to return for several months. They begged to have a
telegram sent to me asking me to return. Finally about two o'clock in the
night, when she was getting very low, and the children would not be
comforted in any other way, she consented to have a telegram sent to the
missionary home in New York City. Knowing as she did that it was God's will
for me to go to Norway and knowing also that if I returned so soon, I could
not go if she should recover, she prayed earnestly that the Lord would
hinder me from getting the telegram, which he did. God heard her prayer and
also healed her. After stopping with the church in New York for sometime, I
went to Boston, and thence on the 20th of January, 1905 sailed on the
Steamship Saxonia of the Cunard line for Liverpool, England. Everything
went well--the Atlantic was the smoothest I had ever seen it. I wondered
how it could be otherwise, inasmuch as my family and many people of God
were sending up earnest prayers for my safe journey. My journey from
Liverpool to Hull was by railroad, but at the latter place, I embarked on
the S. S. Tasso of the Wilson Line bound for Tronheim, Norway. Getting into
the North Sea we had a very rough voyage. We were to make our first stop at
Stavanger, but the weather was so stormy as we neared the coast that
evening that we did not dare to sail in the dark. Consequently we anchored
out in the North Sea for the night. While the ship tossed up and down and
back and forth through the night, I dreamed the ship was going on dry land.
I could hear the screeching as it went on the rocks and chills went down my
back. Then the scene changed. In my dream I seemed to be on land standing
looking at the ship going, and wondering why it did not tip over. I looked
close and on the right hand side of the ship was a large stone, almost as
high as the ship, scraping against its side. On the left side was a small
stone steadying it as it moved along. Finally it moved out into deep water
and turned to the left, and in a little while we landed at our destination,
Tronheim. In the morning I told my dream at the breakfast table and said,
"We may have an accident before we get through." The people laughed and
said, "Do preachers believe in dreams?" I said, "Yes, when they come true."
They thought there was no danger, for the reason the ship was so large.
"Well," I said, "it is very stormy weather and the sea is full of rocks
along the coast and we do not know what may happen." That day we landed
safely in Stavanger, and then went to our next stop, Bergen. Leaving there
we encountered the roughest sailing I had ever experienced. Four ships
started out at the same time from the dock, and only one was able to anchor
at the next stop, Aalesund, so we had to anchor out in the ocean. The next
morning we were able to land at the dock. Thence we went to Christiansund,
which was our last stop before our final destination. It was a good harbor,
and were ready to leave there at 8 p.m., but as the storm was still raging
out in the sea, the captain decided to remain in the harbor until twelve
o'clock. Then we should land at our destination at eight o'clock in the
morning. At twelve o'clock we left the harbor. The storm was still raging
and a heavy snow was falling. At 1:15 a.m. I felt a shock and heard the
same screeching noise that I had heard in my dream and knew at once what
had happened. Immediately the stewart came running into the stateroom
calling, "Everybody up! take nothing along. We are sinking!"

Quicker than I can tell you the seven men with me in the stateroom were up
and dressing, putting on all the clothes they could. Up the stairs they
went, throwing away their tobacco and pipes, and leaving behind their
whisky bottles, some empty and some partly empty. I got up, dressed, took
my Bible and read a little. Then I knelt down and had prayer. The stewart
came down and said, "Aren't you in a hurry? We are sinking!" I said, "No,
he that believeth shall make no haste." He looked at me and went on the
deck. The snow storm was whistling wildly through the tackling of the ship,
and the seamen were working with all their might to lower the life boats.
Others were running to and fro. Some women were crying aloud and others
were praying while the water was pouring into the sides of the ship. The
pumps were working to their full capacity, throwing out the water. It was
indeed a sad sight. As a seaman was running by, I asked him to direct me to
the pilot. He looked at me and said in a harsh voice, "What do you want
with the pilot?" and went his way. A little further on I met another
seaman, and asked him the same question. He said, "The pilots are both over
there with the captain," pointing to three men who were standing a short
distance away.

I walked over to where they were standing, conversing with one another. I
saluted them and said to the captain. "Could you spare me a minute or two?"
"If it is important, I can," he replied. "I think it is," I said. "Speak on
then," he said.

I then asked him who the pilot of the boat was, and one pointed to himself
and another man. Then I said to the head pilot, "We are off the rock now,
are we not?" "Yes," he answered. "Did you turn to the left when you turned
off the rock," I asked. "Yes," he replied. "If that is the case we need not
go into the life boats," I replied, "as this boat is going to land in
Tronhein, without loss of life."

The captain looked at me and said, "What do you know about navigation,
man?" pointing to the water that was being pumped out of the ship; "we are
sinking." "I know nothing about navigation," I replied. "Explain yourself,"
he said. Then I told my dream, and when I had finished speaking, I saw the
tears running down the weather-beaten cheeks of the pilots. Then the
captain said, "What kind of a man are you?" I answered, "An ordinary
minister." Then the pilot said to the captain, "We had better listen to
this man. He may be more right than we, because as long as this ship can
hold up, we are safe, but if we go into the boats in this fearful weather
and dark night, we shall soon be dashed to pieces against the rocks."

Then the pilot said to me, "Our ship sticks 28 feet in the water and the
rock we struck was only twelve feet under the water, so you see it is a
great miracle that our ship is not in two, and one end on each side of the
rock. Had that happened, no one would have known what became of us, for we
are now in 53 fathoms of water." Orders were then given not to lower the
life boats.

Then I said to the captain, "Is this the Tasso, that used to sail on Norway
24 years ago?" He replied, "No, that lays on the bottom of the sea six
miles from here. What about it?" I said, "I embarked on that ship at
Tronheim the 27th day of April on a Sunday afternoon at four o'clock, of
the year 1881, with 384 other young people who were sailing for England, on
our way to America. At nine o'clock we got into an awful snowstorm and just
lay drifting until one fifteen a.m., exactly the same time of night as we
struck the rock this time. We went on the rock and turned over on the side
just outside of the Agness lighthouse." Then the captain said, "What kind
of a man are you?" "Just an ordinary minister," I answered. The captain
then told me his father was captain of that ship at that time. (It might be
interesting to the reader to know that we lay on our side until almost six
fifteen in the morning when the ship straightened up as the tide arose.
Then they cut the anchor chain and we backed up and went our way.) Needless
to say, that night was one of the greatest prayer meetings ever held.

While I was speaking with the Captain, the first mate had come, a fine tall
Englishman. "Will you kindly go with me to the front end of the ship and
see if we can see any lights? We are lost. We don't know where we are." I
answered, "I know nothing about navigation sir." He said, "Please go with
me." I did, and coming out there, I saw three lights, and he could not see
any. He said, "Keep your eyes on them, and I'll run for the captain." They
both came running and the captain could not see the lights either. Turning
to me he said, "You must be mistaken." "No sir,"

I replied, "I can see them now." He then asked me the color of the lights.
After I had given him a description of them, he saw them himself and
explained, "They are steamers. Where are we? We are lost!" He called out in
agony.

We lay there until six fifteen in the morning. When we turned around to the
right between the rocks, they knew where to go. The pumps were in full
operation, but our ship was tipping backward more and more as if it were
going to stand on one end. We landed in Tronheim in the afternoon with our
handsatchels and our lives, and as soon as the pumps stopped, the ship
filled with water and sank in the harbor.

I saw an account of the wreck in two Norwegian papers after the ship had
been raised and placed on dry dock. The paper stated that the cargo was a
total loss and the ship was about thirty eight thousand dollars. That
nearly every plate from midship to stern was torn loose, just as I had seen
in my dream and the paper said they could not understand why the ship had
not sunk before, as one plate hole was enough to sink the ship. My wife
wrote me later and said, "I know why the ship did not sink. I and many
others were praying that God would keep that ship on top of the waves,
because he had one of his little ones on the ship." The Lord verified his
promises by hearing the prayers of his people to protect me and bring me
safely to my destination. The blessings of salvation never seemed more real
to me than at that time, as I was enabled to be calm and quiet through all
the perils, having the sweet assurance that the mighty arm of God was
upholding me and protecting not only me, but those who were traveling with
me. He hears and answers prayers. Those who trust and believe in him he
often saves from death and destruction.

HOMEWARD BOUND

My return trip was just as eventful as my trip to Norway. For some time I
had been praying earnestly for the Lord to direct me in getting the right
ship across the ocean, as I was to sail during the stormy season of Spring.
On the twentieth of March, 1905, I left the home of my parents in Norway,
with the intention of sailing the next morning. I was to sail on an English
boat bound for Hull, England, in order to reach the fastest boat on the
Cunard Line bound from Liverpool to New York, as I thought that would be
the best vessel to take. Soon after leaving my fathers home, I stopped at a
little seaport called Levanger to visit a relative of mine for a few hours,
expecting to leave on the evening train, but my relative persuaded me to
stay and take the early morning train. He said I would have ample time to
reach my boat in Tronhiem, but when my train entered the station the next
morning, the ship upon which I had intended sailing was just leaving the
harbor.

I did not understand what this meant, but remembered the scripture which
said that "All things work together for good to those that love the Lord."
Had my plans for reaching the fast steamer from Liverpool to New York
carried and had the ship sailed on schedule, I should have been in New York
in ten days, but now I had to make the best of the situation, so I decided
to embark on the S. S. United States of the Scandinavian-American Line from
Oslo which was due in New York just one week later than the other ship, and
if run on schedule generally arrived in New York nine days after leaving
Oslo.

We sailed from Oslo on time, but after being out at sea for a day, we found
to our surprise and dissatisfaction of many of the passengers that instead
of going direct to New York, we had to go to the Azores to pick up some
passengers from another ship of the same line, as a shaft of that ship had
been broken in a storm on the Atlantic Ocean, and the ship had been towed
to some Island. This made a very long round-about voyage.

With the exception of two or three days of storm, the weather was good, but
the waves rolled exceedingly high every day. By this we knew that farther
north in the ocean, a terrible storm was raging.

Finally after fifteen days of rough sailing, we found ourselves just
outside New York in the midst of a heavy fog, such as I had never before
witnessed. The whistles of the fog horns of the ships kept blowing and the
bells ringing as we slowly proceeded in the afternoon, but finally we had
to anchor, as a pilot from the shore entered our ship and forbade us to go
any further. He said the sea was full of anchored ships on account of the
fog, some of which had been there for three days. He said we could not move
until the wind changed and drove the fog away. I felt quite satisfied,
although like many others, I had been very seasick while on the voyage.
Early the next morning I went on the deck. There was so much unrest and
grumbling among the passengers that it was quite unpleasant for me to stay
on the ship any longer. However, the fog seemed to be thicker than ever. It
was so dense a person could hardly see beyond his outstretched arm. I went
to my room, and there while lying across the bed, prayed earnestly to God
to take away the fog. Then I went on deck and looked, but the fog seemed to
be still worse. I went down and prayed the second time, but found on my
return the fog seemed to be thicker than ever. The third time I went and
prayed, and while I was praying a voice said to me, "Change your clothes."
I knew what it meant. The Lord had heard my prayers. I arose and put on my
best suit of clothes (for I expected soon to be in New York). Then I went
to the breakfast table.

The people were complaining on account of having to remain so long on the
ship. I said, "Before we have finished breakfast, we shall be on our way
into the harbor." Some asked who had said so. I said I had been praying to
God and He had assured me that such would be the case. Eight men got up and
laughed me to scorn, saying, "ha, ha, ha," but while we were eating we
heard something rattle and someone asked. "What is that?" I said, "I
suppose they are raising the anchor." A number sprang from, their seats and
looked through the portholes and the fog was gone, and we were on our way
to the port. Then one man arose and said, "That minister's religion must be
right." After that there was no more laughing and scorning. Thank God, he
stood by me and showed himself mighty in answering my prayers and in
lifting the fog to the astonishment of my fellow travelers. Our ship was
the first one to pass into port, though some had been waiting there for
three days for an opportunity to reach New York.

After landing, I learned that the Cunard liner on which I had intended to
sail from Liverpool, had not yet arrived. It did not arrive until the next
day. According to reports it had the worst voyage that any ship of that
company had had for forty six years, and a number of passengers were badly
hurt, being thrown about by the rolling and tossing of the ship. A young
man who came across the ocean on that ship informed me that a number had to
be tied to their beds, and many were injured. After learning these things,
I perceived that the Lord had answered prayer in a wonderful way. He had
hindered me from embarking on that ship, and had thus spared me much
unnecessary suffering.

Thanks be to his precious and matchless name. It is safe to put our whole
trust in God, because He knows how to protect and shield us from harm and
danger. It is my prayer that the relating of this incident of the Lord's
dealings with me may prove a blessing and inspiration to others, and enable
them to put their whole trust in the Lord in time of difficulty and
distress. He will surely hear and answer prayer when we call upon Him in a
simple childlike manner.

       *       *       *       *       *

AN ANSWER TO PRAYER

For the glory of God, I wish to relate two very definite instances of
answered prayer.

One time I was holding services nine miles north of Kerkhoven, Minn. The
meetings were very good, but I was under a very severe trial, and it seemed
very difficult for me to learn the will of the Lord as to whether at the
close of the meeting I should go home or to Grand Forks, North Dakota, Camp
Meeting. I learned that my fare from Kerkhoven to Grand Forks would be
$3.32. Then I went out into the grove three times, (I believe it was on
Friday,) and asked the Lord that on Sunday forenoon at the close of the
services He would put it in the mind of somebody to give me exactly $3.32
if He wanted me to go to Grand Forks. No one but the Lord knew my needs. On
Sunday after the service while I was shaking hands with the people, a
brother put some money in my outside coat pocket. When I left the house, I
walked to the grove to the same spot where I had prayed and knelt down and
thanked the Lord for $3.32 in my pocket, and when I had counted the money I
found that it was the exact amount for which I had prayed. He had not only
supplied my carfare, but had in this way made known His will to me. Before
I left the next morning, the brethren had given me more, so that I had
something to send to my family.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SECOND INCIDENT

The second incident I desire to relate, occurred at the time when the Lord
made it very clear to me to go to a certain place in South Dakota to hold a
meeting in a new place. This also was on Friday and I knew that the Lord
was directing me to go on the following Wednesday. I was in need of a suit
of clothes, as what I had was not fit to wear in public. I was also in need
of carfare. An elderly sister was staying with us and together with my wife
we had prayer and agreed that the Lord would supply these needs before
Wednesday morning. While we were in prayer the Lord made it clear and
definite that He would grant our petition. As we arose from our knees, I
said, "Thank God, I have the money by faith." The elderly sister said,
"Well, I suppose you will have to write to some of the well-to-do brethren
and tell them your need." "No," I answered, "The Lord will tell them. I
might make a mistake if I undertake to write to any of them." "You will not
have the money then," she said. "Yes, mother," I said, "You will see before
next Wednesday morning that I will have all I need." She doubted and said
she would see.

The following Sunday we went to Colfax, Minnesota and held a service and
received one dollar, and I said, "Thank God for one dollar." Then on
Monday, I received a letter from a brother who lived near Sisseton, South
Dakota which contained a check for seven dollars. The check was from a man
whom I did not know that I had ever seen, and he did not know my address,
but drove fifteen miles with a team and in a lumber wagon to another
brother who knew my address. He told him to send it to me immediately, as
he was impressed that I was in need. The old mother knew this brother and
said he was well-to-do, and could well afford to send it. I said to her,
"Did I not tell you that the Lord knew to whom to speak." She was very much
astonished. I also received another letter in which there was a check from
a brother whom I had not seen for four years. He wrote that while he was
coming from Crookston, Minnesota to where he had been working, and was
nearing Wadena, Minnesota, the Spirit of the Lord told him to hurry to the
bank before it closed and send Brother Susag five dollars. In his letter he
said he thought I must be in great need and that he hurried and reached the
bank in time to get the money. He further said, "May the Lord bless you and
use you to His glory."

Wednesday morning I started for Saint Paul, Minnesota with thirteen dollars
in my pocket. Arriving there, I was looking for a second hand clothing
store. I stood on the street praying for the Lord to direct me and He said,
"Samuelson, Samuelson." I walked around a few blocks and suddenly I looked
up over a store and it said, "Samuelson Second Hand Clothing." Going in,
the merchant asked if he could help me. I said, "Have you a Prince Albert
coat and vest that will fit me." He looked and said, "Just your fit," and
walked over to a show case and brought the coat and vest and put it on me.
It fit like it was made to order by a tailor. You could not see that it had
even been on a man before. He said it was an eighty five dollar coat and
vest, and it surely looked like it. It had silk facing on the lapels. I
took off the coat, and put my own back on. I felt that I did not dare ask
him the price. He said, "Aren't you going to take it." He took my coat off
and put the coat back on me. Then I prayed the Lord for courage to ask him
the price, so I said "What's your price?" He said, "A dollar and a half." I
caught my breath and said, "What did you say?" He repeated, "A dollar and a
half." I said, "Have you a pair of new trousers that will fit me?" I had to
have the silk facing taken off, for fear I would be asked to the altar for
too fine a suit.

I not only bought the coat and vest, but one new and one second hand
trousers, and all came to $4.50.

Going to Arlington, I was dressed in the finest suit I had ever had in my
life. I overheard two ladies speaking about me. One said, "You can see that
man has seen better days by the fine clothes he wears." I wore that coat
and vest for many years, and couldn't wear it out. Finally I got too stout
and then I gave it away.

       *       *       *       *       *

At one time the Missionary Board was writing of the need in the
Scandinavian countries, and wanted me to go immediately, though they were
unable to finance me. Also the leading brethren of the Scandinavian
Publishing Company at St. Paul Park almost demanded me to go. I prayed and
wept, and said to the Lord, "Haven't you got any one else to go as you know
I am a poor man, in debt on my home, and would be leaving my family in
need, shifting for themselves." For three days it got darker and darker for
me. Finally the third day toward evening I got desperate, and going into my
bedroom, I prayed earnestly, not knowing where a penny of carfare would
come from. As I was praying I said, "Listen, Lord, you know I am honest and
earnest. Do not let me be deceived. I'll take one of these Bibles on the
table, and close my eyes and throw it up in the air and catch it and the
scripture my thumb is on when I catch it, I'll accept as an answer from
you." I did so, and my thumb was on Mark 10:29-30. "And Jesus answered and
said, Verily I say unto you, there is no man that hath left house or
brethren or sisters or fathers or mothers or wife or children or lands, for
my sake and the gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold now in this
time, houses and brethren and sisters and mothers and children and lands
with persecutions, and in the world to come, eternal life." I said, "Amen."
Then I got a phone message from Saint Paul Park saying, "We have been
looking for you. Why don't you come?" My answer was, "I have no money."
They said they had a check for thirteen dollars for me. I answered, "I am
coming."

From there I went to Chicago to meet Brother E. E. Byrum who was president
of the Missionary Board. He took me into a room and said, "It is almost
cruel to demand you to go when we have no way to finance you, but the need
is so urgent, and we know you have faith and the only thing I can do is to
lay my hands on you and pray for you." He did so, praying and weeping, and
when we got through he took out his purse and emptied it into my hand. It
contained 94 cents. How I got there, I do not know.

I spent some time in Norway and Sweden visiting the churches holding
revival meetings. From there I went on to Denmark where I spent thirteen
months helping the dear faithful workers in raising up eight new
congregations, making a total of thirteen. In 1916 the Missionary Board
sent $25 per month for seven and one half months to wife and the children.

Before leaving Denmark, I visited all thirteen of the congregations which
were there at that time, and preached my farewell sermon. In each place
they gave me an offering and a large size envelope, thick and fat and
written on the outside, "Not to be opened until on the North Sea or the
Atlantic." When I opened them, there were many letters from different
persons in each congregation expressing their appreciation for the help and
blessing I had been to them. If I am not mistaken, there were 153 in all,
and there was sufficient money in those letters to almost pay for my first
car, a Ford. The promise previously quoted in Mark 10:29-30 was verily
fulfilled.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once I was in great need of at least one hundred dollars and I had calls
for three meetings at the same date. From one of these, I knew I would
receive a hundred and twenty five dollars, and another, one hundred, but I
knew the third could not give more than fifty. For three days I stayed home
and prayed, and the Lord said I should go to the third, which I did.

On arriving at the place, I found they were closing a union meeting in one
of the large churches the following day. They told me that the evangelist
required them to forward him $500 before he would start his meeting, also
$300 at the close of his meeting and $200 for his singer.

Monday night I began our service in the Church of God. One got saved.
Tuesday night the crowd could not all get in the church. The Presbyterian
minister of the town was there and he said it was too bad the people could
not get in and offered us the Presbyterian Church free of charge. It was
the largest church in town. We accepted and announced our meetings to be
held there for Wednesday night. The church was packed and overflowing. Many
were outside who could not get in. A 32nd degree Mason came to me and said,
"Have you ever preached in a Masonic Hall?" I said I had preached in the
Masonic Temple in Chicago, so he offered to get the Masonic Hall for me. I
thanked him and accepted his offer, so the balance of the meeting was held
there. It was filled for every service.

When the two weeks meeting was over, the church gave me $52.50 and the next
day I was asked to come to a chain store; the manager said the store always
gave a present to every evangelist who came to town. Then he said, "There
is a present for you. What do you need? My wife says you need a pair of
shoes, so go over to the counter and pick out a pair. They are fourteen
dollars a pair." Then he said, "Come and sit down. I want to talk to you."
Reaching his hand in his pocket he handed me a five dollar bill and said,
"That's from me." Then the man who let me use the Masonic Hall came in. He
said to the merchant, "Are you trying to persuade Mr. Susag to go with you
to Norway to fish?" The merchant answered, "I wish I could." "So do I," he
answered. Then he continued, "Mr. M., you know that you and I are about as
low down in the mud as we can get, and every evangelist that comes to town
is digging the hole deeper; but this man has kept on for two weeks doing
his best to dig us out." The merchant answered, "That is right." Then the
Mason handed me a check for ten dollars, and turning he said, "When--" and
he walked away with tears in his eyes. Later on I understand he got saved
and went to glory.

As I left the station that day for my home, many people came to the station
to see me off and shook hands with me, leaving money in my hand or slipping
it into my pockets. After I got on the train, I counted the money and found
I had $187.00 instead of the fifty I had expected. Again God proved Himself
to be the God that He says He is and His promises are true.

       *       *       *       *       *

TRIP TO EUROPE IN 1939

The Lord made it very clear to me that I should go to Europe again. I
expected to stay four years. When it was understood that I was to sail for
Europe, a number of people in a certain congregation requested me to stop
over as they wanted to send greetings, so I did, thinking also that they
might give me a little offering to help me on the way, but for some reason
they failed to do so.

The war broke out in Europe. I was able only to visit the churches, and
late in the fall of the same year I was ordered to leave these countries.
After being home for some time, I met the wife of a minister and she asked,
"Where have you been, Bro. Susag? We haven't seen you nor heard of you for
so long." I told her I had been to Europe. "Why, no," she explained, "you
were in such and such a congregation," (naming a place where I had stopped
to receive greetings to carry to Europe). Then she said, "They said that
you had not gotten any further than New York, as you did not have the money
to go any farther." Then I told her, "The Lord made it very clear to me to
go, so I went."

After leaving this place for New York I was sitting on the train reading my
Bible when a train man came along and said, "Are you reading the good
book?" After answering yes, he asked if I was a minister. I answered,
"yes," and he asked where I was going. I told him I was on my way to
Europe. "Do you have the finances supplied?" he asked. I told him I
traveled by faith. "To what church do you belong?" he asked. I told him,
the Church of God. So he explained, "My pastor is Brother ----; What is
your name?" When I told him, he said, "Why, I have heard of you." As he
left he said, "Pardon me, I will see you again before we come to our
divisional point." Later on he came and handed me a sum of money, so my
needs were nicely cared for.

On hearing of my experience, the sister exclaimed, "Why! God's promise, 'My
God shall supply all your needs,' was fulfilled at that time."

       *       *       *       *       *

ARRESTED FOR BEING A GERMAN DOCTOR

In 1915 I was on the Atlantic ocean on my way to Europe, and the captain
came to me a number of times on the voyage, saying, "I am afraid you are
going to have trouble if an English boat catches us before we get to
Norway, because you claim to be a Norwegian by birth and a minister. We
think you are a German by birth and a doctor. We had one sailing with us
the last trip from Saint Paul, Minnesota and he spelled his name 'Susage'
and was a German and a doctor. You spell your name 'Susag.' He had a goatee
like you and looked just like you, and we think you two are brothers. We
believe you are an American citizen, and if you acknowledge that you are a
German and a doctor, we believe we can be a help to you. We will guarantee
to the English people that we will take care of you and take you back to
America the next trip."

I thanked him and smiled and said, "But I am still a Norwegian and a
preacher, and I believe I am going to stand the test."

Sure enough a number of us were apprehended by an English war ship, and
they sailed us into Kirkwall, Scotland and put nine of us (me included)
under arrest. The fourth day a high official came from London to examine
our papers, and I was the first one to march in between two rows of
soldiers with bayonets on the guns ready for action. The captain and first
mate were present to see how I was coming out. Finally a soldier called,
"Halt!" and I assure you, I stopped and smiled at them all. I saluted the
officer and handed him my papers After he had examined them thoroughly, he
said to me, "Where were you born, Reverend?" I said, "in Norway." "What
City?" "Stienkjer," I answered. "Will you tell us that in your own tongue?"

I did so; then he folded my papers nicely and handed them, back to me,
smiled and saluted and said, "Pass on; you are ok." I enjoyed the
experience very much.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LORD GETS ME A CLERGY PERMIT ON THE RAILROAD

When the Lord saved me, he called me into the ministry. I knew the ministry
were securing half fare on railroads, but did not know that they had to be
ordained before they could get it. But I did know that the Lord had
ordained me for the Ministry. So I went to the depot agent in my home town,
and asked him if he would sign for me so I could have the benefits of
clergy rates. He had known me for some years, so told me he could if I
would swear that I was a preacher. I said, "No, I can't swear. If you can't
take my word for it, I'll go without a permit." He said, "If you can't
swear, I will sign for you." So I sent in my application to the clergy
bureau, and a few days later I received the permit, but there was a little
slip with it which said, "Are you wholly engaged in gospel work, or do you
do some secular work?" I studied and prayed about it and wrote the clergy
bureau and sent the permit back and said, "When I travel, I do nothing but
gospel work, but when I am home, I preach twice on Sunday and once a week,
and through the week I do whatsoever my hands find to do. I do not want any
railroad bill against me in the day of judgment. So if you find upon this
explanation that I am worthy of your courtesy, I will be very pleased to
receive the permit, and if not, I thank you."

A few days later, the permit was returned to me with a letter saying,
"Please accept our courtesy. We are not afraid of being imposed upon by a
man like that."

When I was ordained, the brethren said, "Now you can get half fare on the
railroads." "Well," I said, "I have had that almost seven years already."
When I explained to them they were astonished.

       *       *       *       *       *

A WONDERFUL EXPERIENCE

I was the evangelist at the South Dakota State Camp Meeting one year. After
the meeting was over and I had received my offering from the committee, a
brother came to me and wanted to give me $50 extra but I refused to accept
it. "Why," he said, "Don't you need it?" "Yes," I said, "I need it badly,
but I do not feel I can take it." "Well," he said, finally after much
persuasion, "If you won't take it, I'll put it in the bank. For the Lord
told me to give it to you, and I don't want it, and it will be there until
you call for it."

About nine months later, I needed money and wrote him to see if I could
borrow it until the next camp meeting. He sent it right away and wrote
saying, "Thank God, it is out of my hands, and I'll never take it back
again." At the next camp meeting, I tried again to pay it back, but I
failed, so I went to prayer and asked the Lord what I should do. The Lord
said, "You give Brother Renbeck fifteen dollars for a new suit, and you
keep the rest for your family." (In those days one could get a good suit
for fifteen dollars).

I looked for Brother Renbeck and finally he came. He had been weeping,
although he still seemed happy. "Why have you been weeping?" I asked. "I
need a new suit, and I went out and prayed and the Lord told me I could get
a new fifteen dollar one." I reached my hand out and said, "Here is your
fifteen dollars." He stepped back and said, "No, no! I couldn't take it
from you. You need it worse than I do." I explained to him how it was, and
he accepted it and praised the Lord. In those days we didn't know any
different than to trust the Lord.

     *       *       *       *       *

AN EXPERIENCE WITH TWELVE MINISTERS ON THE TRAIN

At one time while on the train in North Dakota, I sat down in the company
of twelve ministers, representing that many denominations. While listening
to them I decided that this was the time for a little fellow to keep his
mouth shut. One young minister appeared to be the leader in the discussion
standing with his Greek Testament in his hand. Finally he turned to me and
said, "Are you a minister too?" I told him I was. "What denomination do you
belong to?" I told him Church of God. "Well," he said, "If you belong to
the Church of God, you have a horn in our side." I had met three of them
once and they surely horned me. I said, "Yes, I've got a horn and I pity
the minister that hasn't got one." (The horn represents power in
scripture). "But," I said, "I use that on only one preacher." "Who is
that," he said. "The devil." "Well," he said, "If you have one you have not
showed it to us because you have kept still." Then turning, he pointed to
each of the ministers individually asking each one what visible church of
God he belonged to, and each answered, naming their own denomination. Then
he said, "I belong to the visible Church of God Congregational." I spoke up
then and said, "I belong to the visible Church of God." Then he slapped his
hand on the arm of the seat and said, "You've got me, Brother." Then I
said, "You see me, don't you?" "Yes," he said. "I see you, shake hands."
Then he asked me how far I was going, saying that he would like to have a
talk with me.

I told him I was going to Bismark, to which he said, "It is too bad that I
change at the next station."

That ended the conversation. They seemed to have no more to say.

       *       *       *       *       *

EXPERIENCE WITH TWELVE OTHER PREACHERS

When I was holding a meeting in a certain state, some of the church said
there had been a couple of preachers holding services across the street
from the Church of God chapel, and some of the saints had attended their
meetings and became confused. They wanted me to preach against it. I said,
"I cannot do that. The Word of God says, 'Thou shalt not judge a strange
servant.' But I will pray the Lord to help me to meet them to get
acquainted with their teaching." I did pray earnestly that I might meet
them. Later I came to a town where I had to stay all night. I found twelve
preachers there who were trying to start a new spiritual mushroom or work,
and of the twelve preachers, two of them were the association preachers who
had been holding the meetings across from our chapel in the town previously
spoken of. I went to their service that evening and sat and prayed
earnestly that if God was displeased with this new work they were trying to
start, that the minister who was going to speak that night would have the
hardest time preaching that he ever had in his life.

A minister arose to preach. His preaching was Biblical, but he had a hard
time, while the other ministers kept on praying, "Lord, give the brother
the anointing." He worked and perspired until all of a sudden he sat down.
The ministers huddled together and talked and prayed and finally sent one
of their number out into the audience to talk with the people. He finally
wound up at me. He asked me a number of questions, whether I was saved and
sanctified, and then left. But the ministers seemed to be dissatisfied, and
sent another minister to me to investigate. At last he said, "I suppose the
sermon tonight scared you." I said, "No, that was a good sermon and I have
been preaching that way for over thirty eight years. That is the way the
apostles preached."

"Well," he said, "We didn't know there was anyone preaching like that."
Then I said, "But he had a hard time." "Yes," he answered, "He said he had
the hardest time he had ever had in his life, and he has preached from the
Atlantic to the Pacific and from Canada to the Gulf of Mexico and had never
met anything like that he said." "Yes, and he was preaching against me." He
replied, "Yes, and it was you that made it hard for him." Then I said, "I
prayed earnestly that the Lord would make it hard for him, if the Lord was
dissatisfied with his association."

The association must have died because I never heard of it again. It turned
out that the two ministers at that place were the two which held the
meeting previously spoken of.

Once at the South Dakota State Camp Meeting, on account of the weather, we
had the services in the chapel. One day a man came who said he was a
minister. No one knew him, but he looked like a good man. He asked for the
privilege of preaching and it was granted him. After he had been preaching
a while it was evident to all that he was badly confused, so the spiritual
ones commenced to lift their hearts in prayer to God to stop him, which He
did, insomuch that he left the platform and went to the stove to spit,
trying to clear his throat. However, there was nothing in his throat. He
tried again to speak, but he could not, so finally went out and left the
grounds. We never saw him again.

Brother Thomas Nelson and I held a meeting in Wisconsin and we had the same
kind of an experience as the one given above. The man in this case was a
professor in college and a real orator, but his religious doctrine was
unscriptural. Brother Nelson and I had given him the privilege of
preaching. We gave one another an understanding glance to be agreed in
prayer asking God to stop him immediately. He lost his voice and could not
continue speaking.

       *       *       *       *       *

DISCOURAGEMENT BLINDS A PERSON

At one time I was holding a meeting at Badger, South Dakota. The meeting
was fairly good in a way but I expected results and hoped to see souls
saved. I worked and fasted and prayed, but to no avail. It seemed there was
no conviction upon sinners. When that meeting was over, I decided to quit
the ministry, thinking to myself, "What is the use to go on this way,
enduring hardships and sufferings and not seeing any souls saved." I
thought I must be a failure, so going home, I went through Minneapolis,
Minnesota to visit my sister. After the evening meal I thought I would take
a walk. As I strolled up Lake Street, I saw to my left in the middle of the
block, a large sign, 'Revival Meetings, Minnesota's Greatest Evangelist.' I
became interested because I had lived in Minnesota many years and had never
heard his name before, so I decided to attend. By the time he was half
through his sermon, my discouragement had vanished. I thought, "I'm a
better preacher than that; I can preach the Truth." So I went back to
preaching with fresh courage and determination.

The next year just before the Minnesota State Camp Meeting at St. Paul
Park, I came home with another load of discouragement. It seemed to me I
was backslidden and that Brother Nelson and Brother Tubbs were going to
deal with me at the meeting and tell me so. I told wife to go on to the
meeting and I would stay home and rest a few days, as I was tired. She
objected and refused to go without me, telling me the saints would be
asking about me, and if I told them you were home they would be wondering
why and I would have no peace, so that was that. We went and I did not
attempt to preach neither Saturday, Sunday, nor Monday. I was waiting,
expecting the brethren to come and have a talk with me. Finally on Monday
afternoon Bro. Nelson came and said, "Let us go out into the timber. I want
to have a talk with you." Then he said, "Brother Susag, what is the matter
with you? You are holding up the meeting. Everyone is expecting you to
preach and you sit there and say nothing." I answered, "Yes, I know that
you know what it is." "Why I don't know anything," he said, "What do you
mean?" I said, "Aren't you and Bro. Tubbs going to deal with me? You know I
am backslidden." "Since when?" he asked. I told him I did not know. He then
said, "We surely do not know anything. It is just an imposition of the
devil. Rebuke him and get into the pulpit and preach." We had prayer, and
rebuked the devil and his accusations, and the spell was completely broken.

A year later at the Minnesota State Camp Meeting, Brother Nelson was not
feeling well, neither was I. One day, Brother Nelson said to me, "What do
you think is the trouble with us? Maybe we are bad boys." I told him, "No,
that is not the reason, however, we do not see many healings and miracles
now." As we stood there talking, we could not think of anything that had
taken place of late.

Just then a sister came up to where we were and said, "Praise the Lord,
brethren." We said, "Amen." "I do not suppose you know me?" "Yes, we know
you," we said, "But we have forgotten your name." "My name is Rasmussen,"
she said; "I haven't seen you, Brother Nelson, since you were down and
prayed for our youngest son who was down with double pneumonia." Brother
Nelson said, "The Lord healed the boy, didn't He?" "I should say He did,"
she answered. "He not only healed him, but changed him from a puny,
delicate child to a strong, husky child--the healhiest one we have." She
went away and we felt we had gotten a reproof, and yet an encouragement,
from the Lord.

Then a brother came along and he said, "Praise the Lord. Wasn't it
wonderful how the Lord restored Brother Krutz?" That was another reproof.
Then a sister came by and said, "Have you heard about Sister Johnson?" We
asked, which Johnson, and she said, "Brother Morris Johnson's mother. She
fell and broke her leg just above the ankle and they took her on the train
to St. Paul and while waiting in the Union Depot for a train for home,
saints came on their way to the camp meeting and seeing her suffering they
had compassion on her, and prayed the prayer of faith, and she was
instantly healed, insomuch that she went back to the camp meeting." After
she left, Brother Nelson started one direction for the timber and I the
other. We felt the Lord had been grieved because of our discouragement and
had reproved us in this way.

       *       *       *       *       *

On Sunday morning while I was holding a meeting at Rice Lake, I was
preaching on the Joy of the Lord. After speaking a few minutes, the Lord
spoke to me and said, "Your theme today will be trials and
discouragements," so I announced to the congregation that the Lord had
changed my subject, and in my talk, I related some of the worse trials and
discouragements I had passed through. After I was through speaking, a
brother came up to the pulpit and said, "Shame on you, Brother Susag." I
said, "Say that again." He did a little stronger than before, so I said,
"Say it again, for 'all good things are three.'" Then he did say it strong.
He said, "Here you have been standing here telling that preachers get tried
and tempted and discouraged like that--" and he turned and went out.

When he had gone, a young lady came up and asked me for dinner and said
that Brother and Sister ---- were coming to dinner, too. On arriving at
their home, they all sat down to visit. They didn't take off their wraps,
nor ask me to either. They said to me, "Do you know why the Lord changed
your subject today?" I told them it must have been for somebody. "Yes,"
they said, "It was for the four of us." (These four had gotten saved in the
revival I had held the year before.) "We have been tempted and tried so
much," they said, "so we came near giving up." Then they'd said to one
another, "Look at Brother Susag. He is happy all the time. He is not tried
and tempted like we are." But when they heard of my experiences, they said,
"The shame is on us." They were much encouraged and went on in the service
of God. They finally moved somewhere to the northwest and I am told that
one of the brothers became a minister, and the other three Sunday School
workers.

Many people do not realize that ministers pass through much suffering both
spiritual and physical for the sake of others, but they are glad to do so
for Christ's sake and for the sake of others.

While pastoring in Grand Forks, North Dakota a lady called on the phone one
day and asked to speak to The Rev.

Susag. "I am the one speaking," I said. Then she told me she had heard from
Mrs. Werstlein that I would pray for anyone no matter what church they
belonged to. I told her I would. Then she said, "My husband is at the
Catholic hospital and the doctor just called up and said he is liable to
die any minute, and cannot live longer than until three o'clock this
afternoon. He is an infidel." Then she continued, "Would you kindly go see
him and talk to him and then come by the house as I'd like to hear what he
had to say and what you think about it." I told her I would if I could get
in to see him. "Tell them that I sent you," she said. At first they refused
to let me in, but after telling them I was pastor and that his wife had
sent me they said alright. They said, "He is near death and almost has one
foot in the grave."

When I went into his room and saw how bad he was, I introduced myself to
him and said, "I'm sorry to find you in such a condition. I have been where
you are now. I will not tire you out with much talk, but would you let me
read you a scripture lesson and pray with you?" He answered, "It would be
out of place to refuse such an offer under such circumstances." So I read
Jesus' conversation with Nicodemus (John 3:1). Then I knelt and prayed a
short prayer. When I got through, he put his hand out and said, "Thank you,
I have got to see you in the morning." I asked him what time and he told me
nine o'clock. Then I bid him good-bye and went to the door. When I reached
the door I thought I heard him say something and turned and said, "Beg your
pardon, did you say something?"

He said, "Can I depend on you?" I answered, "Yes, you can depend on me, and
furthermore we have service tonight in the church, and I will tell the
folks to agree in prayer for you and also to fast and pray tomorrow that
the Lord will heal you." He thanked me and I left him.

When I went to his house, his wife said, "What do you think about my
husband?" I answered, "He is pretty low, but I am going back to see him
tomorrow morning at nine o'clock." She said, "He isn't going to live that
long." I told her he was not going to die, but going to live, and she said,
"Who said so?" I answered, "The Lord."

Next morning I went back and eight nurses met me and one said, "What did
you do to that man yesterday? He had one foot in the grave and now he is
going to live." "Of course he is going to live," I said. Then they said,
"But what did you do? We have never seen anything like this." "Well," I
said, "I did what they used to do in olden times." "What was that?" they
asked. "Prayed," I said. "Yes," they said, "that helps."

Going into his room, he was smiling and I began to talk to him about the
Lord. Then he said, "I do not believe in those old women's fables." I said,
"I am going to get you to believe in God." He replied, "You can't do it." I
answered, "By God's help I can, for where you are, I have been, and where I
am, you can come. If I can only gain one point with you I can get you to
believe in God." (He was a professor at the University of North Dakota). I
had to come back in the afternoon at three o'clock and the next morning at
about nine. When I came in he said, "You are too late. The doctor was here
with two specialists and I told them I wanted to get up and go home; I am
well. They answered me, 'You stay in bed; you are a sick man. There are no
T B germs about you but we are studying about what kind of medicine to give
you.'" He then asked me how I would have answered them, if I had been here,
and I said to him, "I would have said to them, 'The God of Heaven that you
don't believe in, heard prayers and smote those germs and made you well.'"
He said, "If you had told them that, there would have been a panic."

The next morning he got up and went home. I was sent to Europe on a special
mission the next day by the Missionary Board and the church. After
returning in January, one Monday morning I went to the Northern State Bank
on business and on opening the door into the bank, who should I meet, but
this professor. My hands went up and I said, "Glory to God! Here is the man
the Lord kept out of the grave last August." Up went his hands, and he
said, "Bless God. God Almighty did something for me."

I regret that I have not kept a record through the years. The only record I
have is for the first eleven months I was pastor in Brookings and White,
South Dakota. I preached 272 sermons, made 178 pastoral visits, wrote 202
letters, traveled almost fifteen thousand miles during that time, and in my
fifty years ministry, have had a stated salary only about six years. In my
first ten to fifteen years, I preached (at intervals) as many as six
sermons a day, three in Norwegian and three in English. In all I have
preached something over 17,000 sermons, and have traveled over one million
miles. I have crossed the Atlantic Ocean seventeen times one way, and
preached a good many times on fifteen of those voyages.

Returning to America in the late fall of 1939, many people asked me who I
thought was to blame for the war. They named a number of the leading rulers
of the warring nations, and then they added, "The devil." I said, "None of
them are to blame for the war." "Who then?" they asked. "Backslidden,
professing Christians," I said. Then they asked if I thought America would
get into it, and I answered, "Most assuredly." However the majority of them
said no, and they also said that our American boys would never leave
American soil to fight. I told them that our boys would not only go to
Europe to fight, but to almost all the Islands of the sea. Then they asked
how long I thought the war was going to last, and I told them "1949." A
goodly number laughed me to scorn. Not long ago, I received a letter from
my oldest son who said, "I have been checking up on you dad and everything
that you said would happen, has come true up to the present date." The
actual fighting is over, but thousands of our men are in foreign lands, and
no peace. If the Lord does not get an opportunity to perform a miracle,
another war will start before any real peace.

I have not built any chapels large or small, but I have started about fifty
or more congregations in this country (America) and in Europe. Also I have
raised quite a sum of money to build chapels and to help ministers and
missionaries in need. I have raised thousands for church and missionary
work in general, seventy per cent has come from the brethren of Norwegian
descent, fifteen percent from the Danish descent, ten percent from those of
German descent, three percent from the Swedish, and two percent from
Americans. The percent here mentioned is for the work in Scandinavian
countries only.

     *       *       *       *       *

While holding a meeting in Bowbells, North Dakota, after a few days three
families quit coming and I went out to the farm to see them. When I arrived
at the first farm, the other two families were there visiting. After
conversing a while, I asked them why they had not been out to the services
of late. Finally the man who was the head of the house said, "We did not
like it when you said the preacher could not forgive sins." I answered, "If
you have wronged the preacher, and ask him his forgiveness he can forgive
you, but there are some sins that even the Lord cannot forgive. For
instance, if you owe ten dollars to your neighbor over the hill, and you
are not willing to pay him, you can keep on praying as long as you live,
and the Lord could not forgive you if you are not willing to settle with
him. Of course, if you didn't know where he was and couldn't find him, the
Lord would forgive you all right." The man answered, "We will come to the
services," they said, and some of them got saved. Unbeknown to me, he had
owed his neighbor ten dollars for four years and was unwilling to pay, but
after he became willing he got saved and paid his debt.

       *       *       *       *       *

One man got saved in a meeting in South Dakota, and the Lord reminded him
of twelve ears of corn which he had taken from his neighbor's field to feed
his own oxen. As he went by on his way to town, he said, "Yes, I'll attend
to that tonight." So after dark he filled a bushel basket with corn and
took it over and emptied it into the man's hog pen, feeling good that he
had done his duty. The next morning after worship, the Lord spoke to him
and said, "I suppose today you will go over and settle for the twelve ears
of corn." "Why I took that over last night," he protested, "But you took
that over to the hogs, and they were already fed." So he went over and
confessed to the man. We can see by this that it was not the corn the Lord
was so interested in as his humble confession.

GOD WORKS IN VARIOUS WAYS FOR THE PROTECTION AND DELIVERANCE OF HIS
CHILDREN

A certain brother who was a farmer needed a threshing machine badly, and an
agent visited him to see if he could make the deal. They were agreed on
prices and terms, but when they talked over the time of delivery, the agent
acknowledged he could not get it to him in time for fall threshing, so the
deal fell through. Another agent, hearing of it decided he would go and see
the farmer. This time the deal went through, with the promise that the
machinery would be delivered in time.

The brother mortgaged his farm and the threshing machine for forty five
hundred dollars, but when harvest time came it had not come. He wrote the
manufacturers, and they said that as soon as they could get it built and
shipped, they would do so. The farmer became desperate. He took the sales
contract to an attorney, but he found a clause in it that prevented him
from doing anything about it. It looked as if he would lose all his
threshing income that fall as well as the machine and his farm too. Many
earnest prayers went up that the Lord would intervene in his behalf.

During harvest time that year, he lost hundreds of dollars in not having
the machine.

Finally in January, the machine was shipped from the factory. The freight
train that was pulling it got within three miles of the town. It was
pulling up grade slowly, and in turning a sharp curve the whole car which
was carrying the threshing machine loosened from the rest of the train, and
tumbled down a steep embankment, completely demolishing the whole thing.
The railroad paid the damages, and the brother was released from all
responsibility.

A good many went out to see the wreckage, and none could understand how the
car would become disconnected from the train. They did not know our God,
and the way he answers prayer.

     *       *       *       *       *

When I was holding a meeting at Grand Forks, wife wrote me that an epidemic
of small pox had broken out in the neighborhood, but that it was not
necessary for me to come home because, she said, "I put the children and
myself into the 9lst Psalm and we will remain there until the scourge is
over" and I thank God, it did not come near our dwelling.

     *       *       *       *       *

No apology is made for writing this book, recording the incidents and
experiences herein found. As Elijah's God is still the God of the universe
and today He hears the prayers of the humble and delivers them in time of
need. The author is acquainted with the persons mentioned herein, and has a
personal knowledge of the things related. No doubt some will question the
truthfulness of some of the statements made in this volume. But the truth
must not be withheld because of a few skeptics and unbelievers. Some
doubted the miracles wrought by the apostles. One good minister in
California said one time, when introducing me to the ministers at a
ministers' meeting, "This brother can relate more incidents than anyone I
have ever known, and if I did not know Brother Susag, as well as I do, I
would have said he lied." I answered, "If I did not know him as well as I
do, I would have said he lied, too."

Brother C. E. Brown, present editor of the Gospel Trumpet, upon introducing
me to a number of ministers at the Anderson Camp meeting, also stated that
I could relate more actual incidents and experiences than anyone he had
ever met.

Many ministers and the laity as well, have through the years wanted me to
write a book of my experiences, even ministers of other movements. But I am
afraid I have waited too long to remember hundreds of incidents that have
taken place during my ministry. People say that when I am under the
anointing of the Holy Ghost when preaching, the incidents flow from my lips
like a stream.

My earnest humble prayer is that these incidents and experiences may prove
a blessing and an inspiration that will quicken the faith of those in need
whose help can come only from God.

As my name is S. O. Susag, I think it is fitting to say as the distress
call of a ship is SOS, that I have heard the distress call in my fifty-two
years ministry, hundreds of times from the evangelistic field, and
missionary fields in other lands, from insane asylums, hospitals, sick
rooms, and the Lord has heard prayer, and wrought many miracles, almost
unbelievable. To God belongs all the glory and praise.

       *       *       *       *       *

One time I received a distress call from Geo. W. Green and family who were
living that time on a farm near Hancock, Minnesota, to come and pray for a
sick child. They were living six or seven miles out of town, and no one was
there to meet me, so I had to get the taxi to take me out. I arrived late
in the evening. Going into the house, I learned the child was already dead.
All the occupants of the house, both up and down stairs, were sick in bed
with the flu, thirteen in all. Sister Green was the only one able to get
out of bed to let me in. I had no way to get back to town, but as we were
talking and praying, a doctor happened along and stopped and came in and
asked Sister Green to make him a strong cup of coffee and sandwich. He
said, "This is the third night since I was in bed, and I need something to
strengthen me." He filled out a burial permit for the child so it could be
buried. And he said, "You can't stay here tonight." I told him I had no way
to get back to town, so he offered to take me. I went and the next day I
returned with the undertaker. The road to the cemetery went through the
town, but the leading lady, a social worker (I presume) forbad us taking
the body through town. So we had to detour several miles out of our way. An
epidemic of flu broke out in the town and I am told that this lady was the
first one to die with it. At the Green home the Lord restored the entire
thirteen to health, and protected me. Throughout the years I have been
protected from all manner of contagious diseases where I have been called
to pray.

       *       *       *       *       *

Brother Edward Ahrendt and I were holding a meeting in Grand Forks, North
Dakota. One evening the call was made, and the altar was filled with
seekers. Brother Ahrendt and I started at opposite ends to pray and
instruct. As I knelt, the first one was a woman and I felt as if I had
knelt by a barrel of devils. I was surprised that she was professing to be
a Christian. Lifting my hand in astonishment, I said, "Sister G--you are
possessed with devils." After the altar service was over, Brother Ahrendt
and I laid our hands on her and commanded the devils to come out in the
name of Jesus, which they did. The next morning we had prayer and testimony
meeting and she arose and testified and in a way she excused herself. I
said, "Sister, be careful or the devils will enter into you again."
Evidently they did, because the other women in the rooming house told me
that in the evening when she arrived at her room to go to bed, the devils
rolled her up like a ball with her heels almost on her shoulders, and her
sufferings were horrible. They prayed and did everything they could to help
her get straightened out, but to no avail. They tried to find Bro. Ahrendt
and I, but we had moved that night to another place. No one seemed to know
where we were. They called up all the saints that had phones, but without
success. Finally, two of the sisters started out going from house to house
among the saints that had no phones, and at four o'clock in the morning
they reached the house where we were stopping. We went over as quickly as
possible, and when we went up onto the porch, she straightened out
instantly. The devil was going to play possum on us. Brother Ahrendt and I
had a consultation, as he had never had any experiences with cases of devil
possession before. He said, "Brother Susag, Saturday night when we prayed
for her, there was no manifestation showing that she was possessed."
"Well," I said, "There is no need of them having to be thrown around by the
devil when you know they are possessed," so I said I would pray and we
would see how it would come out, because I knew there was a need of full
agreement. We phoned Brother Gus Niles and asked if we could come to his
place with Mrs. G----. When we got there, we went into a room and locked
the doors. Brother Ahrendt prayed in one corner and Brother Niles in
another corner. I gave her a chair by the table, and I sat opposite. I
said, "Sister, I have known you for four years and all that time you have
deceived yourself and the saints and the ministry. You have had no
salvation all this time. Now tell me what the devil had you do when you
came home from meetings." She said, "One time when I came home, I went out
to the barn to feed milk to the calf, and he wouldn't drink, and I got
angry and took a small club and struck him. He bawled and broke the rope
and jumped through the window and ran out into the woods." When she was
telling this, her hand flew up and she commenced beating the air with it
and she could not stop. I let her continue beating for a time, then I said,
"Lord, stop that arm," and it did stop. Then I asked her what the devil got
her to do other times when she came home. She said, "Another time when I
came home, husband's dog had gotten into the house, and I opened the door
to get him out, and as he went through the door, I kicked him in anger
because I hated my husband," and as she said this, she started kicking the
table and then she fell on the floor on her back still kicking the chair
and the table. Just then Brother Ahrendt came running and said, "I rebuke
the devil in Jesus' name." He had become convinced that the devils were
there by now.

Then the three of us laid hands on her, commanding the devils to come out
of her, which they did. Then she got saved and sanctified, and got a sweet
settled experience which everyone had confidence in. She later became an
able Sunday School teacher and worker for the Lord.

       *       *       *       *       *

A WARNING

The evening when I said, "Sister G, you are possessed with devils," I
looked back in the audience and saw a sister with her mouth open and
looking at me with surprise and apparent criticism, as if to say, "What do
you mean by saying such things to Sister G?" Just then I saw many serpents
crawling in her lap and up her breast and in to her mouth. After the
service this woman's sister came to me and said, "Do you know that my
sister, Mary, is possessed with devils?" I said, "Yes," and she asked how I
knew, saying, "She told me she had just gotten possessed." I said, "I saw
them entering."

We took her to a private home and she was delivered by the power of God.

     *       *       *       *       *

There is always a cause when God does not answer prayer, either in
individuals or congregations. I have been speaking of individual cases in
this book, where prayer was not answered. Now I will speak of
congregational hindrances that I know of personally.

There is never an effect without a cause that produces the effect. In a
certain congregation where I held several successful revivals for several
pastors, there came a time when the work did not prosper as it had in
previous years. By chance after twenty years absence, I stopped in there
one prayer meeting night, having business in the town that day. They
entreated me to come back and speak for them on a certain Sunday, which I
did. The Lord gave us two precious services. They took up their regular
Sunday evening offering. After that, they announced that they would take up
an offering especially for Brother Susag, which they did, and set the
basket in a position where I noticed the contents, which was in the
neighborhood of fifteen dollars or a little more. Next morning when I was
ready to take the train, I was handed four dollars with the remark, "This
is our custom." No wonder the congregation did not prosper, and still these
dear people had done their duty, but were unaware of what the hindrance
was.

I know of other cases of that same kind, both with other ministers and
myself. Once in a camp meeting a young minister was the evangelist, whom
the Lord used mightily. One evening they were going to take up the love
offering for the evangelist. A nice offering came in, not any too large,
and they gave the evangelist seventy percent.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once at the Grand Forks, North Dakota Camp Meeting, Brother P. Pederson of
Hoboken, New Jersey was to preach. He read his text and related some of his
experiences and the Holy Ghost began to bring the people to the altar. He
then closed his Bible and said, "A greater preacher than I is now
speaking."

       *       *       *       *       *

During the depression it looked as though we were going to lose the state
camp grounds at Grand Forks. At the camp meeting the Board said there is no
other way than to let it go. I said, "No." "Well," they said, "Then you
will have to raise the money because we cannot." I said, "If you will give
me a free hand, to go at it when the Lord says to, I will." They said O. K.
One evening the Lord said, "Now is the time," so I said to Brother Monk,
"Let me have a few minutes?" Within a few minutes we had the amount to the
cent. Brother Monk said, "This time the devil was licked and the depression
also." It pays to pray.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first Camp Meeting I attended at Grand Forks, I generally got up at 3
or 4 a.m. and went to the woods to pray. At that time you could hardly find
a place to pray.

There were two or three members praying behind every tree before I got
there.

The first Camp Meeting I attended in Anderson, I went out early in the
cemetery and here they were praying every where.

The pioneer ministers knew how to pray, because they had no sermon outline
book to take it from. Their converts knew how, too, for they were taught by
the Holy Ghost.

     *       *       *       *       *

Once Brother Renbeck and I were holding a meeting in Erskine, Minn. It was
42 degrees below zero every day, and we had to stand the bread by the
heating stove and a number of times it froze so hard on the table, before
we got through with our meal, that we could not eat it. When we went to
bed, we could see the stars twinkling through the cracks of the roof. We
took off our shoes and coats and lay down on the bed, and pulled our fur
caps down over our ears and put our fur coats over us. Often through the
night we would have to turn over because the side that was down got cold.
This may seem ridiculous to some, but God knows it is true.

     *       *       *       *       *

In 1911 Brother Morris Johnson and I held a meeting on the west coast of
Denmark. At the place where we stayed and slept, we had to climb up a
ladder through a hole into the room to sleep. The bed was too short for
Bro. Johnson and too narrow for two, and the bed clothes accordingly.

We could not sleep much after breakfast. We took our traveling blankets and
walked out side the town where there were some old grave hills that had
been opened to get out the wealth that was buried. It left a deep hollow
place in the ground. There was ice in the bottom. We wrapped our blankets
around us and lay down so the wind could not blow on us and slept some.
That was pioneering in Denmark. In this little town it was really the first
great battle for the truth won in Denmark.

Many have said that much of the pioneer work was lost and did not pay. It
is true, some was lost, but what would we have had today without it? I pray
God to rekindle the pioneer spirit and passion for souls and trust in the
Lord. The opportunities are still here. If I were a young man I would say





End of Project Gutenberg's Personal Experiences of S. O. Susag, by S. O. Susag

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PERSONAL EXPERIENCES ***

This file should be named 7038.txt or 7038.zip

This eBook was produced by Joel Erickson <joel@oneporpoise.com>,
Charles Franks <charlz@lvcablemodem.com>,and
Juliet Sutherland <juliet.sutherland@verizon.ne

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*
