The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Golden Goose Book, by L. Leslie Brooke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Golden Goose Book

Author: L. Leslie Brooke

Illustrator: L. Leslie Brooke

Release Date: April 20, 2005 [EBook #15661]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLDEN GOOSE BOOK ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.





[Transcriber's Note: Numerous references to illustrations have been
removed from the text version of the book. Look for a fully-illustrated
html version on this site.]


THE
GOLDEN GOOSE BOOK

BEING THE STORIES OF

THE GOLDEN GOOSE
THE THREE BEARS
THE 3 LITTLE PIGS
TOM THUMB

_With numerous Drawings in
Colour and Black-and-White_

_by_

L. LESLIE BROOKE

LONDON

FREDERICK WARNE AND CO., LTD.

AND NEW YORK




_Copyright in all countries
signatory to the Berne Convention_
FREDERICK WARNE & CO. LTD.
LONDON, ENGLAND


FIRST PRINTED 1905

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

PRINTED FOR THE PUBLISHERS BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LTD.,
LONDON AND BRECCLES




THE GOLDEN GOOSE


There was once a man who had three sons, the youngest of whom was called
the Simpleton. He was laughed at and despised and neglected on all
occasions. Now it happened one day that the eldest son wanted to go into
the forest, to hew wood, and his Mother gave him a beautiful cake and a
bottle of wine to take with him, so that he might not suffer from hunger
or thirst. When he came to the wood he met a little old grey man, who,
bidding him good-day, said: "Give me a small piece of the cake in your
wallet, and let me drink a mouthful of your wine; I am so hungry and
thirsty." But the clever son answered: "If I were to give you my cake
and wine, I should have none for myself, so be off with you," and he left
the little man standing there, and walked away. Hardly had he begun to hew
down a tree, when his axe slipped and cut his arm, so that he had to go
home at once and have the wound bound up. This was the work of the little
grey man.

Thereupon the second son went into the wood, and the Mother gave him, as
she had given to the eldest, a sweet cake and a bottle of wine. The little
old man met him also, and begged for a small slice of cake and a drink of
wine. But the second son spoke out quite plainly. "What I give to you I
lose myself--be off with you," and he left the little man standing there,
and walked on. Punishment was not long in coming to him, for he had
given but two strokes at a tree when he cut his leg so badly that he had
to be carried home.

Then said the Simpleton: "Father, let me go into the forest and hew wood."
But his Father answered him: "Your brothers have done themselves much
harm, so as you understand nothing about wood-cutting you had better not
try." But the Simpleton begged for so long that at last the Father said:
"Well, go if you like; experience will soon make you wiser." To him the
Mother gave a cake, but it was made with water and had been baked in the
ashes, and with it she gave him a bottle of sour beer. When he came to the
wood the little grey man met him also, and greeted him, and said: "Give me
a slice of your cake and a drink from your bottle; I am so hungry and
thirsty." The Simpleton replied: "I have only a cake that has been baked
in the ashes, and some sour beer, but if that will satisfy you, let us sit
down and eat together." So they sat themselves down, and as the Simpleton
held out his food it became a rich cake, and the sour beer became good
wine. So they ate and drank together, and when the meal was finished, the
little man said: "As you have a good heart and give so willingly a share
of your own, I will grant you good luck. Yonder stands an old tree; hew it
down, and in its roots you will find something." Saying this the old man
took his departure, and off went the Simpleton and cut down the tree.
When it fell, there among its roots sat a goose, with feathers of pure
gold. He lifted her out, and carried her with him to an inn where he
intended to stay the night.

Now the innkeeper had three daughters, who on seeing the goose were
curious to know what wonderful kind of a bird it could be, and longed to
have one of its golden feathers. The eldest daughter thought to herself,
"Surely a chance will come for me to pull out one of those feathers";
and so when the Simpleton had gone out, she caught the goose by the wing.
But there her hand stuck fast! Shortly afterwards the second daughter
came, as she too was longing for a golden feather. She had hardly touched
her sister, however, when she also stuck fast. And lastly came the third
daughter with the same object. At this the others cried out, "Keep off,
for goodness' sake, keep off!" But she, not understanding why they told
her to keep away, thought to herself, "If they go to the goose, why
should not I?" She sprang forward, but as she touched her sister she too
stuck fast, and pull as she might she could not get away; and thus they
had all to pass the night beside the goose.

The next morning the Simpleton took the goose under his arm and went on
his way, without troubling himself at all about the three girls who were
hanging to the bird. There they went, always running behind him, now to
the right, now to the left, whichever way he chose to go. In the middle
of the fields they met the parson, and when he saw the procession he
called out, "Shame on you, you naughty girls, why do you run after a young
fellow in this way? Come, leave go!" With this he caught the youngest by
the hand, and tried to pull her back, but when he touched her he found he
could not get away, and he too must needs run behind. Then the sexton came
along, and saw the parson following on the heels of the three girls. This
so astonished him that he called out, "Hi! Sir Parson, whither away so
fast? Do you forget that today we have a christening?" and ran after him,
and caught him by the coat, but he too remained sticking fast.

As the five now ran on, one behind the other, two labourers who were
returning from the field with their tools, came along. The parson called
out to them and begged that they would set him and the sexton free. No
sooner had they touched the sexton, than they too had to hang on, and now
there were seven running after the Simpleton and the goose.

In this way they came to a city where a King reigned who had an only
daughter, who was so serious that no one could make her laugh. Therefore
he had announced that whoever should make her laugh should have her for
his wife. When the Simpleton heard this he went with his goose and his
train before the Princess, and when she saw the seven people all running
behind each other, she began to laugh, and she laughed and laughed till it
seemed as though she could never stop. Thereupon the Simpleton demanded
her for his wife, but the King was not pleased at the thought of such a
son-in-law, and he made all kinds of objections. He told the Simpleton
that he must first bring him a man who could drink off a whole cellarful
of wine. At once the Simpleton thought of the little grey man, who would
be sure to help him, so off he went into the wood, and in the place where
he had cut down the tree he saw a man sitting who looked most miserable.
The Simpleton asked him what was the cause of his trouble.

"I have such a thirst," the man answered, "and I cannot quench it. I
cannot bear cold water. I have indeed emptied a cask of wine, but what is
a drop like that to a thirsty man?"

"In that case I can help you," said the Simpleton. "Just come with me and
you shall be satisfied."

He led him to the King's cellar, and the man at once sat down in front of
the great cask, and drank and drank till before a day was over he had
drunk the whole cellarful of wine. Then the Simpleton demanded his bride
again, but the King was angry that a mean fellow everyone called a
Simpleton should win his daughter, and he made new conditions. Before
giving him his daughter to wife he said that the Simpleton must find a man
who would eat a whole mountain of bread. The Simpleton did not stop long
to consider, but went off straight to the wood. There in the same place
as before sat a man who was buckling a strap tightly around him, and
looking very depressed. He said:

"I have eaten a whole ovenful of loaves, but what help is that when a man
is as hungry as I am? I feel quite empty, and I must strap myself together
if I am not to die of hunger."

The Simpleton was delighted on hearing this, and said: "Get up at once and
come with me. I will give you enough to eat to satisfy your hunger."

He led him to the King, who meanwhile had ordered all the meal in the
Kingdom to be brought together, and an immense mountain of bread baked
from it. The man from the wood set to work on it, and in one day the
whole mountain had disappeared.

For the third time the Simpleton demanded his bride, but yet again the
King tried to put him off, and said that he must bring him a ship that
would go both on land and water.

"If you are really able to sail such a ship," said he, "you shall at once
have my daughter for your wife."

The Simpleton went into the wood, and there sat the little old grey man to
whom he had given his cake.

"I have drunk for you, and I have eaten for you," said the little man,
"and I will also give you the ship; all this I do for you because you were
kind to me."

Then he gave the Simpleton a ship that went both on land and water, and
when the King saw it he knew he could no longer keep back his daughter.
The wedding was celebrated, and after the King's death, the Simpleton
inherited the Kingdom, and lived very happily ever after with his wife.





THE STORY OF THE THREE BEARS


Once upon a time there were Three Bears, who lived together in a house of
their own, in a wood. One of them was a Little, Small, Wee Bear; and one
was a Middle-sized Bear, and the other was a Great, Huge Bear. They had
each a pot for their porridge; a little pot for the Little, Small, Wee
Bear; and a middle-sized pot for the Middle Bear, and a great pot for the
Great, Huge Bear. And they had each a chair to sit in; a little chair
for the Little, Small, Wee Bear; and a middle-sized chair for the Middle
Bear, and a great chair for the Great, Huge Bear. And they had each a bed
to sleep in; a little bed for the Little, Small, Wee Bear; and a
middle-sized bed for the Middle Bear, and a great bed for the Great, Huge
Bear.

One day, after they had made the porridge for their breakfast, and poured
it into their porridge-pots, they walked out into the wood while the
porridge was cooling, that they might not burn their mouths by beginning
too soon to eat it. And while they were walking, a little Girl called
Goldenlocks came to the house. First she looked in at the window, and then
she peeped in at the keyhole; and seeing nobody in the house, she turned
the handle of the door. The door was not fastened, because the Bears were
good Bears, who did nobody any harm, and never suspected that anybody
would harm them. So Goldenlocks opened the door, and went in; and well
pleased she was when she saw the porridge on the table. If she had been a
thoughtful little Girl, she would have waited till the Bears came home,
and then, perhaps, they would have asked her to breakfast; for they were
good Bears--a little rough or so, as the manner of Bears is, but for all
that very good-natured and hospitable. But the porridge looked tempting,
and she set about helping herself.

So first she tasted the porridge of the Great, Huge Bear, and that was too
hot for her. And then she tasted the porridge of the Middle Bear, and that
was too cold for her. And then she went to the porridge of the Little,
Small, Wee Bear, and tasted that; and that was neither too hot nor too
cold, but just right, and she liked it so well that she ate it all up.

Then Goldenlocks sat down in the chair of the Great, Huge Bear, and that
was too hard for her. And then she sat down in the chair of the Middle
Bear, and that was too soft for her. And then she sat down in the chair of
the Little, Small, Wee Bear, and that was neither too hard nor too soft,
but just right. So she seated herself in it, and there she sat till the
bottom of the chair came out, and down she came plump upon the ground.

Then Goldenlocks went upstairs into the bedchamber in which the three
Bears slept. And first she lay down upon the bed of the Great, Huge Bear,
but that was too high at the head for her. And next she lay down upon the
bed of the Middle Bear, and that was too high at the foot for her. And
then she lay down upon the bed of the Little, Small, Wee Bear; and that
was neither too high at the head nor at the foot, but just right. So she
covered herself up comfortably, and lay there till she fell fast asleep.

By this time the Three Bears thought their porridge would be cool enough;
so they came home to breakfast. Now Goldenlocks had left the spoon of the
Great, Huge Bear standing in his porridge.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN AT MY PORRIDGE!" said the Great, Huge Bear, in his
great, rough, gruff voice. And when the Middle Bear looked at hers, she
saw that the spoon was standing in it too.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN AT MY PORRIDGE!" said the Middle Bear, in her middle
voice. Then the Little, Small, Wee Bear looked at his, and there was the
spoon in the porridge-pot, but the porridge was all gone.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN AT MY PORRIDGE, AND HAS EATEN IT ALL UP!" said the
Little, Small, Wee Bear, in his little, small, wee voice.

Upon this the Three Bears, seeing that someone had entered their house,
and eaten up the Little, Small, Wee Bear's breakfast, began to look about
them. Now Goldenlocks had not put the hard cushion straight when she rose
from the chair of the Great, Huge Bear.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN SITTING IN MY CHAIR!" said the Great, Huge Bear, in his
great, rough, gruff voice.

And Goldenlocks had squatted down the soft cushion of the Middle Bear.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN SITTING IN MY CHAIR!" said the Middle Bear, in her
middle voice.

And you know what Goldenlocks had done to the third chair.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN SITTING IN MY CHAIR, AND HAS SAT THE BOTTOM OUT OF IT!"
said the Little, Small, Wee Bear, in his little, small, wee voice.

Then the Three Bears thought it necessary that they should make farther
search; so they went upstairs into their bedchamber. Now Goldenlocks had
pulled the pillow of the Great, Huge Bear out of its place.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN LYING IN MY BED!" said the Great, Huge Bear, in his
great, rough, gruff voice.

And Goldenlocks had pulled the bolster of the Middle Bear out of its
place.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN LYING IN MY BED!" said the Middle Bear, in her middle
voice.

And when the Little, Small, Wee Bear came to look at his bed, there was
the bolster in its place; and the pillow in its place upon the bolster;
and upon the pillow was the head of Goldenlocks--which was not in its
place, for she had no business there.

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN LYING IN MY BED--AND HERE SHE IS!" said the Little,
Small, Wee Bear, in his little, small, wee voice.

Goldenlocks had heard in her sleep the great, rough, gruff voice of the
Great, Huge Bear, and the middle voice of the Middle Bear, but it was only
as if she had heard someone speaking in a dream. But when she heard the
little, small, wee voice of the Little, Small, Wee Bear, it was so sharp,
and so shrill, that it awakened her at once. Up she started; and when she
saw the Three Bears on one side of the bed she tumbled herself out at the
other, and ran to the window. Now the window was open, because the Bears,
like good, tidy Bears, as they were, always opened their bedchamber window
when they got up in the morning. Out Goldenlocks jumped, and ran away as
fast as she could run--never looking behind her; and what happened to her
afterwards I cannot tell. But the Three Bears never saw anything more of
her.




THE THREE LITTLE PIGS


Once upon a time there was an old Sow with three little Pigs, and as she
had not enough to keep them, she sent them out to seek their fortune.

The first that went off met a Man with a bundle of straw, and said to him,
"Please, Man, give me that straw to build me a house"; which the Man did,
and the little Pig built a house with it. Presently came along a Wolf, and
knocked at the door, and said, "Little Pig, little Pig, let me come in."

To which the Pig answered, "No, no, by the hair of my chinny chin chin."

"Then I'll huff and I'll puff, and I'll blow your house in!" said the
Wolf. So he huffed, and he puffed, and he blew his house in, and ate up
the little Pig.

The second Pig met a Man with a bundle of furze, and said, "Please, Man,
give me that furze to build a house"; which the Man did, and the Pig built
his house. Then along came the Wolf and said, "Little Pig, little Pig, let
me come in."

"No, no, by the hair of my chinny chin chin."

"Then I'll puff and I'll huff, and I'll blow your house in!" So he huffed
and he puffed, and he puffed and he huffed, and at last he blew the house
down, and ate up the second little Pig.

The third little Pig met a Man with a load of bricks, and said, "Please,
Man, give me those bricks to build a house with"; so the Man gave him the
bricks, and he built his house with them. So the Wolf came, as he did to
the other little Pigs, and said, "Little Pig, little Pig, let me come in."

"No, no, by the hair of my chinny chin chin." "Then I'll huff and I'll
puff, and I'll blow your house in." Well, he huffed and he puffed, and he
huffed and he puffed, and he puffed and he huffed; but he could _not_
get the house down. When he found that he could not, with all his huffing
and puffing, blow the house down, he said, "Little Pig, I know where there
is a nice field of turnips."

"Where?" said the little Pig.

"Oh, in Mr. Smith's home-field; and if you will be ready to-morrow
morning, I will call for you, and we will go together and get some for
dinner."

"Very well," said the little Pig, "I will be ready. What time do you mean
to go?"

"Oh, at six o'clock."

Well, the little Pig got up at five, and got the turnips and was home
again before six. When the Wolf came he said, "Little Pig, are you ready?"

"Ready!" said the little Pig, "I have been and come back again, and got a
nice pot-full for dinner."

The Wolf felt very angry at this, but thought that he would be _up_ to
the little Pig somehow or other; so he said, "Little Pig, I know where
there is a nice apple-tree." "Where?" said the Pig.

"Down at Merry-garden," replied the Wolf; "and if you will not deceive me
I will come for you, at five o'clock to-morrow, and we will go together
and get some apples."

Well, the little Pig woke at four the next morning, and bustled up, and
went off for the apples, hoping to get back before the Wolf came; but he
had farther to go, and had to climb the tree, so that just as he was
coming down from it, he saw the Wolf coming, which, as you may suppose,
frightened him very much. When the Wolf came up he said, "Little Pig,
what! are you here before me? Are they nice apples?"

"Yes, very," said the little Pig; "I will throw you down one." And he
threw it so far that, while the Wolf was gone to pick it up, the little
Pig jumped down and ran home.

The next day the Wolf came again, and said to the little Pig, "Little Pig,
there is a Fair in the Town this afternoon: will you go?"

"Oh, yes," said the Pig, I will go; what time shall you be ready?"

"At three," said the Wolf.

So the little Pig went off before the time, as usual, and got to the Fair,
and bought a butter churn, and was on his way home with it when he saw the
Wolf coming. Then he could not tell what to do. So he got into the churn
to hide, and in doing so turned it round, and it began to roll, and rolled
down the hill with the Pig inside it, which frightened the Wolf so much
that he ran home without going to the Fair.

He went to the little Pig's house, and told him how frightened he had
been by a great round thing which came down the hill past him.

Then the little Pig said, "Hah! I frightened you, did I? I had been to the
Fair and bought a butter churn, and when I saw you I got into it, and
rolled down the hill."

Then the Wolf was very angry indeed, and declared he would eat up the
little Pig, and that he would get down the chimney after him.

When the little Pig saw what he was about, he hung on the pot full of
water, and made up a blazing fire, and, just as the Wolf was coming down,
took off the cover of the pot, and in fell the Wolf. And the little Pig
put on the cover again in an instant, boiled him up, and ate him for
supper, and lived happy ever after.




TOM THUMB


Long ago, in the merry days of good King Arthur, there lived a ploughman
and his wife. They were very poor, but would have been contented and happy
if only they could have had a little child. One day, having heard of the
great fame of the magician Merlin, who was living at the Court of King
Arthur, the wife persuaded her husband to go and tell him of their
trouble. Having arrived at the Court, the man besought Merlin with tears
in his eyes to give them a child, saying that they would be quite content
even though it should be no bigger than his thumb. Merlin determined to
grant the request, and what was the countryman's astonishment to find when
he reached home that his wife had a son, who, wonderful to relate, was no
bigger than his father's thumb!

The parents were now very happy, and the christening of the little fellow
took place with great ceremony. The Fairy Queen, attended by all her
company of elves, was present at the feast. She kissed the little child,
and, giving it the name of Tom Thumb, told her fairies to fetch the
tailors of her Court, who dressed her little godson according to her
orders. His hat was made of a beautiful oak leaf, his shirt of a fine
spider's web, and his hose and doublet were of thistledown, his stockings
were made with the rind of a delicate green apple, and the garters were
two of the finest little hairs imaginable, plucked from his mother's
eyebrows, while his shoes were made of the skin of a little mouse. When he
was thus dressed, the Fairy Queen kissed him once more, and, wishing him
all good luck, flew off with the fairies to her Court.

As Tom grew older, he became very amusing and full of tricks, so that his
mother was afraid to let him out of her sight. One day, while she was
making a batter pudding, Tom stood on the edge of the bowl, with a lighted
candle in his hand, so that she might see that the pudding was made
properly. Unfortunately, however, when her back was turned, Tom fell into
the bowl, and his mother, not missing him, stirred him up in the pudding,
tied it in a cloth, and put it into the pot. The batter filled Tom's
mouth, and prevented him from calling out, but he had no sooner felt the
hot water, than he kicked and struggled so much that the pudding jumped
about in the pot, and his mother, thinking the pudding was bewitched, was
nearly frightened out of her wits. Pulling it out of the pot, she ran with
it to her door, and gave it to a tinker who was passing. He was very
thankful for it, and looked forward to having a better dinner than he had
enjoyed for many a long day. But his pleasure did not last long, for, as
he was getting over a stile, he happened to sneeze very hard, and Tom,
who had been quite quiet inside the pudding for some time, called out at
the top of his little voice, "Hallo, Pickens!" This so terrified the
tinker that he flung away the pudding, and ran off as fast as he could.
The pudding was all broken to pieces by the fall, and Tom crept out,
covered with batter, and ran home to his mother, who had been looking
everywhere for him, and was delighted to see him again. She gave him a
bath in a cup, which soon washed off all the pudding, and he was none the
worse for his adventure.

A few days after this, Tom accompanied his mother when she went into the
fields to milk the cows, and, fearing he might be blown away by the wind,
she tied him to a sow-thistle with a little piece of thread. While she was
milking, a cow came by, bit off the thistle, and swallowed up Tom. Poor
Tom did not like her big teeth, and called out loudly, "Mother, mother!"
"But where are you, Tommy, my dear Tommy?" cried out his mother,
wringing her hands. "Here, mother," he shouted, "inside the red cow's
mouth!" And, saying that, he began to kick and scratch till the poor cow
was nearly mad, and at length tumbled him out of her mouth. On seeing
this, his mother rushed to him, caught him in her arms, and carried him
safely home.

Some days after this, his father took him to the fields a-ploughing, and
gave him a whip, made of a barley straw, with which to drive the oxen; but
little Tom was soon lost in a furrow. An eagle seeing him, picked him up
and flew with him to the top of a hill where stood a giant's castle. The
giant put him at once into his mouth, intending to swallow him up, but Tom
made such a great disturbance when he got inside that the monster was soon
glad to get rid of him, and threw him far away into the sea. But he was
not drowned, for he had scarcely touched the water before he was swallowed
by a large fish, which was shortly afterwards captured and brought to King
Arthur, as a present, by the fisherman. When the fish was opened, everyone
was astonished at finding Tom inside. He was at once carried to the King,
who made him his Court dwarf.

    Long time he lived in jollity,
      Beloved of the Court,
    And none like Tom was so esteemed
      Amongst the better sort.

The Queen was delighted with the little boy, and made him dance a gaillard
on her left hand. He danced so well that King Arthur gave him a ring,
which he wore round his waist like a girdle.

Tom soon began to long to see his parents again, and begged the King to
allow him to go home for a short time. This was readily permitted, and the
King told him he might take with him as much money as he could carry.

    And so away goes lusty Tom,
      With three pence at his back--
    A heavy burthen which did make
      His very bones to crack.

He had to rest more than a hundred times by the way, but, after two days
and two nights, he reached his father's house in safety. His mother saw
him coming, and ran out to meet him, and there was great rejoicing at his
arrival. He spent three happy days at home, and then set out for the Court
once more.

Shortly after his return, he one day displeased the King, so, fearing the
royal anger, he crept into an empty flower-pot, where he lay for a long
time. At last he ventured to peep out, and, seeing a fine large butterfly
on the ground close by, he stole out of his hiding-place, jumped on its
back, and was carried up into the air. The King and nobles all strove to
catch him, but at last poor Tom fell from his seat into a watering-pot, in
which he was almost drowned, only luckily the gardener's child saw him,
and pulled him out. The King was so pleased to have him safe once more
that he forgot to scold him, and made much of him instead.

Tom afterwards lived many years at Court, one of the best beloved of King
Arthur's knights.

    Thus he at tilt and tournament
      Was entertained so,
    That all the rest of Arthur's knights
      Did him much pleasure show.
    With good Sir Launcelot du Lake,
      Sir Tristram and Sir Guy,
    Yet none compared to brave Tom Thumb
      In acts of chivalry.




PRINTED FOR THE PUBLISHERS BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LTD.,
LONDON AND BECCLES


LESLIE BROOKE'S
CHILDREN'S BOOKS


OTHER BOOKS
WITH DRAWINGS
BY
LESLIE BROOKE

JOHNNY CROW'S GARDEN
JOHNNY CROW'S PARTY

A ROUNDABOUT TURN
Verses by
ROBERT H. CHARLES

LESLIE BROOKE'S
LITTLE BOOKS
size 7 in. by 5-1/2 in.
4 BOOKS
NURSERY STORIES
4 BOOKS
NURSERY RHYMES

THE NURSERY RHYME
BOOK
Edited by ANDREW LANG

PUBLISHED BY
FREDERICK WARNE & Co. Ltd.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Golden Goose Book, by L. Leslie Brooke

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLDEN GOOSE BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 15661.txt or 15661.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/6/6/15661/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
