The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Black Bag, by Louis Joseph Vance

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Black Bag

Author: Louis Joseph Vance

Posting Date: February 8, 2011 [EBook #9779]
Release Date: January, 2006
First Posted: October 15, 2003

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLACK BAG ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Leonard Johnson and PG
Distributed Proofreading.










THE BLACK BAG


By LOUIS JOSEPH VANCE



WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY THOMAS FOGARTY


1908




TO MY MOTHER




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

    I. DIVERSIONS OF A RUINED GENTLEMAN

   II. "AND SOME THERE BE WHO HAVE ADVENTURES THRUST UPON THEM"

  III. CALENDAR'S DAUGHTER

   IV. 9 FROGNALL STREET, W. C.

    V. THE MYSTERY OF A FOUR-WHEELER

   VI. "BELOW BRIDGE"

  VII. DIVERSIONS OF A RUINED GENTLEMAN--RESUMED

 VIII. MADAME L'INTRIGANTE

   IX. AGAIN "BELOW BRIDGE"; AND BEYOND

    X. DESPERATE MEASURES

   XI. OFF THE NORE

  XII. PICARESQUE PASSAGES

 XIII. A PRIMER OF PROGRESSIVE CRIME

  XIV. STRATAGEMS AND SPOILS

   XV. REFUGEES

  XVI. TRAVELS WITH A CHAPERON

 XVII. ROGUES AND VAGABONDS

XVIII. ADVENTURERS' LUCK

  XIX. i--THE UXBRIDGE ROAD

      ii--THE CROWN AND MITRE

     iii--THE JOURNEY'S END


THE BLACK BAG




I


DIVERSIONS OF A RUINED GENTLEMAN

Upon a certain dreary April afternoon in the year of grace, 1906, the
apprehensions of Philip Kirkwood, Esquire, _Artist-peintre_, were enlivened
by the discovery that he was occupying that singularly distressing social
position, which may be summed up succinctly in a phrase through long usage
grown proverbial: "Alone in London." These three words have come to connote
in our understanding so much of human misery, that to Mr. Kirkwood they
seemed to epitomize absolutely, if not happily, the various circumstances
attendant upon the predicament wherein he found himself. Inevitably an
extremist, because of his youth, (he had just turned twenty-five), he
took no count of mitigating matters, and would hotly have resented the
suggestion that his case was anything but altogether deplorable and
forlorn.

That he was not actually at the end of his resources went for nothing; he
held the distinction a quibble, mockingly immaterial,--like the store of
guineas in his pocket, too insignificant for mention when contrasted with
his needs. And his base of supplies, the American city of his nativity,
whence--and not without a glow of pride in his secret heart--he was wont to
register at foreign hostelries, had been arbitrarily cut off from him by
one of those accidents sardonically classified by insurance and express
corporations as Acts of God.

Now to one who has lived all his days serenely in accord with the dictates
of his own sweet will, taking no thought for the morrow, such a situation
naturally seems both appalling and intolerable, at the first blush. It must
be confessed that, to begin with, Kirkwood drew a long and disconsolate
face over his fix. And in that black hour, primitive of its kind in his
brief span, he became conscious of a sinister apparition taking shape at
his elbow--a shade of darkness which, clouting him on the back with a
skeleton hand, croaked hollow salutations in his ear.

"Come, Mr. Kirkwood, come!" its mirthless accents rallied him. "Have you
no welcome for me?--you, who have been permitted to live the quarter of a
century without making my acquaintance? Surely, now, it's high time we were
learning something of one another, you and I!" "But I don't understand,"
returned Kirkwood blankly. "I don't know you--"

"True! But you shall: I am the Shade of Care--"

"Dull Care!" murmured Kirkwood, bewildered and dismayed; for the visitation
had come upon him with little presage and no invitation whatever.

"Dull Care," the Shade assured him. "Dull Care am I--and Care that's
anything but dull, into the bargain: Care that's like a keen pain in your
body, Care that lives a horror in your mind, Care that darkens your days
and flavors with bitter poison all your nights, Care that--"

But Kirkwood would not listen further. Courageously submissive to his
destiny, knowing in his heart that the Shade had come to stay, he yet found
spirit to shake himself with a dogged air, to lift his chin, set the strong
muscles of his jaw, and smile that homely wholesome smile which was his
peculiarly.

"Very well," he accepted the irremediable with grim humor; "what must be,
must. I don't pretend to be glad to see you, but--you're free to stay as
long as you find the climate agreeable. I warn you I shan't whine. Lots of
men, hundreds and hundreds of 'em, have slept tight o' nights with you for
bedfellow; if they could grin and bear you, I believe I can."

Now Care mocked him with a sardonic laugh, and sought to tighten upon his
shoulders its bony grasp; but Kirkwood resolutely shrugged it off and went
in search of man's most faithful dumb friend, to wit, his pipe; the which,
when found and filled, he lighted with a spill twisted from the envelope of
a cable message which had been vicariously responsible for his introduction
to the Shade of Care.

"It's about time," he announced, watching the paper blacken and burn in the
grate fire, "that I was doing something to prove my title to a living." And
this was all his valedictory to a vanished competence. "Anyway," he added
hastily, as if fearful lest Care, overhearing, might have read into his
tone a trace of vain repining, "anyway, I'm a sight better off than those
poor devils over there! I really have a great deal to be thankful for, now
that my attention's drawn to it."

For the ensuing few minutes he thought it all over, soberly but with a
stout heart; standing at a window of his bedroom in the Hotel Pless, hands
deep in trouser pockets, pipe fuming voluminously, his gaze wandering out
over a blurred infinitude of wet shining roofs and sooty chimney-pots: all
of London that a lowering drizzle would let him see, and withal by no means
a cheering prospect, nor yet one calculated to offset the disheartening
influence of the indomitable Shade of Care. But the truth is that
Kirkwood's brain comprehended little that his eyes perceived; his thoughts
were with his heart, and that was half a world away and sick with pity
for another and a fairer city, stricken in the flower of her loveliness,
writhing in Promethean agony upon her storied hills.

There came a rapping at the door.

Kirkwood removed the pipe from between his teeth long enough to say "Come
in!" pleasantly.

The knob was turned, the door opened. Kirkwood, swinging on one heel,
beheld hesitant upon the threshold a diminutive figure in the livery of the
Pless pages.

"Mister Kirkwood?"

Kirkwood nodded.

"Gentleman to see you, sir."

Kirkwood nodded again, smiling. "Show him up, please," he said. But before
the words were fairly out of his mouth a footfall sounded in the corridor,
a hand was placed upon the shoulder of the page, gently but with decision
swinging him out of the way, and a man stepped into the room.

"Mr. Brentwick!" Kirkwood almost shouted, jumping forward to seize his
visitor's hand.

"My dear boy!" replied the latter. "I'm delighted to see you. 'Got your
note not an hour ago, and came at once--you see!"

"It was mighty good of you. Sit down, please. Here are cigars.... Why, a
moment ago I was the most miserable and lonely mortal on the footstool!"

"I can fancy." The elder man looked up, smiling at Kirkwood from the depths
of his arm-chair, as the latter stood above him, resting an elbow on
the mantel. "The management knows me," he offered explanation of his
unceremonious appearance; "so I took the liberty of following on the heels
of the bellhop, dear boy. And how are you? Why are you in London, enjoying
our abominable spring weather? And why the anxious undertone I detected in
your note?"

He continued to stare curiously into Kirkwood's face. At a glance, this
Mr. Brentwick was a man of tallish figure and rather slender; with a
countenance thin and flushed a sensitive pink, out of which his eyes shone,
keen, alert, humorous, and a trace wistful behind his glasses. His years
were indeterminate; with the aspect of fifty, the spirit and the verve of
thirty assorted oddly. But his hands were old, delicate, fine and fragile;
and the lips beneath the drooping white mustache at times trembled, almost
imperceptibly, with the generous sentiments that come with mellow age. He
held his back straight and his head with an air--an air that was not a
swagger but the sign-token of seasoned experience in the world. The most
carping could have found no flaw in the quiet taste of his attire. To sum
up, Kirkwood's very good friend--and his only one then in London--Mr.
Brentwick looked and was an English gentleman.

"Why?" he persisted, as the younger man hesitated. "I am here to find out.
To-night I leave for the Continent. In the meantime ..."

"And at midnight I sail for the States," added Kirkwood. "That is mainly
why I wished to see you--to say good-by, for the time."

"You're going home--" A shadow clouded Brentwick's clear eyes.

"To fight it out, shoulder to shoulder with my brethren in adversity."

The cloud lifted. "That is the spirit!" declared the elder man. "For the
moment I did you the injustice to believe that you were running away. But
now I understand. Forgive me.... Pardon, too, the stupidity which I must
lay at the door of my advancing years; to me the thought of you as a
Parisian fixture has become such a commonplace, Philip, that the news of
the disaster hardly stirred me. Now I remember that you are a Californian!"

"I was born in San Francisco," affirmed Kirkwood a bit sadly. "My father
and mother were buried there ..."

"And your fortune--?"

"I inherited my father's interest in the firm of Kirkwood & Vanderlip; when
I came over to study painting, I left everything in Vanderlip's hands. The
business afforded me a handsome living."

"You have heard from Mr. Vanderlip?"

"Fifteen minutes ago." Kirkwood took a cable-form, still damp, from his
pocket, and handed it to his guest. Unfolding it, the latter read:

"_Kirkwood, Pless, London. Stay where you are no good coming back
everything gone no insurance letter follows vanderlip_."

"When I got the news in Paris," Kirkwood volunteered, "I tried the banks;
they refused to honor my drafts. I had a little money in hand,--enough
to see me home,--so closed the studio and came across. I'm booked on the
_Minneapolis_, sailing from Tilbury at daybreak; the boat-train leaves at
eleven-thirty. I had hoped you might be able to dine with me and see me
off."

In silence Brentwick returned the cable message. Then, with a thoughtful
look, "You are sure this is wise?" he queried.

"It's the only thing I can see."

"But your partner says--"

"Naturally he thinks that by this time I should have learned to paint well
enough to support myself for a few months, until he can get things running
again. Perhaps I might." Brentwick supported the presumption with a decided
gesture. "But have I a right to leave Vanderlip to fight it out alone? For
Vanderlip has a wife and kiddies to support; I--"

"Your genius!"

"My ability, such as it is--and that only. It can wait.... No; this means
simply that I must come down from the clouds, plant my feet on solid earth,
and get to work."

"The sentiment is sound," admitted Brentwick, "the practice of it, folly.
Have you stopped to think what part a rising young portrait-painter can
contribute toward the rebuilding of a devastated city?"

"The painting can wait," reiterated Kirkwood. "I can work like other men."

"You can do yourself and your genius grave injustice. And I fear me you
will, dear boy. It's in keeping with your heritage of American obstinacy.
Now if it were a question of money--"

"Mr. Brentwick!" Kirkwood protested vehemently. "I've ample for my present
needs," he added.

"Of course," conceded Brentwick with a sigh. "I didn't really hope you
would avail yourself of our friendship. Now there's my home in Aspen
Villas.... You have seen it?"

"In your absence this afternoon your estimable butler, with commendable
discretion, kept me without the doors," laughed the young man.

"It's a comfortable home. You would not consent to share it with me
until--?"

"You are more than good; but honestly, I must sail to-night. I wanted only
this chance to see you before I left. You'll dine with me, won't you?"

"If you would stay in London, Philip, we would dine together not once but
many times; as it is, I myself am booked for Munich, to be gone a week,
on business. I have many affairs needing attention between now and the
nine-ten train from Victoria. If you will be my guest at Aspen Villas--"

"Please!" begged Kirkwood, with a little laugh of pleasure because of the
other's insistence. "I only wish I could. Another day--"

"Oh, you will make your million in a year, and return scandalously
independent. It's in your American blood." Frail white fingers tapped an
arm of the chair as their owner stared gravely into the fire. "I confess I
envy you," he observed.

"The opportunity to make a million in a year?" chuckled Kirkwood.

"No. I envy you your Romance."

"The Romance of a Poor Young Man went out of fashion years ago.... No, my
dear friend; my Romance died a natural death half an hour since."

"There spoke Youth--blind, enviable Youth!... On the contrary, you are but
turning the leaves of the first chapter of your Romance, Philip."

"Romance is dead," contended the young man stubbornly.

"Long live the King!" Brentwick laughed quietly, still attentive to the
fire. "Myself when young," he said softly, "did seek Romance, but never
knew it till its day was done. I'm quite sure that is a poor paraphrase of
something I have read. In age, one's sight is sharpened--to see Romance in
another's life, at least. I say I envy you. You have Youth, unconquerable
Youth, and the world before you.... I must go."

He rose stiffly, as though suddenly made conscious of his age. The old eyes
peered more than a trifle wistfully, now, into Kirkwood's. "You will not
fail to call on me by cable, dear boy, if you need--anything? I ask it as
a favor.... I'm glad you wished to see me before going out of my life. One
learns to value the friendship of Youth, Philip. Good-by, and good luck
attend you."

Alone once more, Kirkwood returned to his window. The disappointment he
felt at being robbed of his anticipated pleasure in Brentwick's company at
dinner, colored his mood unpleasantly. His musings merged into vacuity,
into a dull gray mist of hopelessness comparable only to the dismal skies
then lowering over London-town.

Brentwick was good, but Brentwick was mistaken. There was really nothing
for Kirkwood to do but to go ahead. But one steamer-trunk remained to be
packed; the boat-train would leave before midnight, the steamer with the
morning tide; by the morrow's noon he would be upon the high seas, within
ten days in New York and among friends; and then ...

The problem of that afterwards perplexed Kirkwood more than he cared to
own. Brentwick had opened his eyes to the fact that he would be practically
useless in San Francisco; he could not harbor the thought of going
back, only to become a charge upon Vanderlip. No; he was resolved that
thenceforward he must rely upon himself, carve out his own destiny.
But--would the art that he had cultivated with such assiduity, yield him a
livelihood if sincerely practised with that end in view? Would the mental
and physical equipment of a painter, heretofore dilettante, enable him to
become self-supporting?

Knotting his brows in concentration of effort to divine the future, he
doubted himself, darkly questioning alike his abilities and his temper
under trial; neither ere now had ever been put to the test. His eyes became
somberly wistful, his heart sore with regret of Yesterday--his Yesterday of
care-free youth and courage, gilded with the ineffable, evanescent glamour
of Romance--of such Romance, thrice refined of dross, as only he knows who
has wooed his Art with passion passing the love of woman.

Far away, above the acres of huddled roofs and chimney-pots, the
storm-mists thinned, lifting transiently; through them, gray, fairy-like,
the towers of Westminster and the Houses of Parliament bulked monstrous
and unreal, fading when again the fugitive dun vapors closed down upon the
city.

Nearer at hand the Shade of Care nudged Kirkwood's elbow, whispering
subtly. Romance was indeed dead; the world was cold and cruel.

The gloom deepened.

In the cant of modern metaphysics, the moment was psychological.

There came a rapping at the door.

Kirkwood removed the pipe from between his teeth long enough to say "Come
in!" pleasantly.

The knob was turned, the door opened. Kirkwood, turning on one heel, beheld
hesitant upon the threshold a diminutive figure in the livery of the Pless
pages.

"Mr. Kirkwood?"

Kirkwood nodded.

"Gentleman to see you, sir."

Kirkwood nodded again, smiling if somewhat perplexed. Encouraged, the child
advanced, proffering a silver card-tray at the end of an unnaturally rigid
forearm. Kirkwood took the card dubiously between thumb and forefinger and
inspected it without prejudice.

"'George B. Calendar,'" he read. "'George B. Calendar!' But I know no such
person. Sure there's no mistake, young man?"

The close-cropped, bullet-shaped, British head was agitated in vigorous
negation, and "Card for Mister Kirkwood!" was mumbled in dispassionate
accents appropriate to a recitation by rote.

"Very well. But before you show him up, ask this Mr. Calendar if he is
quite sure he wants to see Philip Kirkwood."

"Yessir."

The child marched out, punctiliously closing the door. Kirkwood tamped
down the tobacco in his pipe and puffed energetically, dismissing the
interruption to his reverie as a matter of no consequence--an obvious
mistake to be rectified by two words with this Mr. Calendar whom he did not
know. At the knock he had almost hoped it might be Brentwick, returning
with a changed mind about the bid to dinner.

He regretted Brentwick sincerely. Theirs was a curious sort of
friendship--extraordinarily close in view of the meagerness of either's
information about the other, to say nothing of the disparity between their
ages. Concerning the elder man Kirkwood knew little more than that they had
met on shipboard, "coming over"; that Brentwick had spent some years in
America; that he was an Englishman by birth, a cosmopolitan by habit, by
profession a gentleman (employing that term in its most uncompromisingly
British significance), and by inclination a collector of "articles of
virtue and bigotry," in pursuit of which he made frequent excursions to the
Continent from his residence in a quaint quiet street of Old Brompton. It
had been during his not infrequent, but ordinarily abbreviated, sojourns in
Paris that their steamer acquaintance had ripened into an affection almost
filial on the one hand, almost paternal on the other....

There came a rapping at the door.

Kirkwood removed the pipe from between his teeth long enough to say "Come
in!" pleasantly.

The knob was turned, the door opened. Kirkwood, swinging on one heel,
beheld hesitant upon the threshold a rather rotund figure of medium height,
clad in an expressionless gray lounge suit, with a brown "bowler" hat held
tentatively in one hand, an umbrella weeping in the other. A voice, which
was unctuous and insinuative, emanated from the figure.

"Mr. Kirkwood?"

Kirkwood nodded, with some effort recalling the name, so detached had been
his thoughts since the disappearance of the page.

"Yes, Mr. Calendar--?"

"Are you--ah--busy, Mr. Kirkwood?"

"Are you, Mr. Calendar?" Kirkwood's smile robbed the retort of any flavor
of incivility.

Encouraged, the man entered, premising that he would detain his host but a
moment, and readily surrendering hat and umbrella. Kirkwood, putting the
latter aside, invited his caller to the easy chair which Brentwick had
occupied by the fireplace.

"It takes the edge off the dampness," Kirkwood explained in deference to
the other's look of pleased surprise at the cheerful bed of coals. "I'm
afraid I could never get acclimated to life in a cold, damp room--or a damp
cold room--such as you Britishers prefer."

"It is grateful," Mr. Calendar agreed, spreading plump and well cared-for
hands to the warmth. "But you are mistaken; I am as much an American as
yourself."

"Yes?" Kirkwood looked the man over with more interest, less
matter-of-course courtesy.

He proved not unprepossessing, this unclassifiable Mr. Calendar; he was
dressed with some care, his complexion was good, and the fullness of his
girth, emphasized as it was by a notable lack of inches, bespoke a nature
genial, easy-going and sybaritic. His dark eyes, heavy-lidded, were
active--curiously, at times, with a subdued glitter--in a face large,
round, pink, of which the other most remarkable features were a mustache,
close-trimmed and showing streaks of gray, a chubby nose, and duplicate
chins. Mr. Calendar was furthermore possessed of a polished bald spot,
girdled with a tonsure of silvered hair--circumstances which lent some
factitious distinction to a personality otherwise commonplace.

His manner might be best described as uneasy with assurance; as though he
frequently found it necessary to make up for his unimpressive stature by
assuming an unnatural habit of authority. And there you have him; beyond
these points, Kirkwood was conscious of no impressions; the man was
apparently neutral-tinted of mind as well as of body.

"So you knew I was an American, Mr. Calendar?" suggested Kirkwood.

"'Saw your name on the register; we both hail from the same neck of the
woods, you know."

"I didn't know it, and--"

"Yes; I'm from Frisco, too."

"And I'm sorry."

Mr. Calendar passed five fat fingers nervously over his mustache, glanced
alertly up at Kirkwood, as if momentarily inclined to question his tone,
then again stared glumly into the fire; for Kirkwood had maintained an
attitude purposefully colorless. Not to put too fine a point upon it, he
believed that his caller was lying; the man's appearance, his mannerisms,
his voice and enunciation, while they might have been American, seemed all
un-Californian. To one born and bred in that state, as Kirkwood had been,
her sons are unmistakably hall-marked.

Now no man lies without motive. This one chose to reaffirm, with a show of
deep feeling: "Yes; I'm from Frisco, too. We're companions in misfortune."

"I hope not altogether," said Kirkwood politely.

Mr. Calendar drew his own inferences from the response and mustered up a
show of cheerfulness. "Then you're not completely wiped out?"

"To the contrary, I was hoping you were less unhappy."

"Oh! Then you are--?"

Kirkwood lifted the cable message from the mantel. "I have just heard from
my partner at home," he said with a faint smile; and quoted: "'Everything
gone; no insurance.'"

Mr. Calendar pursed his plump lips, whistling inaudibly. "Too bad, too
bad!" he murmured sympathetically. "We're all hard hit, more or less."
He lapsed into dejected apathy, from which Kirkwood, growing at length
impatient, found it necessary to rouse him.

"You wished to see me about something else, I'm sure?"

Mr. Calendar started from his reverie. "Eh? ... I was dreaming. I beg
pardon. It seems hard to realize, Mr. Kirkwood, that this awful catastrophe
has overtaken our beloved metropolis--"

The canting phrases wearied Kirkwood; abruptly he cut in. "Would a
sovereign help you out, Mr. Calendar? I don't mind telling you that's about
the limit of my present resources."

"Pardon _me_." Mr. Calendar's moon-like countenance darkened; he assumed a
transparent dignity. "You misconstrue my motive, sir."

"Then I'm sorry."

"I am not here to borrow. On the other hand, quite by accident I discovered
your name upon the register, down-stairs; a good old Frisco name, if you
will permit me to say so. I thought to myself that here was a chance
to help a fellow-countryman." Calendar paused, interrogative; Kirkwood
remained interested but silent. "If a passage across would help you, I--I
think it might be arranged," stammered Calendar, ill at ease.

"It might," admitted Kirkwood, speculative.

"I could fix it so that you could go over--first-class, of course--and pay
your way, so to speak, by, rendering us, me and my partner, a trifling
service."

"Ah?"

"In fact," continued Calendar, warming up to his theme, "there might be
something more in it for you than the passage, if--if you're the right man,
the man I'm looking for."

"That, of course, is the question."

"Eh?" Calendar pulled up suddenly in a full-winged flight of enthusiasm.

Kirkwood eyed him steadily. "I said that it is a question, Mr. Calendar,
whether or not I am the man you're looking for. Between you and me and the
fire-dogs, I don't believe I am. Now if you wish to name your _quid
pro quo_, this trifling service I'm to render in recognition of your
benevolence, you may."

"Ye-es," slowly. But the speaker delayed his reply until he had surveyed
his host from head to foot, with a glance both critical and appreciative.

He saw a man in height rather less than the stock size six-feet so much
in demand by the manufacturers of modern heroes of fiction; a man a bit
round-shouldered, too, but otherwise sturdily built, self-contained,
well-groomed.

Kirkwood wears a boy's honest face; no one has ever called him handsome. A
few prejudiced persons have decided that he has an interesting countenance;
the propounders of this verdict have been, for the most part, feminine.
Kirkwood himself has been heard to declare that his features do not fit;
in its essence the statement is true, but there is a very real, if
undefinable, engaging quality in their very irregularity. His eyes are
brown, pleasant, set wide apart, straightforward of expression.

Now it appeared that, whatever his motive, Mr. Calendar had acted upon
impulse in sending his card up to Kirkwood. Possibly he had anticipated a
very different sort of reception from a very different sort of man. Even in
the light of subsequent events it remains difficult to fathom the mystery
of his choice. Perhaps Fate directed it; stranger things have happened at
the dictates of a man's Destiny.

At all events, this Calendar proved not lacking in penetration; men of his
stamp are commonly endowed with that quality to an eminent degree. Not slow
to reckon the caliber of the man before him, the leaven of intuition began
to work in his adipose intelligence. He owned himself baffled.

"Thanks," he concluded pensively; "I reckon you're right. You won't do,
after all. I've wasted your time. Mine, too."

"Don't mention it."

Calendar got heavily out of his chair, reaching for his hat and umbrella.
"Permit me to apologize for an unwarrantable intrusion, Mr. Kirkwood." He
faltered; a worried and calculating look shadowed his small eyes. "I _was_
looking for some one to serve me in a certain capacity--"

"Certain or questionable?" propounded Kirkwood blandly, opening the door.

Pointedly Mr. Calendar ignored the imputation. "Sorry I disturbed you.
G'dafternoon, Mr. Kirkwood."

"Good-by, Mr. Calendar." A smile twitched the corners of Kirkwood's
too-wide mouth.

Calendar stepped hastily out into the hall. As he strode--or rather,
rolled--away, Kirkwood maliciously feathered a Parthian arrow.

"By the way, Mr. Calendar--?"

The sound of retreating footsteps was stilled and "Yes?" came from the
gloom of the corridor.

"Were you ever in San Francisco? Really and truly? Honest Injun, Mr.
Calendar?"

For a space the quiet was disturbed by harsh breathing; then, in a
strained voice, "Good day, Mr. Kirkwood"; and again the sound of departing
footfalls.

Kirkwood closed the door and the incident simultaneously, with a smart bang
of finality. Laughing quietly he went back to the window with its dreary
outlook, now the drearier for lengthening evening shadows.

"I wonder what his game is, anyway. An adventurer, of course; the woods are
full of 'em. A queer fish, even of his kind! And with a trick up his sleeve
as queer and fishy as himself, no doubt!"




II


"AND SOME THERE BE WHO HAVE ADVENTURES THRUST UPON THEM"

The assumption seems not unwarrantable, that Mr. Calendar figuratively
washed his hands of Mr. Kirkwood. Unquestionably Mr. Kirkwood considered
himself well rid of Mr. Calendar. When the latter had gone his way,
Kirkwood, mindful of the fact that his boat-train would leave St. Pancras
at half-after eleven, set about his packing and dismissed from his thoughts
the incident created by the fat _chevalier d'industrie_; and at six
o'clock, or thereabouts, let himself out of his room, dressed for the
evening, a light rain-coat over one arm, in the other hand a cane,--the
drizzle having ceased.

A stolid British lift lifted him down to the ground floor of the
establishment in something short of five minutes. Pausing in the office
long enough to settle his bill and leave instructions to have his luggage
conveyed to the boat-train, he received with entire equanimity the affable
benediction of the clerk, in whose eyes he still figured as that radiant
creature, an American millionaire; and passed on to the lobby, where he
surrendered hat, coat and stick to the cloak-room attendant, ere entering
the dining-room.

The hour was a trifle early for a London dinner, the handsome room but
moderately filled with patrons. Kirkwood absorbed the fact unconsciously
and without displeasure; the earlier, the better: he was determined to
consume his last civilized meal (as he chose to consider it) at his serene
leisure, to live fully his ebbing moments in the world to which he was
born, to drink to its cloying dregs one ultimate draught of luxury.

A benignant waiter bowed him into a chair by a corner table in
juxtaposition with an open window, through which, swaying imperceptibly the
closed hangings, were wafted gentle gusts of the London evening's sweet,
damp breath.

Kirkwood settled himself with an inaudible sigh of pleasure. He was dining,
for the last time in Heaven knew how long, in a first-class restaurant.

With a deferential flourish the waiter brought him the menu-card. He had
served in his time many an "American, millionaire"; he had also served this
Mr. Kirkwood, and respected him as one exalted above the run of his kind,
in that he comprehended the art of dining.

Fifteen minutes later the waiter departed rejoicing, his order complete.

To distract a conscience whispering of extravagance, Kirkwood lighted a
cigarette.

The room was gradually filling with later arrivals; it was the most favored
restaurant in London, and, despite the radiant costumes of the women, its
atmosphere remained sedate and restful.

A cab clattered down the side street on which the window opened.

At a near-by table a woman laughed, quietly happy. Incuriously Kirkwood
glanced her way. She was bending forward, smiling, flattering her escort
with the adoration of her eyes. They were lovers alone in the wilderness of
the crowded restaurant. They seemed very happy.

Kirkwood was conscious of a strange pang of emotion. It took him some time
to comprehend that it was envy.

He was alone and lonely. For the first time he realized that no woman had
ever looked upon him as the woman at the adjoining table looked upon her
lover. He had found time to worship but one mistress--his art.

And he was renouncing her.

He was painfully conscious of what he had missed, had lost--or had not yet
found: the love of woman.

The sensation was curious--new, unique in his experience.

His cigarette burned down to his fingers as he sat pondering. Abstractedly,
he ground its fire out in an ash-tray.

The waiter set before him a silver tureen, covered.

He sat up and began to consume his soup, scarce doing it justice. His dream
troubled him--his dream of the love of woman.

From a little distance his waiter regarded him, with an air of
disappointment. In the course of an hour and a half he awoke, to discover
the attendant in the act of pouring very hot and black coffee from a bright
silver pot into a demi-tasse of fragile porcelain. Kirkwood slipped a
single lump of sugar into the cup, gave over his cigar-case to be filled,
then leaned back, deliberately lighting a long and slender panetela as a
preliminary to a last lingering appreciation of the scene of which he was a
part.

He reviewed it through narrowed eyelids, lazily; yet with some slight
surprise, seeming to see it with new vision, with eyes from which scales of
ignorance had dropped.

This long and brilliant dining-hall, with its quiet perfection of
proportion and appointment, had always gratified his love of the beautiful;
to-night it pleased him to an unusual degree. Yet it was the same as ever;
its walls tinted a deep rose, with their hangings of dull cloth-of-gold,
its lights discriminatingly clustered and discreetly shaded, redoubled in
half a hundred mirrors, its subdued shimmer of plate and glass, its soberly
festive assemblage of circumspect men and women splendidly gowned, its
decorously muted murmur of voices penetrated and interwoven by the strains
of a hidden string orchestra--caressed his senses as always, yet with
a difference. To-night he saw it a room populous with lovers, lovers
insensibly paired, man unto woman attentive, woman of man regardful.

He had never understood this before. This much he had missed in life.

It seemed hard to realize that one must forego it all for ever.

Presently he found himself acutely self-conscious. The sensation puzzled
him; and without appearing to do so, he traced it from effect to cause; and
found the cause in a woman--a girl, rather, seated at a table the third
removed from him, near the farther wall of the room.

Too considerate, and too embarrassed, to return her scrutiny openly, look
for look, he yet felt sure that, however temporarily, he was become the
object of her intent interest.

Idly employed with his cigar, he sipped his coffee. In time aware that she
had turned her attention elsewhere, he looked up.

At first he was conscious of an effect of disappointment. She was nobody
that he knew, even by reputation. She was simply a young girl, barely out
of her teens--if as old as that phrase would signify. He wondered what she
had found in him to make her think him worth so long a study; and looked
again, more keenly curious.

With this second glance, appreciation stirred the artistic side of his
nature, that was already grown impatient of his fretted mood. The slender
and girlish figure, posed with such absolute lack of intrusion against a
screen of rose and gilt, moved him to critical admiration. The tinted glow
of shaded candles caught glistening on the spun gold of her fair hair,
and enhanced the fine pallor of her young shoulders. He saw promise, and
something more than promise, in her face, its oval something dimmed by warm
shadows that unavailingly sought to blend youth and beauty alike into the
dull, rich background.

In the sheer youth of her (he realized) more than in aught else, lay her
chiefest charm. She could be little more than a child, indeed, if he were
to judge her by the purity of her shadowed eyes and the absence of emotion
in the calm and direct look which presently she turned upon him who sat
wondering at the level, penciled darkness of her brows.

At length aware that she had surprised his interest, Kirkwood glanced
aside--coolly deliberate, lest she should detect in his attitude anything
more than impersonal approval.

A slow color burned his cheeks. In his temples there rose a curious
pulsing.

After a while she drew his gaze again, imperiously--herself all unaware of
the havoc she was wreaking on his temperament.

He could have fancied her distraught, cloaking an unhappy heart with placid
brow and gracious demeanor; but such a conception matched strangely her
glowing youth and spirit. What had she to do with Care? What concern had
Black Care, whose gaunt shape in sable shrouds had lurked at his shoulder
all the evening, despite his rigid preoccupation, with a being as
charmingly flushed with budding womanhood as this girl?

"Eighteen?" he hazarded. "Eighteen, or possibly nineteen, dining at the
Pless in a ravishing dinner-gown, and--unhappy? Oh, hardly--not she!"

Yet the impression haunted him, and ere long he was fain to seek
confirmation or denial of it in the manner of her escort.

The latter sat with back to Kirkwood, cutting a figure as negative as his
snug evening clothes. One could surmise little from a fleshy thick neck,
a round, glazed bald spot, a fringe of grizzled hair, and two bright red
ears.

Calendar?

Somehow the fellow did suggest Kirkwood's caller of the afternoon. The
young man could not have said precisely how, for he was unfamiliar with the
aspect of that gentleman's back. None the less the suggestion persisted.

By now, a few of the guests, theater-bound, for the most part, were
leaving. Here and there a table stood vacant, that had been filled, cloth
tarnished, chairs disarranged: in another moment to be transformed into its
pristine brilliance under the deft attentions of the servitors.

Down an aisle, past the table at which the girl was sitting, came two,
making toward the lobby; the man, a slight and meager young personality, in
the lead. Their party had attracted Kirkwood's notice as they entered; why,
he did not remember; but it was in his mind that then they had been three.
Instinctively he looked at the table they had left--one placed at some
distance from the girl, and hidden from her by an angle in the wall. It
appeared that the third member had chosen to dally a few moments over his
tobacco and a liqueur-brandy. Kirkwood could see him plainly, lounging in
his chair and fumbling the stem of a glass: a heavy man, of somber habit,
his black and sullen brows lowering and thoughtful above a face boldly
handsome.

The woman of the trio was worthy of closer attention. Some paces in the
wake of her lack-luster esquire, she was making a leisurely progress,
trailing the skirts of a gown magnificent beyond dispute, half concealed
though it was by the opera cloak whose soft folds draped her shoulders.
Slowly, carrying her head high, she approached, insolent eyes reviewing
the room from beneath their heavy lids; a metallic and mature type of dark
beauty, supremely self-confident and self-possessed.

Men turned involuntarily to look after her, not altogether in undiluted
admiration.

In the act of passing behind the putative Calendar, she paused momentarily,
bending as if to gather up her train. Presumably the action disturbed her
balance; she swayed a little, and in the effort to recover, rested the tips
of her gloved fingers upon the edge of the table. Simultaneously (Kirkwood
could have sworn) a single word left her lips, a word evidently pitched
for the ear of the hypothetical Calendar alone. Then she swept on,
imperturbable, assured.

To the perplexed observer it was indubitably evident that some
communication had passed from the woman to the man. Kirkwood saw the fat
shoulders of the girl's companion stiffen suddenly as the woman's hand
rested at his elbow; as she moved away, a little rippling shiver was
plainly visible in the muscles of his back, beneath his coat--mute token
of relaxing tension. An instant later one plump and mottled hand was
carelessly placed where the woman's had been; and was at once removed with
fingers closed.

To the girl, watching her face covertly, Kirkwood turned for clue to the
incident. He made no doubt that she had observed the passage; proof of that
one found in her sudden startling pallor (of indignation?) and in her eyes,
briefly alight with some inscrutable emotion, though quickly veiled by
lowered lashes. Slowly enough she regained color and composure, while her
_vis-à-vis_ sat motionless, head inclined as if in thought.

Abruptly the man turned in his chair to summon a waiter, and exposed his
profile. Kirkwood was in no wise amazed to recognize Calendar--a badly
frightened Calendar now, however, and hardly to be identified with the
sleek, glib fellow who had interviewed Kirkwood in the afternoon. His
flabby cheeks were ashen and trembling, and upon the back of his chair
the fat white fingers were drumming incessantly an inaudible tattoo of
shattered nerves.

"Scared silly!" commented Kirkwood. "Why?" Having spoken to his waiter,
Calendar for some seconds raked the room with quick glances, as if seeking
an acquaintance. Presumably disappointed, he swung back to face the
girl, bending forward to reach her ears with accents low-pitched and
confidential. She, on her part, fell at once attentive, grave and
responsive. Perhaps a dozen sentences passed between them. At the outset
her brows contracted and she shook her head in gentle dissent; whereupon
Calendar's manner became more imperative. Gradually, unwillingly, she
seemed to yield consent. Once she caught her breath sharply, and, infected
by her companion's agitation, sat back, color fading again in the round
young cheeks.

Kirkwood's waiter put in an inopportune appearance with the bill. The young
man paid it. When he looked up again Calendar had swung squarely about
in his chair. His eye encountered Kirkwood's. He nodded pleasantly.
Temporarily confused, Kirkwood returned the nod.

In a twinkling he had repented; Calendar had left his chair and was wending
his way through the tables toward Kirkwood's. Reaching it, he paused,
offering the hand of genial fellowship. Kirkwood accepted it half-heartedly
(what else was he to do?) remarking at the same time that Calendar had
recovered much of his composure. There was now a normal coloring in the
heavily jowled countenance, with less glint of fear in the quick, dark
eyes; and Calendar's hand, even if moist and cold, no longer trembled.
Furthermore it was immediately demonstrated that his impudence had not
deserted him.

"Why, Kirkwood, my dear fellow!" he crowed--not so loudly as to attract
attention, but in a tone assumed to divert suspicion, should he be
overheard. "This is great luck, you know--to find you here."

"Is it?" returned Kirkwood coolly. He disengaged his fingers.

The pink plump face was contorted in a furtive grimace of deprecation.
Without waiting for permission Calendar dropped into the vacant chair.

"My dear sir," he proceeded, unabashed, "I throw myself upon your mercy."

"The devil you do!"

"I must. I'm in the deuce of a hole, and there's no one I know here besides
yourself. I--I--"

Kirkwood saw fit to lead him on; partly because, out of the corner of his
eye, he was aware of the girl's unconcealed suspense. "Go on, please, Mr.
Calendar. You throw yourself on a total stranger's mercy because you're in
the deuce of a hole; and--?"

"It's this way; I'm called away on urgent business imperative business.
I must go at once. My daughter is with me. My daughter! Think of my
embarrassment; I can not leave her here, alone, nor can I permit her to go
home unprotected."

Calendar paused in anxiety.

"That's easily remedied, then," suggested Kirkwood.

"How?"

"Put her in a cab at the door."

"I ... No. The devil! I couldn't think of it. You won't understand. I--"

"I do not understand,--" amended the younger man politely.

Calendar compressed his lips nervously. It was plain that the man was
quivering with impatience and half-mad with excitement. He held quiet only
long enough to regain his self-control and take counsel with his prudence.

"It is impossible, Mr. Kirkwood. I must ask you to be generous and believe
me."

"Very well; for the sake of the argument, I do believe you, Mr. Calendar."

"Hell!" exploded the elder man in an undertone. Then swiftly, stammering
in his haste: "I can't let Dorothy accompany me to the door," he declared.
"She--I--I throw myself upon your mercy!"

"What--again?"

"The truth--the truth is, if you will have it, that I am in danger of
arrest the moment I leave here. If my daughter is with me, she will have to
endure the shame and humiliation--"

"Then why place her in such a position?" Kirkwood demanded sharply.

Calendar's eyes burned, incandescent with resentment. Offended, he offered
to rise and go, but changed his mind and sat tight in hope.

"I beg of you, sir--"

"One moment, Mr. Calendar."

Abruptly Kirkwood's weathercock humor shifted--amusement yielding to
intrigued interest. After all, why not oblige the fellow? What did anything
matter, now? What harm could visit him if he yielded to this corpulent
adventurer's insistence? Both from experience and observation he knew this
for a world plentifully peopled by soldiers of fortune, contrivers of
snares and pitfalls for the feet of the unwary. On the other hand, it is
axiomatic that a penniless man is perfectly safe anywhere. Besides, there
was the girl to be considered.

Kirkwood considered her, forthwith. In the process thereof, his eyes sought
her, perturbed. Their glances clashed. She looked away hastily, crimson to
her temples.

Instantly the conflict between curiosity and caution, inclination and
distrust, was at an end. With sudden compliance, the young man rose.

"I shall be most happy to be of service to your daughter, Mr. Calendar,"
he said, placing the emphasis with becoming gravity. And then, the fat
adventurer leading the way, Kirkwood strode across the room--wondering
somewhat at himself, if the whole truth is to be disclosed.




III


CALENDAR'S DAUGHTER

All but purring with satisfaction and relief, Calendar halted.

"Dorothy, my dear, permit me to introduce an old friend--Mr. Kirkwood.
Kirkwood, this is my daughter."

"Miss Calendar," acknowledged Kirkwood.

The girl bowed, her eyes steady upon his own. "Mr. Kirkwood is very kind,"
she said gravely.

"That's right!" Calendar exclaimed blandly. "He's promised to see you home.
Now both of you will pardon my running away, I know."

"Yes," assented Kirkwood agreeably.

The elder man turned and hurried toward the main entrance.

Kirkwood took the chair he had vacated. To his disgust he found himself
temporarily dumb. No flicker of thought illuminated the darkness of his
confusion. How was he to open a diverting conversation with a young woman
whom he had met under auspices so extraordinary? Any attempt to gloze the
situation, he felt, would be futile. And, somehow, he did not care to
render himself ridiculous in her eyes, little as he knew her.

Inanely dumb, he sat watching her, smiling fatuously until it was borne
in on him that he was staring like a boor and grinning like an idiot.
Convinced, he blushed for himself; something which served to make him more
tongue-tied than ever.

As for his involuntary protégée, she exhibited such sweet composure that he
caught himself wondering if she really appreciated the seriousness of her
parent's predicament; if, for that matter, its true nature were known to
her at all. Calendar, he believed, was capable of prevarication, polite and
impolite. Had he lied to his daughter? or to Kirkwood? To both, possibly;
to the former alone, not improbably. That the adventurer had told him the
desperate truth, Kirkwood was quite convinced; but he now began to believe
that the girl had been put off with some fictitious explanation. Her
tranquillity and self-control were remarkable, otherwise; she seemed very
young to possess those qualities in such eminent degree.

She was looking wearily past him, her gaze probing some unguessed abyss of
thought. Kirkwood felt himself privileged to stare in wonder. Her naïve
aloofness of poise gripped his imagination powerfully,--the more
so, perhaps, since it seemed eloquent of her intention to remain
enigmatic,--but by no means more powerfully than the unaided appeal of her
loveliness.

Presently the girl herself relieved the tension of the situation, fairly
startling the young man by going straight to the heart of things. Without
preface or warning, lifting her gaze to his, "My name is really Dorothy
Calendar," she observed. And then, noting his astonishment, "You would be
privileged to doubt, under the circumstances," she added. "Please let us be
frank."

"Well," he stammered, "if I didn't doubt, let's say I was unprejudiced."

His awkward, well-meant pleasantry, perhaps not conceived in the best of
taste, sounded in his own ears wretchedly flat and vapid. He regretted it
spontaneously; the girl ignored it.

"You are very kind," she iterated the first words he had heard from her
lips. "I wish you to understand that I, for one, appreciate it."

"Not kind; I have done nothing. I am glad.... One is apt to become
interested when Romance is injected into a prosaic existence." Kirkwood
allowed himself a keen but cheerful glance.

She nodded, with a shadowy smile. He continued, purposefully, to distract
her, holding her with his honest, friendly eyes.

"Since it is to be confidences" (this she questioned with an all but
imperceptible lifting of the eyebrows), "I don't mind telling you my own
name is really Philip Kirkwood."

"And you are an old friend of my father's?"

He opened his lips, but only to close them without speaking. The girl moved
her shoulders with a shiver of disdain.

"I knew it wasn't so."

"You know it would be hard for a young man like myself to be a very old
friend," he countered lamely.

"How long, then, have you known each other?"

"Must I answer?"

"Please."

"Between three and four hours."

"I thought as much." She stared past him, troubled. Abruptly she said:
"Please smoke."

"Shall I? If you wish it, of course...."

She repeated: "Please."

"We were to wait ten minutes or so," she continued.

He produced his cigarette-case.

"If you care to smoke it will seem an excuse." He lighted his cigarette.
"And then, you may talk to me," she concluded calmly.

"I would, gladly, if I could guess what would interest you."

"Yourself. Tell me about yourself," she commanded.

"It would bore you," he responded tritely, confused.

"No; you interest me very much." She made the statement quietly,
contemptuous of coquetry.

"Very well, then; I am Philip Kirkwood, an American."

"Nothing more?"

"Little worth retailing."

"I'm sorry."

"Why?" he demanded, piqued.

"Because you have merely indicated that you are a wealthy American."

"Why wealthy?"

"If not, you would have some aim in life--a calling or profession."

"And you think I have none?"

"Unless you consider it your vocation to be a wealthy American."

"I don't. Besides, I'm not wealthy. In point of fact, I ..." He pulled up
short, on the verge of declaring himself a pauper. "I am a painter."

Her eyes lightened with interest. "An artist?"

"I hope so. I don't paint signs--or houses," he remarked.

Amused, she laughed softly. "I suspected it," she declared.

"Not really?"

"It was your way of looking at--things, that made me guess it: the
painter's way. I have often noticed it."

"As if mentally blending colors all the time?"

"Yes; that and--seeing flaws."

"I have discovered none," he told her brazenly.

But again her secret cares were claiming her thoughts, and the gay,
inconsequential banter died upon her scarlet lips as a second time her
glance ranged away, sounding mysterious depths of anxiety.

Provoked, he would have continued the chatter. "I have confessed," he
persisted. "You know everything of material interest about me. And
yourself?"

"I am merely Dorothy Calendar," she answered.

"Nothing more?" He laughed.

"That is all, if you please, for the present."

"I am to content myself with the promise of the future?"

"The future," she told him seriously, "is to-morrow; and to-morrow ..." She
moved restlessly in her chair, eyes and lips pathetic in their distress.
"Please, we will go now, if you are ready."

"I am quite ready, Miss Calendar."

He rose. A waiter brought the girl's cloak and put it in Kirkwood's hands.
He held it until, smoothing the wrists of her long white gloves, she stood
up, then placed the garment upon her white young shoulders, troubled by the
indefinable sense of intimacy imparted by the privilege. She permitted
him this personal service! He felt that she trusted him, that out of her
gratitude had grown a simple and almost childish faith in his generosity
and considerateness.

As she turned to go her eyes thanked him with an unfathomable glance. He
was again conscious of that esoteric disturbance in his temples. Puzzled,
hazily analyzing the sensation, he followed her to the lobby.

A page brought him his top-coat, hat and stick; tipping the child from
sheer force of habit, he desired a gigantic porter, impressively ornate in
hotel livery, to call a hansom. Together they passed out into the night, he
and the girl.

Beneath a permanent awning of steel and glass she waited patiently,
slender, erect, heedless of the attention she attracted from wayfarers.

The night was young, the air mild. Upon the sidewalk, muddied by a million
feet, two streams of wayfarers flowed incessantly, bound west from Green
Park or east toward Piccadilly Circus; a well-dressed throng for the most
part, with here and there a man in evening dress. Between the carriages at
the curb and the hotel doors moved others, escorting fluttering butterfly
women in elaborate toilets, heads bare, skirts daintily gathered above
their perishable slippers. Here and there meaner shapes slipped silently
through the crowd, sinister shadows of the city's proletariat, blotting
ominously the brilliance of the scene.

A cab drew in at the block. The porter clapped an arc of wickerwork over
its wheel to protect the girl's skirts. She ascended to the seat.

Kirkwood, dropping sixpence in the porter's palm, prepared to follow; but a
hand fell upon his arm, peremptory, inexorable. He faced about, frowning,
to confront a slight, hatchet-faced man, somewhat under medium height,
dressed in a sack suit and wearing a derby well forward over eyes that were
hard and bright.

"Mr. Calendar?" said the man tensely. "I presume I needn't name my
business. I'm from the Yard--"

"My name is not Calendar."

The detective smiled wearily. "Don't be a fool, Calendar," he began. But
the porter's hand fell upon his shoulder and the giant bent low to bring
his mouth close to the other's ear. Kirkwood heard indistinctly his own
name followed by Calendar's, and the words: "Never fear. I'll point him
out."

"But the woman?" argued the detective, unconvinced, staring into the cab.

"Am I not at liberty to have a lady dine with me in a public restaurant?"
interposed Kirkwood, without raising his voice.

The hard eyes looked him up and down without favor. Then: "Beg pardon, sir.
I see my mistake," said the detective brusquely.

"I am glad you do," returned Kirkwood grimly. "I fancy it will bear
investigation."

He mounted the step. "Imperial Theater," he told the driver, giving the
first address that occurred to him; it could be changed. For the moment
the main issue was to get the girl out of the range of the detective's
interest.

He slipped into his place as the hansom wheeled into the turgid tide of
west-bound traffic.

So Calendar had escaped, after all! Moreover, he had told the truth to
Kirkwood.

By his side the girl moved uneasily. "Who was that man?" she inquired.

Kirkwood sought her eyes, and found them wholly ingenuous. It seemed
that Calendar had not taken her into his confidence, after all. She was,
therefore, in no way implicated in her father's affairs. Inexplicably the
young man's heart felt lighter. "A mistake; the fellow took me for some one
he knew," he told her carelessly.

The assurance satisfied her. She rested quietly, wrapped up in personal
concerns. Her companion pensively contemplated an infinity of arid and
hansom-less to-morrows. About them the city throbbed in a web of misty
twilight, the humid farewell of a dismal day. In the air a faint haze swam,
rendering the distances opalescent. Athwart the western sky the after-glow
of a drenched sunset lay like a wash of rose-madder. Piccadilly's asphalt
shone like watered silk, black and lustrous, reflecting a myriad lights in
vibrant ribbons of party-colored radiance. On every hand cab-lamps danced
like fire-flies; the rumble of wheels blended with the hollow pounding
of uncounted hoofs, merging insensibly into the deep and solemn roar of
London-town.

Suddenly Kirkwood was recalled to a sense of duty by a glimpse of Hyde Park
Corner. He turned to the girl. "I didn't know where you wished to go--?"

She seemed to realize his meaning with surprise, as one, whose thoughts
have strayed afar, recalled to an imperative world.

"Oh, did I forget? Tell him please to drive to Number Nine, Frognall
Street, Bloomsbury."

Kirkwood poked his cane through the trap, repeating the address. The
cab wheeled smartly across Piccadilly, swung into Half Moon Street, and
thereafter made better time, darting briskly down abrupt vistas of shining
pavement, walled in by blank-visaged houses, or round two sides of one of
London's innumerable private parks, wherein spring foliage glowed a tender
green in artificial light; now and again it crossed brilliant main arteries
of travel, and eventually emerged from a maze of backways into Oxford
Street, to hammer eastwards to Tottenham Court Road.

Constraint hung like a curtain between the two; a silence which the young
man forbore to moderate, finding more delight that he had cared (or dared)
confess to, in contemplation of the pure girlish profile so close to him.

She seemed quite unaware of him, lost in thought, large eyes sober, lips
serious that were fashioned for laughter, round little chin firm with some
occult resolution. It was not hard to fancy her nerves keyed to a high
pitch of courage and determination, nor easy to guess for what reason.
Watching always, keenly sensitive to the beauty of each salient line
betrayed by the flying lights, Kirkwood's own consciousness lost itself in
a profitless, even a perilous labyrinth of conjecture.

The cab stopped. Both occupants came to their senses with a little start.
The girl leaned out over; the apron, recognized the house she sought in one
swift glance, testified to the recognition with a hushed exclamation,
and began to arrange her skirts. Kirkwood, unheeding her faint-hearted
protests, jumped out, interposing his cane between her skirts and the
wheel. Simultaneously he received a vivid mental photograph of the
locality.

Frognall Street proved to be one of those by-ways, a short block in
length, which, hemmed in on all sides by a meaner purlieu, has (even in
Bloomsbury!) escaped the sordid commercial eye of the keeper of furnished
lodgings, retaining jealously something of the old-time dignity and reserve
that were its pride in the days before Society swarmed upon Mayfair and
Belgravia.

Its houses loomed tall, with many windows, mostly lightless--materially
aggravating that air of isolate, cold dignity which distinguishes the
Englishman's castle. Here and there stood one less bedraggled than
its neighbors, though all, without exception, spoke assertively of
respectability down-at-the-heel but fighting tenaciously for existence.
Some, vanguards of that imminent day when the boarding-house should reign
supreme, wore with shamefaced air placards of estate-agents, advertising
their susceptibility to sale or lease. In the company of the latter was
Number 9.

The American noted the circumstance subconsciously, at a moment when Miss
Calendar's hand, small as a child's, warm and compact in its white glove,
lay in his own. And then she was on the sidewalk, her face, upturned to
his, vivacious with excitement.

"You have been so kind," she told him warmly, "that one hardly knows how to
thank you, Mr. Kirkwood."

"I have done nothing--nothing at all," he mumbled, disturbed by a sudden,
unreasoning alarm for her.

She passed quickly to the shelter of the pillared portico. He followed
clumsily. On the door-step she turned, offering her hand. He took and
retained it.

"Good night," she said.

"I'm to understand that I'm dismissed, then?" he stammered ruefully.

She evaded his eyes. "I--thank you--I have no further need--"

"You are quite sure? Won't you believe me at your service?"

She laughed uneasily. "I'm all right now."

"I can do nothing more? Sure?"

"Nothing. But you--you make me almost sorry I can't impose still further
upon your good nature."

"Please don't hesitate ..."

"Aren't you very persistent, Mr. Kirkwood?" Her fingers moved in his;
burning with the reproof, he released them, and turned to her so woebegone
a countenance that she repented of her severity. "Don't worry about me,
please. I am truly safe now. Some day I hope to be able to thank you
adequately. Good night!"

Her pass-key grated in the lock. Opening, the door disclosed a dark and
uninviting entry-hall, through which there breathed an air heavy with the
dank and dusty odor of untenanted rooms. Hesitating on the threshold, over
her shoulder the girl smiled kindly upon her commandeered esquire; and
stepped within.

He lifted his hat automatically. The door closed with an echoing slam. He
turned to the waiting cab, fumbling for change.

"I'll walk," he told the cabby, paying him off.

The hansom swept away to a tune of hammering hoofs; and quiet rested upon
the street as Kirkwood turned the nearest corner, in an unpleasant temper,
puzzled and discontented. It seemed hardly fair that he should have been
dragged into so promising an adventure, by his ears (so to put it), only to
be thus summarily called upon to write "Finis" beneath the incident.

He rounded the corner and walked half-way to the next street, coming to an
abrupt and rebellious pause by the entrance to a covered alleyway, of two
minds as to his proper course of action.

In the background of his thoughts Number 9, Frognall Street, reared its
five-story façade, sinister and forbidding. He reminded himself of its
unlighted windows; of its sign, "To be let"; of the effluvia of desolation
that had saluted him when the door swung wide. A deserted house; and the
girl alone in it!--was it right for him to leave her so?




IV


9 FROGNALL STREET, W. C.

The covered alleyway gave upon Quadrant Mews; or so declared a notice
painted on the dead wall of the passage.

Overhead, complaining as it swayed in the wind, hung the smirched and
weather-worn sign-board of the Hog-in-the-Pound public house; wherefrom
escaped sounds of such revelry by night as is indulged in by the British
working-man in hours of ease. At the curb in front of the house of
entertainment, dejected animals drooping between their shafts, two hansoms
stood in waiting, until such time as the lords of their destinies should
see fit to sally forth and inflict themselves upon a cab-hungry populace.
As Kirkwood turned, a third vehicle rumbled up out of the mews.

Kirkwood can close his eyes, even at this late day, and both see and hear
it all again--even as he can see the unbroken row of dingy dwellings that
lined his way back from Quadrant Mews to Frognall Street corner: all
drab and unkempt, all sporting in their fan-lights the legend and lure,
"Furnished Apartments."

For, between his curiosity about and his concern for the girl, he was being
led back to Number 9, by the nose, as it were,--hardly willingly, at best.
Profoundly stupefied by the contemplation of his own temerity, he yet
returned unfaltering. He who had for so long plumed himself upon his strict
supervision of his personal affairs and equally steadfast unconsciousness
of his neighbor's businesses, now found himself in the very act of pushing
in where he was not wanted: as he had been advised in well-nigh as many
words. He experienced an effect of standing to one side, a witness of
his own folly, with rising wonder, unable to credit the strength of
the infatuation which was placing him so conspicuously in the way of a
snubbing.

If perchance he were to meet the girl again as she was leaving Number
9,--what then? The contingency dismayed him incredibly, in view of the fact
that it did not avail to make him pause. To the contrary he disregarded it
resolutely; mad, impertinent, justified of his unnamed apprehensions, or
simply addled,--he held on his way.

He turned up Frognall Street with the manner of one out for a leisurely
evening stroll. Simultaneously, from the farther corner, another pedestrian
debouched, into the thoroughfare--a mere moving shadow at that distance,
brother to blacker shadows that skulked in the fenced areas and unlively
entries of that poorly lighted block. The hush was something beyond belief,
when one remembered the nearness of blatant Tottenham Court Road.

Kirkwood conceived a wholly senseless curiosity about the other wayfarer.
The man was walking rapidly, heels ringing with uncouth loudness, cane
tapping the flagging at brief intervals. Both sounds ceased abruptly as
their cause turned in beneath one of the porticos. In the emphatic and
unnatural quiet that followed, Kirkwood, stepping more lightly, fancied
that another shadow followed the first, noiselessly and with furtive
stealth.

Could it be Number 9 into which they had passed? The American's heart beat
a livelier tempo at the suggestion. If it had not been Number 9--he was
still too far away to tell--it was certainly one of the dwellings adjacent
thereunto. The improbable possibility (But why improbable?) that the girl
was being joined by her father, or by friends, annoyed him with illogical
intensity. He mended his own pace, designing to pass whichever house it
might be before the door should be closed; thought better of this, and
slowed up again, anathematizing himself with much excuse for being the
inquisitive dolt that he was.

Approaching Number 9 with laggard feet, he manufactured a desire to light
a cigarette, as a cover for his design, were he spied upon by unsuspected
eyes. Cane under arm, hands cupped to shield a vesta's flame, he stopped
directly before the portico, turning his eyes askance to the shadowed
doorway; and made a discovery sufficiently startling to hold him spellbound
and, incidentally, to scorch his gloves before he thought to drop the
match.

The door of Number 9 stood ajar, a black interval an inch or so in width
showing between its edge and the jamb.

Suspicion and alarm set his wits a-tingle. More distinctly he recalled the
jarring bang, accompanied by the metallic click of the latch, when the girl
had shut herself in--and him out. Now, some person or persons had followed
her, neglecting the most obvious precaution of a householder. And why? Why
but because the intruders did not wish the sound of closing to be audible
to her--or those--within?

He reminded himself that it was all none of his affair, decided to pass on
and go his ways in peace, and impulsively, swinging about, marched straight
away for the unclosed door.

"'Old'ard, guvner!"

Kirkwood halted on the cry, faltering in indecision. Should he take the
plunge, or withdraw? Synchronously he was conscious that a man's figure
had detached itself from the shadows beneath the nearest portico and was
drawing nearer, with every indication of haste, to intercept him.

"'Ere now, guvner, yer mykin' a mistyke. You don't live 'ere."

"How do you know?" demanded Kirkwood crisply, tightening his grip on his
stick.

Was this the second shadow he had seemed to see--the confederate of him who
had entered Number 9; a sentry to forestall interruption? If so, the fellow
lacked discretion, though his determination that the American should not
interfere was undeniable. It was with an ugly and truculent manner, if more
warily, that the man closed in.

"I knows. You clear hout, or--"

He flung out a hand with the plausible design of grasping Kirkwood by the
collar. The latter lifted his stick, deflecting the arm, and incontinently
landed his other fist forcibly on the fellow's chest. The man reeled back,
cursing. Before he could recover Kirkwood calmly crossed the threshold,
closed the door and put his shoulder to it. In another instant, fumbling in
the darkness, he found the bolts and drove them home.

And it was done, the transformation accomplished; his inability to refrain
from interfering had encompassed his downfall, had changed a peaceable and
law-abiding alien within British shores into a busybody, a trespasser, a
misdemeanant, a--yes, for all he knew to the contrary, in the estimation of
the Law, a burglar, prime candidate for a convict's stripes!

Breathing hard with excitement he turned and laid his back against the
panels, trembling in every muscle, terrified by the result of his impulsive
audacity, thunder-struck by a lightning-like foreglimpse of its possible
consequences. Of what colossal imprudence had he not been guilty?

"The devil!" he whispered. "What an ass, what an utter ass I am!"

Behind him the knob was rattled urgently, to an accompaniment of feet
shuffling on the stone; and immediately--if he were to make a logical
deduction from the rasping and scraping sound within the door-casing--the
bell-pull was violently agitated, without, however, educing any response
from the bell itself, wherever that might be situate. After which, as if in
despair, the outsider again rattled and jerked the knob.

Be his status what it might, whether servant of the household, its
caretaker, or a night watchman, the man was palpably determined both to get
himself in and Kirkwood out, and yet (curious to consider) determined to
gain his end without attracting undue attention. Kirkwood had expected to
hear the knocker's thunder, as soon as the bell failed to give tongue; but
it did not sound although there _was_ a knocker,--Kirkwood himself had
remarked that antiquated and rusty bit of ironmongery affixed to the middle
panel of the door. And it made him feel sure that something surreptitious
and lawless was in process within those walls, that the confederate
without, having failed to prevent a stranger from entering, left unemployed
a means so certain-sure to rouse the occupants.

But his inferential analysis of this phase of the proceedings was summarily
abrupted by that identical alarm. In a trice the house was filled with
flying echoes, wakened to sonorous riot by the crash and clamor of the
knocker; and Kirkwood stood fully two yards away, his heart hammering
wildly, his nerves a-jingle, much as if the resounding blows had landed
upon his own person rather than on stout oaken planking.

Ere he had time to wonder, the racket ceased, and from the street filtered
voices in altercation. Listening, Kirkwood's pulses quickened, and he
laughed uncertainly for pure relief, retreating to the door and putting an
ear to a crack.

The accents of one speaker were new in his hearing, stern, crisp, quick
with the spirit of authority which animates that most austere and dignified
limb of the law to be encountered the world over, a London bobby.

"Now then, my man, what do you want there? Come now, speak up, and step out
into the light, where I can see you."

The response came in the sniffling snarl of the London ne'er-do-well, the
unemployable rogue whose chiefest occupation seems to be to march in the
ranks of The Unemployed on the occasion of its annual demonstrations.

"Le' me alone, carntcher? Ah'm doin' no 'arm, officer,--"

"Didn't you hear me? Step out here. Ah, that's better.... No harm, eh?
Perhaps you'll explain how there's no harm breakin' into unoccupied
'ouses?"

"Gorblimy, 'ow was I to know? 'Ere's a toff 'ands me sixpence fer hopenin'
'is cab door to-dye, an', sezee, 'My man,' 'e sez, 'yer've got a 'onest
fyce. W'y don'cher work?' sezee. ''Ow can I?' sez I. ''Ere'm I hout of
a job these six months, lookin' fer work every dye an' carn't find it.'
Sezee, 'Come an' see me this hevenin' at me home, Noine, Frognall Stryte,'
'e sez, an'--"

"That'll do for now. You borrow a pencil and paper and write it down and
I'll read it when I've got more time; I never heard the like of it. This
'ouse hasn't been lived in these two years. Move on, and don't let me find
you round 'ere again. March, I say!"

There was more of it--more whining explanations artfully tinctured with
abuse, more terse commands to depart, the whole concluding with scraping
footsteps, diminuendo, and another perfunctory, rattle of the knob as the
bobby, having shoo'd the putative evil-doer off, assured himself that
no damage had actually been done. Then he, too, departed, satisfied and
self-righteous, leaving a badly frightened but very grateful amateur
criminal to pursue his self-appointed career of crime.

He had no choice other than to continue; in point of fact, it had been
insanity just then to back out, and run the risk of apprehension at the
hands of that ubiquitous bobby, who (for all he knew) might be lurking not
a dozen yards distant, watchful for just such a sequel. Still, Kirkwood
hesitated with the best of excuses. Reassuring as he had found the
sentinel's extemporized yarn,--proof positive that the fellow had had no
more right to prohibit a trespass than Kirkwood to commit one,--at the
same time he found himself pardonably a prey to emotions of the utmost
consternation and alarm. If he feared to leave the house he had no warrant
whatever to assume that he would be permitted to remain many minutes
unharmed within its walls of mystery.

The silence of it discomfited him beyond measure; it was, in a word,
uncanny.

Before him, as he lingered at the door, vaguely disclosed by a wan
illumination penetrating a dusty and begrimed fan-light, a broad hall
stretched indefinitely towards the rear of the building, losing itself in
blackness beyond the foot of a flight of stairs. Save for a few articles of
furniture,--a hall table, an umbrella-stand, a tall dumb clock flanked by
high-backed chairs,--it was empty. Other than Kirkwood's own restrained
respiration not a sound throughout the house advertised its inhabitation;
not a board creaked beneath the pressure of a foot, not a mouse rustled in
the wainscoting or beneath the floors, not a breath of air stirred sighing
in the stillness.

And yet, a tremendous racket had been raised at the front door, within the
sixty seconds past! And yet, within twenty minutes two persons, at
least, had preceded Kirkwood into the building! Had they not heard? The
speculation seemed ridiculous. Or had they heard and, alarmed, been too
effectually hobbled by the coils of their nefarious designs to dare reveal
themselves, to investigate the cause of that thunderous summons? Or were
they, perhaps, aware of Kirkwood's entrance, and lying _perdui_, in some
dark corner, to ambush him as he passed?

True, that were hardly like the girl. True, on the other hand, it
were possible that she had stolen away while Kirkwood was hanging in
irresolution by the passage to Quadrant Mews. Again, the space of time
between Kirkwood's dismissal and his return had been exceedingly brief;
whatever her errand, she could hardly have fulfilled it and escaped. At
that moment she might be in the power and at the mercy of him who had
followed her; providing he were not friendly. And in that case, what
torment and what peril might not be hers?

Spurred by solicitude, the young man put personal apprehensions in his
pocket and forgot them, cautiously picking his way through the gloom to the
foot of the stairs. There, by the newel-post, he paused. Darkness walled
him about. Overhead the steps vanished in a well of blackness; he could
not even see the ceiling; his eyes ached with futile effort to fathom the
unknown; his ears rang with unrewarded strain of listening. The silence
hung inviolate, profound.

Slowly he began to ascend, a hand following the balusters, the other with
his cane exploring the obscurity before him. On the steps, a carpet, thick
and heavy, muffled his footfalls. He moved noiselessly. Towards the top
the staircase curved, and presently a foot that groped for a higher level
failed to find it. Again he halted, acutely distrustful.

Nothing happened.

He went on, guided by the balustrade, passing three doors, all open,
through which the undefined proportions of a drawing-room and boudoir were
barely suggested in a ghostly dusk. By each he paused, listening, hearing
nothing.

His foot struck with a deadened thud against the bottom step of the
second flight, and his pulses fluttered wildly for a moment. Two
minutes--three--he waited in suspense. From above came no sound. He went
on, as before, save that twice a step yielded, complaining, to his weight.
Toward the top the close air, like the darkness, seemed to weigh more
heavily upon his consciousness; little drops of perspiration started out on
his forehead, his scalp tingled, his mouth was hot and dry, he felt as if
stifled.

Again the raised foot found no level higher than its fellows. He stopped
and held his breath, oppressed by a conviction that some one was near him.
Confirmation of this came startlingly--an eerie whisper in the night, so
close to him that he fancied he could feel the disturbed air fanning his
face.

"_Is it you, Eccles_?"

He had no answer ready. The voice was masculine, if he analyzed it
correctly. Dumb and stupid he stood poised upon the point of panic.

"_Eccles, is it you_?"

The whisper was both shrill and shaky. As it ceased Kirkwood was
half blinded by a flash of light, striking him squarely in the eyes.
Involuntarily he shrank back a pace, to the first step from the top.
Instantaneously the light was eclipsed.

"_Halt or--or I fire_!"

By now he realized that he had been scrutinized by the aid of an electric
hand-lamp. The tremulous whisper told him something else--that the speaker
suffered from nerves as high-strung as his own. The knowledge gave him
inspiration. He cried at a venture, in a guarded voice, "_Hands up_!"--and
struck out smartly with his stick. Its ferrule impinged upon something soft
but heavy. Simultaneously he heard a low, frightened cry, the cane was
swept aside, a blow landed glancingly on his shoulder, and he was carried
fairly off his feet by the weight of a man hurled bodily upon him with
staggering force and passion. Reeling, he was borne back and down a step
or two, and then,--choking on an oath,--dropped his cane and with one hand
caught the balusters, while the other tore ineffectually at wrists of
hands that clutched his throat. So, for a space, the two hung, panting and
struggling.

Then endeavoring to swing his shoulders over against the wall, Kirkwood
released his grip on the hand-rail and stumbled on the stairs, throwing his
antagonist out of balance. The latter plunged downward, dragging Kirkwood
with him. Clawing, kicking, grappling, they went to the bottom, jolted
violently by each step; but long before the last was reached, Kirkwood's
throat was free.

Throwing himself off, he got to his feet and grasped the railing for
support; then waited, panting, trying to get his bearings. Himself
painfully shaken and bruised, he shrewdly surmised that his assailant had
fared as ill, if not worse. And, in point of fact, the man lay with neither
move nor moan, still as death at the American's feet.

And once more silence had folded its wings over Number 9, Frognall Street.

More conscious of that terrifying, motionless presence beneath him, than
able to distinguish it by power of vision, he endured interminable minutes
of trembling horror, in a witless daze, before he thought of his match-box.
Immediately he found it and struck a light. As the wood caught and the
bright small flame leaped in the pent air, he leaned forward, over the
body, breathlessly dreading what he must discover.

The man lay quiet, head upon the floor, legs and hips on the stairs. One
arm had fallen over his face, hiding the upper half. The hand gleamed white
and delicate as a woman's. His chin was smooth and round, his lips thin and
petulant. Beneath his top-coat, evening dress clothed a short and slender
figure. Nothing whatever of his appearance suggested the burly ruffian, the
midnight marauder; he seemed little more than a boy old enough to dress
for dinner. In his attitude there was something pitifully suggestive of a
beaten child, thrown into a corner.

Conscience-smitten and amazed Kirkwood stared on until, without warning,
the match flickered and went out. Then, straightening up with an
exclamation at once of annoyance and concern, he rattled the box; it made
no sound,--was empty. In disgust he swore it was the devil's own luck, that
he should run out of vestas at a time so critical. He could not even say
whether the fellow was dead, unconscious, or simply shamming. He had little
idea of his looks; and to be able to identify him might save a deal of
trouble at some future time,--since he, Kirkwood, seemed so little able
to disengage himself from the clutches of this insane adventure! And the
girl--. what had become of her? How could he continue to search for her,
without lights or guide, through all those silent rooms, whose walls might
inclose a hundred hidden dangers in that house of mystery?

But he debated only briefly. His blood was young, and it was hot; it was
quite plain to him that he could not withdraw and retain his self-respect.
If the girl was there to be found, most assuredly, he must find her. The
hand-lamp that had dazzled him at the head of the stairs should be his aid,
now that he thought of it,--and providing he was able to find it.

In the scramble on the stairs he had lost his hat, but he remembered that
the vesta's short-lived light had discovered this on the floor beyond
the man's body. Carefully stepping across the latter he recovered his
head-gear, and then, kneeling, listened with an ear close to the fellow's
face. A softly regular beat of breathing reassured him. Half rising, he
caught the body beneath the armpits, lifting and dragging it off the
staircase; and knelt again, to feel of each pocket in the man's clothing,
partly as an obvious precaution, to relieve him of his advertised revolver
against an untimely wakening, partly to see if he had the lamp about him.

The search proved fruitless. Kirkwood suspected that the weapon, like his
own, had existed only in his victim's ready imagination. As for the lamp,
in the act of rising he struck it with his foot, and picked it up.

It felt like a metal tube a couple of inches in diameter, a foot or so
in length, passably heavy. He fumbled with it impatiently. "However the
dickens," he wondered audibly, "does the infernal machine work?" As it
happened, the thing worked with disconcerting abruptness as his untrained
fingers fell hapchance on the spring. A sudden glare again smote him in the
face, and at the same instant, from a point not a yard away, apparently, an
inarticulate cry rang out upon the stillness.

Heart in his mouth, he stepped back, lowering the lamp (which impishly went
out) and lifting a protecting forearm.

"Who's that?" he demanded harshly.

A strangled sob of terror answered him, blurred by a swift rush of skirts,
and in a breath his shattered nerves quieted and a glimmer of common sense
penetrated the murk anger and fear had bred in his brain. He understood,
and stepped forward, catching blindly at the darkness with eager hands.

"Miss Calendar!" he cried guardedly. "Miss Calendar, it is I--Philip
Kirkwood!"

There was a second sob, of another caliber than the first; timid fingers
brushed his, and a hand, warm and fragile, closed upon his own in a passion
of relief and gratitude.

"Oh, I am so g-glad!" It was Dorothy Calendar's voice, beyond mistake.
"I--I didn't know what t-to t-think.... When the light struck your face
I was sure it was you, but when I called, you answered in a voice so
strange,--not like yours at all! ... Tell me," she pleaded, with palpable
effort to steady herself; "what has happened?"

"I think, perhaps," said Kirkwood uneasily, again troubled by his racing
pulses, "perhaps you can do that better than I."

"Oh!" said the voice guiltily; her fingers trembled on his, and were gently
withdrawn. "I was so frightened," she confessed after a little pause, "so
frightened that I hardly understand ... But you? How did you--?"

"I worried about you," he replied, in a tone absurdly apologetic. "Somehow
it didn't seem right. It was none of my business, of course, but ... I
couldn't help coming back. This fellow, whoever he is--don't worry;
he's unconscious--slipped into the house in a manner that seemed to me
suspicious. I hardly know why I followed, except that he left the door an
open invitation to interference ..."

"I can't be thankful enough," she told him warmly, "that you did interfere.
You have indeed saved me from ..."

"Yes?"

"I don't know what. If I knew the man--"

"You don't _know_ him?"

"I can't even guess. The light--?"

She paused inquiringly. Kirkwood fumbled with the lamp, but, whether its
rude handling had impaired some vital part of the mechanism, or whether the
batteries through much use were worn out, he was able to elicit only one
feeble glow, which was instantly smothered by the darkness.

"It's no use," he confessed. "The thing's gone wrong."

"Have you a match?"

"I used my last before I got hold of this."

"Oh," she commented, discouraged. "Have you any notion what he looks like?"

Kirkwood thought briefly. "Raffles," he replied with a chuckle. "He looks
like an amateurish and very callow Raffles. He's in dress clothes, you
know."

"I wonder!" There was a nuance of profound bewilderment in her exclamation.
Then: "He knocked against something in the hall--a chair, I presume; at all
events, I heard that and put out the light. I was ... in the room above the
drawing-room, you see. I stole down to this floor--was there, in the corner
by the stairs when he passed within six inches, and never guessed it. Then,
when he got on the next floor, I started on; but you came in. I slipped
into the drawing-room and crouched behind a chair. You went on, but I dared
not move until ... And then I heard some one cry out, and you fell down the
stairs together. I hope you were not hurt--?"

"Nothing worth mention; but _he_ must have got a pretty stiff knock, to lay
him out so completely." Kirkwood stirred the body with his toe, but the man
made no sign. "Dead to the world ... And now, Miss Calendar?"

If she answered, he did not hear; for on the heels of his query banged the
knocker down below; and thereafter crash followed crash, brewing a deep and
sullen thundering to rouse the echoes and send them rolling, like voices of
enraged ghosts, through the lonely rooms.




V


THE MYSTERY OF A FOUR-WHEELER

"What's that?" At the first alarm the girl had caught convulsively at
Kirkwood's arm. Now, when a pause came in the growling of the knocker, she
made him hear her voice; and it was broken and vibrant with a threat of
hysteria. "Oh, what can it mean?"

"I don't know." He laid a hand reassuringly over that which trembled on his
forearm. "The police, possibly."

"Police!" she iterated, aghast. "What makes you think--?"

"A man tried to stop me at the door," he answered quickly. "I got in before
he could. When he tried the knocker, a bobby came along and stopped him.
The latter may have been watching the house since then,--it'd be only his
duty to keep an eye on it; and Heaven knows we raised a racket, coming
head-first down those stairs! Now we are up against it," he added brightly.

But the girl was tugging at his hand. "Come!" she begged breathlessly.
"Come! There is a way! Before they break in--"

"But this man--?" Kirkwood hung back, troubled.

"They--the police are sure to find and care for him."

"So they will." He chuckled, "And serve him right! He'd have choked me to
death, with all the good will in the world!"

"Oh, do hurry!"

Turning, she sped light-footed down the staircase to the lower hall, he
at her elbow. Here the uproar was loudest--deep enough to drown whatever
sounds might have been made by two pairs of flying feet. For all that
they fled on tiptoe, stealthily, guilty shadows in the night; and at the
newel-post swung back into the unbroken blackness which shrouded the
fastnesses backward of the dwelling. A sudden access of fury on the part of
the alarmist at the knocker, spurred them on with quaking hearts. In half a
dozen strides, Kirkwood, guided only by instinct and the _frou-frou_ of the
girl's skirts as she ran invisible before him, stumbled on the uppermost
steps of a steep staircase; only a hand-rail saved him, and that at the
last moment. He stopped short, shocked into caution. From below came a
contrite whisper: "I'm so sorry! I should have warned you."

He pulled himself together, glaring wildly at nothing. "It's all right--"

"You're not hurt, truly? Oh, do come quickly."

She waited for him at the bottom of the flight;--happily for him, for he
was all at sea.

"Here--your hand--let me guide you. This darkness is dreadful ..."

He found her hand, somehow, and tucked his into it, confidingly, and not
without an uncertain thrill of satisfaction.

"Come!" she panted. "Come! If they break in--"

Stifled by apprehension, her voice failed her.

They went forward, now less impetuously, for it was very black; and the
knocker had fallen still.

"No fear of that," he remarked after a time. "They wouldn't dare break in."

A fluttering whisper answered him: "I don't know. We dare risk nothing."

They seemed to explore, to penetrate acres of labyrinthine chambers and
passages, delving deep into the bowels of the earth, like rabbits burrowing
in a warren, hounded by beagles.

Above stairs the hush continued unbroken; as if the dumb Genius of the
Place had cast a spell of silence on the knocker, or else, outraged, had
smitten the noisy disturber with a palsy.

The girl seemed to know her way; whether guided by familiarity or by
intuition, she led on without hesitation, Kirkwood blundering in her wake,
between confusion of impression, and dawning dismay conscious of but one
tangible thing, to which he clung as to his hope of salvation: those firm,
friendly fingers that clasped his own.

It was as if they wandered on for an hour; probably from start to finish
their flight took up three minutes, no more. Eventually the girl stopped,
releasing his hand. He could hear her syncopated breathing before him, and
gathered that something was wrong. He took a step forward.

"What is it?"

Her full voice broke out of the obscurity startlingly close, in his very
ear.

"The door--the bolts--I can't budge them."

"Let me ..."

He pressed forward, brushing her shoulder. She did not draw away, but
willingly yielded place to his hands at the fastenings; and what had proved
impossible to her, to his strong fingers was a matter of comparative ease.
Yet, not entirely consciously, he was not quick. As he tugged at the bolts
he was poignantly sensitive to the subtle warmth of her at his side; he
could hear her soft dry sobs of excitement and suspense, punctuating the
quiet; and was frightened, absolutely, by an impulse, too strong for
ridicule, to take her in his arms and comfort her with the assurance that,
whatever her trouble, he would stand by her and protect her.... It were
futile to try to laugh it off; he gave over the endeavor. Even at this
critical moment he found himself repeating over and over to his heart the
question: "Can this be love? Can this be love? ..."

Could it be love at an hour's acquaintance? Absurd! But he could not
laugh--nor render himself insensible to the suggestion.

He found that he had drawn the bolts. The girl tugged and rattled at the
knob. Reluctantly the door opened inwards. Beyond its threshold stretched
ten feet or more of covered passageway, whose entrance framed an oblong
glimmering with light. A draught of fresh air smote their faces. Behind
them a door banged.

"Where does this open?"

"On the mews," she informed him.

"The mews!" He stared in consternation at the pallid oval that stood for
her face. "The mews! But you, in your evening gown, and I--"

"There's no other way. We must chance it. Are you afraid?"

Afraid? ... He stepped aside. She slipped by him and on. He closed the
door, carefully removing the key and locking it on the outside; then joined
the girl at the entrance to the mews, where they paused perforce, she as
much disconcerted as he, his primary objection momentarily waxing in force
as they surveyed the conditions circumscribing their escape.

Quadrant Mews was busily engaged in enjoying itself. Night had fallen
sultry and humid, and the walls and doorsteps were well fringed and
clustered with representatives of that class of London's population which
infests mews through habit, taste, or force of circumstance.

On the stoops men sprawled at easy length, discussing short, foul cutties
loaded with that rank and odoriferous compound which, under the name and
in the fame of tobacco, is widely retailed at tuppence the ounce. Their
women-folk more commonly squatted on the thresholds, cheerfully squabbling;
from opposing second-story windows, two leaned perilously forth, slanging
one another across the square briskly in the purest billingsgate; and were
impartially applauded from below by an audience whose appreciation seemed
faintly tinged with envy. Squawking and yelling children swarmed over the
flags and rude cobblestones that paved the ways. Like incense, heavy and
pungent, the rich effluvia of stable-yards swirled in air made visible by
its faint burden of mist.

Over against the entrance wherein Kirkwood and the girl lurked, confounded
by the problem of escaping undetected through this vivacious scene, a
stable-door stood wide, exposing a dimly illumined interior. Before it
waited a four-wheeler, horse already hitched in between the shafts, while
its driver, a man of leisurely turn of mind, made lingering inspection of
straps and buckles, and, while Kirkwood watched him, turned attention to
the carriage lamps.

The match which he raked spiritedly down his thigh, flared ruddily; the
succeeding paler glow of the lamp threw into relief a heavy beefy mask,
with shining bosses for cheeks and nose and chin; through narrow slits
two cunning eyes glittered like dull gems. Kirkwood appraised him with
attention, as one in whose gross carcass was embodied their only hope of
unannoyed return to the streets and normal surroundings of their world. The
difficulty lay in attracting the man's attention and engaging him without
arousing his suspicions or bringing the population about their ears. Though
he hesitated long, no favorable opportunity presented itself; and in time
the Jehu approached the box with the ostensible purpose of mounting and
driving off. In this critical situation the American, forced to recognize
that boldness must mark his course, took the girl's fate and his own in his
hands, and with a quick word to his companion, stepped out of hiding.

The cabby had a foot upon the step when Kirkwood tapped his shoulder.

"My man--"

"Lor, lumme!" cried the fellow in amaze, pivoting on his heel. Cupidity and
quick understanding enlivened the eyes which in two glances looked
Kirkwood up and down, comprehending at once both his badly rumpled hat
and patent-leather shoes. "S'help me,"--thickly,--"where'd you drop from,
guvner?"

"That's my affair," said Kirkwood briskly. "Are you engaged?"

"If you mykes yerself my fare," returned the cabby shrewdly, "I _ham_."

"Ten shillings, then, if you get us out of here in one minute and
to--say--Hyde Park Corner in fifteen."

"Us?" demanded the fellow aggressively.

Kirkwood motioned toward the passageway. "There's a lady with me--there.
Quick now!"

Still the man did not move. "Ten bob," he bargained; "an' you runnin' awye
with th' stuffy ol' gent's fair darter? Come now, guvner, is it gen'rous?
Myke it a quid an'--"

"A pound then. _Will_ you hurry?"

By way of answer the fellow scrambled hastily up to the box and snatched at
the reins. "_Ck_! Gee-e hup!" he cried sonorously.

By now the mews had wakened to the fact of the presence of a "toff" in its
midst. His light topcoat and silk hat-rendered him as conspicuous as a red
Indian in war-paint would have been on Rotten Row. A cry of surprise was
raised, and drowned in a volley of ribald inquiry and chaff.

Fortunately, the cabby was instant to rein in skilfully before the
passageway, and Kirkwood had the door open before the four-wheeler stopped.
The girl, hugging her cloak about her, broke cover (whereat the hue and cry
redoubled), and sprang into the body of the vehicle. Kirkwood followed,
shutting the door. As the cab lurched forward he leaned over and drew down
the window-shade, shielding the girl from half a hundred prying eyes. At
the same time they gathered momentum, banging swiftly, if loudly out of the
mews.

An urchin, leaping on the step to spy in Kirkwood's window, fell off,
yelping, as the driver's whiplash curled about his shanks.

The gloom of the tunnel inclosed them briefly ere the lights of the
Hog-in-the-Pound flashed by and the wheels began to roll more easily.
Kirkwood drew back with a sigh of relief.

"Thank God!" he said softly.

The girl had no words.

Worried by her silence, solicitous lest, the strain ended, she might be on
the point of fainting, he let up the shade and lowered the window at her
side.

She seemed to have collapsed in her corner. Against the dark upholstery her
hair shone like pale gold in the half-light; her eyes were closed and she
held a handkerchief to her lips; the other hand lay limp.

"Miss Calendar?"

She started, and something bulky fell from the seat and thumped heavily on
the floor. Kirkwood bent to pick it up, and so for the first time was
made aware that she had brought with her a small black gladstone bag of
considerable weight. As he placed it on the forward seat their eyes met.

"I didn't know--" he began.

"It was to get that," she hastened to explain, "that my father sent me ..."

"Yes," he assented in a tone indicating his complete comprehension. "I
trust ..." he added vaguely, and neglected to complete the observation,
losing himself in a maze of conjecture not wholly agreeable. This was a new
phase of the adventure. He eyed the bag uneasily. What did it contain? How
did he know ...?

Hastily he abandoned that line of thought. He had no right to
infer anything whatever, who had thrust himself uninvited into her
concerns--uninvited, that was to say, in the second instance, having
been once definitely given his congé. Inevitably, however, a thousand
unanswerable questions pestered him; just as, at each fresh facet of
mystery disclosed by the sequence of the adventure, his bewilderment
deepened.

The girl stirred restlessly. "I have been thinking," she volunteered in a
troubled tone, "that there is absolutely no way I know of, to thank you
properly."

"It is enough if I've been useful," he rose in gallantry to the emergency.

"That," she commented, "was very prettily said. But then I have never known
any one more kind and courteous and--and considerate, than you." There was
no savor of flattery in the simple and direct statement; indeed, she was
looking away from him, out of the window, and her face was serious with
thought; she seemed to be speaking of, rather than to, Kirkwood. "And I
have been wondering," she continued with unaffected candor, "what you must
be thinking of me."

"I? ... What should I think of you, Miss Calendar?"

With the air of a weary child she laid her head against the cushions again,
face to him, and watched him through lowered lashes, unsmiling.

"You might be thinking that an explanation is due you. Even the way we
were brought together was extraordinary, Mr. Kirkwood. You must be very
generous, as generous as you have shown yourself brave, not to require some
sort of an explanation of me."

"I don't see it that way."

"I do ... You have made me like you very much, Mr. Kirkwood."

He shot her a covert glance--causelessly, for her _naiveté_ was flawless.
With a feeling of some slight awe he understood this--a sensation of
sincere reverence for the unspoiled, candid, child's heart and mind that
were hers. "I'm glad," he said simply; "very glad, if that's the case, and
presupposing I deserve it. Personally," he laughed, "I seem to myself to
have been rather forward."

"No; only kind and a gentleman."

"But--please!" he protested.

"Oh, but I mean it, every word! Why shouldn't I? In a little while, ten
minutes, half an hour, we shall have seen the last of each other. Why
should I not tell you how I appreciate all that you have unselfishly done
for me?"

"If you put it that way,--I'm sure I don't know; beyond that it embarrasses
me horribly to have you overestimate me so. If any courage has been shown
this night, it is yours ... But I'm forgetting again." He thought to divert
her. "Where shall I tell the cabby to go this time, Miss Calendar?"

"Craven Street, please," said the girl, and added a house number. "I am to
meet my father there, with this,"--indicating the gladstone bag.

Kirkwood thrust head and shoulders out the window and instructed the cabby
accordingly; but his ruse had been ineffectual, as he found when he sat
back again. Quite composedly the girl took up the thread of conversation
where it had been broken off.

"It's rather hard to keep silence, when you've been so good. I don't want
you to think me less generous than yourself, but, truly, I can tell you
nothing." She sighed a trace resentfully; or so he thought. "There is
little enough in this--this wretched affair, that I understand myself; and
that little, I may not tell ... I want you to know that."

"I understand, Miss Calendar."

"There's one thing I may say, however. I have done nothing wrong to-night,
I believe," she added quickly.

"I've never for an instant questioned that," he returned with a qualm of
shame; for what he said was not true.

"Thank you ..."

The four-wheeler swung out of Oxford Street into Charing Cross Road.
Kirkwood noted the fact with a feeling of some relief that their ride
was to be so short; like many of his fellow-sufferers from "the artistic
temperament," he was acutely disconcerted by spoken words of praise and
gratitude; Miss Calendar, unintentionally enough, had succeeded only in
rendering him self-conscious and ill at ease.

Nor had she fully relieved her mind, nor voiced all that perturbed her.
"There's one thing more," she said presently: "my father. I--I hope you
will think charitably of him."

"Indeed, I've no reason or right to think otherwise."

"I was afraid--afraid his actions might have seemed peculiar, to-night ..."

"There are lots of things I don't understand, Miss Calendar. Some day,
perhaps, it will all clear up,--this trouble of yours. At least, one
supposes it is trouble, of some sort. And then you will tell me the whole
story.... Won't you?" Kirkwood insisted.

"I'm afraid not," she said, with a smile of shadowed sadness. "We are to
say good night in a moment or two, and--it will be good-by as well. It's
unlikely that we shall ever meet again."

"I refuse positively to take such a gloomy view of the case!"

She shook her head, laughing with him, but with shy regret. "It's so, none
the less. We are leaving London this very night, my father and I--leaving
England, for that matter."

"Leaving England?" he echoed. "You're not by any chance bound for America,
are you?"

"I ... can't tell you."

"But you can tell me this: are you booked on the _Minneapolis_?"

"No--o; it is a--quite another boat."

"Of course!" he commented savagely. "It wouldn't be me to have _any_ sort
of luck!"

She made no reply beyond a low laugh. He stared gloomily out of his window,
noting indifferently that they were passing the National Gallery. On their
left Trafalgar Square stretched, broad and bare, a wilderness of sooty
stone with an air of mutely tolerating its incongruous fountains. Through
Charing Cross roared a tide-rip of motor-busses and hackney carriages.

Glumly the young man foresaw the passing of his abbreviated romance; their
destination was near at hand. Brentwick had been right, to some extent, at
least; it was quite true that the curtain had been rung up that very night,
upon Kirkwood's Romance; unhappily, as Brentwick had not foreseen, it was
immediately to be rung down.

The cab rolled soberly into the Strand.

"Since we are to say good-by so very soon," suggested Kirkwood, "may I ask
a parting favor, Miss Calendar?"

She regarded him with friendly eyes. "You have every right," she affirmed
gently.

"Then please to tell me frankly: are you going into any further danger?"

"And is that the only boon you crave at my hands, Mr. Kirkwood?"

"Without impertinence ..."

For a little time, waiting for him to conclude his vague phrase, she
watched him in an expectant silence. But the man was diffident to a
degree--At length, somewhat unconsciously, "I think not," she answered.
"No; there will be no danger awaiting me at Mrs. Hallam's. You need not
fear for me any more--Thank you."

He lifted his brows at the unfamiliar name. "Mrs. Hallam--?"

"I am going to her house in Craven Street."

"Your father is to meet you there?"--persistently.

"He promised to."

"But if he shouldn't?"

"Why--" Her eyes clouded; she pursed her lips over the conjectural
annoyance. "Why, in that event, I suppose--It would be very embarrassing.
You see, I don't know Mrs. Hallam; I don't know that she expects me, unless
my father is already there. They are old friends--I could drive round for a
while and come back, I suppose."

But she made it plain that the prospect did not please her.

"Won't you let me ask if Mr. Calender is there, before you get out, then? I
don't like to be dismissed," he laughed; "and, you know, you shouldn't go
wandering round all alone."

The cab drew up. Kirkwood put a hand on the door and awaited her will.

"It--it would be very kind ... I hate to impose upon you."

He turned the knob and got out. "If you'll wait one moment," he said
superfluously, as he closed the door.

Pausing only to verify the number, he sprang up the steps and found the
bell-button.

It was a modest little residence, in nothing more remarkable than its
neighbors, unless it was for a certain air of extra grooming: the area
railing was sleek with fresh black paint; the doorstep looked the better
for vigorous stoning; the door itself was immaculate, its brasses shining
lustrous against red-lacquered woodwork. A soft glow filled the fanlight.
Overhead the drawing-room windows shone with a cozy, warm radiance.

The door opened, framing the figure of a maid sketched broadly in masses of
somber black and dead white.

"Can you tell me, is Mr. Calendar here?"

The servant's eyes left his face, looked past him at the waiting cab, and
returned.

"I'm not sure, sir. If you will please step in."

Kirkwood hesitated briefly, then acceded. The maid closed the door.

"What name shall I say, sir?"

"Mr. Kirkwood."

"If you will please to wait one moment, sir--"

He was left in the entry hall, the servant hurrying to the staircase and
up. Three minutes elapsed; he was on the point of returning to the girl,
when the maid reappeared.

"Mrs. Hallam says, will you kindly step up-stairs, sir."

Disgruntled, he followed her; at the head of the stairs she bowed him into
the drawing-room and again left him to his own resources.

Nervous, annoyed, he paced the floor from wall to wall, his footfalls
silenced by heavy rugs. As the delay was prolonged he began to fume with
impatience, wondering, half regretting that he had left the girl outside,
definitely sorry that he had failed to name his errand more explicitly to
the maid. At another time, in another mood, he might have accorded more
appreciation to the charm of the apartment, which, betraying the feminine
touch in every detail of arrangement and furnishing, was very handsome in
an unconventional way. But he was quite heedless of externals.

Wearied, he deposited himself sulkily in an armchair by the hearth.

From a boudoir on the same floor there came murmurs of two voices, a man's
and a woman's. The latter laughed prettily.

"Oh, any time!" snorted the American. "Any time you're through with your
confounded flirtation, Mr. George B. Calendar!"

The voices rose, approaching. "Good night," said the woman gaily; "farewell
and--good luck go with you!"

"Thank you. Good night," replied the man more conservatively.

Kirkwood rose, expectant.

There was a swish of draperies, and a moment later he was acknowledging the
totally unlooked-for entrance of the mistress of the house. He had thought
to see Calendar, presuming him to be the man closeted with Mrs. Hallam;
but, whoever that had been, he did not accompany the woman. Indeed, as she
advanced from the doorway, Kirkwood could hear the man's footsteps on the
stairs.

"This is Mr. Kirkwood?" The note of inquiry in the well-trained voice--a
very alluring voice and one pleasant to listen to, he thought--made it seem
as though she had asked, point-blank, "Who is Mr. Kirkwood?"

He bowed, discovering himself in the presence of an extraordinarily
handsome and interesting woman; a woman of years which as yet had not told
upon her, of experience that had not availed to harden her, at least in so
far as her exterior charm of personality was involved; a woman, in brief,
who bore close inspection well, despite an elusive effect of maturity, not
without its attraction for men. Kirkwood was impressed that it would be
very easy to learn to like Mrs. Hallam more than well--with her approval.

Although he had not anticipated it, he was not at all surprised to
recognize in her the woman who, if he were not mistaken, had slipped to
Calendar that warning in the dining-room of the Pless. Kirkwood's state of
mind had come to be such, through his experiences of the past few
hours, that he would have accepted anything, however preposterous, as a
commonplace happening. But for that matter there was nothing particularly
astonishing in this _rencontre_.

"I am Mrs. Hallam. You were asking for Mr. Calendar?"

"He was to have been here at this hour, I believe," said Kirkwood.

"Yes?" There was just the right inflection of surprise in her carefully
controlled tone.

He became aware of an undercurrent of feeling; that the woman was
estimating him shrewdly with her fine direct eyes. He returned her regard
with admiring interest; they were gray-green eyes, deep-set but large, a
little shallow, a little changeable, calling to mind the sea on a windy,
cloudy day.

Below stairs a door slammed.

"I am not a detective, Mrs. Hallam," announced the young man suddenly.
"Mr. Calendar required a service of me this evening; I am here in natural
consequence. If it was Mr. Calendar who left this house just now, I am
wasting time."

"It was not Mr. Calendar." The fine-lined brows arched in surprise, real
or pretended, at his first blurted words, and relaxed; amused, the woman
laughed deliciously. "But I am expecting him any moment; he was to have
been here half an hour since.... Won't you wait?"

She indicated, with a gracious gesture, a chair, and took for herself one
end of a davenport. "I'm sure he won't be long, now."

"Thank you, I will return, if I may." Kirkwood moved toward the door.

"But there's no necessity--" She seemed insistent on detaining him,
possibly because she questioned his motive, possibly for her own
divertisement.

Kirkwood deprecated his refusal with a smile. "The truth is, Miss Calendar
is waiting in a cab, outside. I--"

"Dorothy Calendar!" Mrs. Hallam rose alertly. "But why should she wait
there? To be sure, we've never met; but I have known her father for many
years." Her eyes held steadfast to his face; shallow, flawed by her every
thought, like the sea by a cat's-paw he found them altogether inscrutable;
yet received an impression that their owner was now unable to account for
him.

She swung about quickly, preceding him to the door and down the stairs. "I
am sure Dorothy will come in to wait, if I ask her," she told Kirkwood in a
high sweet voice. "I'm so anxious to know her. It's quite absurd, really,
of her--to stand on ceremony with me, when her father made an appointment
here. I'll run out and ask--"

Mrs. Hallam's slim white fingers turned latch and knob, opening the street
door, and her voice died away as she stepped out into the night. For a
moment, to Kirkwood, tagging after her with an uncomfortable sense of
having somehow done the wrong thing, her figure--full fair shoulders and
arms rising out of the glittering dinner gown--cut a gorgeous silhouette
against the darkness. Then, with a sudden, imperative gesture, she half
turned towards him.

"But," she exclaimed, perplexed, gazing to right and left, "but the cab,
Mr. Kirkwood?"

He was on the stoop a second later. Standing beside her, he stared blankly.

To the left the Strand roared, the stream of its night-life in high spate;
on the right lay the Embankment, comparatively silent and deserted, if
brilliant with its high-swung lights. Between the two, quiet Craven Street
ran, short and narrow, and wholly innocent of any form of equipage.




VI


"BELOW BRIDGE"

In silence Mrs. Hallam turned to Kirkwood, her pose in itself a question
and a peremptory one. Her eyes had narrowed; between their lashes the green
showed, a thin edge like jade, cold and calculating. The firm lines of her
mouth and chin had hardened.

Temporarily dumb with consternation, he returned her stare as silently.

"_Well_, Mr.--Kirkwood?"

"Mrs. Hallam," he stammered, "I--"

She lifted her shoulders impatiently and with a quick movement stepped back
across the threshold, where she paused, a rounded arm barring the entrance,
one hand grasping the door-knob, as if to shut him out at any moment.

"I'm awaiting your explanation," she said coldly.

[Illustration: "I'm waiting your explanation," she said coldly.]

He grinned with nervousness, striving to penetrate the mental processes of
this handsome Mrs. Hallam. She seemed to regard him with a suspicion which
he thought inexcusable. Did she suppose he had spirited Dorothy Calendar
away and then called to apprise her of the fact? Or that he was some sort
of an adventurer, who had manufactured a plausible yarn to gain him access
to her home? Or--harking back to her original theory--that he was an
emissary from Scotland Yard? ... Probably she distrusted him on the latter
hypothesis. The reflection left him more at ease.

"I am quite as mystified as you, Mrs. Hallam," he began. "Miss Calendar was
here, at this door, in a four-wheeler, not ten minutes ago, and--"

"Then where is she now?"

"Tell me where Calendar is," he retorted, inspired, "and I'll try to answer
you!"

But her eyes were blank. "You mean--?"

"That Calendar was in this house when I came; that he left, found his
daughter in the cab, and drove off with her. It's clear enough."

"You are quite mistaken," she said thoughtfully. "George Calendar has not
been here this night."

He wondered that she did not seem to resent his imputation. "I think not--"

"Listen!" she cried, raising a warning hand; and relaxing her vigilant
attitude, moved forward once more, to peer down toward the Embankment.

A cab had cut in from that direction and was bearing down upon them with
a brisk rumble of hoofs. As it approached, Kirkwood's heart, that
had lightened, was weighed upon again by disappointment. It was no
four-wheeler, but a hansom, and the open wings of the apron, disclosing a
white triangle of linen surmounted by a glowing spot of fire, betrayed the
sex of the fare too plainly to allow of further hope that it might be the
girl returning.

At the door, the cab pulled up sharply and a man tumbled hastily out upon
the sidewalk.

"Here!" he cried throatily, tossing the cabby his fare, and turned toward
the pair upon the doorstep, evidently surmising that something was amiss.
For he was Calendar in proper person, and a sight to upset in a twinkling
Kirkwood's ingeniously builded castle of suspicion.

"Mrs. Hallam!" he cried, out of breath. "'S my daughter here?" And then,
catching sight of Kirkwood's countenance: "Why, hello, Kirkwood!" he
saluted him with a dubious air.

The woman interrupted hastily. "Please come in, Mr. Calendar. This
gentleman has been inquiring for you, with an astonishing tale about your
daughter."

"Dorothy!" Calendar's moon-like visage was momentarily divested of any
trace of color. "What of her?"

"You had better come in," advised Mrs. Hallam brusquely.

The fat adventurer hopped hurriedly across the threshold, Kirkwood
following. The woman shut the door, and turned with back to it, nodding
significantly at Kirkwood as her eyes met Calendar's.

"Well, well?" snapped the latter impatiently, turning to the young man.

But Kirkwood was thinking quickly. For the present he contented himself
with a deliberate statement of fact: "Miss Calendar has disappeared." It
gave him an instant's time ... "There's something damned fishy!" he told
himself. "These two are playing at cross-purposes. Calendar's no fool; he's
evidently a crook, to boot. As for the woman, she's had her eyes open for
a number of years. The main thing's Dorothy. She didn't vanish of her own
initiative. And Mrs. Hallam knows, or suspects, more than she's going to
tell. I don't think she wants Dorothy found. Calendar does. So do I. Ergo:
I'm for Calendar."

"Disappeared?" Calendar was barking at him. "How? When? Where?"

"Within ten minutes," said Kirkwood. "Here, let's get it straight.... With
her permission I brought her here in a four-wheeler." He was carefully
suppressing all mention of Frognall Street, and in Calendar's glance read
approval of the elision. "She didn't want to get out, unless you were here.
I asked for you. The maid showed me up-stairs. I left your daughter in the
cab--and by the way, I hadn't paid the driver. That's funny, too! Perhaps
six or seven minutes after I came in Mrs. Hallam found out that Miss
Calendar was with me and wanted to ask her in. When we got to the door--no
cab. There you have it all."

"Thanks--it's plenty," said Calendar dryly. He bent his head in thought for
an instant, then looked up and fixed Mrs. Hallam with an unprejudiced
eye, "I say!" he demanded explosively. "There wasn't any one here that
knew--eh?"

Her fine eyes wavered and fell before his; and Kirkwood remarked that her
under lip was curiously drawn in.

"I heard a man leave as Mrs. Hallam joined me," he volunteered helpfully,
and with a suspicion of malice. "And after that--I paid no attention at the
time--it seems to me I did hear a cab in the street--"

"Ow?" interjected Calendar, eying the woman steadfastly and employing an
exclamation of combined illumination and inquiry more typically British
than anything Kirkwood had yet heard from the man.

For her part, the look she gave Kirkwood was sharp with fury. It was more;
it was a mistake, a flaw in her diplomacy; for Calendar intercepted it.
Unceremoniously he grasped her bare arm with his fat hand.

"Tell me who it was," he demanded in an ugly tone.

She freed herself with a twist, and stepped back, a higher color in her
cheeks, a flash of anger in her eyes.

"Mr. Mulready," she retorted defiantly. "What of that?"

"I wish I was sure," declared the fat adventurer, exasperated. "As it is,
I bet a dollar you've put your foot in it, my lady. I warned you of that
blackguard.... There! The mischief's done; we won't row over it. One
moment." He begged it with a wave of his hand; stood pondering briefly,
fumbled for his watch, found and consulted it. "It's the barest chance," he
muttered. "Perhaps we can make it."

"What are you going to do?" asked the woman.

"Give _Mister_ Mulready a run for his money. Come along, Kirkwood; we
haven't a minute. Mrs. Hallam, permit us...." She stepped aside and he
brushed past her to the door. "Come, Kirkwood!"

He seemed to take Kirkwood's company for granted; and the young man was not
inclined to argue the point. Meekly enough he fell in with Calendar on the
sidewalk. Mrs. Hallam followed them out. "You won't forget?" she called
tentatively.

"I'll 'phone you if we find out anything." Calendar jerked the words
unceremoniously over his shoulder as, linking arms with Kirkwood, he drew
him swiftly along. They heard her shut the door; instantly Calendar
stopped. "Look here, did Dorothy have a--a small parcel with her?"

"She had a gladstone bag."

"Oh, the devil, the devil!" Calendar started on again, muttering
distractedly. As they reached the corner he disengaged his arm. "We've a
minute and a half to reach Charing Cross Pier; and I think it's the last
boat. You set the pace, will you? But remember I'm an oldish man and--and
fat."

They began to run, the one easily, the other lumbering after like an
old-fashioned square-rigged ship paced by a liner.

Beneath the railway bridge, in front of the Underground station, the
cab-rank cried them on with sardonic view-halloos; and a bobby remarked
them with suspicion, turning to watch as they plunged round the corner and
across the wide Embankment.

The Thames appeared before them, a river of ink on whose burnished surface
lights swam in long winding streaks and oily blobs. By the floating pier a
County Council steamboat strained its hawsers, snoring huskily. Bells were
jingling in her engine-room as the two gained the head of the sloping
gangway.

Kirkwood slapped a shilling down on the ticket-window ledge. "Where to?" he
cried back to Calendar.

"Cherry Gardens Pier," rasped the winded man. He stumbled after Kirkwood,
groaning with exhaustion. Only the tolerance of the pier employees gained
them their end; the steamer was held some seconds for them; as Calendar
staggered to its deck, the gangway was jerked in, the last hawser cast off.
The boat sheered wide out on the river, then shot in, arrow-like, to the
pier beneath Waterloo Bridge.

The deck was crowded and additional passengers embarked at every stop. In
the circumstances conversation, save on the most impersonal topics, was
impossible; and even had it been necessary or advisable to discuss the
affair which occupied their minds, where so many ears could hear, Calendar
had breath enough neither to answer nor to catechize Kirkwood. They found
seats on the forward deck and rested there in grim silence, both fretting
under the enforced restraint, while the boat darted, like some illuminated
and exceptionally active water insect, from pier to pier.

As it snorted beneath London Bridge, Calendar's impatience drove him from
his seat back to the gangway. "Next stop," he told Kirkwood curtly; and
rested his heavy bulk against the paddle-box, brooding morosely, until,
after an uninterrupted run of more than a mile, the steamer swept in,
side-wheels backing water furiously against the ebbing tide, to Cherry
Gardens landing.

Sweet name for a locality unsavory beyond credence! ... As they emerged on
the street level and turned west on Bermondsey Wall, Kirkwood was fain to
tug his top-coat over his chest and button it tight, to hide his linen. In
a guarded tone he counseled his companion to do likewise; and Calendar,
after a moment's blank, uncomprehending stare, acknowledged the wisdom of
the advice with a grunt.

The very air they breathed was rank with fetid odors bred of the gaunt dark
warehouses that lined their way; the lights were few; beneath the looming
buildings the shadows were many and dense. Here and there dreary and
cheerless public houses appeared, with lighted windows conspicuous in a
lightless waste. From time to time, as they hurried on, they encountered,
and made wide detours to escape contact with knots of wayfarers--men
debased and begrimed, with dreary and slatternly women, arm in arm,
zigzaging widely across the sidewalks, chorusing with sodden voices the
burden of some popularized ballad. The cheapened, sentimental refrains
echoed sadly between benighted walls....

Kirkwood shuddered, sticking close to Calendar's side. Life's naked
brutalities had theretofore been largely out of his ken. He had heard of
slums, had even ventured to mouth politely moral platitudes on the subject
of overcrowding in great centers of population, but in the darkest flights
of imagination had never pictured to himself anything so unspeakably
foul and hopeless as this.... And they were come hither seeking--Dorothy
Calendar! He was unable to conceive what manner of villainy could be
directed against her, that she must be looked for in such surroundings.

After some ten minutes' steady walking, Calendar turned aside with a
muttered word, and dived down a covered, dark and evil-smelling passageway
that seemed to lead toward the river.

Mastering his involuntary qualms, Kirkwood followed.

Some ten or twelve paces from its entrance the passageway swerved at a
right angle, continuing three yards or so to end in a blank wall, wherefrom
a flickering, inadequate gas-lamp jutted. At this point a stone platform,
perhaps four feet square, was discovered, from the edge of which a flight
of worn and slimy stone steps led down to a permanent boat-landing, where
another gas-light flared gustily despite the protection of its frame of
begrimed glass.

"Good Lord!" exclaimed the young man. "What, in Heaven's name, Calendar--?"

"Bermondsey Old Stairs. Come on."

They descended to the landing-stage. Beneath them the Pool slept, a sheet
of polished ebony, whispering to itself, lapping with small stealthy
gurgles angles of masonry and ancient piles. On the farther bank tall
warehouses reared square old-time heads, their uncompromising, rugged
profile relieved here and there by tapering mastheads. A few, scattering,
feeble lights were visible. Nothing moved save the river and the wind.

The landing itself they found quite deserted; something which the
adventurer comprehended with a nod which, like its accompanying,
inarticulate ejaculation, might have been taken to indicate either
satisfaction or disgust. He ignored Kirkwood altogether, for the time
being, and presently produced a small, bright object, which, applied to his
lips, proved to be a boatswain's whistle. He sounded two blasts, one long,
one brief.

There fell a lull, Kirkwood watching the other and wondering what next
would happen. Calendar paced restlessly to and fro upon the narrow landing,
now stopping to incline an ear to catch some anticipated sound, now
searching with sweeping glances the black reaches of the Pool.

Finally, consulting his watch, "Almost ten," he announced.

"We're in time?"

"Can't say.... Damn! ... If that infernal boat would only show up--"

He was lifting the whistle to sound a second summons when a rowboat rounded
a projecting angle formed by the next warehouse down stream, and with
clanking oar-locks swung in toward the landing. On her thwarts two figures,
dipping and rising, labored with the sweeps. As they drew in, the man
forward shipped his blades, and rising, scrambled to the bows in order to
grasp an iron mooring-ring set in the wall. The other awkwardly took in his
oars and, as the current swung the stern downstream, placed a hand palm
downward upon the bottom step to hold the boat steady.

Calendar waddled to the brink of the stage, grunting with relief.

"The other man?" he asked brusquely. "Has he gone aboard? Or is this the
first trip to-night?"

One of the watermen nodded assent to the latter question, adding gruffly:
"Seen nawthin' of 'im, sir."

"Very good," said Calendar, as if he doubted whether it were very good or
bad. "We'll wait a bit."

"Right-o!" agreed the waterman civilly.

Calendar turned back, his small eyes glimmering with satisfaction. Fumbling
in one coat pocket he brought to light a cigar-case. "Have a smoke?" he
suggested with a show of friendliness. "By Heaven, I was beginnin' to get
worried!"

"As to what?" inquired Kirkwood pointedly, selecting a cigar.

He got no immediate reply, but felt Calendar's sharp eyes upon him while he
manoeuvered with matches for a light.

"That's so," it came at length. "You don't know. I kind of forgot for a
minute; somehow you seemed on the inside."

Kirkwood laughed lightly. "I've experienced something of the same sensation
in the past few hours."

"Don't doubt it." Calendar was watching him narrowly. "I suppose," he put
it to him abruptly, "you haven't changed your mind?"

"Changed my mind?"

"About coming in with me."

"My dear sir, I can have no mind to change until a plain proposition is
laid before me."

"Hmm!" Calendar puffed vigorously until it occurred to him to change the
subject. "You won't mind telling me what happened to you and Dorothy?"

"Certainly not."

Calendar drew nearer and Kirkwood, lowering his voice, narrated briefly the
events since he had left the Pless in Dorothy's company.

Her father followed him intently, interrupting now and again with
exclamation or pertinent question; as, Had Kirkwood been able to see the
face of the man in No. 9, Frognall Street? The negative answer seemed to
disconcert him.

"Youngster, you say? Blam' if I can lay my mind to _him_! Now if that
Mulready--"

"It would have been impossible for Mulready--whoever he is--to recover and
get to Craven Street before we did," Kirkwood pointed out.

"Well--go on." But when the tale was told, "It's that scoundrel, Mulready!"
the man affirmed with heat. "It's his hand--I know him. I might have had
sense enough to see he'd take the first chance to hand me the double-cross.
Well, this does for _him_, all right!" Calendar lowered viciously at the
river. "You've been blame' useful," he told Kirkwood assertively. "If
it hadn't been for you, I don't know where _I'd_ be now,--nor Dorothy,
either,"--an obvious afterthought. "There's no particular way I can show my
appreciation, I suppose? Money--?"

"I've got enough to last me till I reach New York, thank you."

"Well, if the time ever comes, just shout for George B. I won't be
wanting.... I only wish you were with us; but that's out of the question."

"Doubtless ..."

"No two ways about it. I bet anything you've got a conscience concealed
about your person. What? You're an honest man, eh?"

"I don't want to sound immodest," returned Kirkwood, amused.

"You don't need to worry about that.... But an honest man's got no business
in _my_ line." He glanced again at his watch. "Damn that Mulready! I wonder
if he was 'cute enough to take another way? Or did he think ... The fool!"

He cut off abruptly, seeming depressed by the thought that he might have
been outwitted; and, clasping hands behind his back, chewed savagely on his
cigar, watching the river. Kirkwood found himself somewhat wearied; the
uselessness of his presence there struck him with added force. He bethought
him of his boat-train, scheduled to leave a station miles distant, in an
hour and a half. If he missed it, he would be stranded in a foreign land,
penniless and practically without friends--Brentwick being away and all the
rest of his circle of acquaintances on the other side of the Channel. Yet
he lingered, in poor company, daring fate that he might see the end of the
affair. Why?

There was only one honest answer to that question. He stayed on because of
his interest in a girl whom he had known for a matter of three hours, at
most. It was insensate folly on his part, ridiculous from any point of
view. But he made no move to go.

The slow minutes lengthened monotonously.

There came a sound from the street level. Calendar held up a hand of
warning. "Here they come! Steady!" he said tensely. Kirkwood, listening
intently, interpreted the noise as a clash of hoofs upon cobbles.

Calendar turned to the boat.

"Sheer off," he ordered. "Drop out of sight. I'll whistle when I want you."

"Aye, aye, sir."

The boat slipped noiselessly away with the current and in an instant was
lost to sight. Calendar plucked at Kirkwood's sleeve, drawing him into the
shadow of the steps. "E-easy," he whispered; "and, I say, lend me a hand,
will you, if Mulready turns ugly?"

"Oh, yes," assented Kirkwood, with a nonchalance not entirely unassumed.

The racket drew nearer and ceased; the hush that fell thereafter seemed
only accentuated by the purling of the river. It was ended by footsteps
echoing in the covered passageway. Calendar craned his thick neck round the
shoulder of stone, reconnoitering the landing and stairway.

"Thank God!" he said under his breath. "I was right, after all!"

A man's deep tones broke out above. "This way. Mind the steps; they're a
bit slippery, Miss Dorothy."

"But my father--?" came the girl's voice, attuned to doubt.

"Oh, he'll be along--if he isn't waiting now, in the boat."

They descended, the man leading. At the foot, without a glance to right or
left, he advanced to the edge of the stage, leaning out over the rail as if
endeavoring to locate the rowboat. At once the girl appeared, moving to his
side.

"But, Mr. Mulready--"

The girl's words were drowned by a prolonged blast on the boatswain's
whistle at her companion's lips; the shorter one followed in due course.
Calendar edged forward from Kirkwood's side.

"But what shall we do if my father isn't here? Wait?"

"No; best not to; best to get on the _Alethea_ as soon as possible, Miss
Calendar. We can send the boat back."

"'Once aboard the lugger the girl is mine'--eh, Mulready?--to say nothing
of the loot!"

If Calendar's words were jocular, his tone conveyed a different impression
entirely. Both man and girl wheeled right about to face him, the one with a
strangled oath, the other with a low cry.

"The devil!" exclaimed this Mr. Mulready.

"Oh! My father!" the girl voiced her recognition of him.

"Not precisely one and the same person," commented Calendar suavely.
"But--er--thanks, just as much.... You see, Mulready, when I make an
appointment, I keep it."

"We'd begun to get a bit anxious about you--" Mulready began defensively.

"So I surmised, from what Mrs. Hallam and Mr. Kirkwood told me.... Well?"

The man found no ready answer. He fell back a pace to the railing, his
features working with his deep chagrin. The murky flare of the gas-lamp
overhead fell across a face handsome beyond the ordinary but marred by a
sullen humor and seamed with indulgence: a face that seemed hauntingly
familiar until Kirkwood in a flash of visual memory reconstructed the
portrait of a man who lingered over a dining-table, with two empty chairs
for company. This, then, was he whom Mrs. Hallam had left at the Pless; a
tall, strong man, very heavy about the chest and shoulders....

"Why, my dear friend," Calendar was taunting him, "you don't seem overjoyed
to see me, for all your wild anxiety! 'Pon my word, you act as if you
hadn't expected me--and our engagement so clearly understood, at that! ...
Why, you fool!"--here the mask of irony was cast. "Did you think for a
moment I'd let myself be nabbed by that yap from Scotland Yard? Were you
banking on that? I give you my faith I ambled out under his very nose! ...
Dorothy, my dear," turning impatiently from Mulready, "where's that bag?"

The girl withdrew a puzzled gaze from Mulready's face, (it was apparent to
Kirkwood that this phase of the affair was no more enigmatic to him than to
her), and drew aside a corner of her cloak, disclosing the gladstone bag,
securely grasped in one gloved hand.

"I have it, thanks to Mr. Kirkwood," she said quietly.

Kirkwood chose that moment to advance from the shadow. Mulready started and
fixed him with a troubled and unfriendly stare. The girl greeted him with a
note of sincere pleasure in her surprise.

"Why, Mr. Kirkwood! ... But I left you at Mrs. Hallam's!"

Kirkwood bowed, smiling openly at Mulready's discomfiture.

"By your father's grace, I came with him," he said. "You ran away without
saying good night, you know, and I'm a jealous creditor."

She laughed excitedly, turning to Calendar. "But _you_ were to meet me at
Mrs. Hallam's?"

"Mulready was good enough to try to save me the trouble, my dear. He's an
unselfish soul, Mulready. Fortunately it happened that I came along not
five minutes after he'd carried you off. How was that, Dorothy?"

Her glance wavered uneasily between the two, Mulready and her father. The
former, shrugging to declare his indifference, turned his back squarely
upon them. She frowned.

"He came out of Mrs. Hallam's and got into the four-wheeler, saying you had
sent him to take your place, and would join us on the _Alethea_."

"So-o! How about it, Mulready?"

The man swung back slowly. "What you choose to think," he said after a
deliberate pause.

"Well, never mind! We'll go over the matter at our leisure on the
_Alethea_."

There was in the adventurer's tone a menace, bitter and not to be ignored;
which Mulready saw fit to challenge.

"I think not," he declared; "I think not. I'm weary of your addle-pated
suspicions. It'd be plain to any one but a fool that I acted for the best
interests of all concerned in this matter. If you're not content to see it
in that light, I'm done."

"Oh, if you want to put it that way, I'm _not_ content, Mr. Mulready,"
retorted Calendar dangerously.

"Please yourself. I bid you good evening and--good-by." The man took a step
toward the stairs.

Calendar dropped his right hand into his top-coat pocket. "Just a minute,"
he said sweetly, and Mulready stopped. Abruptly the fat adventurer's
smoldering resentment leaped in flame. "That'll be about all, Mr. Mulready!
'Bout face, you hound, and get into that boat! D'you think I'll temporize
with you till Doomsday? Then forget it. You're wrong, dead wrong. Your
bluff's called, and"--with an evil chuckle--"I hold a full house,
Mulready,--every chamber taken." He lifted meaningly the hand in the coat
pocket. "Now, in with you."

With a grin and a swagger of pure bravado Mulready turned and obeyed.
Unnoticed of any, save perhaps Calendar himself, the boat had drawn in at
the stage a moment earlier. Mulready dropped into it and threw himself
sullenly upon the midships thwart.

"Now, Dorothy, in you go, my dear," continued Calendar, with a
self-satisfied wag of his head.

Half dazed, to all seeming, she moved toward the boat. With clumsy and
assertive gallantry her father stepped before her, offering his hand,--his
hand which she did not touch; for, in the act of descending, she remembered
and swung impulsively back to Kirkwood.

"Good night, Mr. Kirkwood; good night,--I shan't forget."

He took her hand and bowed above it; but when his head was lifted, he still
retained her fingers in a lingering clasp.

"Good night," he said reluctantly.

The crass incongruity of her in that setting smote him with renewed force.
Young, beautiful, dainty, brilliant and graceful in her pretty evening
gown, she figured strangely against the gloomy background of the river, in
those dull and mean surroundings of dank stone and rusted iron. She was
like (he thought extravagantly) a whiff of flower-fragrance lost in the
miasmatic vapors of a slough.

The innocent appeal and allure of her face, upturned to his beneath the
gas-light, wrought compassionately upon his sensitive and generous heart.
He was aware of a little surge of blind rage against the conditions that
had brought her to that spot, and against those whom he held responsible
for those conditions.

In a sudden flush of daring he turned and nodded coolly to Calendar. "With
your permission," he said negligently; and drew the girl aside to the angle
of the stairway.

"Miss Calendar--" he began; but was interrupted.

"Here--I say!"

Calendar had started toward him angrily.

Kirkwood calmly waved him back. "I want a word in private with your
daughter, Mr. Calendar," he announced with quiet dignity. "I don't think
you'll deny me? I've saved you some slight trouble to-night."

Disgruntled, the adventurer paused. "Oh--_all_ right," he grumbled. "I
don't see what ..." He returned to the boat.

"Forgive me, Miss Calendar," continued Kirkwood nervously. "I know I've no
right to interfere, but--"

"Yes, Mr. Kirkwood?"

"--but hasn't this gone far enough?" he floundered unhappily. "I can't like
the look of things. Are you sure--sure that it's all right--with you, I
mean?"

She did not answer at once; but her eyes were kind and sympathetic. He
plucked heart of their tolerance.

"It isn't too late, yet," he argued. "Let me take you to your friends,--you
must have friends in the city. But this--this midnight flight down the
Thames, this atmosphere of stealth and suspicion, this--"

"But my place is with my father, Mr. Kirkwood," she interposed. "I daren't
doubt him--dare I?"

"I ... suppose not."

"So I must go with him.... I'm glad--thank you for caring, dear Mr.
Kirkwood. And again, good night."

"Good luck attend you," he muttered, following her to the boat.

Calendar helped her in and turned back to Kirkwood with a look of arch
triumph; Kirkwood wondered if he had overheard. Whether or no, he could
afford to be magnanimous. Seizing Kirkwood's hand, he pumped it vigorously.

"My dear boy, you've been an angel in disguise! And I guess you think me
the devil in masquerade." He chuckled, in high conceit with himself over
the turn of affairs. "Good night and--and fare thee well!" He dropped into
the boat, seating himself to face the recalcitrant Mulready. "Cast off,
there!"

The boat dropped away, the oars lifting and falling. With a weariful sense
of loneliness and disappointment, Kirkwood hung over the rail to watch them
out of sight.

A dozen feet of water lay between the stage and the boat. The girl's dress
remained a spot of cheerful color; her face was a blur. As the watermen
swung the bows down-stream, she looked back, lifting an arm spectral in its
white sheath. Kirkwood raised his hat.

The boat gathered impetus, momentarily diminishing in the night's illusory
perspective; presently it was little more than a fugitive blot, gliding
swiftly in midstream. And then, it was gone entirely, engulfed by the
obliterating darkness.

[Illustration: The boat gathered impetus.]

Somewhat wearily the young man released the railing and ascended the
stairs. "And that is the end!" he told himself, struggling with an acute
sense of personal injury. He had been hardly used. For a few hours his
life had been lightened by the ineffable glamor of Romance; mystery and
adventure had engaged him, exorcising for the time the Shade of Care; he
had served a fair woman and been associated with men whose ways, however
questionable, were the ways of courage, hedged thickly about with perils.

All that was at an end. Prosaic and workaday to-morrows confronted him in
endless and dreary perspective; and he felt again upon his shoulder the
bony hand of his familiar, Care....

He sighed: "Ah, well!"

Disconsolate and aggrieved, he gained the street. He was miles from St.
Pancras, foot-weary, to all intents and purposes lost.

In this extremity, Chance smiled upon him. The cabby who, at his initial
instance, had traveled this weary way from Quadrant Mews, after the manner
of his kind, ere turning back, had sought surcease of fatigue at the
nearest public; from afar Kirkwood saw the four-wheeler at the curb, and
made all haste toward it.

Entering the gin-mill he found the cabby, soothed him with bitter, and,
instructing him for St. Pancras with all speed, dropped, limp and listless
with fatigue, into the conveyance.

As it moved, he closed his eyes; the face of Dorothy Calendar shone out
from the blank wall of his consciousness, like an illuminated picture cast
upon a screen. She smiled upon him, her head high, her eyes tender and
trustful. And he thought that her scarlet lips were sweet with promise and
her glance a-brim with such a light as he had never dreamed to know.

And now that he knew it and desired it, it was too late; an hour gone he
might, by a nod of his head, have cast his fortunes with hers for weal or
woe. But now ...

Alas and alackaday, that Romance was no more!




VII


DIVERSIONS OF A RUINED GENTLEMAN--RESUMED

From the commanding elevation of the box, "Three 'n' six," enunciated the
cabby, his tone that of a man prepared for trouble, acquainted with
trouble, inclined to give trouble a welcome. His bloodshot eyes blinked
truculently at his alighted fare. "Three 'n' six," he iterated
aggressively.

An adjacent but theretofore abstracted policeman pricked up his ears and
assumed an intelligent expression.

"Bermondsey Ol' Stairs to Sain' Pancras," argued the cabby assertively;
"seven mile by th' radius; three 'n' six!"

Kirkwood stood on the outer station platform, near the entrance to
third-class waiting-rooms. Continuing to fumble through his pockets for an
elusive sovereign purse, he looked up mildly at the man.

"All right, cabby," he said, with pacific purpose; "you'll get your fare in
half a shake."

"Three 'n' six!" croaked the cabby, like a blowsy and vindictive parrot.

The bobby strolled nearer.

"Yes?" said Kirkwood, mildly diverted. "Why not sing it, cabby?"

"Lor' lumme!" The cabby exploded with indignation, continuing to give a
lifelike imitation of a rumpled parrot. "I 'ad trouble enough wif you at
Bermondsey Ol' Stairs, hover that quid you promised, didn't I? Sing it! My
heye!"

"Quid, cabby?" And then, remembering that he had promised the fellow a
sovereign for fast driving from Quadrant Mews, Kirkwood grinned broadly,
eyes twinkling; for Mulready must have fallen heir to that covenant. "But
you got the sovereign? You got it, didn't you, cabby?"

The driver affirmed the fact with unnecessary heat and profanity and an
amendment to the effect that he would have spoiled his fare's sanguinary
conk had the outcome been less satisfactory.

The information proved so amusing that Kirkwood, chuckling, forbore to
resent the manner of its delivery, and, abandoning until a more favorable
time the chase of the coy sovereign purse, extracted from one trouser
pocket half a handful of large English small change.

"Three shillings, six-pence," he counted the coins into the cabby's grimy
and bloated paw; and added quietly: "The exact distance is rather less
than, four miles, my man; your fare, precisely two shillings. You may keep
the extra eighteen pence, for being such a conscientious blackguard,--or
talk it over with the officer here. Please yourself."

He nodded to the bobby, who, favorably impressed by the silk hat which
Kirkwood, by diligent application of his sleeve during the cross-town ride,
had managed to restore to a state somewhat approximating its erstwhile
luster, smiled at the cabby a cold, hard smile. Whereupon the latter,
smirking in unabashed triumph, spat on the pavement at Kirkwood's feet,
gathered up the reins, and wheeled out.

"A 'ard lot, sir," commented the policeman, jerking his helmeted head
towards the vanishing four-wheeler.

"Right you are," agreed Kirkwood amiably, still tickled by the knowledge
that Mulready had been obliged to pay three times over for the ride that
ended in his utter discomfiture. Somehow, Kirkwood had conceived no liking
whatever for the man; Calendar he could, at a pinch, tolerate for his sense
of humor, but Mulready--! "A surly dog," he thought him.

Acknowledging the policeman's salute and restoring two shillings and a
few fat copper pennies to his pocket, he entered the vast and echoing
train-shed. In the act, his attention was attracted and immediately riveted
by the spectacle of a burly luggage navvy in a blue jumper in the act of
making off with a large, folding sign-board, of which the surface was
lettered expansively with the advice, in red against a white background:

BOAT-TRAIN LEAVES ON TRACK 3

Incredulous yet aghast the young man gave instant chase to the navvy,
overhauling him with no great difficulty. For your horny-handed British
working-man is apparently born with two golden aphorisms in his mouth:
"Look before you leap," and "Haste makes waste." He looks continually,
seldom, if ever, leaps, and never is prodigal of his leisure.

Excitedly Kirkwood touched the man's arm with a detaining hand.
"Boat-train?" he gasped, pointing at the board.

"Left ten minutes ago, thank you, sir."

"Wel-l, but...! Of course I can get another train at Tilbury?"

"For yer boat? No, sir, thank you, sir. Won't be another tryne till
mornin', sir."

"Oh-h!..."

Aimlessly Kirkwood drifted away, his mind a blank.

Sometime later he found himself on the steps outside the station, trying to
stare out of countenance a glaring electric mineral-water advertisement on
the farther side of the Euston Road.

He was stranded....

Beyond the spiked iron fence that enhedges the incurving drive, the roar of
traffic, human, wheel and hoof, rose high for all the lateness of the hour:
sidewalks groaning with the restless contact of hundreds of ill-shod
feet; the roadway thundering--hansoms, four-wheelers, motor-cars, dwarfed
coster-mongers' donkey-carts and ponderous, rumbling, C.-P. motor-vans,
struggling for place and progress. For St. Pancras never sleeps.

The misty air swam luminous with the light of electric signs as with the
radiance of some lurid and sinister moon. The voice of London sounded in
Kirkwood's ears, like the ominous purring of a somnolent brute beast,
resting, gorged and satiated, ere rising again to devour. To devour--

Stranded!...

Distracted, he searched pocket after pocket, locating his watch, cigar- and
cigarette-cases, match-box, penknife--all the minutiae of pocket-hardware
affected by civilized man; with old letters, a card-case, a square envelope
containing his steamer ticket; but no sovereign purse. His small-change
pocket held less than three shillings--two and eight, to be exact--and a
brass key, which he failed to recognize as one of his belongings.

And that was all. At sometime during the night he had lost (or been
cunningly bereft of?) that little purse of chamois-skin containing the
three golden sovereigns which he had been husbanding to pay his steamer
expenses, and which, if only he had them now, would stand between him and
starvation and a night in the streets.

And, searching his heart, he found it brimming with gratitude to Mulready,
for having relieved him of the necessity of settling with the cabby.

"Vagabond?" said Kirkwood musingly. "Vagabond?" He repeated the word softly
a number of times, to get the exact flavor of it, and found it little to
his taste. And yet...

He thrust both hands deep in his trouser pockets and stared purposelessly
into space, twisting his eyebrows out of alignment and crookedly protruding
his lower lip.

If Brentwick were only in town--But he wasn't, and wouldn't be, within the
week.

"No good waiting here," he concluded. Composing his face, he reëntered the
station. There were his trunks, of course. He couldn't leave them standing
on the station platform for ever.

He found the luggage-room and interviewed a mechanically courteous
attendant, who, as the result of profound deliberation, advised him to try
his luck at the lost-luggage room, across the station. He accepted the
advice; it was a foregone conclusion that his effects had not been conveyed
to the Tilbury dock; they could not have been loaded into the luggage van
without his personal supervision. Still, anything was liable to happen when
his unlucky star was in the ascendant.

He found them in the lost-luggage room.

A clerk helped him identify the articles and ultimately clucked with a
perfunctory note: "Sixpence each, please."

"I--ah--pardon?"

"Sixpence each, the fixed charge, sir. For every twenty-four hours or
fraction thereof, sixpence per parcel."

"Oh, thank you so much," said Kirkwood sweetly. "I will call to-morrow."

"Very good, sir. Thank you, sir."

"Five times sixpence is two-and-six," Kirkwood computed, making his way
hastily out of the station, lest a worse thing befall him. "No, bless your
heart!--not while two and eight represents the sum total of my fortune."

He wandered out into the night; he could not linger round the station till
dawn; and what profit to him if he did? Even were he to ransom his trunks,
one can scarcely change one's clothing in a public waiting-room.

Somewhere in the distance a great clock chimed a single stroke, freighted
sore with melancholy. It knelled the passing of the half-hour after
midnight; a witching hour, when every public shuts up tight, and gentlemen
in top-hats and evening dress are doomed to pace the pave till day (barring
they have homes or visible means of support)--till day, when pawnshops open
and such personal effects as watches and hammered silver cigar-cases may be
hypothecated.

Sable garments fluttering, Care fell into step with Philip Kirkwood; Care
the inexorable slipped a skeleton arm through his and would not be denied;
Care the jade clung affectionately to his side, refusing to be jilted.

"Ah, you thought you would forget me?" chuckled the fleshless lips by his
ear. "But no, my boy; I'm with you now, for ever and a day. 'Misery loves
company,' and it wouldn't be pretty of me to desert you in this extremity,
would it? Come, let us beguile the hours till dawn with conversation.
Here's a sprightly subject: What are you going to do, Mr. Kirkwood? _What
are you going to do?_"

But Kirkwood merely shook a stubborn head and gazed straight before him,
walking fast through ways he did not recognize, and pretending not to hear.
None the less the sense of Care's solicitous query struck like a pain into
his consciousness. What was he to do?

An hour passed.

Denied the opportunity to satisfy its beast hunger and thirst, humanity
goes off to its beds. In that hour London quieted wonderfully; the streets
achieved an effect of deeper darkness, the skies, lowering, looked down
with a blush less livid for the shamelessness of man; cab ranks lengthened;
solitary footsteps added unto themselves loud, alarming, offensive echoes;
policemen, strolling with lamps blazing on their breasts, became as
lightships in a trackless sea; each new-found street unfolded its
perspective like a canyon of mystery, and yet teeming with a hundred masked
hazards; the air acquired a smell more clear and clean, an effect more
volatile; and the night-mist thickened until it studded one's attire with
myriads of tiny buttons, bright as diamond dust.

Through this long hour Kirkwood walked without a pause.

Another clock, somewhere, clanged resonantly twice.

The world was very still....

And so, wandering foot-loose in a wilderness of ways, turning aimlessly,
now right, now left, he found himself in a street he knew, yet seemed not
to know: a silent, black street one brief block in length, walled with
dead and lightless dwellings, haunted by his errant memory; a street whose
atmosphere was heavy with impalpable essence of desuetude; in two words,
Frognall Street.

Kirkwood identified it with a start and a guilty tremor. He stopped
stock-still, in an unreasoning state of semi-panic, arrested by a silly
impulse to turn and fly; as if the bobby, whom he descried approaching him
with measured stride, pausing now and again to try a door or flash
his bull's-eye down an area, were to be expected to identify the man
responsible for that damnable racket raised ere midnight in vacant Number
9!

Oddly enough, the shock of recognition brought him to his
senses,--temporarily. He was even able to indulge himself in a quiet,
sobering grin at his own folly. He passed the policeman with a nod and a
cool word in response to the man's good-natured, "Good-night, sir." Number
9 was on the other side of the street; and he favored its blank and dreary
elevation with a prolonged and frank stare--that profited him nothing, by
the way. For a crazy notion popped incontinently into his head, and would
not be cast forth.

At the corner he swerved and crossed, still possessed of his devil of
inspiration. It would be unfair to him to say that he did not struggle to
resist it, for he did, because it was fairly and egregiously asinine; yet
struggling, his feet trod the path to which it tempted him.

"Why," he expostulated feebly, "I might's well turn back and beat that
bobby over the head with my cane!..."

But at the moment his hand was in his change pocket, feeling over that same
brass door-key which earlier he had been unable to account for, and he was
informing himself how very easy it would have been for the sovereign purse
to have dropped from his waistcoat pocket while he was sliding on his ear
down the dark staircase. To recover it meant, at the least, shelter for
the night, followed by a decent, comfortable and sustaining morning meal.
Fortified by both he could redeem his luggage, change to clothing more
suitable for daylight traveling, pawn his valuables, and enter into
negotiations with the steamship company for permission to exchange his
passage, with a sum to boot, for transportation on another liner. A most
feasible project! A temptation all but irresistible!

But then--the risk.... Supposing (for the sake of argument) the customary
night-watchman to have taken up a transient residence in Number 9;
supposing the police to have entered with him and found the stunned man on
the second floor: would the watchman not be vigilant for another nocturnal
marauder? would not the police now, more than ever, be keeping a wary eye
on that house of suspicious happenings?

Decidedly, to reënter it would be to incur a deadly risk. And yet,
undoubtedly, beyond question! his sovereign purse was waiting for him
somewhere on the second flight of stairs; while as his means of clandestine
entry lay warm in his fingers--the key to the dark entry, which he had by
force of habit pocketed after locking the door.

He came to the Hog-in-the-Pound. Its windows were dim with low-turned
gas-lights. Down the covered alleyway, Quadrant Mews slept in a dusk but
fitfully relieved by a lamp or two round which the friendly mist clung
close and thick.

There would be none to see....

Skulking, throat swollen with fear, heart beating like a snare-drum,
Kirkwood took his chance. Buttoning his overcoat collar up to his chin
and cursing the fact that his hat must stand out like a chimney-pot on a
detached house, he sped on tiptoe down the cobbled way and close beneath
the house-walls of Quadrant Mews. But, half-way in, he stopped, confounded
by an unforeseen difficulty. How was he to identify the narrow entry of
Number 9, whose counterparts doubtless communicated with the mews from
every residence on four sides of the city block?

The low inner tenements were yet high enough to hide the rear elevations of
Frognall Street houses, and the mist was heavy besides; otherwise he had
made shift to locate Number 9 by ticking off the dwellings from the corner.
If he went on, hit or miss, the odds were anything-you-please to one that
he would blunder into the servant's quarters of some inhabited house,
and--be promptly and righteously sat upon by the service-staff, while the
bobby was summoned.

Be that as it might--he almost lost his head when he realized this--escape
was already cut off by the way he had come. Some one, or, rather, some two
men were entering the alley. He could hear the tramping and shuffle of
clumsy feet, and voices that muttered indistinctly. One seemed to trip over
something, and cursed. The other laughed; the voices grew more loud. They
were coming his way. He dared no longer vacillate.

But--which passage should he choose?

He moved on with more haste than discretion. One heel slipped on a cobble
time-worn to glassy smoothness; he lurched, caught himself up in time to
save a fall, lost his hat, recovered it, and was discovered. A voice,
maudlin with drink, hailed and called upon him to stand and give an account
of himself, "like a goo' feller." Another tempted him with offers of drink
and sociable confabulation. He yielded not; adamantine to the seductive
lure, he picked up his heels and ran. Those behind him, remarking with
resentment the amazing fact that an intimate of the mews should run away
from liquor, cursed and made after him, veering, staggering, howling like
ravening animals.

For all their burden of intoxication, they knew the ground by instinct and
from long association. They gained on him. Across the way a window-sash
went up with a bang, and a woman screamed. Through the only other entrance
to the mews a belated cab was homing; its driver, getting wind of the
unusual, pulled up, blocking the way, and added his advice to the uproar.

Caught thus between two fires, and with his persecutors hard upon him,
Kirkwood dived into the nearest black hole of a passageway and in sheer
desperation flung himself, key in hand, against the door at the end. Mark
how his luck served him who had forsworn her! He found a keyhole and
inserted the key. It turned. So did the knob. The door gave inward. He fell
in with it, slammed it, shot the bolts, and, panting, leaned against its
panels, in a pit of everlasting night but--saved!--for the time being, at
all events.

Outside somebody brushed against one wall, cannoned to the other, brought
up with a crash against the door, and, perforce at a standstill, swore from
his heart.

"Gorblimy!" he declared feelingly. "I'd 'a' took my oath I sore'm run in
'ere!" And then, in answer to an inaudible question: "No, 'e ain't. Gorn
an' let the fool go to 'ell. 'Oo wants 'im to share goo' liker? Not I!..."

Joining his companion he departed, leaving behind him a trail of
sulphur-tainted air. The mews quieted gradually.

Indoors Kirkwood faced unhappily the enigma of fortuity, wondering: Was
this by any possibility Number 9?

The key had fitted; the bolts had been drawn on the inside; and while
the key had been one of ordinary pattern and would no doubt have proven
effectual with any one of a hundred common locks, the finger of probability
seemed to indicate that his luck had brought him back to Number 9.

In spite of all this, he was sensible of little confidence; though this
were truly Number 9, his freedom still lay on the knees of the gods, his
very life, belike, was poised, tottering, on a pinnacle of chance.

In the end, taking heart of desperation, he stooped and removed his shoes;
a precaution which later appealed to his sense of the ridiculous, in view
of the racket he had raised in entering, but which at the moment seemed
most natural and in accordance with common sense. Then rising, he held his
breath, staring and listening. About him the pitch darkness was punctuated
with fading points of fire, and in his ears was a noise of strange
whisperings, very creepy--until, gritting his teeth, he controlled his
nerves and gradually realized that he was alone, the silence undisturbed.

He went forward gingerly, feeling his way like a blind man on strange
ground. Ere long he stumbled over a door-sill and found that the walls
of the passage had fallen away; he had entered a room, a black cavern of
indeterminate dimensions. Across this he struck at random, walked himself
flat against a wall, felt his way along to an open door, and passed through
to another apartment as dark as the first.

Here, endeavoring to make a circuit of the walls, he succeeded in throwing
himself bodily across a bed, which creaked horribly; and for a full minute
lay as he had fallen, scarce daring to think. But nothing followed, and he
got up and found a shut door which let him into yet a third room, wherein
he barked both shins on a chair; and escaped to a fourth whose atmosphere
was highly flavored with reluctant odors of bygone cookery, stale water and
damp plumbing--probably the kitchen. Thence progressing over complaining
floors through what may have been the servants' hall, a large room with
a table in the middle and a number of promiscuous chairs (witness his
tortured shins!), he finally blundered into the basement hallway.

By now a little calmer, he felt assured that this was really Number 9,
Frognall Street, and a little happier about it all, though not even
momentarily forgetful of the potential police and night-watchman.

However, he mounted the steps to the ground floor without adventure and
found himself at last in the same dim and ghostly hall which he had entered
some six hours before; the mockery of dusk admitted by the fan-light was
just strong enough to enable him to identify the general lay of the land
and arrangement of furniture.

More confidently with each uncontested step, he continued his quest.
Elation was stirring his spirit when he gained the first floor and moved
toward the foot of the second flight, approaching the spot whereat he was
to begin the search for the missing purse. The knowledge that he lacked
means of obtaining illumination deterred him nothing; he had some hope
of finding matches in one of the adjacent rooms, but, failing that, was
prepared to ascend the stairs on all fours, feeling every inch of their
surface, if it took hours. Ever an optimistic soul, instinctively inclined
to father faith with a hope, he felt supremely confident that his search
would not prove fruitless, that he would win early release from his
temporary straits.

And thus it fell out that, at the instant he was thinking it time to begin
to crawl and hunt, his stockinged feet came into contact with something
heavy, yielding, warm--something that moved, moaned, and caused his hair to
bristle and his flesh to creep.

We will make allowances for him; all along he had gone on the assumption
that his antagonist of the dark stairway would have recovered and made off
with all expedition, in the course of ten or twenty minutes, at most, from
the time of his accident. To find him still there was something entirely
outside of Kirkwood's reckoning: he would as soon have thought to encounter
say, Calendar,--would have preferred the latter, indeed. But this fellow
whose disability was due to his own interference, who was reasonably to be
counted upon to raise the very deuce and all of a row!

The initial shock, however shattering to his equanimity, soon, lost effect.
The man evidently remained unconscious, in fact had barely moved; while the
moan that Kirkwood heard, had been distressingly faint.

"Poor devil!" murmured the young man. "He must be in a pretty bad way, for
sure!" He knelt, compassion gentling his heart, and put one hand to the
insentient face. A warm sweat moistened his fingers; his palm was fanned by
steady respiration.

Immeasurably perplexed, the American rose, slipped on his shoes and
buttoned them, thinking hard the while. What ought he to do? Obviously
flight suggested itself,--incontinent flight, anticipating the man's
recovery. On the other hand, indubitably the latter had sustained such
injury that consciousness, when it came to him, would hardly be reinforced
by much aggressive power. Moreover, it was to be remembered that the one
was in that house with quite as much warrant as the other, unless Kirkwood
had drawn a rash inference from the incident of the ragged sentry. The two
of them were mutual, if antagonistic, trespassers; neither would dare
bring about the arrest of the other. And then--and this was not the least
consideration to influence Kirkwood--perhaps the fellow would die if he got
no attention.

Kirkwood shut his teeth grimly. "I'm no assassin," he informed himself, "to
strike and run. If I've maimed this poor devil and there are consequences,
I'll stand 'em. The Lord knows it doesn't matter a damn to anybody, not
even to me, what happens to me; while _he_ may be valuable."

Light upon the subject, actual as well as figurative, seemed to be the
first essential; his mind composed, Kirkwood set himself in search of it.
The floor he was on, however, afforded him no assistance; the mantels were
guiltless of candles and he discovered no matches, either in the wide and
silent drawing-room, with its ghastly furniture, like mummies in their
linen swathings, or in the small boudoir at the back. He was to look either
above or below, it seemed.

After some momentary hesitation, he went up-stairs, his ascent marked by a
single and grateful accident; half-way to the top he trod on an object that
clinked underfoot, and, stooping, retrieved the lost purse. Thus was he
justified of his temerity; the day was saved--that is, to-morrow was.

The rooms of the second-floor were bedchambers, broad, deep, stately,
inhabited by seven devils of loneliness. In one, on a dresser, Kirkwood
found a stump of candle in a china candlestick; the two charred ends of
matches at its base were only an irritating discovery, however--evidence
that real matches had been the mode in Number 9, at some remote date.
Disgusted and oppressed by cumulative inquisitiveness, he took the
candle-end back to the hall; he would have given much for the time and
means to make a more detailed investigation into the secret of the house.

Perhaps it was mostly his hope of chancing on some clue to the mystery of
Dorothy Calender--bewitching riddle that she was!--that fascinated his
imagination so completely. Aside from her altogether, the great house that
stood untenanted, yet in such complete order, so self-contained in its
darkened quiet, intrigued him equally with the train of inexplicable events
that had brought him within its walls. Now--since his latest entrance--his
vision had adjusted itself to cope with the obscurity to some extent; and
the street lights, meagerly reflected through the windows from the bosom of
a sullen pall of cloud, low-swung above the city, had helped him to piece
together many a detail of decoration and furnishing, alike somber and
richly dignified. Kirkwood told himself that the owner, whoever he might
be, was a man of wealth and taste inherited from another age; he had found
little of meretricious to-day in the dwelling, much that was solid and
sedate and homely, and--Victorian.... He could have wished for more; a box
of early Victorian vestas had been highly acceptable.

Making his way down-stairs to the stricken man--who was quite as he had
been--Kirkwood bent over and thrust rifling fingers into his pockets,
regardless of the wretched sense of guilt and sneakishness imparted by the
action, stubbornly heedless of the possibility of the man's awakening to
find himself being searched and robbed.

In the last place he sought, which should (he realized) have been the
first, to wit, the fob pocket of the white waistcoat, he found a small gold
matchbox, packed tight with wax vestas; and, berating himself for crass
stupidity--he had saved a deal of time and trouble by thinking of this
before--lighted the candle.

As its golden flame shot up with scarce a tremor, preyed upon by a
perfectly excusable concern, he bent to examine the man's countenance....
The arm which had partly hidden it had fallen back into a natural position.
It was a young face that gleamed pallid in the candlelight--a face unlined,
a little vapid and insignificant, with features regular and neat, betraying
few characteristics other than the purely negative attributes of a
character as yet unformed, possibly unformable; much the sort of a face
that he might have expected to see, remembering those thin and pouting lips
that before had impressed him. Its owner was probably little more than
twenty. In his attire there was a suspicion of a fop's preciseness, aside
from its accidental disarray; the cut of his waistcoat was the extreme of
the then fashion, the white tie (twisted beneath one ear) an exaggerated
"butterfly," his collar nearly an inch too tall; and he was shod with pumps
suitable only for the dancing-floor,--a whim of the young-bloods of London
of that year.

"I can't make him out at all!" declared Kirkwood. "The son of a gentleman
too weak to believe that cubs need licking into shape? Reared to man's
estate, so sheltered from the wicked world that he never grew a bark?...
The sort that never had a quarrel in his life, 'cept with his tailor?...
Now what the devil is _this_ thing doing in this midnight mischief?...
Damn!"

It was most exasperating, the incongruity of the boy's appearance assorted
with his double rôle of persecutor of distressed damsels and nocturnal
house-breaker!

Kirkwood bent closer above the motionless head, with puzzled eyes striving
to pin down some elusive resemblance that he thought to trace in those
vacuous features--a resemblance to some one he had seen, or known, at some
past time, somewhere, somehow.

"I give it up. Guess I'm mistaken. Anyhow, five young Englishmen out of
every ten of his class are just as blond and foolish. Now let's see how bad
he's hurt."

With hands strong and gentle, he turned the round, light head. Then, "Ah!"
he commented in the accent of comprehension. For there was an angry looking
bump at the base of the skull; and, the skin having been broken, possibly
in collision with the sharp-edged newel-post, a little blood had stained
and matted the straw-colored hair.

Kirkwood let the head down and took thought. Recalling a bath-room on the
floor above, thither he went, unselfishly forgetful of his predicament if
discovered, and, turning on the water, sopped his handkerchief until it
dripped. Then, returning, he took the boy's head on his knees, washed the
wound, purloined another handkerchief (of silk, with a giddy border)
from the other's pocket, and of this manufactured a rude but serviceable
bandage.

Toward the conclusion of his attentions, the sufferer began to show signs
of returning animation. He stirred restlessly, whimpered a little, and
sighed. And Kirkwood, in consternation, got up.

"So!" he commented ruefully. "I guess I am an ass, all right--taking all
that trouble for you, my friend. If I've got a grain of sense left, this is
my cue to leave you alone in your glory."

He was lingering only to restore to the boy's pockets such articles as he
had removed in the search for matches,--the match-box, a few silver coins,
a bulky sovereign purse, a handsome, plain gold watch, and so forth. But
ere he concluded he was aware that the boy was conscious, that his eyes,
open and blinking in the candlelight, were upon him.

They were blue eyes, blue and shallow as a doll's, and edged with long,
fine lashes. Intelligence, of a certain degree, was rapidly informing them.
Kirkwood returned their questioning glance, transfixed in indecision, his
primal impulse to cut-and-run for it was gone; he had nothing to fear from
this child who could not prevent his going whenever he chose to go; while
by remaining he might perchance worm from him something about the girl.

"You're feeling better?" He was almost surprised to hear his own voice put
the query.

"I--I think so. Ow, my head!... I say, you chap, whoever you are, what's
happened?... I want to get up." The boy added peevishly: "Help a fellow,
can't you?"

"You've had a nasty fall," Kirkwood observed evenly, passing an arm
beneath the boy's shoulder and helping him to a sitting position. "Do you
remember?"

The other snuffled childishly and scrubbed across the floor to rest his
back against the wall.

"Why-y ... I remember fallin'; and then ... I woke up and it was all dark
and my head achin' fit to split. I presume I went to sleep again ... I say,
what're you, doing here?"

Instead of replying, Kirkwood lifted a warning finger.

"Hush!" he said tensely, alarmed by noises in the street. "You don't
suppose--?"

He had been conscious of a carriage rolling up from the corner, as well as
that it had drawn up (presumably) before a near-by dwelling. Now the rattle
of a key in the hall-door was startlingly audible. Before he could move,
the door itself opened with a slam.

Kirkwood moved toward the stair-head, and drew back with a cry of disgust.
"Too late!" he told himself bitterly; his escape was cut off. He could run
up-stairs and hide, of course, but the boy would inform against him and....

He buttoned up his coat, settled his hat on his head, and moved near the
candle, where it rested on the floor. One glimpse would suffice to show him
the force of the intruders, and one move of his foot put out the light;
then--_perhaps_--he might be able to rush them.

Below, a brief pause had followed the noise of the door, as if those
entering were standing, irresolute, undecided which way to turn; but
abruptly enough the glimmer of candlelight must have been noticed. Kirkwood
heard a hushed exclamation, a quick clatter of high heels on the parquetry,
pattering feet on the stairs, all but drowned by swish and ripple of silken
skirts; and a woman stood at the head of the flight--to the American an
apparition profoundly amazing as she paused, the light from the floor
casting odd, theatric shadows beneath her eyes and over her brows, edging
her eyes themselves with brilliant light beneath their dark lashes, showing
her lips straight and drawn, and shimmering upon the spangles of an evening
gown, visible beneath the dark cloak which had fallen back from her white,
beautiful shoulders.




VIII


MADAME L'INTRIGANTE

"Mrs. Hallam!" cried Kirkwood, beneath his breath.

The woman ignored his existence. Moving swiftly forward, she dropped on
both knees by the side of the boy, and caught up one of his hands, clasping
it passionately in her own.

"Fred!" she cried, a curious break in her tone. "My little Freddie! Oh,
what has happened, dearie?"

"Oh, hello, Mamma," grunted that young man, submitting listlessly to her
caresses and betraying no overwhelming surprise at her appearance there.
Indeed he seemed more concerned as to what Kirkwood, an older man, would
be thinking, to see him so endeared and fondled, than moved by any other
emotion. Kirkwood could see his shamefaced, sidelong glances; and despised
him properly for them.

But without attending to his response, Mrs. Hallam rattled on in the uneven
accents of excitement. "I waited until I couldn't wait any longer, Freddie
dear. I had to know--had to come. Eccles came home about nine and said that
you had told him to wait outside, that some one had followed you in here,
and that a bobby had told him to move on. I didn't know what--"

"What's o'clock now?" her son interrupted.

"It's about three, I think ... Have you hurt yourself, dear? Oh, why
_didn't_ you come home? You must've known I was dying of anxiety!"

"Oh, I say! Can't you see I'm hurt? 'Had a nasty fall and must've been
asleep ever since."

"My precious one! How--?"

"Can't say, hardly ... I say, don't paw a chap so, Mamma ... I brought
Eccles along and told him to wait because--well, because I didn't feel so
much like shuttin' myself up in this beastly old tomb. So I left the door
ajar, and told him not to let anybody come in. Then I came up-stairs. There
must've been somebody already in the house; I know I _thought_ there was.
It made me feel creepy, rather. At any rate, I heard voices down below, and
the door banged, and somebody began hammerin' like fun on the knocker."

The boy paused, rolling an embarrassed eye up at the stranger.

"Yes, yes, dear!" Mrs. Hallam urged him on.

"Why, I--I made up my mind to cut my stick--let whoever it was pass me on
the stairs, you know. But he followed me and struck me, and then I jumped
at him, and we both fell down the whole flight. And that's all. Besides, my
head's achin' like everything."

"But this man--?"

Mrs. Hallam looked up at Kirkwood, who bowed silently, struggling to hide
both his amusement and perplexity. More than ever, now, the case presented
a front inscrutable to his wits; try as he might, he failed to fit an
explanation to any incident in which he had figured, while this last
development--that his antagonist of the dark stairway had been Mrs.
Hallam's son!--seemed the most astounding of all, baffling elucidation
completely.

He had abandoned all thought of flight and escape. It was too late; in the
brisk idiom of his mother-tongue, he was "caught with the goods on." "May
as well face the music," he counseled himself, in resignation. From what he
had seen and surmised of Mrs. Hallam, he shrewdly suspected that the tune
would prove an exceedingly lively one; she seemed a woman of imagination,
originality, and an able-bodied temper.

"_You_, Mr. Kirkwood!"

Again he bowed, grinning awry.

She rose suddenly. "You will be good enough to explain your presence here,"
she informed him with dangerous serenity.

"To be frank with you--"

"I advise that course, Mr. Kirkwood."

"Thanks, awf'ly.... I came here, half an hour ago, looking for a lost purse
full--well, not _quite_ full of sovereigns. It was my purse, by the way."

Suspicion glinted like foxfire in the cold green eyes beneath her puckered
brows. "I do not understand," she said slowly and in level tones.

"I didn't expect you to," returned Kirkwood; "no more do I.... But, anyway,
it must be clear to you that I've done my best for this gentleman here." He
paused with an interrogative lift of his eyebrows.

"'This gentleman' is my son, Frederick Hallam.... But you will explain--"

"Pardon me, Mrs. Hallam; I shall explain nothing, at present. Permit me
to point out that your position here--like mine--is, to say the least,
anomalous." The random stroke told, as he could tell by the instant
contraction of her eyes of a cat. "It would be best to defer explanations
till a more convenient time--don't you think? Then, if you like, we can
chant confidences in an antiphonal chorus. Just now your--er--son is not
enjoying himself apparently, and ... the attention of the police had best
not be called to this house too often in one night."

His levity seemed to displease and perturb the woman; she turned from him
with an impatient movement of her shoulders.

"Freddie, dear, do you feel able to walk?"

"Eh? Oh, I dare say--I don't know. Wonder would your friend--ah--Mr.
Kirkwood, lend me an arm?"

"Charmed," Kirkwood declared suavely. "If you'll take the candle, Mrs.
Hallam--"

He helped the boy to his feet and, while the latter hung upon him and
complained querulously, stood waiting for the woman to lead the way with
the light; something which, however, she seemed in no haste to do. The
pause at length puzzled Kirkwood, and he turned, to find Mrs. Hallam
holding the candlestick and regarding him steadily, with much the same
expression of furtive mistrust as that with which she had favored him on
her own door-stoop.

[Illustration: He helped the boy to his feet, and stood waiting.]

"One moment," she interposed in confusion; "I won't keep you waiting...;"
and, passing with an averted face, ran quickly up-stairs to the second
floor, taking the light with her. Its glow faded from the walls above and
Kirkwood surmised that she had entered the front bedchamber. For some
moments he could hear her moving about; once, something scraped and bumped
on the floor, as if a heavy bit of furniture had been moved; again there
was a resounding thud that defied speculation; and this was presently
followed by a dull clang of metal.

His fugitive speculations afforded him little enlightenment; and, meantime,
young Hallam, leaning partly against the wall and quite heavily on
Kirkwood's arm, filled his ears with puerile oaths and lamentations; so
that, but for the excuse of his really severe shaking-up, Kirkwood had
been strongly tempted to take the youngster by the shoulders and kick him
heartily, for the health of his soul.

But eventually--it was not really long--there came the quick rush of Mrs.
Hallam's feet along the upper hall, and the woman reappeared, one hand
holding her skirts clear of her pretty feet as she descended in a rush that
caused the candle's flame to flicker perilously.

Half-way down, "Mr. Kirkwood!" she called tempestuously.

"Didn't you find it?" he countered blandly.

She stopped jerkily at the bottom, and, after a moment of confusion. "Find
what, sir?" she asked.

"What you sought, Mrs. Hallam."

Smiling, he bore unflinching the prolonged inspection of her eyes, at once
somber with doubt of him and flashing with indignation because of his
impudence.

"You knew I wouldn't find it, then!... Didn't you?"

"I may have suspected you wouldn't."

Now he was sure that she had been searching for the gladstone bag. That,
evidently, was the bone of contention. Calendar had sent his daughter for
it, Mrs. Hallam her son; Dorothy had been successful ... But, on the other
hand, Calendar and Mrs. Hallam were unquestionably allies. Why, then--?

"Where is it, Mr. Kirkwood?"

"Madam, have you the right to know?"

Through another lengthening pause, while they faced each other, he marked
again the curious contraction of her under lip.

"I have the right," she declared steadily. "Where is it?"

"How can I be sure?"

"Then you don't know--!"

"Indeed," he interrupted, "I would be glad to feel that I ought to tell you
what I know."

"_What_ you know!"

The exclamation, low-spoken, more an echo of her thoughts than intended
for Kirkwood, was accompanied by a little shake of the woman's head, mute
evidence to the fact that she was bewildered by his finesse. And this
delighted the young man beyond measure, making him feel himself master of
a difficult situation. Mysteries had been woven before his eyes so
persistently, of late, that it was a real pleasure to be able to do a
little mystifying on his own account. By adopting this reticent and
non-committal attitude, he was forcing the hand of a woman old enough to be
his mother and most evidently a past-mistress in the art of misleading. All
of which seemed very fascinating to the amateur in adventure.

The woman would have led again, but young Hallam cut in, none too
courteously.

"I say, Mamma, it's no good standing here, palaverin' like a lot of flats.
Besides, I'm awf'ly knocked up. Let's get home and have it out there."

Instantly his mother softened. "My poor boy!... Of course we'll go."

Without further demur she swept past and down the stairway before
them--slowly, for their progress was of necessity slow, and the light most
needed. Once they were in the main hall, however, she extinguished the
candle, placed it on a side table, and passed out through the door.

It had been left open, as before; and Kirkwood was not at all surprised to
see a man waiting on the threshold,--the versatile Eccles, if he erred not.
He had little chance to identify him, as it happened, for at a word from
Mrs. Hallam the man bowed and, following her across the sidewalk, opened
the door of a four-wheeler which, with lamps alight and liveried driver on
the box, had been waiting at the carriage-block.

As they passed out, Kirkwood shut the door; and at the same moment the
little party was brought up standing by a gruff and authoritative summons.

"Just a minute, please, you there!"

"Aha!" said Kirkwood to himself. "I thought so." And he halted, in
unfeigned respect for the burly and impressive figure, garbed in blue and
brass, helmeted and truncheoned, bull's-eye shining on breast like the
Law's unblinking and sleepless eye, barring the way to the carriage.

Mrs. Hallam showed less deference for the obstructionist. The assumed
hauteur and impatience of her pose was artfully reflected in her voice as
she rounded upon the bobby, with an indignant demand: "What is the meaning
of this, officer?"

"Precisely what I wants to know, ma'am," returned the man, unyielding
beneath his respectful attitude. "I'm obliged to ask you to tell me what
you were doing in that 'ouse.... And what's the matter with this 'ere
gentleman?" he added, with a dubious stare at young Hallam's bandaged head
and rumpled clothing.

"Perhaps you don't understand," admitted Mrs. Hallam sweetly. "Of course--I
see--it's perfectly natural. The house has been shut up for some time
and--"

"Thank you, ma'am; that's just it. There was something wrong going on early
in the evening, and I was told to keep an eye on the premises. It's duty,
ma'am; I've got my report to make."

"The house," said Mrs. Hallam, with the long-suffering patience of one
elucidating a perfectly plain proposition to a being of a lower order of
intelligence, "is the property of my son, Arthur Frederick Burgoyne Hallam,
of Cornwall. This is--"

"Beg pardon, ma'am, but I was told Colonel George Burgoyne, of Cornwall--"

"Colonel Burgoyne died some time ago. My son is his heir. This is my son.
He came to the house this evening to get some property he desired, and--it
seems--tripped on the stairs and fell unconscious. I became worried about
him and drove over, accompanied by my friend, Mr. Kirkwood."

The policeman looked his troubled state of mind, and wagged a doubtful head
over the case. There was his duty, and there was, opposed to it, the fact
that all three were garbed in the livery of the well-to-do.

At length, turning to the driver, he demanded, received, and noted in his
memorandum-book, the license number of the equipage.

"It's a very unusual case, ma'am," he apologized; "I hopes you won't 'old
it against me. I'm only trying to do my duty--"

"And safeguard our property. You are perfectly justified, officer."

"Thank you, ma'am. And would you mind giving me your cards, please, all of
you?"

"Certainly not." Without hesitation the woman took a little hand-bag from
the seat of the carriage and produced a card; her son likewise found his
case and handed the officer an oblong slip.

"I've no cards with me," the American told the policeman; "my name,
however, is Philip Kirkwood, and I'm staying at the Pless."

"Very good, sir; thank you." The man penciled the information in his little
book. "Thank you, ma'am, and Mr. Hallam, sir. Sorry to have detained you.
Good morning."

Kirkwood helped young Hallam into the carriage, gave Mrs. Hallam his hand,
and followed her. The man Eccles shut the door, mounting the box beside the
driver. Immediately they were in motion.

The American got a final glimpse of the bobby, standing in front of Number
9, Frognall Street, and watching them with an air of profound uncertainty.
He had Kirkwood's sympathy, therein; but he had little time to feel with
him, for Mrs. Hallam turned upon him very suddenly.

"Mr. Kirkwood, will you be good enough to tell me who and what you are?"

The young man smiled his homely, candid smile. "I'll be only too glad, Mrs.
Hallam, when I feel sure you'll do as much for yourself."

She gave him no answer; it, was as if she were choosing words. Kirkwood
braced himself to meet the storm; but none ensued. There was rather a lull,
which strung itself out indefinitely, to the monotonous music of hoofs and
rubber tires.

Young Hallam was resting his empty blond head against the cushions, and had
closed his eyes. He seemed to doze; but, as the carriage rolled past the
frequent street-lights, Kirkwood could see that the eyes of Mrs. Hallam
were steadily directed to his face.

His outward composure was tempered by some amusement, by more admiration;
the woman's eyes were very handsome, even when hardest and most cold. It
was not easy to conceive of her as being the mother of a son so immaturely
mature. Why, she must have been at least thirty-eight or -nine! One
wondered; she did not look it....

The carriage stopped before a house with lighted windows. Eccles jumped
down from the box and scurried to open the front door. The radiance of
a hall-lamp was streaming out into the misty night when he returned to
release his employers.

They were returned to Craven Street! "One more lap round the track!" mused
Kirkwood. "Wonder will the next take me back to Bermondsey Old Stairs."

At Mrs. Hallam's direction, Eccles ushered him into the smoking-room, on
the ground floor in the rear of the dwelling, there to wait while she
helped her son up-stairs and to bed. He sighed with pleasure at first
glimpse of its luxurious but informal comforts, and threw himself
carelessly into a heavily padded lounging-chair, dropping one knee over the
other and lighting the last of his expensive cigars, with a sensation of
undiluted gratitude; as one coming to rest in the shadow of a great rock in
a weary land.

Over his shoulder a home-like illumination was cast by an electric
reading-lamp shaded with red silk. At his feet brass fire-dogs winked
sleepily in the fluttering blaze of a well-tended stove. The walls were
hung with deep red, the doors and divans upholstered in the same restful
shade. In one corner an old clock ticked soberly. The atmosphere would
have proved a potent invitation to reverie, if not to sleep--he was very
sleepy--but for the confusion in the house.

In its chambers, through the halls, on the stairs, there were hurryings and
scurryings of feet and skirts, confused with murmuring voices. Presently,
in an adjoining room, Philip Kirkwood heard a maid-servant wrestling
hopefully with that most exasperating of modern time-saving devices,
the telephone as countenanced by our English cousins. Her patience and
determination won his approval, but availed nothing for her purpose; in the
outcome the telephone triumphed and the maid gave up the unequal contest.

Later, a butler entered the room; a short and sturdy fellow, extremely ill
at ease. Drawing a small taboret to the side of Kirkwood's chair, he placed
thereon a tray, deferentially imparting the information that "Missis 'Allam
'ad thought 'ow as Mister Kirkwood might care for a bit of supper."

"Please thank Mrs. Hallam for me." Kirkwood's gratified eyes ranged the
laden tray. There were sandwiches, biscuit, cheese, and a pot of black
coffee, with sugar and cream. "It was very kindly thought of," he added.

"Very good, sir, thank you, sir."

The man turned to go, shuffling soundlessly. Kirkwood was suddenly
impressed with his evasiveness; ever since he had entered the room, his
countenance had seemed turned from the guest.

"Eccles!" he called sharply, at a venture.

The butler halted, thunderstruck. "Ye-es, s-sir?"

[Illustration: Eccles]

"Turn round, Eccles; I want a look at you."

Eccles faced him unwillingly, with a stolid front but shifty eyes. Kirkwood
glanced him up and down, grinning.

"Thank you, Eccles; I'll remember you now. You'll remember me, too, won't
you? You're a bad actor, aren't you, Eccles?"

"Yes, sir; thank you, sir," mumbled the man unhappily; and took instant
advantage of the implied permission to go.

Intensely diverted by the recollection of Eccles' abortive attempt to stop
him at the door of Number 9, and wondering--now that he came to think of
it--why, precisely, young Hallam had deemed it necessary to travel with
a body-guard and adopt such furtive methods to enter into as well as to
obtain what was asserted to be his own property, Kirkwood turned active
attention to the lunch.

Thoughtfully he poured himself a cup of coffee, swallowing it hot and black
as it came from the silver pot; then munched the sandwiches.

It _was_ kindly thought of, this early morning repast; Mrs. Hallam seemed
more and more a remarkable woman with each phase of her character that she
chose to disclose. At odds with him, she yet took time to think of his
creature needs!

What could be her motive,--not in feeding him, but in involving her name
and fortune in an affair so strangely flavored?... This opened up a desert
waste of barren speculation. "What's anybody's motive, who figures in this
thundering dime-novel?" demanded the American, almost contemptuously.
And--for the hundredth time--gave it up; the day should declare it, if so
hap he lived to see that day: a distant one, he made no doubt. The only
clear fact in his befogged and bemused mentality was that he was at once
"broke" and in this business up to his ears. Well, he'd see it through;
he'd nothing better to do, and--there was the girl:

Dorothy, whose eyes and lips he had but to close his own eyes to see
again as vividly as though she stood before him; Dorothy, whose unspoiled
sweetness stood out in vivid relief against this moil and toil of
conspiracy, like a star of evening shining clear in a stormy sky.

"Poetic simile: I'm going fast," conceded Kirkwood; but he did not smile.
It was becoming quite too serious a matter for laughter. For her sake,
he was in the game "for keeps"; especially in view of the fact that
everything--his own heart's inclination included--seemed to conspire to
keep him in it. Of course he hoped for nothing in return; a pauper who
turns squire-of-dames with matrimonial intent is open to the designation,
"penniless adventurer." No; whatever service he might be to the girl would
be ample recompense to him for his labors. And afterwards, he'd go his
way in peace; she'd soon forget him--if she hadn't already. Women (he
propounded gravely) are queer: there's no telling anything about them!

One of the most unreadable specimens of the sex on which he pronounced this
highly original dictum, entered the room just then; and he found himself at
once out of his chair and his dream, bowing.

"Mrs. Hallam."

The woman nodded and smiled graciously. "Eccles has attended to your needs,
I hope? Please don't stop smoking." She sank into an arm-chair on the
other side of the hearth and, probably by accident, out of the radius of
illumination from the lamp; sitting sidewise, one knee above the other, her
white arms immaculate against the somber background of shadowed crimson.

She was very handsome indeed, just then; though a keener light might have
proved less flattering.

"Now, Mr. Kirkwood?" she opened briskly, with a second intimate and
friendly nod; and paused, her pose receptive.

Kirkwood sat down again, smiling good-natured appreciation of her
unprejudiced attitude.

"Your son, Mrs. Hallam--?"

"Oh, Freddie's doing well enough.... Freddie," she explained, "has a
delicate constitution and has seen little of the world. Such melodrama
as to-night's is apt to shock him severely. We must make allowances, Mr.
Kirkwood."

Kirkwood grinned again, a trace unsympathetically; he was unable to
simulate any enthusiasm on the subject of poor Freddie, whom he had sized
up with passable acumen as a spoiled and coddled child completely under the
thumb of an extremely clever mother.

"Yes," he responded vaguely; "he'll be quite fit after a night's sleep, I
dare say."

The woman was watching him keenly, beneath her lowered lashes. "I think,"
she said deliberately, "that it is time we came to an understanding."

Kirkwood agreed--"Yes?" affably.

"I purpose being perfectly straightforward. To begin with, I don't place
you, Mr. Kirkwood. You are an unknown quantity, a new factor. Won't you
please tell me what you are and.... Are you a friend of Mr. Calendar's?"

"I think I may lay claim to that honor, though"--to Kirkwood's way of
seeing things some little frankness on his own part would be essential if
they were to get on--"I hardly know him, Mrs. Hallam. I had the pleasure of
meeting him only this afternoon."

She knitted her brows over this statement.

"That, I assure you, is the truth," he laughed.

"But ... I really don't understand."

"Nor I, Mrs. Hallam. Calendar aside, I am Philip Kirkwood, American,
resident abroad for some years, a native of San Francisco, of a certain
age, unmarried, by profession a poor painter."

"And--?"

"Beyond that? I presume I must tell you, though I confess I'm in doubt...."
He hesitated, weighing candor in the balance with discretion.

"But who are you for? Are you in George Calendar's pay?"

"Heaven forfend!"--piously. "My sole interest at the present moment is to
unravel a most entrancing mystery--"

"Entitled 'Dorothy Calendar'! Of course. You've known her long?"

"Eight hours, I believe," he admitted gravely; "less than that, in fact."

"Miss Calendar's interests will not suffer through anything you may tell
me."

"Whether they will or no, I see I must swing a looser tongue, or you'll be
showing me the door."

The woman shook her head, amused, "Not until," she told him significantly.

"Very well, then." And he launched into an abridged narrative of the
night's events, as he understood them, touching lightly on his own
circumstances, the real poverty which had brought him back to Craven Street
by way of Frognall. "And there you have it all, Mrs. Hallam."

She sat in silent musing. Now and again he caught the glint of her eyes
and knew that he was being appraised with such trained acumen as only
long knowledge of men can give to women. He wondered if he were found
wanting.... Her dark head bended, elbow on knee, chin resting lightly in
the cradle of her slender, parted fingers, the woman thought profoundly,
her reverie ending with a brief, curt laugh, musical and mirthless as the
sound of breaking glass.

"It is so like Calendar!" she exclaimed: "so like him that one sees how
foolish it was to trust--no, not to trust, but to believe that he could
ever be thrown off the scent, once he got nose to ground. So, if we suffer,
my son and I, I shall have only myself to thank!"

Kirkwood waited in patient attention till she chose to continue. When she
did "Now for my side of the case!" cried Mrs. Hallam; and rising, began to
pace the room, her slender and rounded figure swaying gracefully, the while
she talked.

"George Calendar is a scoundrel," she said: "a swindler, gambler,--what I
believe you Americans call a confidence-man. He is also my late husband's
first cousin. Some years since he found it convenient to leave England,
likewise his wife and daughter. Mrs. Calendar, a country-woman of yours, by
the bye, died shortly afterwards. Dorothy, by the merest accident, obtained
a situation as private secretary in the household of the late Colonel
Burgoyne, of The Cliffs, Cornwall. You follow me?"

"Yes, perfectly."

"Colonel Burgoyne died, leaving his estates to my son, some time ago.
Shortly afterwards Dorothy Calendar disappeared. We know now that her
father took her away, but then the disappearance seemed inexplicable,
especially since with her vanished a great deal of valuable information.
She alone knew of the location of certain of the old colonel's personal
effects."

"He was an eccentric. One of his peculiarities involved the secreting of
valuables in odd places; he had no faith in banks. Among these valuables
were the Burgoyne family jewels--quite a treasure, believe me, Mr.
Kirkwood. We found no note of them among the colonel's papers, and without
Dorothy were powerless to pursue a search for them. We advertised and
employed detectives, with no result. It seems that father and daughter were
at Monte Carlo at the time."

"Beautifully circumstantial, my dear lady," commented Kirkwood--to his
inner consciousness. Outwardly he maintained consistently a pose of
impassive gullibility.

"This afternoon, for the first time, we received news of the Calendars.
Calendar himself called upon me, to beg a loan. I explained our difficulty
and he promised that Dorothy should send us the information by the
morning's post. When I insisted, he agreed to bring it himself, after
dinner, this evening.... I make it quite clear?" she interrupted, a little
anxious.

"Quite clear, I assure you," he assented encouragingly.

"Strangely enough, he had not been gone ten minutes when my son came
in from a conference with our solicitors, informing me that at last a
memorandum had turned up, indicating that the heirlooms would be found in a
safe secreted behind a dresser in Colonel Burgoyne's bedroom."

"At Number 9, Frognall Street."

"Yes.... I proposed going there at once, but it was late and we were dining
at the Pless with an acquaintance, a Mr. Mulready, whom I now recall as a
former intimate of George Calendar. To our surprise we saw Calendar and his
daughter at a table not far from ours. Mr. Mulready betrayed some agitation
at the sight of Calendar, and told me that Scotland Yard had a man out with
a warrant for Calendar's arrest, on old charges. For old sake's sake, Mr.
Mulready begged me to give Calendar a word of warning. I did so--foolishly,
it seems: Calendar was at that moment planning to rob us, Mulready aiding
and abetting him."

The woman paused before Kirkwood, looking down upon him. "And so," she
concluded, "we have been tricked and swindled. I can scarcely believe it of
Dorothy Calendar."

"I, for one, don't believe it." Kirkwood spoke quietly, rising. "Whatever
the culpability of Calendar and Mulready, Dorothy was only their hoodwinked
tool."

"But, Mr. Kirkwood, she must have known the jewels were not hers."

"Yes," he assented passively, but wholly unconvinced.

"And what," she demanded with a gesture of exasperation, "what would you
advise?"

"Scotland Yard," he told her bluntly.

"But it's a family secret! It must not appear in the papers. Don't you
understand--George Calendar is my husband's cousin!"

"I can think of nothing else, unless you pursue them in person."

"But--whither?"

"That remains to be discovered; I can tell you nothing more than I have....
May I thank you for your hospitality, express my regrets that I should
unwittingly have been made the agent of this disaster, and wish you good
night--or, rather, good morning, Mrs. Hallam?"

For a moment she held him under a calculating glance which he withstood
with graceless fortitude. Then, realizing that he was determined not by any
means to be won to her cause, she gave him her hand, with a commonplace
wish that he might find his affairs in better order than seemed probable;
and rang for Eccles.

The butler showed him out.

He took away with him two strong impressions; the one visual, of a
strikingly handsome woman in a wonderful gown, standing under the red glow
of a reading-lamp, in an attitude of intense mental concentration, her
expression plainly indicative of a train of thought not guiltless of
vindictiveness; the other, more mental but as real, he presently voiced to
the huge bronze lions brooding over desolate Trafalgar Square.

"Well," appreciated Mr. Kirkwood with gusto, "_she's_ got Ananias and
Sapphira talked to a standstill, all right!" He ruminated over this for
a moment. "Calendar can lie some, too; but hardly with her picturesque
touch.... Uncommon ingenious, _I_ call it. All the same, there were only
about a dozen bits of tiling that didn't fit into her mosaic a little
bit.... I think they're all tarred with the same stick--all but the girl.
And there's something afoot a long sight more devilish and crafty than that
shilling-shocker of madam's.... Dorothy Calendar's got about as much active
part in it as I have. I'm only from California, but they've got to show
me, before I'll believe a word against her. Those infernal
scoundrels!...Somebody's got to be on the girl's side and I seem to have
drawn the lucky straw.... Good Heavens! is it possible for a grown man to
fall heels over head in love in two short hours? I don't believe it. It's
just interest--nothing more.... And I'll have to have a change of clothes
before I can do anything further."

He bowed gratefully to the lions, in view of their tolerant interest in his
soliloquy, and set off very suddenly round the square and up St. Martin's
Lane, striking across town as directly as might be for St. Pancras Station.
It would undoubtedly be a long walk, but cabs were prohibited by his
straitened means, and the busses were all abed and wouldn't be astir for
hours.

He strode along rapidly, finding his way more through intuition than by
observation or familiarity with London's geography--indeed, was scarce
aware of his surroundings; for his brain was big with fine imagery, rapt in
a glowing dream of knighterrantry and chivalric deeds.

Thus is it ever and alway with those who in the purity of young hearts rush
in where angels fear to tread; if these, Kirkwood and his ilk, be fools,
thank God for them, for with such foolishness is life savored and made
sweet and sound! To Kirkwood the warp of the world and the woof of it was
Romance, and it wrapped him round, a magic mantle to set him apart from
all things mean and sordid and render him impregnable and invisible to the
haunting Shade of Care.

Which, by the same token, presently lost track of him entirely, and
wandered off to find and bedevil some other poor devil. And Kirkwood, his
eyes like his spirit elevated, saw that the clouds of night were breaking,
the skies clearing, that the East pulsed ever more strongly with the
dim golden promise of the day to come. And this he chose to take for an
omen--prematurely, it may be.




IX


AGAIN "BELOW BRIDGE"; AND BEYOND

Kirkwood wasted little time, who had not much to waste, were he to do that
upon whose doing he had set his heart. It irked him sore to have to lose
the invaluable moments demanded by certain imperative arrangements, but his
haste was such that all was consummated within an hour.

Within the period of a single hour, then, he had ransomed his luggage at
St. Pancras, caused it to be loaded upon a four-wheeler and transferred to
a neighboring hotel of evil flavor but moderate tariff, where he engaged
a room for a week, ordered an immediate breakfast, and retired with his
belongings to his room; he had shaved and changed his clothes, selecting
a serviceable suit of heavy tweeds, stout shoes, a fore-and-aft cap and a
negligée shirt of a deep shade calculated at least to seem clean for a long
time; finally, he had devoured his bacon and eggs, gulped down his coffee
and burned his mouth, and, armed with a stout stick, set off hotfoot in the
still dim glimmering of early day.

By this time his cash capital had dwindled to the sum of two pounds, ten
shillings, eight-pence, and would have been much less had he paid for his
lodging in advance. But he considered his trunks ample security for the
bill, and dared not wait the hour when shopkeepers begin to take down
shutters and it becomes possible to realize upon one's jewelry. Besides
which, he had never before been called upon to consider the advisability of
raising money by pledging personal property, and was in considerable doubt
as to the right course of procedure in such emergency.

At King's Cross Station on the Underground an acute disappointment awaited
him; there, likewise, he learned something about London. A sympathetic
bobby informed him that no trains would be running until after five-thirty,
and that, furthermore, no busses would begin to ply until half after seven.

"It's tramp it or cab it, then," mused the young man mournfully, his
longing gaze seeking a nearby cab-rank--just then occupied by a solitary
hansom, driver somnolent on the box. "Officer," he again addressed
the policeman, mindful of the English axiom: "When in doubt, ask a
bobby."--"Officer, when's high-tide this morning?"

The bobby produced a well-worn pocket-almanac, moistened a massive thumb,
and rippled the pages.

"London Bridge, 'igh tide twenty minutes arfter six, sir," he announced
with a glow of satisfaction wholly pardonable in one who combines the
functions of perambulating almanac, guide-book, encyclopedia, and conserver
of the peace.

Kirkwood said something beneath his breath--a word in itself a comfortable
mouthful and wholesome and emphatic. He glanced again at the cab and
groaned: "O Lord, I just dassent!" With which, thanking the bureau of
information, he set off at a quick step down Grey's Inn Road.

The day had closed down in brilliance upon the city--and the voice of the
milkman was to be heard in the land--when he trudged, still briskly if a
trifle wearily, into Holborn, and held on eastward across the Viaduct and
down Newgate Street; the while addling his weary wits with heart-sickening
computations of minutes, all going hopelessly to prove that he would be
late, far too late even presupposing the unlikely. The unlikely, be it
known, was that the _Alethea_ would not attempt to sail before the turn of
the tide.

For this was his mission, to find the _Alethea_ before she sailed.
Incredible as it may appear, at five o'clock, or maybe earlier, on the
morning of the twenty-second of April, 1906, A.D., Philip Kirkwood,
normally a commonplace but likable young American in full possession of
his senses, might have been seen (and by some was seen) plodding manfully
through Cheapside, London, England, engaged upon a quest as mad, forlorn,
and gallant as any whose chronicle ever inspired the pen of a Malory or
a Froissart. In brief he proposed to lend his arm and courage to be the
shield and buckler of one who might or might not be a damsel in distress;
according as to whether Mrs. Hallam had spoken soothly of Dorothy Calendar,
or Kirkwood's own admirable faith in the girl were justified of itself.

Proceeding upon the working hypothesis that Mrs. Hallam was a polished liar
in most respects, but had told the truth, so far as concerned her statement
to the effect that the gladstone bag contained valuable real property
(whose ownership remained a moot question, though Kirkwood was definitely
committed to the belief that it was none of Mrs. Hallam's or her son's):
he reasoned that the two adventurers, with Dorothy and their booty, would
attempt to leave London by a water route, in the ship, _Alethea_, whose
name had fallen from their lips at Bermondsey Old Stairs.

Kirkwood's initial task, then, would be to find the needle in the
haystack--the metaphor is poor: more properly, to sort out from the
hundreds of vessels, of all descriptions, at anchor in midstream, moored to
the wharves of 'long-shore warehouses, or in the gigantic docks that line
the Thames, that one called _Alethea_; of which he was so deeply mired in
ignorance that he could not say whether she were tramp-steamer, coastwise
passenger boat, one of the liners that ply between Tilbury and all the
world, Channel ferry-boat, private yacht (steam or sail), schooner,
four-master, square-rigger, barque or brigantine.

A task to stagger the optimism of any but one equipped with the sublime
impudence of Youth! Even Kirkwood was disturbed by some little awe when
he contemplated the vast proportions of his undertaking. None the less
doggedly he plugged ahead, and tried to keep his mind from vain surmises
as to what would be his portion when eventually he should find himself a
passenger, uninvited and unwelcome, upon the _Alethea_....

London had turned over once or twice, and was pulling the bedclothes over
its head and grumbling about getting up, but the city was still sound
asleep when at length he paused for a minute's rest in front of the Mansion
House, and realized with a pang of despair that he was completely tuckered
out. There was a dull, vague throbbing in his head; weights pressed upon
his eyeballs until they ached; his mouth was hot and tasted of yesterday's
tobacco; his feet were numb and heavy; his joints were stiff; he yawned
frequently.

With a sigh he surrendered to the flesh's frailty. An early cabby, cruising
up from Cannon Street station on the off-chance of finding some one astir
in the city, aside from the doves and sparrows, suffered the surprise of
his life when Kirkwood hailed him. His face was blank with amazement when
he reined in, and his eyes bulged when the prospective fare, on impulse,
explained his urgent needs. Happily he turned out a fair representative of
his class, an intelligent and unfuddled cabby.

"Jump in, sir," he told Kirkwood cheerfully, as soon as he had assimilated
the latter's demands. "I knows precisely wotcher wants. Leave it all to
me."

The admonition was all but superfluous; Kirkwood was unable, for the time
being, to do aught else than resign his fate into another's guidance. Once
in the cab he slipped insensibly into a nap, and slept soundly on, as
reckless of the cab's swift pace and continuous jouncing as of the sunlight
glaring full in his tired young face.

He may have slept twenty minutes; he awoke faint with drowsiness, tingling
from head to toe from fatigue, and in distress of a queer qualm in the pit
of his stomach, to find the hansom at rest and the driver on the step,
shaking his fare with kindly determination. "Oh, a' right," he assented
surlily, and by sheer force of will made himself climb out to the
sidewalk; where, having rubbed his eyes, stretched enormously and yawned
discourteously in the face of the East End, he was once more himself and
a hundred times refreshed into the bargain. Contentedly he counted three
shillings into the cabby's palm--the fare named being one-and-six.

"The shilling over and above the tip's for finding me the waterman and
boat," he stipulated.

"Right-o. You'll mind the 'orse a minute, sir?"

Kirkwood nodded. The man touched his hat and disappeared inexplicably.
Kirkwood, needlessly attaching himself to the reins near the animal's head,
pried his sense of observation open and became alive to the fact that he
stood in a quarter of London as strange to him as had been Bermondsey Wall.

To this day he can not put a name to it; he surmises that it was Wapping.

Ramshackle tenements with sharp gable roofs lined either side of the way.
Frowsy women draped themselves over the window-sills. Pallid and wasted
parodies on childhood contested the middle of the street with great, slow
drays, drawn by enormous horses. On the sidewalks twin streams of masculine
humanity flowed without rest, both bound in the same direction: dock
laborers going to their day's work. Men of every nationality known to the
world (he thought) passed him in his short five-minute wait by the horse's
head; Britons, brown East Indians, blacks from Jamaica, swart Italians,
Polaks, Russian Jews, wire-drawn Yankees, Spaniards, Portuguese, Greeks,
even a Nubian or two: uniform in these things only, that their backs were
bent with toil, bowed beyond mending, and their faces stamped with the
blurred type-stamp of the dumb laboring brute. A strangely hideous
procession, they shambled on, for the most part silent, all uncouth and
unreal in the clear morning glow.

The outlander was sensible of some relief when his cabby popped hurriedly
out of the entrance to a tenement, a dull-visaged, broad-shouldered
waterman ambling more slowly after.

"Nevvy of mine, sir," announced the cabby; "and a fust-ryte waterman; knows
the river like a book, he do."

The nephew touched his forelock sheepishly.

"Thank you," said Kirkwood; and, turning to the man, "Your boat?" he asked
with the brevity of weariness.

"This wye, sir."

At his guide's heels Kirkwood threaded the crowd and, entering the
tenement, stumbled through a gloomy and unsavory passage, to come out at
last upon a scanty, unrailed veranda overlooking the river. Ten feet below,
perhaps, foul waters purred and eddied round the piles supporting the
rear of the building. On one hand a ladder-like flight of rickety steps
descended to a floating stage to which a heavy rowboat lay moored. In the
latter a second waterman was seated bailing out bilge with a rusty can.

"'Ere we are, sir," said the cabman's nephew, pausing at the head of the
steps. "Now, where's it to be?"

The American explained tersely that he had a message to deliver a friend,
who had shipped aboard a vessel known as the _Alethea_, scheduled to sail
at floodtide; further than which deponent averred naught.

The waterman scratched his head. "A 'ard job, sir; not knowin' wot kind of
a boat she are mykes it 'arder." He waited hopefully.

"Ten shillings," volunteered Kirkwood promptly; "ten shillings if you get
me aboard her before she weighs anchor; fifteen if I keep you out more than
an hour, and still you put me aboard. After that we'll make other terms."

The man promptly turned his back to hail his mate. "'Arf a quid, Bob, if we
puts this gent aboard a wessel name o' _Allytheer_ afore she syles at turn
o' tide."

In the boat the man with the bailing can turned up an impassive
countenance. "Coom down," he clenched the bargain; and set about shipping
the sweeps.

Kirkwood crept down the shaky ladder and deposited himself in the stern of
the boat; the younger boatman settled himself on the midship thwart.

"Ready?"

"Ready," assented old Bob from the bows. He cast off the painter, placed
one sweep against the edge of the stage, and with a vigorous thrust pushed
off; then took his seat.

Bows swinging down-stream, the boat shot out from the shore.

"How's the tide?" demanded Kirkwood, his impatience growing.

"On th' turn, sir," he was told.

For a long moment broadside to the current, the boat responded to the
sturdy pulling of the port sweeps. Another moment, and it was in full
swing, the watermen bending lustily to their task. Under their unceasing
urge, the broad-beamed, heavy craft, aided by the ebbing tide, surged more
and more rapidly through the water; the banks, grim and unsightly with
their towering, impassive warehouses broken by toppling wooden tenements,
slipped swiftly up-stream. Ship after ship was passed, sailing vessels
in the majority, swinging sluggishly at anchor, drifting slowly with the
river, or made fast to the goods-stages of the shore; and in keen anxiety
lest he should overlook the right one, Kirkwood searched their bows and
sterns for names, which in more than one case proved hardly legible.

The _Alethea_ was not of their number.

In the course of some ten minutes, the watermen drove the boat sharply
inshore, bringing her up alongside another floating stage, in the shadow
of another tenement.--both so like those from which they had embarked that
Kirkwood would have been unable to distinguish one from another.

In the bows old Bob lifted up a stentorian voice, summoning one William.

Recognizing that there was some design in this, the passenger subdued his
disapproval of the delay, and sat quiet.

In answer to the third ear-racking hail, a man, clothed simply in dirty
shirt and disreputable trousers, showed himself in the doorway above,
rubbing the sleep out of a red, bloated countenance with a mighty and grimy
fist.

"'Ello," he said surlily. "Wot's th' row?"

"'Oo," interrogated old Bob, holding the boat steady by grasping the stage,
"was th' party wot engyged yer larst night, Bill?"

"Party name o' _Allytheer_," growled the drowsy one. "W'y?"

"Party 'ere's lookin' for 'im. Where'll I find this _Allytheer?_"

"Best look sharp 'r yer won't find 'im," retorted the one above. "'E _was_
at anchor off Bow Creek larst night."

Kirkwood's heart leaped in hope. "What sort of a vessel was she?" he asked,
half rising in his eagerness.

"Brigantine, sir."

"_Thank--you!_" replied Kirkwood explosively, resuming his seat with
uncalculated haste as old Bob, deaf to the amenities of social intercourse
in an emergency involving as much as ten-bob, shoved off again.

And again the boat was flying down in midstream, the leaden waters, shot
with gold of the morning sun, parting sullenly beneath its bows.

The air was still, heavy and tepid; the least exertion brought out beaded
moisture on face and hands. In the east hung a turgid sky, dull with haze,
through which the mounting sun swam like a plaque of brass; overhead it
was clear and cloudless, but besmirched as if the polished mirror of the
heavens had been fouled by the breath of departing night.

On the right, ahead, Greenwich Naval College loomed up, the great
gray-stone buildings beyond the embankment impressively dominating the
scene, in happy relief against the wearisome monotony of the river-banks;
it came abreast; and ebbed into the backwards of the scene.

The watermen straining at the sweeps, the boat sped into Blackwall Reach,
Bugsby Marshes a splash of lurid green to port, dreary Cubitt Town and the
West India Docks to starboard. Here the river ran thick with shipping.

"Are we near?" Kirkwood would know; and by way of reply had a grunt of the
younger waterman.

Again, "Will we make it?" he asked.

The identical grunt answered him; he was free to interpret it as he would;
young William--as old Bob named him--had no breath for idle words. Kirkwood
subsided, controlling his impatience to the best of his ability; the men,
he told himself again and again, were earning their pay, whether or not
they gained the goal of his desire.... Their labors were titanic; on
their temples and foreheads the knotted veins stood out like discolored
whip-cord; their faces were the shade of raw beef, steaming with sweat;
their eyes protruded with the strain that set their jaws like vises; their
chests heaved and shrank like bellows; their backs curved, straightened,
and bent again in rhythmic unison as tiring to the eye as the swinging of a
pendulum.

Hugging the marshy shore, they rounded the Blackwall Point. Young William
looked to Kirkwood, caught his eye, and nodded.

"Here?"

Kirkwood rose, balancing himself against the leap and sway of the boat.

"Sumwhere's ... 'long ... o' 'ere."

From right to left his eager glance swept the river's widening reach.
Vessels were there in abundance, odd, unwieldy, blunt-bowed craft with
huge, rakish, tawny sails; long strings of flat barges, pyramidal mounds of
coal on each, lashed to another and convoyed by panting tugs; steam cargo
boats, battered, worn, rusted sore through their age-old paint; a steel
leviathan of the deep seas, half cargo, half passenger boat, warping
reluctantly into the mouth of the Victoria Dock tidal basin,--but no
brigantine, no sailing vessel of any type.

The young man's lips checked a cry that was half a sob of bitter
disappointment. He had entered into the spirit of the chase heart and soul,
with an enthusiasm that was strange to him, when he came to look back
upon the time; and to fail, even though failure had been discounted a
hundredfold since the inception of his mad adventure, seemed hard, very
hard.

He sat down suddenly. "She's gone!" he cried in a hollow gasp.

The boatmen eased upon their oars, and old Bob stood up in the bows,
scanning the river-scape with keen eyes shielded by a level palm.
Young William drooped forward suddenly, head upon knees, and breathed
convulsively. The boat drifted listlessly with the current.

Old Bob panted: "'Dawn't--see--nawthin'--o' 'er." He resumed his seat.

"There's no hope, I suppose?"

The elder waterman shook his head. "'Carn't sye.... Might be round--nex'
bend--might be--passin' Purfleet.... 'Point is--me an' young Wilyum
'ere--carn't do no more--'n we 'as. We be wore out."

"Yes," Kirkwood assented, disconsolate, "You've certainly earned your pay."
Then hope revived; he was very young in heart, you know. "Can't you suggest
something? I've _got_ to catch that ship!"

Old Bob wagged his head in slow negation; young William lifted his.

"There's a rylewye runs by Woolwich," he ventured. "Yer might tyke tryne
an' go to Sheerness, sir. Yer'd be positive o' passin' 'er if she didn't
syle afore 'igh-tide. 'Ire a boat at Sheerness an' put out an' look for
'er."

"How far's Woolwich?" Kirkwood demanded instantly.

"Mile," said the elder man. "Tyke yer for five-bob extry."

"Done!"

Young William dashed the sweat from his eyes, wiped his palms on his hips,
and fitted the sweeps again to the wooden tholes. Old Bob was as ready.
With an inarticulate cry they gave way.




X


DESPERATE MEASURES

Old Bob seemed something inclined toward optimism, when the boat lay
alongside a landing-stage at Woolwich, and Kirkwood had clambered ashore.

"Yer'll mebbe myke it," the waterman told him with a weatherwise survey of
the skies. "Wind's freshenin' from the east'rds, an' that'll 'old 'er back
a bit, sir."

"Arsk th' wye to th' Dorkyard Styshun," young William volunteered. "'Tis
th' shortest walk, sir. I 'opes yer catches 'er.... Thanky, sir."

He caught dextrously the sovereign which Kirkwood, in ungrudging
liberality, spared them of his store of two. The American nodded
acknowledgments and adieux, with a faded smile deprecating his chances of
winning the race, sorely handicapped as he was. He was very, very tired,
and in his heart suspected that he would fail. But, if he did, he would at
least be able to comfort himself that it was not for lack of trying. He
set his teeth on that covenant, in grim determination; either there was a
strain of the bulldog latent in the Kirkwood breed or else his infatuation
gripped him more strongly than he guessed.

Yet he suspected something of its power; he knew that this was altogether
an insane proceeding, and that the lure that led him on was Dorothy
Calendar. A strange dull light glowed in his weary eyes, on the thought of
her. He'd go through fire and water in her service. She was costing him
dear, perhaps was to cost him dearer still; and perhaps there'd be for
his guerdon no more than a "Thank you, Mr. Kirkwood!" at the end of the
passage. But that would be no less than his deserts; he was not to forget
that he was interfering unwarrantably; the girl was in her father's hands,
surely safe enough there--to the casual mind. If her partnership in her
parent's fortunes were distasteful, she endured it passively, without
complaint.

He decided that it was his duty to remind himself, from time to time,
that his main interest must be in the game itself, in the solution of
the riddle; whatever should befall, he must look for no reward for his
gratuitous and self-appointed part. Indeed he was all but successful in
persuading himself that it was the fascination of adventure alone that drew
him on.

Whatever the lure, it was inexorable; instead of doing as a sensible person
would have done--returning to London for a long rest in his hotel room, ere
striving to retrieve his shattered fortunes--Philip Kirkwood turned up the
village street, intent only to find the railway station and catch the first
available train for Sheerness, were that an early one or a late.

A hapchance native whom he presently encountered, furnished minute
directions for reaching the Dockyard Station of the Southeastern and
Chatham Rail-way, adding comfortable information to the effect that the
next east-bound train would pass through in ten minutes; if Kirkwood would
mend his pace he could make it easily, with time to spare.

Kirkwood mended his pace accordingly, but, contrary to the prediction, had
no time to spare at all. Even as he stormed the ticket-grating, the train
was thundering in at the platform. Therefore a nervous ticket agent passed
him out a first-class ticket instead of the third-class he had asked for;
and there was no time wherein to have the mistake rectified. Kirkwood
planked down the fare, swore, and sprinted for the carriages.

The first compartment whose door he jerked violently open, proved to be
occupied, and was, moreover, not a smoking-car. He received a fleeting
impression of a woman's startled eyes, staring into his own through a thin
mesh of veiling, fell off the running-board, slammed the door, and hurled
himself to-wards the next compartment. Here happier fortune attended upon
his desire; the box-like section was untenanted, and a notice blown upon
the window-glass announced that it was "2nd Class Smoking." Kirkwood
promptly tumbled in; and when he turned to shut the door the coaches were
moving.

A pipe helped him to bear up while the train was making its two other stops
in the Borough of Woolwich: a circumstance so maddening to a man in a
hurry, that it set Kirkwood's teeth on edge with sheer impatience, and
made him long fervently for the land of his birth, where they do things
differently--where the Board of Directors of a railway company doesn't
erect three substantial passenger depôts in the course of a mile and a half
of overgrown village. It consoled him little that none disputed with
him his lonely possession of the compartment, that he _had_ caught the
Sheerness train, or that he was really losing no time; a sense of deep
dejection had settled down upon his consciousness, with a realization of
how completely a fool's errand was this of his. He felt foredoomed to
failure; he was never to see Dorothy Calendar again; and his brain seemed
numb with disappointment.

Rattling and swaying, the train left the town behind.

Presently he put aside his pipe and stared blankly out at a reeling
landscape, the pleasant, homely, smiling countryside of Kent. A deeper
melancholy tinted his mind: Dorothy Calendar was for ever lost to him.

The trucks drummed it out persistently--he thought, vindictively:
"_Lost!... Lost!... For ever lost!..._"

And he had made--was then making--a damned fool of himself. The trucks had
no need to din _that_ into his thick skull by their ceaseless iteration; he
knew it, would not deny it....

And it was all his own fault. He'd had his chance, Calendar had offered him
it. If only he had closed with the fat adventurer!...

Before his eyes field and coppice, hedge and homestead, stream and flowing
highway, all blurred and ran streakily into one another, like a highly
impressionistic water-color. He could make neither head nor tail of the
flying views, and so far as coherent thought was concerned, he could not
put two ideas together. Without understanding distinctly, he presently did
a more wise and wholesome thing: which was to topple limply over on the
cushions and fall fast asleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

After a long time he seemed to realize rather hazily that the carriage-door
had been opened to admit somebody. Its smart closing _bang_ shocked him
awake. He sat up, blinking in confusion, hardly conscious of more, to begin
with, than that the train had paused and was again in full flight. Then,
his senses clearing, he became aware that his solitary companion, just
entered, was a woman. She was seated over across from him, her back to the
engine, in an attitude which somehow suggested a highly nonchalant frame of
mind. She laughed, and immediately her speaking voice was high and sweet in
his hearing.

"Really, you know, Mr. Kirkwood, I simply couldn't contain my impatience
another instant."

Kirkwood gasped and tried to re-collect his wits.

"Beg pardon--I've been asleep," he said stupidly.

"Yes. I'm sorry to have disturbed you, but, you know, you must make
allowances for a woman's nerves."

Beneath his breath the bewildered man said: "The deuce!" and above it, in a
stupefied tone: "Mrs. Hallam!"

She nodded in a not unfriendly fashion, smiling brightly. "Myself, Mr.
Kirkwood! Really, our predestined paths are badly tangled, just now; aren't
they? Were you surprised to find me in here, with you? Come now, confess
you were!"

He remarked the smooth, girlish freshness of her cheeks, the sense and
humor of her mouth, the veiled gleam of excitement in her eyes of the
changing sea; and saw, as well, that she was dressed for traveling,
sensibly but with an air, and had brought a small hand-bag with her.

"Surprised and delighted," he replied, recovering, with mendacity so
intentional and obvious that the woman laughed aloud.

"I knew you'd be!... You see, I had the carriage ahead, the one you didn't
take. I was so disappointed when you flung up to the door and away again!
You didn't see me hanging half out the window, to watch where you went, did
you? That's how I discovered that your discourtesy was unintentional, that
you hadn't recognized me,--by the fact that you took this compartment,
right behind my own."

She paused invitingly, but Kirkwood, grown wary, contented himself
with picking up his pipe and carefully knocking out the dottle on the
window-ledge.

"I was glad to see _you_," she affirmed; "but only partly because you
were you, Mr. Kirkwood. The other and major part was because sight of you
confirmed my own secret intuition. You see, I'm quite old enough and wise
enough to question even my own intuitions."

"A woman wise enough for that is an adult prodigy," he ventured cautiously.

"It's experience and age. I insist upon the age; I the mother of a
grown-up boy! So I deliberately ran after you, changing when we stopped
at Newington. You might've escaped me if I had waited until We got to
Queensborough."

Again she paused in open expectancy. Kirkwood, perplexed, put the pipe in
his pocket, and assumed a factitious look of resignation, regarding her
askance with that whimsical twist of his eyebrows.

"For you are going to Queensborough, aren't you, Mr. Kirkwood?"

"Queensborough?" he echoed blankly; and, in fact, he was at a loss to
follow her drift. "No, Mrs. Hallam; I'm not bound there."

Her surprise was apparent; she made no effort to conceal it. "But," she
faltered, "if not there--"

"'Give you my word, Mrs. Hallam, I have no intention whatever of going to
Queensborough," Kirkwood protested.

"I don't understand." The nervous drumming of a patent-leather covered
toe, visible beneath the hem of her dress, alone betrayed a rising tide of
impatience. "Then my intuition _was_ at fault!"

"In this instance, if it was at all concerned with my insignificant
affairs, yes--most decidedly at fault."

She shook her head, regarding him with grave suspicion. "I hardly know:
whether to believe you. I think...."

Kirkwood's countenance displayed an added shade of red. After a moment, "I
mean no discourtesy," he began stiffly, "but--"

"But you don't care a farthing whether I believe you or not?"

He caught her laughing eye, and smiled, the flush subsiding.

"Very well, then! Now let us see: Where _are_ you bound?"

Kirkwood looked out of the window.

"I'm convinced it's a rendezvous...?"

Kirkwood smiled patiently at the landscape.

"Is Dorothy Calendar so very, very beautiful, Mr. Kirkwood?"--with a trace
of malice.

Ostentatiously Kirkwood read the South Eastern and Chatham's framed card
of warning, posted just above Mrs. Hallam's head, to all such incurable
lunatics as are possessed of a desire to travel on the running-boards of
railway carriages.

"You are going to meet her, aren't you?"

He gracefully concealed a yawn.

The woman's plan of attack took another form. "Last night, when you told me
your story, I believed you."

He devoted himself to suppressing the temptingly obvious retort, and
succeeded; but though he left it unspoken, the humor of it twitched the
corners of his mouth; and Mrs. Hallam was observant. So that her next
attempt to draw him out was edged with temper.

"I believed you an American but a gentleman; it appears that, if you ever
were the latter, you've fallen so low that you willingly cast your lot with
thieves."

Having exhausted his repertoire of rudenesses, Kirkwood took to twiddling
his thumbs.

"I want to ask you if you think it fair to me or my son, to leave us in
ignorance of the place where you are to meet the thieves who stole our--my
son's jewels?"

"Mrs. Hallam," he said soberly, "if I am going to meet Mr. Calendar or Mr.
Mulready, I have no assurance of that fact."

There was only the briefest of pauses, during which she analyzed this;
then, quickly, "But you hope to?" she snapped.

He felt that the only adequate retort to this would be a shrug of his
shoulders; doubted his ability to carry one off; and again took refuge in
silence.

The woman abandoned a second plan of siege, with a readiness that did
credit to her knowledge of mankind. She thought out the next very
carefully, before opening with a masked battery.

"Mr. Kirkwood, can't we be friends--this aside?"

"Nothing could please me more, Mrs. Hallam!"

"I'm sorry if I've annoyed you--"

"And I, too, have been rude."

"Last night, when you cut away so suddenly, you prevented my making you a
proposal, a sort of a business proposition...."

"Yes--?"

"To come over to our side--"

"I thought so. That was why I went."

"Yes; I understood. But this morning, when you've had time to think it
over--?"

"I have no choice in the matter, Mrs. Hallam." The green eyes darkened
ominously. "You mean--I am to understand, then, that you're against us,
that you prefer to side with swindlers and scoundrels, all because of a--"

She discovered him eying her with a smile of such inscrutable and sardonic
intelligence, that the words died on her lips, and she crimsoned,
treasonably to herself. For he saw it; and the belief he had conceived
while attending to her tissue of fabrication, earlier that morning, was
strengthened to the point of conviction that, if anything had been stolen
by anybody, Mrs. Hallam and her son owned it as little as Calendar.

As for the woman, she felt she had steadily lost, rather than gained,
ground; and the flash of anger that had colored her cheeks, lit twin
beacons in her eyes, which she resolutely fought down until they faded to
mere gleams of resentment and determination. But she forgot to control
her lips; and they are the truest indices to a woman's character and
temperament; and Kirkwood did not overlook the circumstance that their
specious sweetness had vanished, leaving them straight, set and hard, quite
the reverse of attractive.

"So," she said slowly, after a silent time, "you are not for Queensborough!
The corollary of that _admission_, Mr. Kirkwood, is that you are for
Sheerness."

"I believe," he replied wearily, "that there are no other stations on this
line, after Newington."

"It follows, then, that--that I follow." And in answer to his perturbed
glance, she added: "Oh, I'll grant that intuition is sometimes a poor
guide. But if you meet George Calendar, so shall I. Nothing can prevent
that. You can't hinder me."

Considerably amused, he chuckled. "Let us talk of other things, Mrs.
Hallam," he suggested pleasantly. "How is your son?"

At this juncture the brakes began to shriek and grind upon the wheels.
The train slowed; it stopped; and the voice of a guard could be heard
admonishing passengers for Queensborough Pier to alight and take the branch
line. In the noise the woman's response was drowned, and Kirkwood was
hardly enough concerned for poor Freddie to repeat his question.

When, after a little, the train pulled out of the junction, neither found
reason to resume the conversation. During the brief balance of the journey
Mrs. Hallam presumably had food for thought; she frowned, pursed her lips,
and with one daintily gloved forefinger followed a seam of her tailored
skirt; while Kirkwood sat watching and wondering how to rid himself of her,
if she proved really as troublesome as she threatened to be.

Also, he wondered continually what it was all about. Why did Mrs. Hallam
suspect him of designing to meet Calendar at Queensborough? Had she
any tangible ground for believing that Calendar could be found in
Queensborough? Presumably she had, since she was avowedly in pursuit of
that gentleman, and, Kirkwood inferred, had booked for Queensborough.
Was he, then, running away from Calendar and his daughter to chase a
will-o'-the-wisp of his credulous fancy, off Sheerness shore?

Disturbing reflection. He scowled over it, then considered the other side
of the face. Presuming Mrs. Hallam to have had reasonably dependable
assurance that Calendar would stop in Queensborough, would she so readily
have abandoned her design to catch him there, on the mere supposition that
Kirkwood might be looking for him in Sheerness? That did not seem likely
to one who esteemed Mrs. Hallam's acumen as highly as Kirkwood did. He
brightened up, forgot that his was a fool's errand, and began again to
project strategic plans into a problematic future.

A sudden jolt interrupted this pastime, and the warning screech of the
brakes informed that he had no time to scheme, but had best continue on the
plan of action that had brought him thus far--that is, trust to his star
and accept what should befall without repining.

He rose, opened the door, and holding it so, turned.

"I regret, Mrs. Hallam," he announced, smiling his crooked smile, "that
a pressing engagement is about to prohibit my 'squiring you through the
ticket-gates. You understand, I'm sure."

His irrepressible humor proved infectious; and Mrs. Hallam's spirit ran as
high as his own. She was smiling cheerfully when she, too, rose.

"I also am in some haste," she averred demurely, gathering up her hand-bag
and umbrella.

A raised platform shot in beside the carriage, and the speed was so
sensibly moderated that the train seemed to be creeping rather than
running. Kirkwood flung the door wide open and lowered himself to the
running-board. The end of the track was in sight and--a man who has been
trained to board San Francisco cable-cars fears to alight from no moving
vehicle. He swung off, got his balance, and ran swiftly down the platform.

A cry from a bystander caused him to glance over his shoulder; Mrs. Hallam
was then in the act of alighting. As he looked the flurry of skirts
subsided and she fell into stride, pursuing.

Sleepy Sheerness must have been scandalized, that day, and its gossips have
acquired ground for many, an uncharitable surmise.

Kirkwood, however, was so fortunate as to gain the wicket before the
employee there awoke to the situation. Otherwise, such is the temper of
British petty officialdom, he might have detained the fugitive. As it was,
Kirkwood surrendered his ticket and ran out into the street with his luck
still a dominant factor in the race. For, looking back, he saw that Mrs.
Hallam had been held up at the gate, another victim of British red-tape;
her ticket read for Queensborough, she was attempting to alight one station
farther down the line, and while undoubtedly she was anxious to pay the
excess fare, Heaven alone knew when she would succeed in allaying the
suspicions and resentment of the ticket-taker.

"That's good for ten minutes' start!" Kirkwood crowed. "And it never
occurred to me--!"

Before the station he found two hacks in waiting, with little to choose
between them; neither was of a type that did not seem to advertise its
pre-Victorian fashioning, and to neither was harnessed an animal that
deserved anything but the epithet of screw. Kirkwood took the nearest for
no other reason than because it was the nearest, and all but startled the
driver off his box by offering double-fare for a brisk pace and a simple
service at the end of the ride. Succinctly he set forth his wants, jumped
into the antiquated four-wheeler, and threw himself down upon musty, dusty
cushions to hug himself over the joke and bless whatever English board of
railway, directors it was that first ordained that tickets should be taken
up at the end instead of the outset of a journey.

It was promptly made manifest that he had further cause for gratulation.
The cabby, recovering from his amazement, was plying an indefatigable whip
and thereby eliciting a degree of speed from his superannuated nag, that
his fare had by no means hoped for, much less anticipated. The cab rocked
and racketed through Sheerness' streets at a pace which is believed to be
unprecedented and unrivaled; its passenger, dashed from side to side, had
all he could do to keep from battering the vehicle to pieces with his head;
while it was entirely out of the question to attempt to determine whether
or not he was being pursued. He enjoyed it all hugely.

In a period of time surprisingly short, he saw, from fleeting glimpses of
the scenery to be obtained through the reeling windows, that they were
threading the outskirts of the town; synchronously, whether by design or
through actual inability to maintain it, the speed was moderated. And in
the course of a few more minutes the cab stopped definitely.

Kirkwood clambered painfully out, shook himself together and the bruises
out of his bones, and looked fearfully back.

Aside from a slowly settling cloud of dust, the road ran clear as far as he
could see--to the point, in fact, where the town closed in about it.

He had won; at all events in so much as to win meant eluding the
persevering Mrs. Hallam. But to what end?

Abstractedly he tendered his lonely sovereign to the driver, and without
even looking at it, crammed the heavy weight of change into his pocket; an
oversight which not only won him the awe-struck admiration of the cabby,
but entailed consequences (it may be) he little apprehended. It was with an
absentminded nod that he acquiesced in the man's announcement that he might
arrange about the boat for him. Accordingly the cabby disappeared; and
Kirkwood continued to stare about him, eagerly, hopefully.

He stood on the brink of the Thames estuary, there a possible five miles
from shore to shore; from his feet, almost, a broad shingle beach sloped
gently to the water.

On one hand a dilapidated picket-fence enclosed the door-yard of a
fisherman's cottage, or, better, hovel,--if it need be accurately
described--at the door of which the cabby was knocking.

The morning was now well-advanced. The sun rode high, a sphere of tarnished
flame in a void of silver-gray, its thin cold radiance striking pallid
sparks from the leaping crests of wind-whipped waves. In the east a wall
of vapor, dull and lusterless, had taken body since the dawn, masking the
skies and shutting down upon the sea like some vast curtain; and out of the
heart of this a bitter and vicious wind played like a sword.

To the north, Shoeburyness loomed vaguely, like a low-drifted bank of
cloud. Off to the right the Nore Lightship danced, a tiny fleck of warm
crimson in a wilderness of slatey-blue waters, plumed with a myriad of
vanishing white-caps.

Up the shelving shore, small, puny wavelets dashed in impotent fury, and
the shingle sang unceasingly its dreary, syncopated monotone. High and dry,
a few dingy boats lay canted wearily upon their broad, swelling sides,--a
couple of dories, apparently in daily use; a small sloop yacht, dismantled
and plainly beyond repair; and an oyster-smack also out of commission.
About them the beach was strewn with a litter of miscellany,--nets, oars,
cork buoys, bits of wreckage and driftwood, a few fish too long forgotten
and (one assumed) responsible in part for the foreign wealth of the
atmosphere.

Some little distance offshore a fishing-boat, catrigged and not more than
twenty-feet over all, swung bobbing at her mooring, keen nose searching
into the wind; at sight of which Kirkwood gave thanks, for his adventitious
guide had served him well, if that boat were to be hired by any manner of
persuasion.

But it was to the farther reaches of the estuary that he gave more
prolonged and most anxious heed, scanning narrowly what shipping was there
to be seen. Far beyond the lightship a liner was riding the waves with
serene contempt, making for the river's mouth and Tilbury Dock. Nearer
in, a cargo boat was standing out upon the long trail, the white of riven
waters showing clearly against her unclean freeboard. Out to east a little
covey of fishing-smacks, red sails well reefed, were scudding before
the wind like strange affrighted water-fowl, and bearing down past a
heavy-laden river barge. The latter, with tarpaulin battened snugly down
over the cockpit and the seas dashing over her wash-board until she seemed
under water half the time, was forging stodgily Londonwards, her bargee at
the tiller smoking a placid pipe.

But a single sailing vessel of any notable tonnage was in sight; and when
he saw her Kirkwood's heart became buoyant with hope, and he began to
tremble with nervous eagerness. For he believed her to be the _Alethea_.

There's no mistaking a ship brigantine-rigged for any other style of craft
that sails the seas.

From her position when first he saw her, Kirkwood could have fancied she
was tacking out of the mouth of the Medway; but he judged that, leaving the
Thames' mouth, she had tacked to starboard until well-nigh within hail of
Sheerness. Now, having presumably, gone about, she was standing out toward
the Nore, boring doggedly into the wind. He would have given a deal for
glasses wherewith to read the name upon her bows, but was sensible of no
hampering doubts; nor, had he harbored any, would they have deterred him.
He had set his heart upon the winning of his venture, had come too far,
risked far too much, to suffer anything now to stay his hand and stand
between him and Dorothy Calendar. Whatever the further risks and hazards,
though he should take his life in his hands to win to her side, he would
struggle on. He recked nothing of personal danger; a less selfish passion
ran molten in his veins, moving him to madness.

Fascinated, he fixed his gaze upon the reeling brigantine, and for a space
it was as if by longing he had projected his spirit to her slanting deck,
and were there, pleading his case with the mistress of his heart....

Voices approaching brought him back to shore. He turned, resuming his mask
of sanity, the better to confer with the owner of the cottage and boats--a
heavy, keen-eyed fellow, ungracious and truculent of habit, and chary of
his words; as he promptly demonstrated.

"I'll hire your boat," Kirkwood told him, "to put me aboard that
brigantine, off to leeward. We ought to start at once."

The fisherman shifted his quid of tobacco from cheek to cheek, grunted
inarticulately, and swung deliberately on his heel, displaying a bull neck
above a pair of heavy shoulders.

"Dirty weather," he croaked, facing back from his survey of the eastern
skies before the American found out whether or not he should resent his
insolence.

"How much?" Kirkwood demanded curtly, annoyed.

The man hesitated, scowling blackly at the heeling vessel, momentarily
increasing her distance from shore. Then with a crafty smile, "Two pound',"
he declared.

The American nodded. "Very well," he agreed simply. "Get out your boat."

The fisherman turned away to shamble noisily over the shingle, huge booted
heels crunching, toward one of the dories. To this he set his shoulder,
shoving it steadily down the beach until only the stern was dry.

Kirkwood looked back, for the last time, up the road to Sheerness. Nothing
moved upon it. He was rid of Mrs. Hallam, if face to face with a sterner
problem. He had a few pence over ten shillings in his pocket, and had
promised to pay the man four times as much. He would have agreed to ten
times the sum demanded; for the boat he must and would have. But he had
neglected to conclude his bargain, to come to an understanding as to
the method of payment; and he felt more than a little dubious as to the
reception the fisherman would give his proposition, sound as he, Kirkwood,
knew it to be.

In the background the cabby loitered, gnawed by insatiable curiosity.

The fisherman turned, calling over his shoulder: "If ye'd catch yon vessel,
come!"

With one final twinge of doubt--the task of placating this surly dog was
anything but inviting--the American strode to the boat and climbed in,
taking the stern seat. The fisherman shoved off, wading out thigh-deep in
the spiteful waves, then threw himself in over the gunwales and shipped the
oars. Bows swinging offshore, rocking and dancing, the dory began to forge
slowly toward the anchored boat. In their faces the wind beat gustily, and
small, slapping waves, breaking against the sides, showered them with fine
spray....

In time the dory lay alongside the cat-boat, the fisherman with a gnarled
hand grasping the latter's gunwale to hold the two together. With some
difficulty Kirkwood transhipped himself, landing asprawl in the cockpit,
amid a tangle of cordage slippery with scales. The skipper followed, with
clumsy expertness bringing the dory's painter with him and hitching it to a
ring-bolt abaft the rudder-head. Then, pausing an instant to stare into the
East with somber eyes, he shipped the tiller and bent to the halyards. As
the sail rattled up, flapping wildly, Kirkwood marked with relief--for it
meant so much time saved--that it was already close reefed.

But when at least the boom was thrashing overhead and the halyards had
been made fast to their cleats, the fisherman again stood erect, peering
distrustfully at the distant wall of cloud.

Then, in two breaths: "Can't do it," he decided; "not at the price."

"Why?" Kirkwood stared despairingly after the brigantine, that was already
drawn far ahead.

"Danger," growled the fellow, "--wind."

At a loss completely, Kirkwood found no words. He dropped his head,
considering.

"Not at the price," the sullen voice iterated; and he looked up to find the
cunning gaze upon him.

"How much, then?"

"Five poun' I'll have--no less, for riskin' my life this day."

"Impossible. I haven't got it."

In silence the man unshipped the tiller and moved toward the cleats.

"Hold on a minute."

Kirkwood unbuttoned his coat and, freeing the chain from his waistcoat
buttonholes, removed his watch.... As well abandon them altogether; he had
designed to leave them as security for the two pounds, and had delayed
stating the terms only for fear lest they be refused. Now, too late as
ever, he recognized his error. But surely, he thought, it should be
apparent even to that low intelligence that the timepiece alone was worth
more than the boat itself.

"Will you take these?" he offered. "Take and keep them--only set me aboard
that ship!"

Deliberately the fisherman weighed the watch and chain in his broad, hard
palm, eyes narrowing to mere slits in his bronzed mask.

"How much?" he asked slowly.

"Eighty pounds, together; the chain alone cost me twenty."

The shifty, covetous eyes ranged from the treasure in his hand to the
threatening east. A puff of wind caught the sail and sent the boom
athwartships, like a mighty flail. Both men ducked instinctively, to escape
a braining.

"How do I know?" objected the skipper.

"I'm telling you. If you've got eyes, you can see," retorted Kirkwood
savagely, seeing that he had erred in telling the truth; the amount he had
named was too great to be grasped at once by this crude, cupidous brain.

"How do I know?" the man repeated. Nevertheless he dropped watch and chain
into his pocket, then with a meaning grimace extended again his horny,
greedy palm.

"What...?"

"Hand over th' two pound' and we'll go."

"I'll see you damned first!"

A flush of rage blinded the young man. The knowledge that the _Alethea_
was minute by minute slipping beyond his reach seemed to madden him.
White-lipped and ominously quiet he rose from his seat on the combing, as,
without answer, the fisherman, crawling out on the overhand, began to haul
in the dory.

"Ashore ye go," he pronounced his ultimatum, motioning Kirkwood to enter
the boat.

The American turned, looking for the _Alethea_, or for the vessel that he
believed bore that name. She was nearing the light-ship when he found
her, and as he looked a squall blurred the air between them, blotting
the brigantine out with a smudge of rain. The effect was as if she had
vanished, as if she were for ever snatched from his grasp; and with Dorothy
aboard her--Heaven alone knew in what need of him!

Mute and blind with despair and wrath, he turned upon the man and caught
him by the collar, forcing him out over the lip of the overhang. They were
unevenly matched, Kirkwood far the slighter, but strength came to him in
the crisis, physical strength and address such as he had not dreamed was at
his command. And the surprise of his onslaught proved an ally of unguessed
potency. Before he himself knew it he was standing on the overhang and had
shifted his hold to seize the fellow about the waist; then, lifting him
clear of the deck, and aided by a lurch of the cat-boat, he cast him
bodily into the dory. The man, falling, struck his head against one of the
thwarts, a glancing blow that stunned him temporarily. Kirkwood himself
dropped as if shot, a trailing reef-point slapping his cheek until it stung
as the boom thrashed overhead. It was as close a call as he had known; the
knowledge sickened him a little.

Without rising he worked the painter loose and cast the dory adrift; then
crawled back into the cockpit. No pang of compassion disturbed him as he
abandoned the fisherman to the mercy of the sea; though the fellow lay
still, uncouthly distorted, in the bottom of the dory, he was in no danger;
the wind and waves together would carry the boat ashore.... For that
matter, the man was even then recovering, struggling to sit up.

Crouching to avoid the boom, Kirkwood went forward to the bows, and,
grasping the mooring cable, drew it in, slipping back into the cockpit to
get a stronger purchase with his feet. It was a struggle; the boat pulled
sluggishly against the wind, the cable inching in jealously. And behind
him he could hear a voice bellowing inarticulate menaces, and knew that in
another moment the fisherman would be at his oars.

Frantically he tugged and tore at the slimy rope, hauling with a will and a
prayer. It gave more readily, towards the end, but he seemed to have fought
with it for ages when at last the anchor tripped and he got it in.

Immediately he leaped back to the stern, fitted in the tiller, and seizing
the mainsheet, drew the boom in till the wind should catch in the canvas.
In the dory the skipper, bending at his oars, was not two yards astern.

He was hard aboard when, the sail filling with a bang, Kirkwood pulled the
tiller up; and the cat-boat slid away, a dozen feet separating them in a
breath.

A yell of rage boomed down the wind, but he paid no heed. Careless alike of
the dangers he had passed and those that yawned before him, he trimmed
the sheet and stood away on the port tack, heading directly for the Nore
Lightship.




XI


OFF THE NORE

Kirkwood's anger cooled apace; at worst it had been a flare of
passion--incandescent. It was seldom more. His brain clearing, the
temperature of his judgment quickly regained its mean, and he saw his
chances without distortion, weighed them without exaggeration.

Leaning against the combing, feet braced upon the slippery and treacherous
deck, he clung to tiller and mainsheet and peered ahead with anxious eyes,
a pucker of daring graven deep between his brows.

A mile to westward, three or more ahead, he could see the brigantine
standing close in under the Essex shore. At times she was invisible; again
he could catch merely the glint of her canvas, white against the dark loom
of the littoral, toned by a mist of flying spindrift. He strained his eyes,
watching for the chance which would take place in the rake of her masts and
sails, when she should come about.

For the longer that manoeuver was deferred, the better was his chance of
attaining his object. It was a forlorn hope. But in time the brigantine,
to escape Maplin Sands, would be forced to tack and stand out past the
lightship, the wind off her port bows. Then their courses would intersect.
It remained to be demonstrated whether the cat-boat was speedy enough to
arrive at this point of contact in advance of, or simultaneously with, the
larger vessel. Every minute that the putative _Alethea_ put off coming
about brought the cat-boat nearer that goal, but Kirkwood could do no more
than hope and try to trust in the fisherman's implied admission that it
could be done. It was all in the boat and the way she handled.

He watched her anxiously, quick to approve her merits as she displayed
them. He had sailed small craft before--frail center-board cat-boats, handy
and swift, built to serve in summer winds and protected waters: never such
an one as this. Yet he liked her.

Deep bosomed she was, with no center-board, dependent on her draught and
heavy keel to hold her on the wind; stanch and seaworthy, sheathed with
stout plank and ribbed with seasoned timber, designed to keep afloat in
the wickedest weather brewed by the foul-tempered German Ocean. Withal her
lines were fine and clean; for all her beam she was calculated to nose
narrowly into the wind and make a pretty pace as well. A good boat: he had
the grace to give the credit to his luck.

Her disposition was more fully disclosed as they drew away from the beach.
Inshore with shoaling water, the waves had been choppy and spiteful but
lacking force of weight. Farther out, as the bottom fell away, the rollers
became more uniform and powerful; heavy sweeping seas met the cat-boat,
from their hollows looming mountainous to the man in the tiny cockpit; who
was nevertheless aware that to a steamer they would be negligible.

His boat breasted them gallantly, toiling sturdily up the steep
acclivities, poising breathlessly on foam-crested summits for dizzy
instants, then plunging headlong down the deep green swales; and left a
boiling wake behind her,--urging ever onward, hugging the wind in her wisp
of blood-red sail, and boring into it, pulling at the tiller with the
mettle of a race-horse slugging at the bit.

Offshore, too, the wind stormed with added strength, or, possibly, had
freshened. For minutes on end the leeward gunwales would run green, and now
and again the screaming, pelting squalls that scoured the estuary would
heel her over until the water cascaded in over the lee combing, and the
rudder, lifted clear, would hang idle until, smitten by some racing billow,
the tiller would be all but torn from Kirkwood's hands. Again and again
this happened; and those were times of trembling. But always the cat-boat
righted, shaking the clinging waters from her and swinging her stem into
the wind again; and there would follow an abbreviated breathing spell,
during which Kirkwood was at liberty to dash the salt spray from his eyes
and search the wind-harried waste for the brigantine. Sometimes he found
her, sometimes not.

Long after he had expected her to, she went about and they began to close
in upon each other. He could see that even with shortened canvas she was
staggering drunkenly under the fierce impacts of the wind. For himself, it
was nip-and-tuck, now, and no man in his normal sense would have risked a
sixpence on the boat's chance to live until she crossed the brigantine's
bows.

Time out of reckoning he was forced to kneel in the swimming cockpit,
steering with one hand, using the bailing-dish with the other, and
keeping his eyes religiously turned to the bellying patch of sail. It was
heartbreaking toil; he began reluctantly to concede that it could not last
much longer. And if he missed the brigantine he would be lost; mortal
strength was not enough to stand the unending strain upon every bone,
muscle and sinew, required to keep the boat upon her course; though for
a time it might cope with and solve the problems presented by each new,
malignant billow and each furious, howling squall, the end inevitably must
be failure. To struggle on would be but to postpone the certain end ...
save and except the possibility of his gaining the brigantine within the
period of time strictly and briefly limited by his powers of endurance.

Long since he had become numb with cold from incessant drenchings of
icy spray, that piled in over the windward counter, keeping the bottom
ankle-deep regardless of his laborious but intermittent efforts with the
bailing dish. And the two, brigantine and cockle-shell, were drawing
together with appalling deliberation.

A dozen times he was on the point of surrender, as often plucked up hope;
as the minutes wore on and he kept above water, he began to believe that if
he could stick it out his judgment and seamanship would be justified ...
though human ingenuity backed by generosity could by no means contrive
adequate excuse for his foolhardiness.

But that was aside, something irreparable. Wan and grim, he fought it out.

But that his voice stuck in his parched throat, he could have shouted in
his elation, when eventually he gained the point of intersection an eighth
of a mile ahead of the brigantine and got sight of her windward freeboard
as, most slowly, the cat-boat forged across her course.

For all that, the moment of his actual triumph was not yet; he had still to
carry off successfully a scheme that for sheer audacity of conception and
contempt for danger, transcended all that had gone before.

Holding the cat-boat on for a time, he brought her about handsomely a
little way beyond the brigantine's course, and hung in the eye of the wind,
the leach flapping and tightening with reports like rifle-shots, and
the water sloshing about his calves--bailing-dish now altogether out of
mind--while he watched the oncoming vessel, his eyes glistening with
anticipation.

She was footing it smartly, the brigantine--lying down to it and snoring
into the wind. Beneath her stem waves broke in snow-white showers, whiter
than the canvas of her bulging jib--broke and, gnashing their teeth in
impotent fury, swirled and eddied down her sleek dark flanks. Bobbing,
courtesying, she plunged onward, shortening the interval with mighty,
leaping bounds. On her bows, with each instant, the golden letters of her
name grew larger and more legible until--_Alethea_!--he could read it plain
beyond dispute.

Joy welled in his heart. He forgot all that he had undergone in the
prospect of what he proposed still to do in the name of the only woman the
world held for him. Unquestioning he had come thus far in her service;
unquestioning, by her side, he was prepared to go still farther, though all
humanity should single her out with accusing fingers....

They were watching him, aboard the brigantine; he could see a line of heads
above her windward rail. Perhaps _she_ was of their number. He waved
an audacious hand. Some one replied, a great shout shattering itself
unintelligibly against the gale. He neither understood nor attempted to
reply; his every faculty was concentrated on the supreme moment now at
hand.

Calculating the instant to a nicety, he paid off the sheet and pulled up
the tiller. The cat-boat pivoted on her heel; with a crack her sail flapped
full and rigid; then, with the untempered might of the wind behind her, she
shot like an arrow under the brigantine's bows, so close that the bowsprit
of the latter first threatened to impale the sail, next, the bows plunging,
crashed down a bare two feet behind the cat-boat's stern.

Working in a frenzy of haste, Kirkwood jammed the tiller hard alee,
bringing the cat about, and, trimming the mainsheet as best he might, found
himself racing under the brigantine's leeward quarter,--water pouring in
generously over the cat's.

Luffing, he edged nearer, handling his craft as though intending to ram the
larger vessel, foot by foot shortening the little interval. When it
was four feet, he would risk the jump; he crawled out on the overhang,
crouching on his toes, one hand light upon the tiller, the other touching
the deck, ready ... ready....

Abruptly the _Alethea_ shut off the wind; the sail flattened and the cat
dropped back. In a second the distance had doubled. In anguish Kirkwood
uttered an exceeding bitter cry. Already he was falling far off her
counter....

A shout reached him. He was dimly conscious of a dark object hurtling
through the air. Into the cockpit, splashing, something dropped--a coil of
rope. He fell forward upon it, into water eighteen inches deep; and for the
first time realized that, but for that line, he had gone to his drowning in
another minute. The cat was sinking.

As he scrambled to his feet, clutching the life-line, a heavy wave washed
over the water-logged craft and left it all but submerged; and a smart tug
on the rope added point to the advice which, reaching his ears in a bellow
like a bull's, penetrated the panic of his wits.

"Jump! _Jump, you fool_!"

In an instant of coherence he saw that the brigantine was luffing; none the
less much of the line had already been paid out, and there was no reckoning
when the end would be reached. Without time to make it fast, he hitched it
twice round his waist and chest, once round an arm, and, grasping it above
his head to ease its constriction when the tug should come, leaped on the
combing and overboard. A green roaring avalanche swept down upon him and
the luckless cat-boat, overwhelming both simultaneously.

The agony that was his during the next few minutes can by no means be
exaggerated. With such crises the human mind is not fitted adequately
to cope; it retains no record of the supreme moment beyond a vague and
incoherent impression of poignant, soul-racking suffering. Kirkwood
underwent a prolonged interval of semi-sentience, his mind dominated
and oppressed by a deathly fear of drowning and a deadening sense of
suffocation, with attendant tortures as of being broken on the wheel--limb
rending from limb; of compression of his ribs that threatened momentarily
to crush in his chest; of a world a-welter with dim swirling green
half-lights alternating with flashes of blinding white; of thunderings in
his ears like salvoes from a thousand cannon....

And his senses were blotted out in blackness....

Then he was breathing once more, the keen clean air stabbing his lungs, the
while he swam unsupported in an ethereal void of brilliance. His mouth
was full of something that burned, a liquid hot, acrid, and stinging. He
gulped, swallowed, slobbered, choked, coughed, attempted to sit up, was
aware that he was the focal center of a ring of glaring, burning eyes, like
eyes of ravening beasts; and fainted.

His next conscious impression was of standing up, supported by friendly
arms on either side, while somebody was asking him if he could walk a step
or two.

He lifted his head and let it fall in token of assent, mumbling a yes; and
looked round him with eyes wherein the light of intelligence burned more
clear with every second. By degrees he catalogued and comprehended his
weirdly altered circumstances and surroundings.

He was partly seated, partly held up, on the edge of the cabin sky-light,
an object of interest to some half-dozen men, seafaring fellows all, by
their habit, clustered round between him and the windward rail. Of their
number one stood directly before him, dwarfing his companions as much by
his air of command as by his uncommon height: tall, thin-faced and sallow,
with hollow weather-worn cheeks, a mouth like a crooked gash from ear to
ear, and eyes like dying coals, with which he looked the rescued up and
down in one grim, semi-humorous, semi-speculative glance. In hands both
huge and red he fondled tenderly a squat brandy flask whose contents had
apparently been employed as a first aid to the drowning.

As Kirkwood's gaze encountered his, the man smiled sourly, jerking his head
to one side with a singularly derisive air.

"Hi, matey!" he blustered. "'Ow goes it now? Feelin' 'appier, eigh?"

[Illustration: "Hi, matey!" he blustered. "'Ow goes it now?"]

"Some, thank you ... more like a drowned rat." Kirkwood eyed him
sheepishly. "I suppose you're the man who threw me that line? I'll have to
wait till my head clears up before I can thank you properly."

"Don't mention it." He of the lantern jaws stowed the bottle away with
jealous care in one of his immense coat pockets, and seized Kirkwood's
hand in a grasp that made the young man wince. "You're syfe enough now.
My nyme's Stryker, Capt'n Wilyum Stryker.... Wot's the row? Lookin' for a
friend?" he demanded suddenly, as Kirkwood's attention wandered.

For the memory of the errand that had brought him into the hands of Captain
William Stryker had come to the young man very suddenly; and his eager eyes
were swiftly roving not along the decks but the wide world besides, for
sight or sign of his heart's desire.

After luffing to pick him up, the brigantine had been again pulled off on
the port tack. The fury of the gale seemed rather to have waxed than waned,
and the _Alethea_ was bending low under the relentless fury of its blasts,
driving hard, with leeward channels awash. Under her port counter, a mile
away, the crimson light-ship wallowed in a riot of breaking combers.
Sheerness lay abeam, five miles or more. Ahead the northeast headland
of the Isle of Sheppey was bulking large and near. The cat-boat had
vanished....

More important still, no one aboard the brigantine resembled in the
remotest degree either of the Calendars, father or daughter, or even
Mulready, the black-avised.

"I sye, 're you lookin' for some one you know?"

"Yes--your passengers. I presume they're below--?"

"Passengers!"

A hush fell upon the group, during which Kirkwood sought Stryker's eye in
pitiful pleading; and Stryker looked round him blankly.

"Where's Miss Calendar?" the young man demanded sharply. "I must see her at
once!"

The keen and deep-set eyes of the skipper clouded as they returned to
Kirkwood's perturbed countenance. "Wot're you talking about?" he demanded
brusquely.

"I must see Miss Calendar, or Calendar himself, or Mulready." Kirkwood
paused, and, getting no reply, grew restive under Stryker's inscrutable
regard.

"That's why I came aboard," he amended, blind to the absurdity of the
statement; "to see--er--Calendar."

"Well ... I'm damned!"

Stryker managed to infuse into his tone a deal of suspicious contempt.

"Why?" insisted Kirkwood, nettled but still uncomprehending.

"D'you mean to tell me you came off from--wherever in 'ell you did come
from--intendin' to board this wessel and find a party nymed Calendar?"

"Certainly I did. Why--?"

"Well!" cried Mr. Stryker, rubbing his hands together with an air
oppressively obsequious, "I'm sorry to _hin_-form you you've come to the
wrong shop, sir; we don't stock no Calendars. We're in the 'ardware line,
we are. You might try next door, or I dessay you'll find what you want at
the stytioner's, round the corner."

A giggle from his audience stimulated him. "If," he continued acidly,
"I'd a-guessed you was such a damn' fool, blimmy if I wouldn't've let you
drownd!"

Staggered, Kirkwood bore his sarcastic truculence without resentment.

"Calendar," he stammered, trying to explain, "Calendar _said_--"

"I carn't 'elp wot Calendar said. Mebbe 'e _did_ myke an engygement with
you, an' you've gone and went an' forgot the dyte. Mebbe it's larst year's
calendar you're thinkin' of. You Johnny" (to a lout of a boy in the group
of seamen), "you run an' fetch this gentleman Whitaker's for Nineteen-six.
Look sharp, now!"

"But--!" With an effort Kirkwood mustered up a show of dignity. "Am I to
understand," he said, as calmly as he could, "that you deny knowing George
B. Calendar and his daughter Dorothy and--"

"I don't 'ave to. Listen to me, young man." For the time the fellow
discarded his clumsy facetiousness. "I'm Wilyum Stryker, Capt'n Stryker,
marster and 'arf-owner of this wessel, and wot I says 'ere is law. We don't
carry no passengers. D'ye understand me?"--aggressively. "There ain't no
pusson nymed Calendar aboard the _Allytheer_, an' never was, an' never will
be!"

"What name did you say?" Kirkwood inquired.

"This ship? The _Allytheer_; registered from Liverpool; bound from London
to Hantwerp, in cargo. Anythink else?"

Kirkwood shook his head, turning to scan the seascape with a gloomy
gaze. As he did so, and remarked how close upon the Sheppey headland the
brigantine had drawn, the order was given to go about. For the moment he
was left alone, wretchedly wet, shivering, wan and shrunken visibly with
the knowledge that he had dared greatly for nothing. But for the necessity
of keeping up before Stryker and his crew, the young man felt that he could
gladly have broken down and wept for sheer vexation and disappointment.

Smartly the brigantine luffed and wore about, heeling deep as she spun away
on the starboard tack.

Kirkwood staggered round the skylight to the windward rail. From this
position, looking forward, he could see that they were heading for the open
sea, Foulness low over the port quarter, naught before them but a brawling
waste of leaden-green and dirty white. Far out one of the sidewheel boats
of the Queensborough-Antwerp line was heading directly into the wind and
making heavy weather of it.

Some little while later, Stryker again approached him, perhaps swayed by an
unaccustomed impulse of compassion; which, however, he artfully concealed.
Blandly ironic, returning to his impersonation of the shopkeeper, "Nothink
else we can show you, sir?" he inquired.

"I presume you couldn't put me ashore?" Kirkwood replied ingenuously.

In supreme disgust the captain showed him his back. "'Ere, you!" he called
to one of the crew. "Tyke this awye--tyke 'im below and put 'im to bed;
give 'im a drink and dry 'is clo's. Mebbe 'e'll be better when 'e wykes up.
'E don't talk sense now, that's sure. If you arsk me, I sye 'e's balmy and
no 'ope for 'im."




XII


PICARESQUE PASSAGES

Contradictory to the hopeful prognosis of Captain Stryker, his unaccredited
passenger was not "better" when, after a period of oblivious rest
indefinite in duration, he awoke. His subsequent assumption of listless
resignation, of pacific acquiescence in the dictates of his destiny, was
purely deceptive--thin ice of despair over profound depths of exasperated
rebellion.

Blank darkness enveloped him when first he opened eyes to wonder. Then
gradually as he stared, piecing together unassorted memories and striving
to quicken drowsy wits, he became aware of a glimmer that waxed and waned,
a bar of pale bluish light striking across the gloom above his couch; and
by dint of puzzling divined that this had access by a port. Turning his
head upon a stiff and unyielding pillow, he could discern a streak of
saffron light lining the sill of a doorway, near by his side. The one
phenomenon taken with the other confirmed a theretofore somewhat hazy
impression that his dreams were dignified by a foundation of fact; that, in
brief, he was occupying a cabin-bunk aboard the good ship _Alethea_.

Overhead, on the deck, a heavy thumping of hurrying feet awoke him to
keener perceptiveness.

Judging from the incessant rolling and pitching of the brigantine, the
crashing thunder of seas upon her sides, the eldrich shrieking of the gale,
as well as from the chorused groans and plaints of each individual bolt
and timber in the frail fabric that housed his fortunes, the wind had
strengthened materially during his hours of forgetfulness--however many the
latter might have been.

He believed, however, that he had slept long, deeply and exhaustively. He
felt now a little emaciated mentally and somewhat absent-bodied--so he put
it to himself. A numb languor, not unpleasant, held him passively supine,
the while he gave himself over to speculative thought.

A wild night, certainly; probably, by that time, the little vessel was in
the middle of the North Sea ... _bound for Antwerp_!

"Oh-h," said Kirkwood vindictively, "_hell_!"

So he was bound for Antwerp! The first color of resentment ebbing from his
thoughts left him rather interested than excited by the prospect. He found
that he was neither pleased nor displeased. He presumed that it would be
no more difficult to raise money on personal belongings in Antwerp than
anywhere else; it has been observed that the first flower of civilization
is the rum-blossom, the next, the conventionalized fleur-de-lis of the
money-lender. There would be pawnshops, then, in Antwerp; and Kirkwood was
confident that the sale or pledge of his signet-ring, scarf-pin, match-box
and cigar-case, would provide him with money enough for a return to London,
by third-class, at the worst. There ... well, all events were on the knees
of the gods; he'd squirm out of his troubles, somehow. As for the other
matter, the Calendar affair, he presumed he was well rid of it,--with a
sigh of regret. It had been a most enticing mystery, you know; and the
woman in the case was extraordinary, to say the least.

The memory of Dorothy Calendar made him sigh again, this time more
violently: a sigh that was own brother to (or at any rate descended in
a direct line from) the furnace sigh of the lover described by, the
melancholy Jaques. And he sat up, bumped his head, groped round until his
hand fell upon a doorknob, opened the door, and looked out into the blowsy
emptiness of the ship's cabin proper, whose gloomy confines were made
visible only by the rays of a dingy and smoky lamp swinging violently in
gimbals from a deck-beam.

Kirkwood's clothing, now rough-dried and warped wretchedly out of shape,
had been thrown carelessly on a transom near the door. He got up, collected
them, and returning to his berth, dressed at leisure, thinking heavily,
disgruntled--in a humor as evil as the after-taste of bad brandy in his
mouth.

When dressed he went out into the cabin, closing the door upon his berth,
and for lack of anything better to do, seated himself on the thwartships
transom, against the forward bulkhead, behind the table. Above his head a
chronometer ticked steadily and loudly, and, being consulted, told him that
the time of day was twenty minutes to four; which meant that he had slept
away some eighteen or twenty hours. That was a solid spell of a rest,
when he came to think of it, even allowing that he had been unusually and
pardonably fatigued when conducted to his berth. He felt stronger now, and
bright enough--and enormously hungry into the bargain.

Abstractedly, heedless of the fact that his tobacco would be water-soaked
and ruined, he fumbled in his pockets for pipe and pouch, thinking to
soothe the pangs of hunger against breakfast-time; which was probably two
hours and a quarter ahead. But his pockets were empty--every one of them.
He assimilated this discovery in patience and cast an eye about the room,
to locate, if possible, the missing property. But naught of his was
visible. So he rose and began a more painstaking search.

The cabin was at once tiny, low-ceiled, and depressingly gloomy. Its
furniture consisted entirely in a chair or two, supplementing the transoms
and lockers as resting-places, and a center-table covered with a cloth of
turkey-red, whose original aggressiveness had been darkly moderated by
libations of liquids, principally black coffee, and burnt offerings of
grease and tobacco-ash. Aside from the companion-way to the deck, four
doors opened into the room, two probably giving upon the captain's and the
mate's quarters, the others on pseudo state-rooms--one of which he had just
vacated--closets large enough to contain a small bunk and naught beside.
The bulkheads and partitions were badly broken out with a rash of pictures
from illustrated papers, mostly offensive. Kirkwood was interested to read
a half-column clipping from a New York yellow journal, descriptive of the
antics of a drunken British sailor who had somehow found his way to the
bar-room of the Fifth Avenue Hotel; the paragraph exploiting the fact that
it had required four policemen in addition to the corps of porters to
subdue him, was strongly underscored in red ink; and the news-story wound
up with the information that in police court the man had given his name as
William Stranger and cheerfully had paid a fine of ten dollars, alleging
his entertainment to have been cheap at the price.

While Kirkwood was employed in perusing this illuminating anecdote, eight
bells sounded, and, from the commotion overhead, the watch changed. A
little later the companion-way door slammed open and shut, and Captain
Stryker--or Stranger; whichever you please--fell down, rather than
descended, the steps.

Without attention to the American he rolled into the mate's room and roused
that personage. Kirkwood heard that the name of the second-in-command was
'Obbs, as well as that he occupied the starboard state-room aft. After a
brief exchange of comment and instruction, Mr. 'Obbs appeared in the shape
of a walking pillar of oil-skins capped by a sou'wester, and went on deck;
Stryker, following him out of the state-room, shed his own oilers in a
clammy heap upon the floor, opened a locker from which he brought forth a
bottle and a dirty glass, and, turning toward the table, for the first time
became sensible of Kirkwood's presence.

"Ow, there you are, eigh, little bright-eyes!" he exclaimed with surprised
animation.

"Good morning, Captain Stryker," said Kirkwood, rising. "I want to tell
you--"

But Stryker waved one great red paw impatiently, with the effect of
sweeping aside and casting into the discard Kirkwood's intended speech of
thanks; nor would he hear him further.

"Did you 'ave a nice little nap?" he interrupted. "Come up bright and
smilin', eigh? Now I guess"--the emphasis made it clear that the captain
believed himself to be employing an Americanism; and so successful was he
in his own esteem that he could not resist the temptation to improve upon
the imitation--"Na-ow I guess yeou're abaout right ready, ben't ye, to hev
a drink, sonny?"

"No, thank you," said Kirkwood, smiling tolerantly. "I've got any amount of
appetite..."

"'Ave you, now?" Stryker dropped his mimicry and glanced at the clock.
"Breakfast," he announced, "will be served in the myne dinin' saloon at
eyght a. m. Passingers is requested not to be lyte at tyble."

Depositing the bottle on the said table, the captain searched until he
found another glass for Kirkwood, and sat down.

"Do you good," he insinuated, pushing the bottle gently over.

"No, thank you," reiterated Kirkwood shortly, a little annoyed.

Stryker seized his own glass, poured out a strong man's dose of the
fiery concoction, gulped it down, and sighed. Then, with a glance at the
American's woebegone countenance (Kirkwood was contemplating a four-hour
wait for breakfast, and, consequently, looking as if he had lost his last
friend), the captain bent over, placing both hands palm down before him and
wagging his head earnestly.

"Please," he implored,--"Please don't let me hinterrupt;" and filled his
pipe, pretending a pensive detachment from his company.

The fumes of burning shag sharpened the tooth of desire. Kirkwood stood it
as long as he could, then surrendered with an: "If you've got any more of
that tobacco, Captain, I'd be glad of a pipe."

An intensely contemplative expression crept into the captain's small blue
eyes.

"I only got one other pyper of this 'ere 'baccy," he announced at length,
"and I carn't get no more till I gets 'ome. I simply couldn't part with it
hunder 'arf a quid."

Kirkwood settled back with a hopeless lift of his shoulders. Abstractedly
Stryker puffed the smoke his way until he could endure the deprivation no
longer.

"I had about ten shillings in my pocket when I came aboard, captain,
and ... a few other articles."

"Ow, yes; so you 'ad, now you mention it."

Stryker rose, ambled into his room, and returned with Kirkwood's
possessions and a fresh paper of shag. While the young man was hastily
filling, lighting, and inhaling the first strangling but delectable whiff,
the captain solemnly counted into his own palm all the loose change except
three large pennies. The latter he shoved over to Kirkwood in company with
a miscellaneous assortment of articles, which the American picked up piece
by piece and began to bestow about his clothing. When through, he sat back,
troubled and disgusted. Stryker met his regard blandly.

"Anything I can do?" he inquired, in suave concern.

"Why ... there _was_ a black pearl scarfpin--"

"W'y, don't you remember? You gave that to me, 'count of me 'avin syved yer
life. 'Twas me throwed you that line, you know."

"Oh," commented Kirkwood briefly. The pin had been among the most valuable
and cherished of his belongings.

"Yes," nodded the captain in reminiscence. "You don't remember? Likely
'twas the brandy singing in yer 'ead. You pushes it into my 'ands,--almost
weepin', you was,--and sez, sez you, 'Stryker,' you sez, 'tyke this in
triflin' toking of my gratichood; I wouldn't hinsult you,' you sez, 'by
hofferin' you money, but this I can insist on yer acceptin', and no
refusal,' says you."

"Oh," repeated Kirkwood.

"If I for a ninstant thought you wasn't sober when you done it.... But no;
you're a gent if there ever was one, and I'm not the man to offend you."

"Oh, indeed."

The captain let the implication pass, perhaps on the consideration that he
could afford to ignore it; and said no more. The pause held for several
minutes, Kirkwood having fallen into a mood of grave distraction. Finally
Captain Stryker thoughtfully measured out a second drink, limited only by
the capacity of the tumbler, engulfed it noisily, and got up.

"Guess I'll be turnin' in," he volunteered affably, yawning and stretching.

"I was about to ask you to do me a service...." began Kirkwood.

"Yes?"--with the rising inflection of mockery.

Kirkwood quietly produced his cigar-case, a gold match-box, gold card-case,
and slipped a signet ring from his finger. "Will you buy these?" he asked.
"Or will you lend me five pounds and hold them as security?"

Stryker examined the collection with exaggerated interest strongly
tinctured with mistrust. "I'll buy 'em," he offered eventually, looking up.

"That's kind of you--"

"Ow, they ain't much use to me, but Bill Stryker's allus willin' to
accommodate a friend.... Four quid, you said?"

"Five...."

"They ain't wuth over four to me."

"Very well; make it four," Kirkwood assented contemptuously.

The captain swept the articles into one capacious fist, pivoted on one heel
at the peril of his neck, and lumbered unsteadily off to his room. Pausing
at the door he turned back in inquiry.

"I sye, 'ow did you come to get the impression there was a party named
Almanack aboard this wessel?"

"Calendar--"

"'Ave it yer own wye," Stryker conceded gracefully.

"There isn't, is there?"

"You 'eard me."

"Then," said Kirkwood sweetly, "I'm sure you wouldn't be interested."

The captain pondered this at leisure. "You seemed pretty keen abaht seein'
'im," he remarked conclusively.

"I was."

"Seems to me I did 'ear the nyme sumw'eres afore." The captain appeared to
wrestle with an obdurate memory. "Ow!" he triumphed. "I know. 'E was a chap
up Manchester wye. Keeper in a loonatic asylum, 'e was. 'That yer party?"

"No," said Kirkwood wearily.

"I didn't know but mebbe 'twas. Excuse me. 'Thought as 'ow mebbe you'd
escyped from 'is tender care, but, findin' the world cold, chynged yer mind
and wanted to gow back."

Without waiting for a reply he lurched into his room and banged the door
to. Kirkwood, divided between amusement and irritation, heard him stumbling
about for some time; and then a hush fell, grateful enough while it lasted;
which was not long. For no sooner did the captain sleep than a penetrating
snore added itself unto the cacophony of waves and wind and tortured ship.

Kirkwood, comforted at first by the blessed tobacco, lapsed insensibly
into dreary meditations. Coming after the swift movement and sustained
excitement of the eighteen hours preceding his long sleep, the monotony
of shipboard confinement seemed irksome to a maddening degree. There was
absolutely nothing he could discover to occupy his mind. If there were
books aboard, none was in evidence; beyond the report of Mr. Stranger's
Manhattan night's entertainment the walls were devoid of reading matter;
and a round of the picture gallery proved a diversion weariful enough when
not purely revolting.

Wherefore Mr. Kirkwood stretched himself out on the transom and smoked and
reviewed his adventures in detail and seriatim, and was by turns indignant,
sore, anxious on his own account as well as on Dorothy's, and out of all
patience with himself. Mystified he remained throughout, and the edge of
his curiosity held as keen as ever, you may believe.

Consistently the affair presented itself to his fancy in the guise of a
puzzle-picture, which, though you study it never so diligently, remains
incomprehensible, until by chance you view it from an unexpected angle,
when it reveals itself intelligibly. It had not yet been his good fortune
to see it from the right viewpoint. To hold the metaphor, he walked endless
circles round it, patiently seeking, but ever failing to find the proper
perspective.... Each incident, however insignificant, in connection with
it, he handled over and over, examining its every facet, bright or dull, as
an expert might inspect a clever imitation of a diamond; and like a perfect
imitation it defied analysis.

Of one or two things he was convinced; for one, that Stryker was a liar
worthy of classification with Calendar and Mrs. Hallam. Kirkwood had
not only the testimony of his sense to assure him that the ship's name,
_Alethea_ (not a common one, by the bye), had been mentioned by both
Calendar and Mulready during their altercation on Bermondsey Old Stairs,
but he had the confirmatory testimony of the sleepy waterman, William, who
had directed Old Bob and Young William to the anchorage off Bow Creek. That
there should have been two vessels of the same unusual name at one and
the same time in the Port of London, was a coincidence too preposterous
altogether to find place in his calculations.

His second impregnable conclusion was that those whom he sought had boarded
the _Alethea_, but had left her before she tripped her anchor. That they
were not stowed away aboard her seemed unquestionable. The brigantine was
hardly large enough for the presence of three persons aboard her to be long
kept a secret from an inquisitive fourth,--unless, indeed, they lay in
hiding in the hold; for which, once the ship got under way, there could be
scant excuse. And Kirkwood did not believe himself a person of sufficient
importance in Calendar's eyes, to make that worthy endure the discomforts
of a'tween-decks imprisonment throughout the voyage, even to escape
recognition.

With every second, then, he was traveling farther from her to whose aid he
had rushed, impelled by motives so hot-headed, so innately, chivalric, so
unthinkingly gallant, so exceptionally idiotic!

Idiot! Kirkwood groaned with despair of his inability to fathom the abyss
of his self-contempt. There seemed to be positively no excuse for _him_.
Stryker had befriended him indeed, had he permitted him to drown. Yet
he had acted for the best, as he saw it. The fault lay in himself: an
admirable fault, that of harboring and nurturing generous and compassionate
instincts. But, of course, Kirkwood couldn't see it that way.

"What else could I do?" he defended himself against the indictment
of common sense. "I couldn't leave her to the mercies of that set of
rogues!... And Heaven knows I was given every reason to believe she would
be aboard this ship! Why, she herself told me that she was sailing ...!"

Heaven knew, too, that this folly of his had cost him a pretty penny,
first and last. His watch was gone beyond recovery, his homeward passage
forfeited; he no longer harbored illusions as to the steamship company
presenting him with another berth in lieu of that called for by that
water-soaked slip of paper then in his pocket--courtesy of Stryker. He had
sold for a pittance, a tithe of its value, his personal jewelry, and had
spent every penny he could call his own. With the money Stryker was to give
him he would be able to get back to London and his third-rate hostelry, but
not with enough over to pay that one week's room-rent, or ...

"Oh, the devil!" he groaned, head in hands.

The future loomed wrapped in unspeakable darkness, lightened by no least
ray of hope. It had been bad enough to lose a comfortable living through
a gigantic convulsion of Nature; but to think that he had lost all else
through his own egregious folly, to find himself reduced to the kennels--!

So Care found him again in those weary hours,--came and sat by his side,
slipping a grisly hand in his and tightening its grip until he could have
cried out with the torment of it; the while whispering insidiously subtile,
evil things in his ear. And he had not even Hope to comfort him; at
any previous stage he had been able to distil a sort of bitter-sweet
satisfaction from the thought that he was suffering for the love of his
life. But now--now Dorothy was lost, gone like the glamour of Romance in
the searching light of day.

Stryker, emerging from his room for breakfast, found the passenger with a
hostile look in his eye and a jaw set in ugly fashion. His eyes, too, were
the abiding-place of smoldering devils; and the captain, recognizing them,
considerately forbore to stir them up with any untimely pleasantries. To be
sure, he was autocrat in his own ship, and Kirkwood's standing aboard was
_nil_; but then there was just enough yellow in the complexion of Stryker's
soul to incline him to sidestep trouble whenever feasible. And besides, he
entertained dark suspicions of his guest--suspicions he scarce dared voice
even to his inmost heart.

The morning meal, therefore, passed off in constrained silence. The captain
ate voraciously and vociferously, pushed back his chair, and went on deck
to relieve the mate. The latter, a stunted little Cockney with a wizened
countenance and a mind as foul as his tongue, got small change of his
attempts to engage the passenger in conversation on topics that he
considered fit for discussion. After the sixth or eighth snubbing he rose
in dudgeon, discharged a poisonous bit of insolence, and retired to his
berth, leaving Kirkwood to finish his breakfast in peace; which the latter
did literally, to the last visible scrap of food and the ultimate drop of
coffee, poor as both were in quality.

To the tune of a moderating wind, the morning wearied away. Kirkwood went
on deck once, for distraction from the intolerable monotony of it all, got
a sound drenching of spray, with a glimpse of a dark line on the eastern
horizon, which he understood to be the low littoral of Holland, and was
glad to dodge below once more and dry himself.

He had the pleasure of the mate's company at dinner, the captain remaining
on deck until Hobbs had finished and gone up to relieve him; and by that
time Kirkwood likewise was through.

Stryker blew down with a blustery show of cheer. "Well, well, my little
man!" (It happened that he topped Kirkwood's stature by at least five
inches.) "Enj'yin' yer sea trip?"

"About as much as you'd expect," snapped Kirkwood.

"Ow?" The captain began to shovel food into his face. (The author regrets
he has at his command no more delicate expression that is literal and
illustrative.) Kirkwood watched him, fascinated with suspense; it seemed
impossible that the man could continue so to employ his knife without
cutting his throat from the inside. But years of such manipulation had made
him expert, and his guest, keenly disappointed, at length ceased to hope.

Between gobbles Stryker eyed him furtively.

"'Treat you all right?" he demanded abruptly.

Kirkwood started out of a brown study. "What? Who? Why, I suppose I ought
to be--indeed, I _am_ grateful," he asserted. "Certainly you saved my life,
and--"

"Ow, I don't mean that." Stryker gathered the imputation into his paw and
flung it disdainfully to the four winds of Heaven. "Bless yer 'art, you're
welcome; I wouldn't let no dorg drownd, 'f I could 'elp it. No," he
declared, "nor a loonatic, neither."

He thrust his plate away and shifted sidewise in his chair. "I 'uz just
wonderin'," he pursued, picking his teeth meditatively with a pen-knife,
"'ow they feeds you in them _as_-ylums. 'Avin' never been inside one,
myself, it's on'y natural I'd be cur'us.... There was one of them
institootions near where I was borned--Birming'am, that is. I used to see
the loonies playin' in the grounds. I remember _just_ as well!... One of
'em and me struck up quite an acquaintance--"

"Naturally he'd take to you on sight."

"Ow? Strynge 'ow _we_ 'it it off, eigh?... You myke me think of 'im. Young
chap, 'e was, the livin' spi't-'n-himage of you. It don't happen, does it,
you're the same man?"

"Oh, go to the devil!"

"Naughty!" said the captain serenely, wagging a reproving forefinger. "Bad,
naughty word. You'll be sorry when you find out wot it means.... Only 'e
was allus plannin' to run awye and drownd 'is-self."...

He wore the joke threadbare, even to his own taste, and in the end got
heavily to his feet, starting for the companionway. "Land you this
arternoon," he remarked casually, "come three o'clock or thereabahts.
Per'aps later. I don't know, though, as I 'ad ought to let you loose."

Kirkwood made no answer. Chuckling, Stryker went on deck.

In the course of an hour the American followed him.

Wind and sea alike had gone down wonderfully since daybreak--a circumstance
undoubtedly in great part due to the fact that they had won in under the
lee of the mainland and were traversing shallower waters. On either hand,
like mist upon the horizon, lay a streak of gray, a shade darker than the
gray of the waters. The _Alethea_ was within the wide jaws of the Western
Scheldt. As for the wind, it had shifted several points to the northwards;
the brigantine had it abeam and was lying down to it and racing to port
with slanting deck and singing cordage.

Kirkwood approached the captain, who, acting as his own pilot, was standing
by the wheel and barking sharp orders to the helmsman.

"Have you a Bradshaw on board?" asked the young man.

"Steady!" This to the man at the wheel; then to Kirkwood: "Wot's that, me
lud?"

Kirkwood repeated his question. Stryker eyed him suspiciously for a
thought.

"Wot d'you want it for?"

"I want to see when I can get a boat back to England."

"Hmm.... Yes, you'll find a Bradshaw in the port-locker, near the for'ard
bulk'ead. Run along now and pl'y--and mind you don't go tearin' out the
pyges to myke pyper boatses to go sylin' in."

Kirkwood went below. Like its adjacent rooms, the cabin was untenanted; the
watch was the mate's, and Stryker a martinet. Kirkwood found the designated
locker and, opening it, saw first to his hand the familiar bulky red volume
with its red garter. Taking it out he carried it to a chair near the
companionway, for a better reading light: the skylight being still battened
down.

The strap removed, the book opened easily, as if by force of habit, at the
precise table he had wished to consult; some previous client had left a
marker between the pages,--and not an ordinary book-mark, by any manner
of means. Kirkwood gave utterance to a little gasp of amazement, and
instinctively glanced up at the companionway, to see if he were observed.

He was not, but for safety's sake he moved farther back into the cabin
and out of the range of vision of any one on deck; a precaution which was
almost immediately justified by the clumping of heavy feet upon the steps
as Stryker descended in pursuit of the ever-essential drink.

"'Find it?" he demanded, staring blindly--with eyes not yet focused to the
change from light to gloom--at the young man, who was sitting with the
guide open on his knees, a tightly clenched fist resting on the transom at
either side of him.

In reply he received a monosyllabic affirmative; Kirkwood did not look up.

"You must be a howl," commented the captain, making for the seductive
locker.

"A--what?"

"A howl, readin' that fine print there in the dark. W'y don't you go over
to the light?... I'll 'ave to 'ave them shutters tyken off the winders."
This was Stryker's amiable figure of speech, frequently employed to
indicate the coverings of the skylight.

"I'm all right." Kirkwood went on studying the book.

Stryker swigged off his rum and wiped his lips with the back of a red paw,
hesitating a moment to watch his guest.

"Mykes it seem more 'ome-like for you, I expect," he observed.

"What do you mean?"

"W'y, Bradshaw's first-cousin to a halmanack, ain't 'e? Can't get one,
take t'other--next best thing. Sorry I didn't think of it sooner; like my
passengers to feel comfy.... Now don't you go trapsein' off to gay Paree
and squanderin' wot money you got left. You 'ear?"

"By the way, Captain!" Kirkwood looked up at this, but Stryker was already
half-way up the companion.

Cautiously the American opened his right fist and held to the light that
which had been concealed, close wadded in his grasp,--a square of sheer
linen edged with lace, crumpled but spotless, and diffusing in the
unwholesome den a faint, intangible fragrance, the veriest wraith of
that elusive perfume which he would never again inhale without instantly
recalling that night ride through London in the intimacy of a cab.

He closed his eyes and saw her again, as clearly as though she stood before
him,--hair of gold massed above the forehead of snow, curling in adorable
tendrils at the nape of her neck, lips like scarlet splashed upon the
immaculate whiteness of her skin, head poised audaciously in its spirited,
youthful allure, dark eyes smiling the least trace sadly beneath the level
brows.

Unquestionably the handkerchief was hers; if proof other than the
assurance of his heart were requisite, he had it in the initial delicately
embroidered in one corner: a D, for Dorothy!... He looked again, to make
sure; then hastily folded up the treasure-trove and slipped it into a
breast pocket of his coat.

No; I am not sure that it was not the left-hand pocket.

Quivering with excitement he bent again over the book and studied it
intently. After all, he had not been wrong! He could assert now, without
fear of refutation, that Stryker had lied.

Some one had wielded an industrious pencil on the page. It was, taken as a
whole, fruitful of clues. Its very heading was illuminating:

LONDON to VLISSINGEN (FLUSHING) AND BREDA;

which happened to be the quickest and most direct route between London and
Antwerp. Beneath it, in the second column from the right, the pencil had
put a check-mark against:

QUEENSBOROUGH ... DEP ... 11A10.

And now he saw it clearly--dolt that he had been not to have divined it ere
this! The _Alethea_ had run in to Queensborough, landing her passengers
there, that they might make connection with the eleven-ten morning boat for
Flushing,--the very side-wheel steamer, doubtless, which he had noticed
beating out in the teeth of the gale just after the brigantine had picked
him up. Had he not received the passing impression that the _Alethea_, when
first he caught sight of her, might have been coming out of the Medway, on
whose eastern shore is situate Queensborough Pier? Had not Mrs. Hallam,
going upon he knew not what information or belief, been bound for
Queensborough, with design there to intercept the fugitives?

Kirkwood chuckled to recall how, all unwittingly, he had been the means
of diverting from her chosen course that acute and resourceful lady; then
again turned his attention to the tables.

A third check had been placed against the train for Amsterdam scheduled to
leave Antwerp at 6:32 p. m. Momentarily his heart misgave him, when he saw
this, in fear lest Calendar and Dorothy should have gone on from Antwerp
the previous evening; but then he rallied, discovering that the boat-train
from Flushing did not arrive at Antwerp till after ten at night; and there
was no later train thence for Amsterdam. Were the latter truly their
purposed destination, they would have stayed overnight and be leaving that
very evening on the 6:32. On the other hand, why should they wait for the
latest train, rather than proceed by the first available in the morning?
Why but because Calendar and Mulready were to wait for Stryker to join them
on the _Alethea_?

Very well, then; if the wind held and Stryker knew his business, there
would be another passenger on that train, in addition to the Calendar
party.

Making mental note of the fact that the boat-train for Flushing and London
was scheduled to leave Antwerp daily at 8:21 p. m., Kirkwood rustled the
leaves to find out whether or not other tours had been planned, found
evidences of none, and carefully restored the guide to the locker, lest
inadvertently the captain should pick it up and see what Kirkwood had seen.

An hour later he went on deck. The skies had blown clear and the brigantine
was well in land-bound waters and still footing a rattling pace. The
river-banks had narrowed until, beyond the dikes to right and left, the
country-side stretched wide and flat, a plain of living green embroidered
with winding roads and quaint Old-World hamlets whose red roofs shone like
dull fire between the dark green foliage of dwarfed firs.

Down with the Scheldt's gray shimmering flood were drifting little
companies of barges, sturdy and snug both fore and aft, tough tanned sails
burning in the afternoon sunlight. A long string of canal-boats, potted
plants flowering saucily in their neatly curtained windows, proprietors
expansively smoking on deck, in the bosoms of their very large families,
was being mothered up-stream by two funny, clucking tugs. Behind the
brigantine a travel-worn Atlantic liner was scolding itself hoarse about
the right of way. Outward bound, empty cattle boats, rough and rusty,
were swaggering down to the sea, with the careless, independent
thumbs-in-armholes air of so many navvies off the job.

And then lifting suddenly above the level far-off sky-line, there appeared
a very miracle of beauty; the delicate tracery of the great Cathedral's
spire of frozen lace, glowing like a thing of spun gold, set against the
sapphire velvet of the horizon.

Antwerp was in sight.

A troublesome care stirring in his mind, Kirkwood looked round the deck;
but Stryker was very busy, entirely too preoccupied with the handling of
his ship to be interrupted with impunity. Besides, there was plenty of
time.

More slowly now, the wind falling, the brigantine crept up the river, her
crew alert with sheets and halyards as the devious windings of the stream
rendered it necessary to trim the canvas at varying angles to catch the
wind.

Slowly, too, in the shadow of that Mechlin spire, the horizon grew rough
and elevated, taking shape in the serrated profile of a thousand gables and
a hundred towers and cross-crowned steeples.

Once or twice, more and more annoyed as the time of their association
seemed to grow more brief, Kirkwood approached the captain; but Stryker
continued to be exhaustively absorbed in the performance of his duties.

Up past the dockyards, where spidery masts stood in dense groves about
painted funnels, and men swarmed over huge wharves like ants over a crust
of bread; up and round the final, great sweeping bend of the river, the
_Alethea_ made her sober way, ever with greater slowness; until at length,
in the rose glow of a flawless evening, her windlass began to clank like a
mad thing and her anchor bit the riverbed, near the left bank, between old
Forts Isabelle and Tête de Flandre, frowned upon from the right by the grim
pile of the age-old Steen castle.

And again Kirkwood sought Stryker, his carking query ready on his lips. But
the captain impatiently waved him aside.

"Don't you bother me now, me lud juke! Wyte until I gets done with the
custom hofficer."

Kirkwood acceded, perforce; and bided his time with what tolerance he could
muster.

A pluttering customs launch bustled up to the _Alethea's_ side, discharged
a fussy inspector on the brigantine's deck, and panted impatiently until
he, the examination concluded without delay, was again aboard.

Stryker, smirking benignly and massaging his lips with the back of his
hand, followed the official on deck, nodded to Kirkwood an intimation that
he was prepared to accord him an audience, and strolled forward to the
waist. The American, mastering his resentment, meekly followed; one can not
well afford to be haughty when one is asking favors.

Advancing to the rail, the captain whistled in one of the river-boats;
then, while the waterman waited, faced his passenger.

"Now, yer r'yal 'ighness, wot can I do for you afore you goes ashore?"

"I think you must have forgotten," said Kirkwood quietly. "I hate to
trouble you, but--there's that matter of four pounds."

Stryker's face was expressive only of mystified vacuity. "Four quid? I
dunno _as_ I know just wot you means."

"You agreed to advance me four pounds on those things of mine...."

"Ow-w!" Illumination overspread the hollow-jowled countenance. Stryker
smiled cheerfully. "Garn with you!" he chuckled. "You will 'ave yer little
joke, won't you now? I declare I never see a loony with such affecsh'nit,
pl'yful wyes!"

Kirkwood's eyes narrowed. "Stryker," he said steadily, "give me the four
pounds and let's have no more nonsense; or else hand over my things at
once."

"Daffy," Stryker told vacancy, with conviction. "Lor' luv me if I sees
'ow he ever 'ad sense enough to escype. W'y, yer majesty!" and he bowed,
ironic. "I '_ave_ given you yer quid."

"Just about as much as I gave you that pearl pin," retorted Kirkwood hotly.
"What the devil do you mean--"

"W'y, yer ludship, four pounds jus pyes yer passyge; I thought you
understood."

"My passage! But I can come across by steamer for thirty shillings,
first-class--"

"Aw, but them steamers! Tricky, they is, and unsyfe ... No, yer gryce, the
W. Stryker Packet Line Lim'ted, London to Antwerp, charges four pounds per
passyge and no reduction for return fare."

Stunned by his effrontery, Kirkwood stared in silence.

"Any complynts," continued the captain, looking over Kirkwood's head, "must
be lyde afore the Board of Directors in writin' not more'n thirty dyes
arfter--"

"You damned scoundrel!" interpolated Kirkwood thoughtfully.

Stryker's mouth closed with a snap; his features froze in a cast of wrath;
cold rage glinted in his small blue eyes. "W'y," he bellowed, "you bloomin'
loonatic, d'ye think you can sye that to Bill Stryker on 'is own wessel!"

He hesitated a moment, then launched a heavy fist at Kirkwood's face.
Unsurprised, the young man side-stepped, caught the hard, bony wrist as the
captain lurched by, following his wasted blow, and with a dexterous twist
laid him flat on his back, with a sounding thump upon the deck. And as the
infuriated scamp rose--which he did with a bound that placed him on
his feet and in defensive posture; as though the deck had been a
spring-board--Kirkwood leaped back, seized a capstan-bar, and faced him
with a challenge.

"Stand clear, Stryker!" he warned the man tensely, himself livid with rage.
"If you move a step closer I swear I'll knock the head off your shoulders!
Not another inch, you contemptible whelp, or I'll brain you!... That's
better," he continued as the captain, caving, dropped his fists and moved
uneasily back. "Now give that boatman money for taking me ashore. Yes, I'm
going--and if we ever meet again, take the other side of the way, Stryker!"

Without response, a grim smile wreathing his thin, hard lips, Stryker
thrust one hand into his pocket, and withdrawing a coin, tossed it to the
waiting waterman. Whereupon Kirkwood backed warily to the rail, abandoned
the capstan-bar and dropped over the side.

Nodding to the boatman, "The Steen landing--quickly," he said in French.

Stryker, recovering, advanced to the rail and waved him a derisive _bon
voyage_.

"By-by, yer hexcellency. I 'opes it may soon be my pleasure to meet you
again. You've been a real privilege to know; I've henjoyed yer comp'ny
somethin' immense. Don't know as I ever met such a rippin', Ay Number One,
all-round, entertynin' ass, afore!"

He fumbled nervously about his clothing, brought to light a rag of cotton,
much the worse for service, and ostentatiously wiped from the corner of
each eye tears of grief at parting. Then, as the boat swung toward the
farther shore, Kirkwood's back was to the brigantine, and he was little
tempted to turn and invite fresh shafts of ridicule.

Rapidly, as he was ferried across the busy Scheldt, the white blaze of his
passion cooled; but the biting irony of his estate ate, corrosive, into his
soul. Hollow-eyed he glared vacantly into space, pale lips unmoving, his
features wasted with despair.

They came to the landing-stage and swung broad-side on. Mechanically the
American got up and disembarked. As heedless of time and place he moved
up the Quai to the gangway and so gained the esplanade; where pausing he
thrust a trembling hand into his trouser pocket.

The hand reappeared, displaying in its outspread palm three big, round,
brown, British pennies. Staring down at them, Kirkwood's lips moved.

"Bed rock!" he whispered huskily.




XIII


A PRIMER OF PROGRESSIVE CRIME

Without warning or presage the still evening air was smitten and made
softly musical by the pealing of a distant chime, calling vespers to its
brothers in Antwerp's hundred belfries; and one by one, far and near, the
responses broke out, until it seemed as if the world must be vibrant
with silver and brazen melody; until at the last the great bells in the
Cathedral spire stirred and grumbled drowsily, then woke to such ringing
resonance as dwarfed all the rest and made it seem as nothing.

Like the beating of a mighty heart heard through the rushing clamor of the
pulses, a single deep-throated bell boomed solemnly six heavy, rumbling
strokes.

Six o'clock! Kirkwood roused out of his dour brooding. The Amsterdam
express would leave at 6:32, and he knew not from what station.

Striding swiftly across the promenade, he entered a small tobacco shop and
made inquiry of the proprietress. His command of French was tolerable; he
experienced no difficulty in comprehending the good woman's instructions.

Trains for Amsterdam, she said, left from the Gare Centrale, a mile or so
across the city. M'sieur had plenty of time, and to spare. There was the
tram line, if m'sieur did not care to take a fiacre. If he would go by way
of the Vielle Bourse he would discover the tram cars of the Rue Kipdorp.
M'sieur was most welcome....

Monsieur departed with the more haste since he was unable to repay this
courtesy with the most trifling purchase; such slight matters annoyed
Kirkwood intensely. Perhaps it was well for him that he had the long walk
to help him work off the fit of nervous exasperation into which he was
plunged every time his thoughts harked back to that jovial black-guard,
Stryker.... He was quite calm when, after a brisk walk of some fifteen
minutes, he reached the station.

A public clock reassured him with the information that he had the quarter
of an hour's leeway; it was only seventeen minutes past eighteen o'clock
(Belgian railway time, always confusing). Inquiring his way to the
Amsterdam train, which was already waiting at the platform, he paced its
length, peering brazenly in at the coach windows, now warm with hope, now
shivering with disappointment, realizing as he could not but realize that,
all else aside, his only chance of rehabilitation lay in meeting Calendar.
But in none of the coaches or carriages did he discover any one even
remotely resembling the fat adventurer, his daughter, or Mulready.

Satisfied that they had not yet boarded the train, he stood aside, tortured
with forebodings, while anxiously scrutinizing each individual of the
throng of intending travelers.... Perhaps they had been delayed--by the
_Alethea's_ lateness in making port very likely; perhaps they purposed
taking not this but a later train; perhaps they had already left the city
by an earlier, or had returned to England.

On time, the bell clanged its warning; the guards bawled theirs; doors were
hastily opened and slammed; the trucks began to groan, couplings jolting
as the engine chafed in constraint. The train and Kirkwood moved
simultaneously out of opposite ends of the station, the one to rattle and
hammer round the eastern boundaries of the city and straighten out at top
speed on the northern route for the Belgian line, the other to stroll
moodily away, idle hands in empty pockets, bound aimlessly anywhere--it
didn't matter!

Nothing whatever mattered in the smallest degree. Ere now the outlook had
been dark; but this he felt to be the absolute nadir of his misfortunes.
Presently--after a while--as soon as he could bring himself to it--he would
ask the way and go to the American Consulate. But just now, low as the tide
of chance had ebbed, leaving him stranded on the flats of vagabondage,
low as showed the measure of his self-esteem, he could not tolerate the
prospect of begging for assistance--help which would in all likelihood be
refused, since his story was quite too preposterous to gain credence in
official ears that daily are filled with the lamentations of those whose
motives do not bear investigation. And if he chose to eliminate the strange
chain of events which had landed him in Antwerp, to base his plea solely on
the fact that he was a victim of the San Francisco disaster ... he himself
was able to smile, if sourly, anticipating the incredulous consular smile
with which he would be shown the door.

No; that he would reserve as a last resort. True, he had already come to
the Jumping-off Place; to the Court of the Last Resort alone could he now
appeal. But ... not yet; after a while he could make his petition, after he
had made a familiar of the thought that he must armor himself with callous
indifference to rebuff, to say naught of the waves of burning shame that
would overwhelm him when he came to the point of asking charity.

He found himself, neither knowing nor caring how he had won thither, in the
Place Verte, the vast venerable pile of the Cathedral rising on his right,
hotels and quaint Old-World dwellings with peaked roofs and gables and
dormer windows, inclosing the other sides of the square. The chimes (he
could hear none but those of the Cathedral) were heralding the hour of
seven. Listless and preoccupied in contemplation of his wretched case he
wandered purposelessly half round the square, then dropped into a bench on
its outskirts.

It was some time later that he noticed, with a casual, indifferent eye, a
porter running out of the Hôtel de Flandre, directly opposite, and calling
a fiacre in to the carriage block.

As languidly he watched a woman, very becomingly dressed, follow the porter
down to the curb.

The fiacre swung in, and the woman dismissed the porter before entering the
vehicle; a proceeding so unusual that it fixed the onlooker's interest.
He sat rigid with attention; the woman seemed to be giving explicit
and lengthy directions to the driver, who nodded and gesticulated his
comprehension.

The woman was Mrs. Hallam.

The first blush of recognition passed, leaving Kirkwood without any
amazement. It was an easy matter to account for her being where she was.
Thrown off the scent by Kirkwood at Sheerness, the previous morning, she
had missed the day boat, the same which had ferried over those whom she
pursued. Returning from Sheerness to Queensborough, however, she had taken
the night boat for Flushing and Antwerp,--and not without her plan, who was
not a woman to waste her strength aimlessly; Kirkwood believed that she
had had from the first a very definite campaign in view. In that campaign
Queensborough Pier had been the first strategic move; the journey to
Antwerp, apparently, the second; and the American was impressed that he was
witnessing the inception of the third decided step.... The conclusion of
this process of reasoning was inevitable: Madam would bear watching.

Thus was a magical transformation brought about. Instantaneously lassitude
and vain repinings were replaced by hopefulness and energy. In a twinkling
the young man was on his feet, every nerve a-thrill with excitement.

Mrs. Hallam, blissfully ignorant of this surveillance over her movements,
took her place in the fiacre. The driver clucked to his horse, cracked
his whip, and started off at a slow trot: a pace which Kirkwood imitated,
keeping himself at a discreet distance to the rear of the cab, but prepared
to break into a run whenever it should prove necessary.

Such exertion, however, was not required of him. Evidently Mrs. Hallam
was in no great haste to reach her destination; the speed of the fiacre
remained extremely moderate; Kirkwood found a long, brisk stride fast
enough to keep it well in sight.

Round the green square, under the beautiful walls of Notre Dame d'Anvers,
through Grande Place and past the Hôtel de Ville, the cab proceeded, dogged
by what might plausibly be asserted the most persistent and infatuated soul
that ever crossed the water; and so on into the Quai Van Dyck, turning to
the left at the old Steen dungeon and, slowing to a walk, moving soberly up
the drive.

Beyond the lip of the embankment, the Scheldt flowed, its broad shining
surface oily, smooth and dark, a mirror for the incandescent glory of the
skies. Over on the western bank old Tête de Flandre lifted up its grim
curtains and bastions, sable against the crimson, rampart and parapet edged
with fire. Busy little side-wheeled ferry steamers spanked the waters
noisily and smudged the sunset with dark drifting trails of smoke; and ever
and anon a rowboat would slip out of shadow to glide languidly with the
current. Otherwise the life of the river was gone; and at their moorings
the ships swung in great quietness, riding lights glimmering like low wan
stars.

In the company of the latter the young man marked down the _Alethea_; a
sight which made him unconsciously clench both fists and teeth, reminding
him of that rare wag, Stryker....

To his way of thinking the behavior of the fiacre was quite unaccountable.
Hardly had the horse paced off the length of two blocks on the Quai ere
it was guided to the edge of the promenade and brought to a stop. And the
driver twisted the reins round his whip, thrust the latter in its socket,
turned sidewise on the box, and began to smoke and swing his heels,
surveying the panorama of river and sunset with complacency--a cabby, one
would venture, without a care in the world and serene in the assurance of
a generous _pour-boire_ when he lost his fare. But as for the latter, she
made no move; the door of the cab remained closed,--like its occupant's
mind, a mystery to the watcher.

Twilight shadows lengthened, darkling, over the land; street-lights flashed
up in long, radiant ranks. Across the promenade hotels and shops were
lighted up; people began to gather round the tables beneath the awnings of
an open-air café. In the distance, somewhere, a band swung into the dreamy
rhythm of a haunting waltz. Scattered couples moved slowly, arm in arm,
along the riverside walk, drinking in the fragrance of the night. Overhead
stars popped out in brilliance and dropped their reflections to swim lazily
on spellbound waters.... And still the fiacre lingered in inaction, still
the driver lorded it aloft, in care-free abandon.

In the course of time this inertia, where he had looked for action, this
dull suspense when he had forecast interesting developments, wore upon the
watcher's nerves and made him at once impatient and suspicious. Now that he
had begun to doubt, he conceived it as quite possible that Mrs. Hallam (who
was capable of anything) should have stolen out of the cab by the other
and, to him, invisible door. To resolve the matter, finally, he took
advantage of the darkness, turned up his coat collar, hunched up his
shoulders, hid his hands in pockets, pulled the visor of his cap well
forward over his eyes, and slouched past the fiacre.

Mrs. Hallam sat within. He could see her profile clearly silhouetted
against the light; she was bending forward and staring fixedly out of the
window, across the driveway. Mentally he calculated the direction of her
gaze, then, moved away and followed it with his own eyes; and found himself
staring at the façade of a third-rate hotel. Above its roof the gilded
letters of a sign, catching the illumination from below, spelled out the
title of "Hôtel du Commerce."

Mrs. Hallam was interested in the Hôtel du Commerce?

Thoughtfully Kirkwood fell back to his former point of observation, now
the richer by another object of suspicion, the hostelry. Mrs. Hallam was
waiting and watching for some one to enter or to leave that establishment.
It seemed a reasonable inference to draw. Well, then, so was Kirkwood, no
less than the lady; he deemed it quite conceivable that their objects were
identical.

He started to beguile the time by wondering what she would do, if...

Of a sudden he abandoned this line of speculation, and catching his breath,
held it, almost afraid to credit the truth that for once his anticipations
were being realized under his very eyes.

Against the lighted doorway of the Hôtel du Commerce, the figures of two
men were momentarily sketched, as they came hurriedly forth; and of the
two, one was short and stout, and even at a distance seemed to bear himself
with an accent of assertiveness, while the other was tall and heavy of
shoulder.

Side by side they marched in step across the embankment to the head of the
Quai gangway, descending without pause to the landing-stage. Kirkwood,
hanging breathlessly over the guard-rail, could hear their footfalls
ringing in hollow rhythm on the planks of the inclined way,--could even
discern Calendar's unlovely profile in dim relief beneath one of the
waterside lights; and he recognized unmistakably Mulready's deep voice,
grumbling inarticulately.

At the outset he had set after them, with intent to accost Calendar; but
their pace had been swift and his irresolute. He hung fire on the issue,
dreading to reveal himself, unable to decide which were the better course,
to pursue the men, or to wait and discover what Mrs. Hallam was about. In
the end he waited; and had his disappointment for recompense.

For Mrs. Hallam did nothing intelligible. Had she driven over to the hotel,
hard upon the departure of the men, he would have believed that she was
seeking Dorothy, and would, furthermore, have elected to crowd their
interview, if she succeeded in obtaining one with the girl. But she did
nothing of the sort. For a time the fiacre remained as it had been ever
since stopping; then, evidently admonished by his fare, the driver
straightened up, knocked out his pipe, disentangled reins and whip, and
wheeled the equipage back on the way it had come, disappearing in a dark
side street leading eastward from the embankment.

Kirkwood was, then, to believe that Mrs. Hallam, having taken all that
trouble and having waited for the two adventurers to appear, had been
content with sight of them? He could hardly believe that of the woman; it
wasn't like her.

He started across the driveway, after the fiacre, but it was lost in a
tangle of side streets before he could make up his mind whether it was
worth while chasing or not; and, pondering the woman's singular action, he
retraced his steps to the promenade rail.

Presently he told himself he understood. Dorothy was no longer of her
father's party; he had a suspicion that Mulready's attitude had made it
seem advisable to Calendar either to leave the girl behind, in England, or
to segregate her from his associates in Antwerp. If not lodged in another
quarter of the city, or left behind, she was probably traveling on ahead,
to a destination which he could by no means guess. And Mrs. Hallam was
looking for the girl; if there were really jewels in that gladstone bag,
Calendar would naturally have had no hesitation about intrusting them to
his daughter's care; and Mrs. Hallam avowedly sought nothing else. How
the woman had found out that such was the case, Kirkwood did not stop to
reckon; unless he explained it on the proposition that she was a person of
remarkable address. It made no matter, one way or the other; he had lost
Mrs. Hallam; but Calendar and Mulready he could put his finger on; they had
undoubtedly gone off to the _Alethea_ to confer again with Stryker,--that
was, unless they proposed sailing on the brigantine, possibly at turn of
tide that night.

Panic gripped his soul and shook it, as a terrier shakes a rat, when he
conceived this frightful proposition.

In his confusion of mind he evolved spontaneously an entirely new
hypothesis: Dorothy had already been spirited aboard the vessel; Calendar
and his confederate, delaying to join her from enigmatic motives, were now
aboard; and presently the word would be, Up-anchor and away!

Were they again to elude him? Not, he swore, if he had to swim for it. And
he had no wish to swim. The clothes he stood in, with what was left of his
self-respect, were all that he could call his own on that side of the North
Sea. Not a boatman on the Scheldt would so much as consider accepting three
English pennies in exchange for boat-hire. In brief, it began to look as if
he were either to swim or ... to steal a boat.

Upon such slender threads of circumstance depends our boasted moral health.
In one fleeting minute Kirkwood's conception of the law of _meum et tuum_,
its foundations already insidiously undermined by a series of cumulative
misfortunes, toppled crashing to its fall; and was not.

He was wholly unconscious of the change. Beneath him, in a space between
the quays bridged by the gangway, a number of rowboats, a putative score,
lay moored for the night and gently rubbing against each other with the
soundless lift and fall of the river. For all that Kirkwood could determine
to the contrary, the lot lay at the mercy of the public; nowhere about was
he able to discern a figure in anything resembling a watchman.

Without a quiver of hesitation--moments were invaluable, if what he feared
were true--he strode to the gangway, passed down, and with absolute
nonchalance dropped into the nearest boat, stepping from one to another
until he had gained the outermost. To his joy he found a pair of oars
stowed beneath the thwarts.

If he had paused to moralize--which he didn't--upon the discovery, he would
have laid it all at the door of his lucky star; and would have been wrong.
We who have never stooped to petty larceny know that the oars had been
placed there at the direction of his evil genius bent upon facilitating his
descent into the avernus of crime. Let us, then, pity the poor young man
without condoning his offense.

Unhitching the painter he set one oar against the gunwale of the next boat,
and with a powerful thrust sent his own (let us so call it for convenience)
stern-first out upon the river; then sat him composedly down, fitted the
oars to their locks, and began to pull straight across-stream, trusting to
the current to carry him down to the _Alethea_. He had already marked down
that vessel's riding-light; and that not without a glow of gratitude to see
it still aloft and in proper juxtaposition to the river-bank; proof that it
had not moved.

He pulled a good oar, reckoned his distance prettily, and shipping the
blades at just the right moment, brought the little boat in under the
brigantine's counter with scarce a jar. An element of surprise he held
essential to the success of his plan, whatever that might turn out to be.

Standing up, he caught the brigantine's after-rail with both hands, one of
which held the painter of the purloined boat, and lifted his head above
the deck line. A short survey of the deserted after-deck gave him further
assurance. The anchor-watch was not in sight; he may have been keeping
well forward by Stryker's instructions, or he may have crept off for forty
winks. Whatever the reason for his absence from the post of duty, Kirkwood
was relieved not to have him to deal with; and drawing himself gently in
over the rail, made the painter fast, and stepped noiselessly over toward
the lighted oblong of the companionway. A murmur of voices from below
comforted him with the knowledge that he had not miscalculated, this time;
at last he stood within striking distance of his quarry.

The syllables of his surname ringing clearly in his ears and followed by
Stryker's fleeting laugh, brought him to a pause. He flushed hotly in the
darkness; the captain was retailing with relish some of his most successful
witticisms at Kirkwood's expense.... "You'd ought to've seed the wye'e
looked at me!" concluded the _raconteur_ in a gale of mirth.

Mulready laughed with him, if a little uncertainly. Calendar's chuckle was
not audible, but he broke the pause that followed.

"I don't know," he said with doubting emphasis. "You say you landed him
without a penny in his pocket? I don't call that a good plan at all. Of
course, he ain't a factor, but ... Well, it might've been as well to give
him his fare home. He might make trouble for us, somehow.... I don't mind
telling you, Cap'n, that you're an ass."

The tensity of certain situations numbs the sensibilities. Kirkwood had
never in his weirdest dreams thought of himself as an eavesdropper; he did
not think of himself as such in the present instance; he merely listened,
edging nearer the skylight, of which the wings were slightly raised, and
keeping as far as possible in shadow.

"Ow, I sye!" the captain was remonstrating, aggrieved. "'Ow was I to know
'e didn't 'ave it in for you? First off, when 'e comes on board (I'll sye
this for 'im, 'e's as plucky as they myke 'em), I thought 'e was from the
Yard. Then, when I see wot a bally hinnocent 'e was, I mykes up my mind
'e's just some one you've been ply in' one of your little gymes on, and 'oo
was lookin' to square 'is account. So I did 'im proper."

"Evidently," assented Calendar dryly. "You're a bit of a heavy-handed
brute, Stryker. Personally I'm kind of sorry for the boy; he wasn't a bad
sort, as his kind runs, and he was no fool, from what little I saw of
him.... I wonder what he wanted."

"Possibly," Mulready chimed in suavely, "you can explain what you wanted
of him, in the first place. How did you come to drag him into _this_
business?"

"Oh, that!" Calendar laughed shortly. "That was partly accident, partly
inspiration. I happened to see his name on the Pless register; he'd put
himself down as from 'Frisco. I figured it out that he would be next door
to broke and getting desperate, ready to do anything to get home; and
thought we might utilize him; to smuggle some of the stuff into the States.
Once before, if you'll remember--no; that was before we got together,
Mulready--I picked up a fellow-countryman on the Strand. He was down and
out, jumped at the job, and we made a neat little wad on it."

"The more fool you, to take outsiders into your confidence," grumbled
Mulready.

"Ow?" interrogated Calendar, mimicking Stryker's accent inimitably. "Well,
you've got a heap to learn about this game, Mul; about the first thing
is that you must trust Old Man Know-it-all, which is me. I've run more
diamonds into the States, in one way or another, in my time, than you ever
pinched out of the shirt-front of a toff on the Empire Prom., before they
made the graft too hot for you and you came to take lessons from me in the
gentle art of living easy."

"Oh, cut that, cawn't you?"

"Delighted, dear boy.... One of the first principles, next to profiting by
the admirable example I set you, is to make the fellows in your own line
trust you. Now, if this boy had taken on with me, I could have got a bunch
of the sparklers on my mere say-so, from old Morganthau up on Finsbury
Pavement. He does a steady business hoodwinking the Customs for the benefit
of his American clients--and himself. And I'd've made a neat little profit
besides: something to fall back on, if this fell through. I don't mind
having two strings to my bow."

"Yes," argued Mulready; "but suppose this Kirkwood had taken on with you
and then peached?"

"That's another secret; you've got to know your man, be able to size him
up. I called on this chap for that very purpose; but I saw at a glance he
wasn't our man. He smelt a nigger in the woodpile and most politely told
me to go to the devil. But if he _had_ come in, he'd've died before he
squealed. I know the breed; there's honor among gentlemen that knocks the
honor of thieves higher'n a kite, the old saw to the contrary--nothing
doing.... You understand me, I'm sure, Mulready?" he concluded with
envenomed sweetness.

"I don't see yet how Kirkwood got anything to do with Dorothy."

"Miss Calendar to you, _Mister_ Mulready!" snapped Calendar. "There, there,
now! Don't get excited.... It was when the Hallam passed me word that a man
from the Yard was waiting on the altar steps for me, that Kirkwood came in.
He was dining close by; I went over and worked on his feelings until he
agreed to take Dorothy off my hands. If I had attempted to leave the place
with her, they'd've spotted me for sure.... My compliments to you, Dick
Mulready."

There came the noise of chair legs scraped harshly on the cabin deck.
Apparently Mulready had leaped to his feet in a rage.

"I've told you--" he began in a voice thick with passion.

"Oh, sit down!" Calendar cut in contemptuously. "Sit down, d'you hear?
That's all over and done with. We understand each other now, and you won't
try any more monkey-shines. It's a square deal and a square divide, so
far's I'm concerned; if we stick together there'll be profit enough for all
concerned. Sit down, Mul, and have another slug of the captain's bum rum."

Although Mulready consented to be pacified, Kirkwood got the impression
that the man was far gone in drink. A moment later he heard him growl
"Chin-chin!" antiphonal to the captain's "Cheer-o!"

"Now, then," Calendar proposed, "Mr. Kirkwood aside--peace be with
him!--let's get down to cases."

"Wot's the row?" asked the captain.

"The row, Cap'n, is the Hallam female, who has unexpectedly shown up in
Antwerp, we have reason to believe with malicious intent and a private
detective to add to the gaiety of nations."

"Wot's the odds? She carn't 'urt us without lyin' up trouble for 'erself."

"Damn little consolation to us when we're working it out in Dartmoor."

"Speak for yourself," grunted Mulready surlily.

"I do," returned Calendar easily; "we're both in the shadow of Dartmoor,
Mul, my boy; since you choose to take the reference as personal. Sing Sing,
however, yawns for me alone; it's going to keep on yawning, too, unless I
miss my guess. I love my native land most to death, _but_ ..."

"Ow, blow that!" interrupted the captain irritably. "Let's 'ear about the
'Allam. Wot're you afryd of?"

"'Fraid she'll set up a yell when she finds out we're planting the loot,
Cap'n. She's just that vindictive; you'd think she'd be satisfied with
her end of the stick, but you don't know the Hallam. That milk-and-water
offspring of hers is the apple of her eye, and Freddie's going to collar
the whole shooting-match or madam will kick over the traces."

"Well?"

"Well, she's queered us here. We can't do anything if my lady is going to
camp on our trail and tell everybody we're shady customers, can we? The
question now before the board is: Where now,--and how?"

"Amsterdam," Mulready chimed in. "I told you that in the beginning."

"But how?" argued Calendar. "The Lord knows I'm willing but ... we can't go
by rail, thanks to the Hallam. We've got to lose her first of all."

"But wot I'm arskin' is, wot's the matter with--"

"The _Alethea_, Cap'n? Nothing, so far as Dick and I are concerned. But my
dutiful daughter is prejudiced; she's been so long without proper paternal
discipline," Calendar laughed, "that she's rather high-spirited. Of course
I might overcome her objections, but the girl's no fool, and every ounce
of pressure I bring to bear just now only helps make her more restless and
suspicious."

"You leave her to me," Mulready interposed, with a brutal laugh. "I'll
guarantee to get her aboard, or..."

"Drop it, Dick!" Calendar advised quietly. "And go a bit easy with that
bottle for five minutes, can't you?"

"Well, then," Stryker resumed, apparently concurring in Calendar's
attitude, "w'y don't one of you tyke the stuff, go off quiet and dispose of
it to a proper fence, and come back to divide. I don't see w'y that--"

"Naturally you wouldn't," chuckled Calendar. "Few people besides the two of
us understand the depth of affection existing between Dick, here, and
me. We just can't bear to get out of sight of each other. We're sure
inseparable--since night before last. Odd, isn't it?"

"You drop it!" snarled Mulready, in accents so ugly that the listener was
startled. "Enough's enough and--"

"There, there, Dick! All right; I'll behave," Calendar soothed him. "We'll
forget and say no more about it."

"Well, see you don't."

"But 'as either of you a plan?" persisted Stryker.

"I have," replied Mulready; "and it's the simplest and best, if you could
only make this long-lost parent here see it."

"Wot is it?"

Mulready seemed to ignore Calendar and address himself to the captain.
He articulated with some difficulty, slurring his words to the point of
indistinctness at times.

"Simple enough," he propounded solemnly. "We've got the gladstone bag here;
Miss Dolly's at the hotel--that's her papa's bright notion; he thinks she's
to be trusted ... Now then, what's the matter with weighing anchor and
slipping quietly out to sea?"

"Leavin' the dootiful darter?"

"Cert'n'y. She's only a drag any way. 'Better off without her.... Then we
can wait our time and get highest market prices--"

"You forget, Dick," Calendar put it, "that there's a thousand in it for
each of us if she's kept out of England for six weeks. A thousand's five
thousand in the land I hail from; I can use five thousand in my business."

"Why can't you be content with what you've got?" demanded Mulready
wrathfully.

"Because I'm a seventh son of a seventh son; I can see an inch or two
beyond my nose. If Dorothy ever finds her way back to England she'll spoil
one of the finest fields of legitimate graft I ever licked my lips to look
at. The trouble with you, Mul, is you're too high-toned. You want to play
the swell mobs-man from post to finish. A quick touch and a clean getaway
for yours. Now, that's all right; that has its good points, but you don't
want to underestimate the advantages of a good blackmailing connection....
If I can keep Dorothy quiet long enough, I look to the Hallam and precious
Freddie to be a great comfort to me in my old age."

"Then, for God's sake," cried Mulready, "go to the hotel, get your brat by
the scruif of her pretty neck and drag her aboard. Let's get out of this."

"I won't," returned Calendar inflexibly.

The dispute continued, but the listener had heard enough. He had to get
away and think, could no longer listen; indeed, the voices of the three
blackguards below came but indistinctly to his ears, as if from a distance.
He was sick at heart and ablaze with indignation by turns. Unconsciously he
was trembling violently in every limb; swept by alternate waves of heat and
cold, feverish one minute, shivering the next. All of which phenomena were
due solely to the rage that welled inside his heart.

Stealthily he crept away to the rail, to stand grasping it and staring
across the water with unseeing eyes at the gay old city twinkling back with
her thousand eyes of light. The cool night breeze, sweeping down unhindered
over the level Netherlands from the bleak North Sea, was comforting to
his throbbing temples. By degrees his head cleared, his rioting pulses
subsided, he could think; and he did.

Over there, across the water, in the dingy and disreputable Hôtel du
Commerce, Dorothy waited in her room, doubtless the prey of unnumbered
nameless terrors, while aboard the brigantine her fate was being decided by
a council of three unspeakable scoundrels, one of whom, professing himself
her father, openly declared his intention of using her to further his
selfish and criminal ends.

His first and natural thought, to steal away to her and induce her to
accompany him back to England, Kirkwood perforce discarded. He could
have wept over the realization of his unqualified impotency. He had no
money,--not even cab-fare from the hotel to the railway station. Something
subtler, more crafty, had to be contrived to meet the emergency. And there
was one way, one only; he could see none other. Temporarily he must make
himself one of the company of her enemies, force himself upon them,
ingratiate himself into their good graces, gain their confidence, then,
when opportunity offered, betray them. And the power to make them tolerate
him, if not receive him as a fellow, the knowledge of them and their plans
that they had unwittingly given him, was his.

And Dorothy, was waiting....

He swung round and without attempting to muffle his footfalls strode toward
the companionway. He must pretend he had just come aboard.

Subconsciously he had been aware, during his time of pondering, that the
voices in the cabin had been steadily gaining in volume, rising louder and
yet more loud, Mulready's ominous, drink-blurred accents dominating the
others. There was a quarrel afoot; as soon as he gave it heed, Kirkwood
understood that Mulready, in the madness of his inflamed brain, was forcing
the issue while Calendar sought vainly to calm and soothe him.

The American arrived at the head of the companionway at a critical
juncture. As he moved to descend some low, cool-toned retort of Calendar's
seemed to enrage his confederate beyond reason. He yelped aloud with wrath,
sprang to his feet, knocking over a chair, and leaping back toward the foot
of the steps, flashed an adroit hand behind him and found his revolver.

"I've stood enough from you!" he screamed, his voice oddly clear in that
moment of insanity. "You've played with me as long as you will, you hulking
American hog! And now I'm going to show--"

As he held his fire to permit his denunciation to bite home, Kirkwood,
appalled to find himself standing on the threshold of a tragedy, gathered
himself together and launched through the air, straight for the madman's
shoulders.

As they went down together, sprawling, Mulready's head struck against a
transom and the revolver fell from his limp fingers.




XIV


STRATAGEMS AND SPOILS

Prepared as he had been for the shock, Kirkwood was able to pick himself up
quickly, uninjured, Mulready's revolver in his grasp.

On his feet, straddling Mulready's insentient body, he confronted Calendar
and Stryker. The face of the latter was a sickly green, the gift of his
fright. The former seemed coldly composed, already recovering from his
surprise and bringing his wits to bear upon the new factor which had been
so unceremoniously injected into the situation.

[Illustration: Straddling Mulready's body, he confronted Calendar and
Stryker.]

Standing, but leaning heavily upon a hand that rested flat on the table,
in the other he likewise held a revolver, which he had apparently drawn in
self-defense, at the crisis of Mulready's frenzy. Its muzzle was deflected.
He looked Kirkwood over with a cool gray eye, the color gradually returning
to his fat, clean-shaven cheeks, replacing the pardonable pallor which had
momentarily rested thereon.

As for Kirkwood, he had covered the fat adventurer before he knew it.
Stryker, who had been standing immediately in the rear of Calendar,
immediately cowered and cringed to find himself in the line of fire.

Of the three conscious men in the brigantine's cabin, Calendar was probably
the least confused or excited. Stryker was palpably unmanned. Kirkwood was
tingling with a sense of mastery, but collected and rapidly revolving the
combinations for the reversed conditions which had been brought about by
Mulready's drunken folly. His elation was apparent in his shining, boyish
eyes, as well as in the bright color that glowed in his cheeks. When he
decided to speak it was with rapid enunciation, but clearly and concisely.

"Calendar," he began, "if a single shot is fired about this vessel the
river police will be buzzing round your ears in a brace of shakes."

The fat adventurer nodded assent, his eyes contracting.

"Very well!" continued Kirkwood brusquely. "You must know that I have
personally nothing to fear from the police; if arrested, I wouldn't be
detained a day. On the other hand, you ... Hand me that pistol, Calendar,
butt first, please. Look sharp, my man! If you don't..."

He left the ellipsis to be filled in by the corpulent blackguard's
intelligence. The latter, gray eyes still intent on the younger man's face,
wavered, plainly impressed, but still wondering.

"Quick! I'm not patient to-night..."

No longer was Calendar of two minds. In the face of Kirkwood's attitude
there was but one course to be followed: that of obedience. Calendar
surrendered an untenable position as gracefully as could be wished.

"I guess you know what you mean by this," he said, tendering the weapon as
per instructions; "I'm doggoned if I do.... You'll allow a certain
latitude in consideration of my relief; I can't say we were anticipating
this--ah--Heaven-sent visitation."

Accepting the revolver with his left hand and settling his forefinger on
the trigger, Kirkwood beamed with pure enjoyment. He found the deference
of the older man, tempered though it was by his indomitable swagger,
refreshing in the extreme.

"A little appreciation isn't exactly out of place, come to think of it,"
he commented, adding, with an eye for the captain: "Stryker, you bold, bad
butterfly, have you got a gun concealed about your unclean person?"

The captain shook visibly with contrition. "No, Mr. Kirkwood," he managed
to reply in a voice singularly lacking in his wonted bluster.

"Say 'sir'!" suggested Kirkwood.

"No, Mr. Kirkwood, sir," amended Stryker eagerly.

"Now come round here and let's have a look at you. Please stay where you
are, Calendar.... Why, Captain, you're shivering from head to foot! Not ill
are you, you wag? Step over to the table there, Stryker, and turn out your
pockets; turn 'em inside out and let's see what you carry in the way of
offensive artillery. And, Stryker, don't be rash; don't do anything you'd
be sorry for afterwards."

"No fear of that," mumbled the captain, meekly shambling toward the table,
and, in his anxiety to give no cause for unpleasantness, beginning to empty
his pockets on the way.

"Don't forget the 'sir,' Stryker. And, Stryker, if you happen to think of
anything in the line of one of your merry quips or jests, don't strain
yourself holding in; get it right off your chest, and you'll feel better."

Kirkwood chuckled, in high conceit with himself, watching Calendar out of
the corner of his eye, but with his attention centered on the infinitely
diverting spectacle afforded by Stryker, whose predacious hands were
trembling violently as, one by one, they brought to light the articles of
which he had despoiled his erstwhile victim.

"Come, come, Stryker! Surely you can think of something witty, surely you
haven't exhausted the possibilities of that almanac joke! Couldn't you
ring another variation on the lunatic wheeze? Don't hesitate out of
consideration for me, Captain; I'm joke proof--perhaps you've noticed?"

Stryker turned upon him an expression at once ludicrous, piteous and
hateful. "That's all, sir," he snarled, displaying his empty palms in token
of his absolute tractability.

"Good enough. Now right about face--quick! Your back's prettier than your
face, and besides, I want to know whether your hip-pockets are empty. I've
heard it's the habit of you gentry to pack guns in your clothes.... None?
That's all right, then. Now roost on the transom, over there in the corner,
Stryker, and don't move. Don't let me hear a word from you. Understand?"

Submissively the captain retired to the indicated spot. Kirkwood turned
to Calendar; of whose attitude, however, he had not been for an instant
unmindful.

"Won't you sit down, Mr. Calendar?" he suggested pleasantly. "Forgive me
for keeping you waiting."

For his own part, as the adventurer dropped passively into his chair,
Kirkwood stepped over Mulready and advanced to the middle of the cabin, at
the same time thrusting Calendar's revolver into his own coat pocket. The
other, Mulready's, he nursed significantly with both hands, while he stood
temporarily quiet, surveying the fleshy face of the prime factor in the
intrigue.

A quaint, grim smile played about the American's lips, a smile a little
contemptuous, more than a little inscrutable. In its light Calendar grew
restive and lost something of his assurance. His feet shifted uneasily
beneath the table and his dark eyes wavered, evading Kirkwood's. At length
he seemed to find the suspense unendurable.

"Well?" he demanded testily. "What d'you want of me?"

"I was just wondering at you, Calendar. In the last few days you've given
me enough cause to wonder, as you'll admit."

The adventurer plucked up spirit, deluded by Kirkwood's pacific tone. "I
wonder at you, Mr. Kirkwood," he retorted. "It was good of you to save my
life and--"

"I'm not so sure of that! Perhaps it had been more humane--"

Calendar owned the touch with a wry grimace. "But I'm damned if I
understand this high-handed attitude of yours!" he concluded heatedly.

"Don't you?" Kirkwood's humor became less apparent, the smile sobering.
"You will," he told the man, adding abruptly: "Calendar, where's your
daughter?"

The restless eyes sought the companionway.

"Dorothy," the man lied spontaneously, without a tremor, "is with friends
in England. Why? Did you want to see her?"

"I rather expected to."

"Well, I thought it best to leave her home, after all."

"I'm glad to hear she's in safe hands," commented Kirkwood.

The adventurer's glance analyzed his face. "Ah," he said slowly, "I see.
You followed me on Dorothy's account, Mr. Kirkwood?"

"Partly; partly on my own. Let me put it to you fairly. When you forced
yourself upon me, back there in London, you offered me some sort of
employment; when I rejected it, you used me to your advantage for the
furtherance of your purposes (which I confess I don't understand), and made
me miss my steamer. Naturally, when I found myself penniless and friendless
in a strange country, I thought again of your offer; and tried to find you,
to accept it."

"Despite the fact that you're an honest man, Kirkwood?" The fat lips
twitched with premature enjoyment.

"I'm a desperate man to-night, whatever I may have been yesterday." The
young man's tone was both earnest and convincing. "I think I've shown that
by my pertinacity in hunting you down."

"Well--yes." Calendar's thick fingers caressed his lips, trying to hide the
dawning smile.

"Is that offer still open?"

His nonchalance completely restored by the very naïveté of the proposition,
Calendar laughed openly and with a trace of irony. The episode seemed to be
turning out better than he had anticipated. Gently his mottled fat fingers
played about his mouth and chins as he looked Kirkwood up and down.

"I'm sorry," he replied, "that it isn't--now. You're too late, Kirkwood;
I've made other arrangements."

"Too bad." Kirkwood's eyes narrowed. "You force me to harsher measures,
Calendar."

Genuinely diverted, the adventurer laughed a second time, tipping back
in his chair, his huge frame shaking with ponderous enjoyment. "Don't do
anything you'd be sorry for," he parroted, sarcastical, the young man's
recent admonition to the captain.

"No fear, Calendar. I'm just going to use my advantage, which you won't
dispute,"--the pistol described an eloquent circle, gleaming in the
lamplight--"to levy on you a little legitimate blackmail. Don't be alarmed;
I shan't hit you any harder than I have to."

"What?" stammered Calendar, astonished. "What in hell _are_ you driving
at?"

"Recompense for my time and trouble. You've cost me a pretty penny, first
and last, with your nasty little conspiracy--whatever it's all about. Now,
needing the money, I purpose getting some of it back. I shan't precisely
rob you, but this is a hold-up, all right.... Stryker," reproachfully, "I
don't see my pearl pin."

"I got it 'ere," responded the sailor hastily, fumbling with his tie.

"Give it me, then." Kirkwood held out his hand and received the trinket.
Then, moving over to the table, the young man, while abating nothing of
his watchfulness, sorted out his belongings from the mass of odds and ends
Stryker had disgorged. The tale of them was complete; the captain had
obeyed him faithfully. Kirkwood looked up, pleased.

"Now see here, Calendar; this collection of truck that I was robbed of by
this resurrected Joe Miller here, cost me upwards of a hundred and fifty.
I'm going to sell it to you at a bargain--say fifty dollars, two hundred
and fifty francs."

"The juice you are!" Calendar's eyes opened wide, partly in admiration.
"D'you realize that this is next door to highway robbery, my young friend?"

"High-seas piracy, if you prefer," assented Kirkwood with entire
equanimity. "I'm going to have the money, and you're going to give it up.
The transaction by any name would smell no sweeter, Calendar. Come--fork
over!"

"And if I refuse?"

"I wouldn't refuse, if I were you."

"Why not?"

"The consequences would be too painful."

"You mean you'd puncture me with that gun?"

"Not unless you attack or attempt to follow me. I mean to say that the
Belgian police are notoriously a most efficient body, and that I'll make
it my duty and pleasure to introduce 'em to you, if you refuse. But you
won't," Kirkwood added soothingly, "will you, Calendar?"

"No." The adventurer had become suddenly thoughtful. "No, I won't. 'Glad to
oblige you."

He tilted his chair still farther back, straightening out his elephantine
legs, inserted one fat hand into his trouser pocket and with some
difficulty extracted a combined bill-fold and coin-purse, at once heavy
with gold and bulky with notes. Moistening thumb and forefinger, "How'll
you have it?" he inquired with a lift of his cunning eyes; and when
Kirkwood had advised him, slowly counted out four fifty-franc notes, placed
them near the edge of the table, and weighted them with five ten-franc
pieces. And, "'That all?" he asked, replacing the pocket-book.

"That will be about all. I leave you presently to your unholy devices, you
and that gay dog, over there." The captain squirmed, reddening. "Just by
way of precaution, however, I'll ask you to wait in here till I'm off."
Kirkwood stepped backwards to the door of the captain's room, opened it and
removed the key from the inside. "Please take Mulready in with you," he
continued. "By the time you get out, I'll be clear of Antwerp. Please don't
think of refusing me,--I really mean it!"

The latter clause came sharply as Calendar seemed to hesitate, his weary,
wary eyes glimmering with doubt. Kirkwood, watching him as a cat her prey,
intercepted a lightning-swift sidelong glance that shifted from his face
to the port lockers, forward. But the fat adventurer was evidently to a
considerable degree deluded by the very child-like simplicity of Kirkwood's
attitude. If the possibility that his altercation with Mulready had been
overheard, crossed his mind, Calendar had little choice other than to
accept the chance. Either way he moved, the risk was great; if he refused
to be locked in the captain's room, there was the danger of the police,
to which Kirkwood had convincingly drawn attention; if he accepted the
temporary imprisonment, he took a risk with the gladstone bag. On the other
hand, he had estimated Kirkwood's honesty as thorough-going, from their
first interview; he had appraised him as a gentleman and a man of honor.
And he did not believe the young man knew, after all ... Perplexed, at
length he chose the smoother way, and with an indulgent lifting of eyebrows
and fat shoulders, rose and waddled over to Mulready.

"Oh, all right," he conceded with deep toleration in his tone for the
idiosyncrasies of youth. "It's all the same to me, beau." He laughed a
nervous laugh. "Come along and lend us a hand, Stryker."

The latter glanced timidly at Kirkwood, his eyes pleading for leave to
move; which Kirkwood accorded with an imperative nod and a fine flourish of
the revolver. Promptly the captain, sprang to Calendar's assistance; and
between the two of them, the one taking Mulready's head, the other his
feet, they lugged him quickly into the stuffy little state-room. Kirkwood,
watching and following to the threshold, inserted the key.

"One word more," he counseled, a hand on the knob. "Don't forget I've
warned you what'll happen if you try to break even with me."

"Never fear, little one!" Calendar's laugh was nervously cheerful. "The
Lord knows you're welcome."

"Thank you 'most to death," responded Kirkwood politely. "Good-by--and
good-by to you, Stryker. 'Glad to have humored your desire to meet me soon
again."

Kirkwood, turning the key in the lock, withdrew it and dropped it on the
cabin table; at the same time he swept into his pocket the money he had
extorted of Calendar. Then he paused an instant, listening; from the
captain's room came a sound of murmurs and scuffling. He debated what they
were about in there--but time pressed. Not improbably they, were crowding
for place at the keyhole, he reflected, as he crossed to the port locker
forward.

He had its lid up in a twinkling, and in another had lifted out the
well-remembered black gladstone bag.

This seems to have been his first compound larceny.

As if stimulated by some such reflection he sprang for the companionway,
dropping the lid of the locker with a bang which must have been
excruciatingly edifying to the men in the captain's room. Whatever their
emotions, the bang was mocked by a mighty kick, shaking the door; which,
Kirkwood reflected, opened outward and was held only by the frailest kind
of a lock: it would not hold long.

Spurred onward by a storm of curses, Stryker's voice chanting infuriated
cacophony with Calendar's, Kirkwood leapt up the companionway even as the
second tremendous kick threatened to shatter the panels. Heart in mouth, a
chill shiver of guilt running up and down his spine, he gained the deck,
cast loose the painter, drew in his rowboat, and dropped over the side;
then, the gladstone bag nestling between his feet, sat down and bent to the
oars.

And doubts assailed him, pressing close upon the ebb of his
excitement--doubts and fears innumerable.

There was no longer a distinction to be drawn between himself and Calendar;
no more could he esteem himself a better and more honest man than that
accomplished swindler. He was not advised as to the Belgian code, but
English law, he understood, made no allowance for the good intent of those
caught in possession of stolen property; though he was acting with the most
honorable motives in the world, the law, if he came within its cognizance,
would undoubtedly place him on Calendar's plane and judge him by the same
standard. To all intents and purposes he was a thief, and thief he would
remain until the gladstone bag with its contents should be restored to its
rightful owner.

Voluntarily, then, he had stepped from the ranks of the hunters to those of
the hunted. He now feared police interference as abjectly as did Calendar
and his set of rogues; and Kirkwood felt wholly warranted in assuming that
the adventurer, with his keen intelligence, would not handicap himself by
ignoring this point. Indeed, if he were to be judged by what Kirkwood had
inferred of his character, Calendar would let nothing whatever hinder him,
neither fear of bodily hurt nor danger of apprehension at the hands of the
police, from making a determined and savage play to regain possession of
his booty.

Well! (Kirkwood set his mouth savagely) Calendar should have a run for his
money!

For the present he could compliment himself with the knowledge that he had
outwitted the rogues, had lifted the jewels and probably two-thirds of
their armament; he had also the start, the knowledge of their criminal
guilt and intent, and his own plans, to comfort him. As for the latter, he
did not believe that Calendar would immediately fathom them; so he took
heart of grace and tugged at the oars with a will, pulling directly for the
city and permitting the current to drift him down-stream at its pleasure.
There could be no more inexcusable folly than to return to the _Quai Steen_
landing and (possibly) the arms of the despoiled boat-owner.

At first he could hear crash after splintering crash sounding dully muffled
from the cabin of the _Alethea_: a veritable devil's tattoo beaten out by
the feet of the prisoners. Evidently the fastening was serving him better
than he had dared hope. But as the black rushing waters widened between
boat and brigantine, the clamor aboard the latter subsided, indicating
that Calendar and Stryker had broken out or been released by the crew. In
ignorance as to whether he were seen or being pursued, Kirkwood pulled on,
winning in under the shadow of the quais and permitting the boat to drift
down to a lonely landing on the edge of the dockyard quarter of Antwerp.

Here alighting, he made the boat fast and, soothing his conscience with a
surmise that its owner would find it there in the morning, strode swiftly
over to the train line that runs along the embankment, swung aboard an
adventitious car and broke his first ten-franc piece in order to pay his
fare.

The car made a leisurely progress up past the old Steen castle and the Quai
landing, Kirkwood sitting quietly, the gladstone bag under his hand, a
searching gaze sweeping the waterside. No sign of the adventurers rewarded
him, but it was now all chance, all hazard. He had no more heart for
confidence.

They passed the Hôtel du Commerce. Kirkwood stared up at its windows,
wondering....

A little farther on, a disengaged fiacre, its driver alert for possible
fares, turned a corner into the esplanade. At sight of it Kirkwood,
inspired, hopped nimbly off the tram-car and signaled the cabby. The latter
pulled up and Kirkwood started to charge him with instructions; something
which he did haltingly, hampered by a slight haziness of purpose. While
thus engaged, and at rest in the stark glare of the street-lamps, with
no chance of concealing himself, he was aware of a rising tumult in the
direction of the landing, and glancing round, discovered a number of people
running toward him. With no time to wonder whether or no he was really the
object of the hue-and-cry, he tossed the driver three silver francs.

"Gare Centrale!" he cried. "And drive like the devil!"

Diving into the fiacre he shut the door and stuck his head out of the
window, taking observations. A ragged fringe of silly rabble was bearing
down upon them, with one or two gendarmes in the forefront, and a giant,
who might or might not be Stryker, a close second. Furthermore, another
cab seemed to have been requisitioned for the chase. His heart misgave him
momentarily; but his driver had taken him at his word and generosity,
and in a breath the fiacre had turned the corner on two wheels, and the
glittering reaches of the embankment, drive and promenade, were blotted
out, as if smudged with lamp-black, by the obscurity of a narrow and
tortuous side street.

He drew in his head the better to preserve his brains against further
emergencies.

After a block or two Kirkwood picked up the gladstone bag, gently opened
the door, and put a foot on the step, pausing to look back. The other cab
was pelting after him with all the enthusiasm of a hound on a fresh
trail. He reflected that this mad progress through the thoroughfares of a
civilized city would not long endure without police intervention. So he
waited, watching his opportunity. The fiacre hurtled onward, the driver
leaning forward from his box to urge the horse with lash of whip and
tongue, entirely unconscious of his fare's intentions.

Between two streets the mouth of a narrow and darksome byway flashed into
view. Kirkwood threw wide the door, and leaped, trusting to the night to
hide his stratagem, to luck to save his limbs. Neither failed him; in a
twinkling he was on all fours in the mouth of the alley, and as he picked
himself up, the second fiacre passed, Calendar himself poking a round bald
poll out of the window to incite his driver's cupidity with promises of
redoubled fare.

Kirkwood mopped his dripping forehead and whistled low with dismay; it
seemed that from that instant on it was to be a vendetta with a vengeance.
Calendar, as he had foreseen, was stopping at nothing.

At a dog trot he sped down the alley to the next street, on which he turned
back--more sedately--toward the river, debouching on the esplanade just one
block from the Hôtel du Commerce. As he swung past the serried tables of a
café, whatever fears he had harbored were banished by the discovery that
the excitement occasioned by the chase had already subsided. Beneath the
garish awnings the crowd was laughing and chattering, eating and sipping
its bock with complete unconcern, heedless altogether of the haggard and
shabby young man carrying a black hand-bag, with the black Shade of Care
for company and a blacker threat of disaster dogging his footsteps. Without
attracting any attention whatever, indeed, he mingled with the strolling
crowds, making his way toward the Hôtel du Commerce. Yet he was not at all
at ease; his uneasy conscience invested the gladstone bag with a magnetic
attraction for the public eye. To carry it unconcealed in his hand
furnished him with a sensation as disturbing as though its worn black sides
had been stenciled STOLEN! in letters of flame. He felt it rendered him a
cynosure of public interest, an object of suspicion to the wide cold world,
that the gaze which lit upon the bag traveled to his face only to espy
thereon the brand of guilt.

For ease of mind, presently, he turned into a convenient shop and spent ten
invaluable francs for a hand satchel big enough to hold the gladstone bag.

With more courage, now that he had the hateful thing under cover, he found
and entered the Hôtel du Commerce.

In the little closet which served for an office, over a desk visibly
groaning with the weight of an enormous and grimy registry book, a sleepy,
fat, bland and good-natured woman of the Belgian _bourgeoisie_ presided,
a benign and drowsy divinity of even-tempered courtesy. To his misleading
inquiry for Monsieur Calendar she returned a cheerful permission to seek
that gentleman for himself.

"Three flights, M'sieu', in the front; suite seventeen it is. M'sieu' does
not mind walking up?" she inquired.

M'sieu' did not in the least, though by no strain of the imagination could
it, be truthfully said that he walked up those steep and redolent stairways
of the Hôtel du Commerce d'Anvers. More literally, he flew with winged
feet, spurning each third padded step with a force that raised a tiny cloud
of fine white dust from the carpeting.

Breathless, at last he paused at the top of the third flight. His heart
was hammering, his pulses drumming like wild things; there was a queer
constriction in his throat, a fire of hope in his heart alternating with
the ice of doubt. Suppose she were not there! What if he were mistaken,
what if he had misunderstood, what if Mulready and Calendar had referred to
another lodging-house?

Pausing, he gripped the balustrade fiercely, forcing his self-control,
forcing himself to reflect that the girl (presuming, for the sake of
argument, he were presently to find her) could not be expected to
understand how ardently he had discounted this moment of meeting, or how
strangely it affected him. Indeed, he himself was more than a little
disturbed by the latter phenomenon, though he was no longer blind to its
cause. But he was not to let her see the evidences of his agitation, lest
she be frightened.

Slowly schooling himself to assume a masque of illuding self-possession and
composure, he passed down the corridor to the door whose panels wore the
painted legend, 17; and there knocked.

Believing that he overheard from within a sudden startled exclamation, he
smiled patiently, tolerant of her surprise.

Burning with impatience as with a fever, he endured a long minute's wait.

Misgivings were prompting him to knock again and summon her by name, when
he heard footfalls on the other side of the door, followed by a click of
the lock. The door was opened grudgingly, a bare six inches.

Of the alarmed expression in the eyes that stared into his, he took no
account. His face lengthened a little as he stood there, dumb, panting,
staring; and his heart sank, down, deep down into a gulf of disappointment,
weighted sorely with chagrin.

Then, of the two the first to recover countenance, he doffed his cap and
bowed.

"Good evening, Mrs. Hallam," he said with a rueful smile.




XV


REFUGEES

Now, if Kirkwood's emotion was poignant, Mrs. Hallam's astonishment
paralleled, and her relief transcended it. In order to understand this it
must be remembered that while Mr. Kirkwood was aware of the lady's presence
in Antwerp, on her part she had known nothing of him since he had so
ungallantly fled her company in Sheerness. She seemed to anticipate that
either Calendar or one of his fellows would be discovered at the door,--to
have surmised it without any excessive degree of pleasure.

Only briefly she hesitated, while her surprise swayed her; then with a
hardening of the eyes and a curt little nod, "I'm sorry," she said with
decision, "but I am busy and can't see you now, Mr. Kirkwood"; and
attempted to shut the door in his face.

Deftly Kirkwood forestalled her intention by inserting both a foot and a
corner of the newly purchased hand-bag between the door and the jamb. He
had dared too greatly to be thus dismissed. "Pardon me," he countered,
unabashed, "but I wish to speak with Miss Calendar."

"Dorothy," returned the lady with spirit, "is engaged...."

She compressed her lips, knitted her brows, and with disconcerting
suddenness thrust one knee against the obstructing hand-bag; Kirkwood,
happily, anticipated the movement just in time to reinforce the bag with
his own knee; it remained in place, the door standing open.

The woman flushed angrily; their glances crossed, her eyes flashing with
indignation; but Kirkwood's held them with a level and unyielding stare.

"I intend," he told her quietly, "to see Miss Calendar. It's useless your
trying to hinder me. We may as well understand each other, Madam, and I'll
tell you now that if you wish to avoid a scene--"

"Dorothy!" the woman called over her shoulder; "ring for the porter."

"By all means," assented Kirkwood agreeably. "I'll send him for a
gendarme."

"You insolent puppy!"

"Madam, your wit disarms me--"

"What is the matter, Mrs. Hallam?" interrupted a voice from the other side
of the door. "Who is it?"

"Miss Calendar!" cried Kirkwood hastily, raising his voice.

"Mr. Kirkwood!" the reply came on the instant. She knew his voice! "Please,
Mrs. Hallam, I will see Mr. Kirkwood."

"You have no time to waste with him, Dorothy," said the woman coldly. "I
must insist--"

"But you don't seem to understand; it is Mr. Kirkwood!" argued the
girl,--as if he were ample excuse for any imprudence!

Kirkwood's scant store of patience was by this time rapidly becoming
exhausted. "I should advise you not to interfere any further, Mrs. Hallam,"
he told her in a tone low, but charged with meaning.

How much did he know? She eyed him an instant longer, in sullen suspicion,
then swung open the door, yielding with what grace she could. "Won't you
come in, Mr. Kirkwood?" she inquired with acidulated courtesy.

"If you press me," he returned winningly, "how can I refuse? You are too
good!"

His impertinence disconcerted even himself; he wondered that she did not
slap him as he passed her, entering the room; and felt that he deserved it,
despite her attitude. But such thoughts could not long trouble one whose
eyes were enchanted by the sight of Dorothy, confronting him in the middle
of the dingy room, her hands, bristling dangerously with hat pins, busy
with the adjustment of a small gray toque atop the wonder that was her
hair. So vivacious and charming she seemed, so spirited and bright her
welcoming smile, so foreign was she altogether to the picture of her, worn
and distraught, that he had mentally conjured up, that he stopped in an
extreme of disconcertion; and dropped the hand-bag, smiling sheepishly
enough under her ready laugh--mirth irresistibly incited by the
plainly-read play of expression on his mobile countenance.

"You must forgive the unconventionally, Mr. Kirkwood," she apologized,
needlessly enough, but to cover his embarrassment. "I am on the point of
going out with Mrs. Hallam--and of course you are the last person on earth
I expected to meet here!"

"It's good to see you, Miss Calendar," he said simply, remarking with much
satisfaction that her trim walking costume bore witness to her statement
that she was prepared for the street.

The girl glanced into a mirror, patted the small, bewitching hat an
infinitesimal fraction of an inch to one side, and turned to him again,
her hands free. One of them, small but cordial, rested in his grasp for an
instant all too brief, the while he gazed earnestly into her face,
noting with concern what the first glance had not shown him,--the almost
imperceptible shadows beneath her eyes and cheek-bones, pathetic records of
the hours the girl had spent, since last he had seen her, in company with
his own grim familiar, Care.

Not a little of care and distress of mind had seasoned her portion in those
two weary days. He saw and knew it; and his throat tightened inexplicably,
again, as it had out there in the corridor. Possibly the change in her had
passed unchallenged by any eyes other than his, but even in the little time
that he had spent in her society, the image of her had become fixed so
indelibly on his memory, that he could not now be deceived. She was
changed--a little, but changed; she had suffered, and was suffering and,
forced by suffering, her nascent womanhood was stirring in the bud. The
child that he had met in London, in Antwerp he found grown to woman's
stature and slowly coming to comprehension of the nature of the change in
herself,--the wonder of it glowing softly in her eyes....

The clear understanding of mankind that is an appanage of woman's estate,
was now added to the intuitions of a girl's untroubled heart. She could
not be blind to the mute adoration of his gaze; nor could she resent it.
Beneath it she colored and lowered her lashes.

"I was about to go out," she repeated in confusion. "I--it's pleasant to
see you, too."

"Thank you," he stammered ineptly; "I--I--"

"If Mr. Kirkwood will excuse us, Dorothy," Mrs. Hallam's sharp tones struck
in discordantly, "we shall be glad to see him when we return to London."

"I am infinitely complimented, Mrs. Hallam," Kirkwood assured her; and of
the girl quickly: "You're going back home?" he asked.

She nodded, with a faint, puzzled smile that included the woman. "After a
little--not immediately. Mrs. Hallam is so kind--"

"Pardon me," he interrupted; "but tell me one thing, please: have you any
one in England to whom you can go without invitation and be welcomed and
cared for--any friends or relations?"

"Dorothy will be with me," Mrs. Hallam answered for her, with cold
defiance.

Deliberately insolent, Kirkwood turned his back to the woman. "Miss
Calendar, will you answer my question for yourself?" he asked the girl
pointedly.

"Why--yes; several friends; none in London, but--"

"Dorothy--"

"One moment, Mrs. Hallam," Kirkwood flung crisply over his shoulder. "I'm
going to ask you something rather odd, Miss Calendar," he continued,
seeking the girl's eyes. "I hope--"

"Dorothy, I--"

"If you please, Mrs. Hallam," suggested the girl, with just the right shade
of independence. "I wish to listen to Mr. Kirkwood. He has been very kind
to me and has every right...." She turned to him again, leaving the woman
breathless and speechless with anger.

"You told me once," Kirkwood continued quickly, and, he felt, brazenly,
"that you considered me kind, thoughtful and considerate. You know me
no better to-day than you did then, but I want to beg you to trust me a
little. Can you trust yourself to my protection until we reach your friends
in England?"

"Why, I--" the girl faltered, taken by surprise.

"Mr. Kirkwood!" cried Mrs. Hallam angrily, finding her voice.

Kirkwood turned to meet her onslaught with a mien grave, determined,
unflinching. "Please do not interfere, Madam," he said quietly.

"You are impertinent, sir! Dorothy, I forbid you to listen to this person!"

The girl flushed, lifting her chin a trifle. "Forbid?" she repeated
wonderingly.

Kirkwood was quick to take advantage of her resentment. "Mrs. Hallam is not
fitted to advise you," he insisted, "nor can she control your actions. It
must already have occurred to you that you're rather out of place in the
present circumstances. The men who have brought you hither, I believe you
already see through, to some extent. Forgive my speaking plainly ... But
that is why you have accepted Mrs. Hallam's offer of protection. Will you
take my word for it, when I tell you she has not your right interests at
heart, but the reverse? I happen to know, Miss Calendar, and I--"

"How dare you, sir?"

Flaming with rage, Mrs. Hallam put herself bodily between them, confronting
Kirkwood in white-lipped desperation, her small, gloved hands clenched and
quivering at her sides, her green eyes dangerous.

But Kirkwood could silence her; and he did. "Do you wish me to speak
frankly, Madam? Do you wish me to tell what I know--and all I know--," with
rising emphasis,--"of your social status and your relations with Calendar
and Mulready? I promise you that if you wish it, or force me to it...."

But he had need to say nothing further; the woman's eyes wavered before his
and a little sob of terror forced itself between her shut teeth. Kirkwood
smiled grimly, with a face of brass, impenetrable, inflexible. And suddenly
she turned from him with indifferent bravado.

"As Mr. Kirkwood says, Dorothy," she said in her high, metallic voice, "I
have no authority over you. But if you're silly enough to consider for a
moment this fellow's insulting suggestion, if you're fool enough to go with
him, unchaperoned through Europe and imperil your--"

"Mrs. Hallam!" Kirkwood cut her short with a menacing tone.

"Why, then, I wash my hands of you," concluded the woman defiantly. "Make
your choice, my child," she added with a meaning laugh and moved away,
humming a snatch from a French _chanson_ which brought the hot blood to
Kirkwood's face.

But the girl did not understand; and he was glad of that. "You may judge
between us," he appealed to her directly, once more. "I can only offer
you my word of honor as an American gentleman that you shall be landed in
England, safe and sound, by the first available steamer--"

"There's no need to say more, Mr. Kirkwood," Dorothy informed him quietly.
"I have already decided. I think I begin to understand some things clearly,
now.... If you're ready, we will go."

From the window, where she stood, holding the curtains back and staring
out, Mrs. Hallam turned with a curling lip.

[Illustration: From the window, Mrs. Hallam turned with a curling lip.]

"'The honor of an American gentleman,'" she quoted with a stinging sneer;
"I'm sure I wish you comfort of it, child!"

"We must make haste, Miss Calendar," said Kirkwood, ignoring the
implication. "Have you a traveling-bag?"

She silently indicated a small valise, closed and strapped, on a table by
the bed, and immediately passed out into the hall. Kirkwood took the case
containing the gladstone bag in one hand, the girl's valise in the other,
and followed.

As he turned the head of the stairs he looked back. Mrs. Hallam was still
at the window, her back turned. From her very passiveness he received an
impression of something ominous and forbidding; if she had lost a trick or
two of the game she played, she still held cards, was not at the end of her
resources. She stuck in his imagination for many an hour as a force to be
reckoned with.

For the present he understood that she was waiting to apprise Calendar and
Mulready of their flight. With the more haste, then, he followed Dorothy
down the three flights, through the tiny office, where Madam sat sound
asleep at her over-burdened desk, and out.

Opposite the door they were fortunate enough to find a fiacre drawn up in
waiting at the curb. Kirkwood opened the door for the girl to enter.

"Gare du Sud," he directed the driver. "Drive your fastest--double fare for
quick time!"

The driver awoke with a start from profound reverie, looked Kirkwood over,
and bowed with gesticulative palms.

"M'sieu', I am desolated, but engaged!" he protested.

"Precisely." Kirkwood deposited the two bags on the forward seat of the
conveyance, and stood back to convince the man. "Precisely," said he,
undismayed. "The lady who engaged you is remaining for a time; I will
settle her bill."

"Very well, M'sieu'!" The driver disclaimed responsibility and accepted the
favor of the gods with a speaking shrug. "M'sieu' said the Gare du Sud? _En
voiture_!"

Kirkwood jumped in and shut the door; the vehicle drew slowly away from
the curb, then with gratifying speed hammered up-stream on the embankment.
Bending forward, elbows on knees, Kirkwood watched the sidewalks narrowly,
partly to cover the girl's constraint, due to Mrs. Hallam's attitude,
partly on the lookout for Calendar and his confederates. In a few moments
they passed a public clock.

"We've missed the Flushing boat," he announced. "I'm making a try for the
Hoek van Holland line. We may possibly make it. I know that it leaves by
the Sud Quai, and that's all I do know," he concluded with an apologetic
laugh.

"And if we miss that?" asked the girl, breaking silence for the first time
since they had left the hotel.

"We'll take the first train out of Antwerp."

"Where to?"

"Wherever the first train goes, Miss Calendar.... The main point is to get
away to-night. That we must do, no matter where we land, or how we get
there. To-morrow we can plan with more certainty."

"Yes..." Her assent was more a sigh than a word.

The cab, dashing down the Rue Leopold de Wael, swung into the Place du Sud,
before the station. Kirkwood, acutely watchful, suddenly thrust head and
shoulders out of his window (fortunately it was the one away from the
depot), and called up to the driver.

"Don't stop! Gare Centrale now--and treble fare!"

"_Oui, M'sieu'! Allons!_"

The whip cracked and the horse swerved sharply round the corner into the
Avenue du Sud. The young man, with a hushed exclamation, turned in his
seat, lifting the flap over the little peephole in the back of the
carriage.

He had not been mistaken. Calendar was standing in front of the station;
and it was plain to be seen, from his pose, that the madly careering fiacre
interested him more than slightly. Irresolute, perturbed, the man took
a step or two after it, changed his mind, and returned to his post of
observation.

Kirkwood dropped the flap and turned back to find the girl's wide eyes
searching his face. He said nothing.

"What was that?" she asked after a patient moment.

"Your father, Miss Calendar," he returned uncomfortably.

There fell a short pause; then: "Why--will you tell me--is it necessary to
run away from my father, Mr. Kirkwood?" she demanded, with a moving little
break in her voice.

Kirkwood hesitated. It were unfeeling to tell her why; yet it was essential
that she should know, however painful the knowledge might prove to her.

And she was insistent; he might not dodge the issue. "Why?" she repeated as
he paused.

"I wish you wouldn't press me for an answer just now, Miss Calendar."

"Don't you think I had better know?"

Instinctively he inclined his head in assent.

"Then why--?"

Kirkwood bent forward and patted the flank of the satchel that held the
gladstone bag.

"What does that mean, Mr. Kirkwood?"

"That I have the jewels," he told her tersely, looking straight ahead.

At his shoulder he heard a low gasp of amazement and incredulity
commingled.

"But--! How did you get them? My father deposited them in bank this
morning?"

"He must have taken them out again.... I got them on board the Alethea,
where your father was conferring with Mulready and Captain Stryker."

"The Alethea!"

"Yes."

"You took them from those men?--you!... But didn't my father--?"

"I had to persuade him," said Kirkwood simply.

"But there were three of them against you!"

"Mulready wasn't--ah--feeling very well, and Stryker's a coward. They gave
me no trouble. I locked them in Stryker's room, lifted the bag of jewels,
and came away.... I ought to tell you that they were discussing the
advisability of sailing away without you--leaving you here, friendless and
without means. That's why I considered it my duty to take a hand.... I
don't like to tell you this so brutally, but you ought to know, and I can't
see how to tone it down," he concluded awkwardly.

"I understand...."

But for some moments she did not speak. He avoided looking at her.

The fiacre, rolling at top speed but smoothly on the broad avenues that
encircle the ancient city, turned into the Avenue de Keyser, bringing into
sight the Gare Centrale.

"You don't--k-know--" began the girl without warning, in a voice gusty with
sobs.

"Steady on!" said Kirkwood gently. "I do know, but don't let's talk about
it now. We'll be at the station in a minute, and I'll get out and see
what's to be done about a train, if neither Mulready or Stryker are about.
You stay in the carriage.... No!" He changed his mind suddenly. "I'll not
risk losing you again. It's a risk we'll have to run in company."

"Please!" she agreed brokenly.

The fiacre slowed up and stopped.

"Are you all right, Miss Calendar?" Kirkwood asked.

The girl sat up, lifting her head proudly. "I am quite ready," she said,
steadying her voice.

Kirkwood reconnoitered through the window, while the driver was descending.

"Gare Centrale, M'sieu'," he said, opening the door.

"No one in sight," Kirkwood told the girl. "Come, please."

He got out and gave her his hand, then paid the driver, picked up the two
bags, and hurried with Dorothy into the station, to find in waiting a
string of cars into which people were moving at leisurely rate. His
inquiries at the ticket-window developed the fact that it was the 22:26 for
Brussels, the last train leaving the Gare Centrale that night, and due to
start in ten minutes.

The information settled their plans for once and all; Kirkwood promptly
secured through tickets, also purchasing "Reserve" supplementary tickets
which entitled them to the use of those modern corridor coaches which take
the place of first-class compartments on the Belgian state railways.

"It's a pleasure," said Kirkwood lightly, as he followed the girl into one
of these, "to find one's self in a common-sense sort of a train again.
'Feels like home." He put their luggage in one of the racks and sat down
beside her, chattering with simulated cheerfulness in a vain endeavor to
lighten her evident depression of spirit. "I always feel like a traveling
anachronism in one of your English trains," he said. "You can't
appreciate--"

The girl smiled bravely.... "And after Brussels?" she inquired.

"First train for the coast," he said promptly. "Dover, Ostend,
Boulogne,--whichever proves handiest, no matter which, so long as it gets
us on English soil without undue delay."

She said "Yes" abstractedly, resting an elbow on the window-sill and her
chin in her palm, to stare with serious, sweet brown eyes out into the
arc-smitten night that hung beneath the echoing roof.

Kirkwood fidgeted in despite of the constraint he placed himself under, to
be still and not disturb her needlessly. Impatience and apprehension of
misfortune obsessed his mental processes in equal degree. The ten minutes
seemed interminable that elapsed ere the grinding couplings advertised the
imminence of their start.

The guards began to bawl, the doors to slam, belated travelers to dash
madly for the coaches. The train gave a preliminary lurch ere settling down
to its league-long inland dash.

Kirkwood, in a fever of hope and an ague of fear, saw a man sprint
furiously across the platform and throw himself on the forward steps of
their coach, on the very instant of the start.

Presently he entered by the forward door and walked slowly through,
narrowly inspecting the various passengers. As he approached the seats
occupied by Kirkwood and Dorothy Calendar, his eyes encountered the young
man's, and he leered evilly. Kirkwood met the look with one that was like a
kick, and the fellow passed with some haste into the car behind.

"Who was that?" demanded the girl, without moving her head.

"How did you know?" he asked, astonished. "You didn't look--"

"I saw your knuckles whiten beneath the skin.... Who was it?"

"Hobbs," he acknowledged bitterly; "the mate of the _Alethea_."

"I know.... And you think--?"

"Yes. He must have been ashore when I was on board the brigantine; he
certainly wasn't in the cabin. Evidently they hunted him up, or ran across
him, and pressed him into service.... You see, they're watching every
outlet.... But we'll win through, never fear!"




XVI


TRAVELS WITH A CHAPERON

The train, escaping the outskirts of the city, remarked the event with an
exultant shriek, then settled down, droning steadily, to night-devouring
flight. In the corridor-car the few passengers disposed themselves to
drowse away the coming hour--the short hour's ride that, in these piping
days of frantic traveling, separates Antwerp from the capital city of
Belgium.

A guard, slamming gustily in through the front door, reeled unsteadily down
the aisle. Kirkwood, rousing from a profound reverie, detained him with a
gesture and began to interrogate him in French. When he departed presently
it transpired that the girl was unaquainted with that tongue.

"I didn't understand, you know," she told him with a slow, shy smile.

"I was merely questioning him about the trains from Brussels to-night. We
daren't stop, you see; we must go on,--keep Hobbs on the jump and lose him,
if possible. There's where our advantage lies--in having only Hobbs to deal
with. He's not particularly intellectual; and we've two heads to his one,
besides. If we can prevent him from guessing our destination and wiring
back to Antwerp, we may win away. You understand?"

"Perfectly," she said, brightening. "And what do you purpose doing now?"

"I can't tell yet. The guard's gone to get me some information about the
night trains on other lines. In the meantime, don't fret about Hobbs; I'll
answer for Hobbs."

"I shan't be worried," she said simply, "with you here...."

Whatever answer he would have made he was obliged to postpone because of
the return of the guard, with a handful of time-tables; and when, rewarded
with a modest gratuity, the man had gone his way, and Kirkwood turned again
to the girl, she had withdrawn her attention for the time.

Unconscious of his bold regard, she was dreaming, her thoughts at
loose-ends, her eyes studying the incalculable depths of blue-black night
that swirled and eddied beyond the window-glass. The most shadowy of smiles
touched her lips, the faintest shade of deepened color rested on her
cheeks.... She was thinking of--him? As long as he dared, the young man,
his heart in his own eyes, watched her greedily, taking a miser's joy of
her youthful beauty, striving with all his soul to analyze the enigma of
that most inscrutable smile.

It baffled him. He could not say of what she thought; and told himself
bitterly that it was not for him, a pauper, to presume a place in her
meditations. He must not forget his circumstances, nor let her tolerance
render him oblivious to his place, which must be a servant's, not a
lover's.

The better to convince himself of this, he plunged desperately into
a forlorn attempt to make head or tail of Belgian railway schedule,
complicated as these of necessity are by the alternation from normal
time notation to the abnormal system sanctioned by the government, and
_vice-versa_, with every train that crosses a boundary line of the state.

So preoccupied did he become in this pursuit that he was subconsciously
impressed that the girl had spoken twice, ere he could detach his interest
from the exasperatingly inconclusive and incoherent cohorts of ranked
figures.

"Can't you find out anything?" Dorothy was asking.

"Precious little," he grumbled. "I'd give my head for a Bradshaw! Only it
wouldn't be a fair exchange.... There seems to be an express for
Bruges leaving the Gare du Nord, Brussels, at fifty-five minutes after
twenty-three o'clock; and if I'm not mistaken, that's the latest train out
of Brussels and the earliest we can catch,... if we _can_ catch it. I've
never been in Brussels, and Heaven only knows how long it would take us to
cab it from the Gare du Midi to the Nord."

In this statement, however, Mr. Kirkwood was fortunately mistaken; not
only Heaven, it appeared, had cognizance of the distance between the two
stations. While Kirkwood was still debating the question, with pessimistic
tendencies, the friendly guard had occasion to pass through the coach; and,
being tapped, yielded the desired information with entire tractability.

It would be a cab-ride of perhaps ten minutes. Monsieur, however, would
serve himself well if he offered the driver an advance tip as an incentive
to speedy driving. Why? Why because (here the guard consulted his watch;
and Kirkwood very keenly regretted the loss of his own)--because this
train, announced to arrive in Brussels some twenty minutes prior to the
departure of that other, was already late. But yes--a matter of some ten
minutes. Could that not be made up? Ah, Monsieur, but who should say?

The guard departed, doubtless with private views as to the madness of all
English-speaking travelers.

"And there we are!" commented Kirkwood in factitious resignation. "If we're
obliged to stop overnight in Brussels, our friends will be on our back
before we can get out in the morning, if they have to come by motor-car."
He reflected bitterly on the fact that with but a little more money at
his disposal, he too could hire a motor-car and cry defiance to their
persecutors. "However," he amended, with rising spirits, "so much the
better our chance of losing Mr. Hobbs. We must be ready to drop off the
instant the train stops."

He began to unfold another time-table, threatening again to lose himself
completely; and was thrown into the utmost confusion by the touch of
the girl's hand, in appeal placed lightly on his own. And had she been
observant, she might have seen a second time his knuckles whiten beneath
the skin as he asserted his self-control--though this time not over his
temper.

His eyes, dumbly eloquent, turned to meet hers. She was smiling.

"Please!" she iterated, with the least imperative pressure on his hand,
pushing the folder aside.

"I beg pardon?" he muttered blankly.

"Is it quite necessary, now, to study those schedules? Haven't you decided
to try for the Bruges express?"

"Why yes, but--"

"Then please don't leave me to my thoughts all the time, Mr. Kirkwood."
There was a tremor of laughter in her voice, but her eyes were grave and
earnest. "I'm very weary of thinking round in a circle--and that," she
concluded, with a nervous little laugh, "is all I've had to do for days!"

"I'm afraid I'm very stupid," he humored her. "This is the second time, you
know, in the course of a very brief acquaintance, that you have found it
necessary to remind me to talk to you."

"Oh-h!" She brightened. "That night, at the Pless? But that was _ages_
ago!"

"It seems so," he admitted.

"So much has happened!"

"Yes," he assented vaguely.

She watched him, a little piqued by his absent-minded mood, for a moment;
then, and not without a trace of malice: "Must I tell you again what to
talk about?" she asked.

"Forgive me. I was thinking about, if not talking to, you.... I've been
wondering just why it was that you left the _Alethea_ at Queensborough, to
go on by steamer."

And immediately he was sorry that his tactless query had swung the
conversation to bear upon her father, the thought of whom could not but
prove painful to her. But it was too late to mend matters; already her
evanescent flush of amusement had given place to remembrance.

"It was on my father's account," she told him in a steady voice, but with
averted eyes; "he is a very poor sailor, and the promise of a rough passage
terrified him. I believe there was a difference of opinion about it, he
disputing with Mr. Mulready and Captain Stryker. That was just after we had
left the anchorage. They both insisted that it was safer to continue by
the _Alethea_, but he wouldn't listen to them, and in the end had his way.
Captain Stryker ran the brigantine into the mouth of the Medway and put us
ashore just in time to catch the steamer."

"Were you sorry for the change?"

"I?" She shuddered slightly. "Hardly! I think I hated the ship from the
moment I set foot on board her. It was a dreadful place; it was all
night-marish, that night, but it seemed most terrible on the _Alethea_ with
Captain Stryker and that abominable Mr. Hobbs. I think that my unhappiness
had as much to do with my father's insistence on the change, as anything.
He ... he was very thoughtful, most of the time."

Kirkwood shut his teeth on what he knew of the blackguard.

"I don't know why," she continued, wholly without affectation, "but I was
wretched from the moment you left me in the cab, to wait while you went in
to see Mrs. Hallam. And when we left you, at Bermondsey Old Stairs, after
what you had said to me, I felt--I hardly know what to say--abandoned, in a
way."

"But you were with your father, in his care--"

"I know, but I was getting confused. Until then the excitement had kept me
from thinking. But you made me think. I began to wonder, to question ...
But what could I do?" She signified her helplessness with a quick and
dainty movement of her hands. "He is my father; and I'm not yet of age, you
know."

"I thought so," he confessed, troubled. "It's very inconsiderate of you,
you must admit."

"I don't understand..."

"Because of the legal complication. I've no doubt your father can 'have
the law on me'"--Kirkwood laughed uneasily--"for taking you from his
protection."

"Protection!" she echoed warmly. "If you call it that!"

"Kidnapping," he said thoughtfully: "I presume that'd be the charge."

"Oh!" She laughed the notion to scorn. "Besides, they must catch us first,
mustn't they?"

"Of course; and"--with a simulation of confidence sadly deceitful--"they
shan't, Mr. Hobbs to the contrary notwithstanding."

"You make me share your confidence, against my better judgment."

"I wish your better judgment would counsel you to share your confidence
with me," he caught her up. "If you would only tell me what it's all about,
as far as you know, I'd be better able to figure out what we ought to do."

Briefly the girl sat silent, staring before her with sweet somber eyes.
Then, "In the very beginning," she told him with a conscious laugh,--"this
sounds very story-bookish, I know--in the very beginning, George Burgoyne
Calendar, an American, married his cousin a dozen times removed, and an
Englishwoman, Alice Burgoyne Hallam."

"Hallam!"

"Wait, please." She sat up, bending forward and frowning down upon her
interlacing, gloved fingers; she was finding it difficult to say what she
must. Kirkwood, watching hungrily the fair drooping head, the flawless
profile clear and radiant against the night-blackened window, saw hot
signals of shame burning on her cheek and throat and forehead.

"But never mind," he began awkwardly.

"No," she told him with decision. "Please let me go on...." She continued,
stumbling, trusting to his sympathy to bridge the gaps in her narrative.
"My father ... There was trouble of some sort.... At all events, he
disappeared when I was a baby. My mother ... died. I was brought up in
the home of my great-uncle, Colonel George Burgoyne, of the Indian
Army--retired. My mother had been his favorite niece, they say; I presume
that was why he cared for me. I grew up in his home in Cornwall; it was my
home, just as he was my father in everything but fact.

"A year ago he died, leaving me everything,--the town house in Frognall
Street, his estate in Cornwall: everything was willed to me on condition
that I must never live with my father, nor in any way contribute to his
support. If I disobeyed, the entire estate without reserve was to go to his
nearest of kin.... Colonel Burgoyne was unmarried and had no children."

The girl paused, lifting to Kirkwood's face her eyes, clear, fearless,
truthful. "I never was given to understand that there was anybody who might
have inherited, other than myself," she declared.

"I see..."

"Last week I received a letter, signed with my father's name, begging me to
appoint an interview with him in London. I did so,--guess how gladly! I was
alone in the world, and he, my father, whom I had never thought to see....
We met at his hotel, the Pless. He wanted me to come and live with
him,--said that he was growing old and lonely and needed a daughter's love
and care. He told me that he had made a fortune in America and was amply
able to provide for us both. As for my inheritance, he persuaded me that it
was by rights the property of Frederick Hallam, Mrs. Hallam's son."

"I have met the young gentleman," interpolated Kirkwood.

"His name was new to me, but my father assured me that he was the next of
kin mentioned in Colonel Burgoyne's will, and convinced me that I had no
real right to the property.... After all, he was my father; I agreed; I
could not bear the thought of wronging anybody. I was to give up everything
but my mother's jewels. It seems,--my father said,--I don't--I can't
believe it now--"

She choked on a little, dry sob. It was some time before she seemed able to
continue.

"I was told that my great-uncle's collection of jewels had been my mother's
property. He had in life a passion for collecting jewels, and it had been
his whim to carry them with him, wherever he went. When he died in Frognall
Street, they were in the safe by the head of his bed. I, in my grief, at
first forgot them, and then afterwards carelessly put off removing them.

"To come back to my father: Night before last we were to call on Mrs.
Hallam. It was to be our last night in England; we were to sail for the
Continent on the private yacht of a friend of my father's, the next
morning.... This is what I was told--and believed, you understand.

"That night Mrs. Hallam was dining at another table at the Pless, it seems.
I did not then know her. When leaving, she put a note on our table, by my
father's elbow. I was astonished beyond words.... He seemed much agitated,
told me that he was called away on urgent business, a matter of life and
death, and begged me to go alone to Frognall Street, get the jewels and
meet him at Mrs. Hallam's later.... I wasn't altogether a fool, for I began
dimly to suspect, then, that something was wrong; but I was a fool, for I
consented to do as he desired. You understand--you know--?"

"I do, indeed," replied Kirkwood grimly. "I understand a lot of things now
that I didn't five minutes ago. Please let me think..."

But the time he took for deliberation was short. He had hoped to find a way
to spare her, by sparing Calendar; but momentarily he was becoming more
impressed with the futility of dealing with her save in terms of candor,
merciful though they might seem harsh.

"I must tell you," he said, "that you have been outrageously misled,
swindled and deceived. I have heard from your father's own lips that Mrs.
Hallam was to pay him two thousand pounds for keeping you out of England
and losing you your inheritance. I'm inclined to question, furthermore, the
assertion that these jewels were your mother's. Frederick Hallam was the
man who followed you into the Frognall Street house and attacked me on the
stairs; Mrs. Hallam admits that he went there to get the jewels. But he
didn't want anybody to know it."

"But that doesn't prove--"

"Just a minute." Rapidly and concisely Kirkwood recounted the events
wherein he had played a part, subsequent to the adventure of Bermondsey Old
Stairs. He was guilty of but one evasion; on one point only did he slur the
truth: he conceived it his honorable duty to keep the girl in ignorance of
his straitened circumstances; she was not to be distressed by knowledge of
his distress, nor could he tolerate the suggestion of seeming to play for
her sympathy. It was necessary, then, to invent a motive to excuse his
return to 9, Frognall Street. I believe he chose to exaggerate the
inquisitiveness of his nature and threw in for good measure a desire
to recover a prized trinket of no particular moment, esteemed for its
associations, and so forth. But whatever the fabrication, it passed muster;
to the girl his motives seemed less important than the discoveries that
resulted from them.

"I am afraid," he concluded the summary of the confabulation he had
overheard at the skylight of the Alethea's cabin, "you'd best make up your
mind that your father--"

"Yes," whispered the girl huskily; and turned her face to the window, a
quivering muscle in the firm young throat alone betraying her emotion.

"It's a bad business," he pursued relentlessly: "bad all round. Mulready,
in your father's pay, tries to have him arrested, the better to rob him.
Mrs. Hallam, to secure your property for that precious pet, Freddie,
connives at, if she doesn't instigate, a kidnapping. Your father takes her
money to deprive you of yours,--which could profit him nothing so long as
you remained in lawful possession of it; and at the same time he conspires
to rob, through you, the rightful owners--if they are rightful owners. And
if they are, why does Freddie Hallam go like a thief in the night to secure
property that's his beyond dispute?... I don't really think you owe your
father any further consideration."

He waited patiently. Eventually, "No-o," the girl sobbed assent.

"It's this way: Calendar, counting on your sparing him in the end, is going
to hound us. He's doing it now: there's Hobbs in the next car, for proof.
Until these jewels are returned, whether to Frognall Street or to young
Hallam, we're both in danger, both thieves in the sight of the law. And
your father knows that, too. There's no profit to be had by discounting the
temper of these people; they're as desperate a gang of swindlers as ever
lived. They'll have those jewels if they have to go as far as murder--"

"Mr. Kirkwood!" she deprecated, in horror.

He wagged his head stubbornly, ominously. "I've seen them in the raw.
They're hot on our trail now; ten to one, they'll be on our backs before we
can get across the Channel. Once in England we will be comparatively safe.
Until then ... But I'm a brute--I'm frightening you!"

"You are, dreadfully," she confessed in a tremulous voice.

"Forgive me. If you look at the dark side first, the other seems all the
brighter. Please don't worry; we'll pull through with flying colors, or my
name's not Philip Kirkwood!"

"I have every faith in you," she informed him, flawlessly sincere. "When
I think of all you've done and dared for me, on the mere suspicion that I
needed your help--"

"We'd best be getting ready," he interrupted hastily. "Here's Brussels."

It was so. Lights, in little clusters and long, wheeling lines, were
leaping out of the darkness and flashing back as the train rumbled through
the suburbs of the little Paris of the North. Already the other passengers
were bestirring themselves, gathering together wraps and hand luggage, and
preparing for the journey's end.

Rising, Kirkwood took down their two satchels from the overhead rack,
and waited, in grim abstraction planning and counterplanning against the
machinations in whose wiles they two had become so perilously entangled.

Primarily, there was Hobbs to be dealt with; no easy task, for Kirkwood
dared not resort to violence nor in any way invite the attention of the
authorities; and threats would be an idle waste of breath, in the case of
that corrupt and malignant, little cockney, himself as keen as any needle,
adept in all the artful resources of the underworld whence he had sprung,
and further primed for action by that master rogue, Calendar.

The train was pulling slowly into the station when he reluctantly abandoned
his latest unfeasible scheme for shaking off the little Englishman,
and concluded that their salvation was only to be worked out through
everlasting vigilance, incessant movement, and the favor of the blind
goddess, Fortune. There was comfort of a sort in the reflection that
the divinity of chance is at least blind; her favors are impartially
distributed; the swing of the wheel of the world is not always to the
advantage of the wrongdoer and the scamp.

He saw nothing of Hobbs as they alighted and hastened from the station, and
hardly had time to waste looking for him, since their train had failed to
make up the precious ten minutes. Consequently he dismissed the fellow from
his thoughts until--with Brussels lingering in their memories a garish
vision of brilliant streets and glowing cafés, glimpsed furtively
from their cab windows during its wild dash over the broad mid-city,
boulevards--at midnight they settled themselves in a carriage of the Bruges
express. They were speeding along through the open country with a noisy
clatter; then a minute's investigation sufficed to discover the mate of the
_Alethea_ serenely ensconced in the coach behind.

The little man seemed rarely complacent, and impudently greeted Kirkwood's
scowling visage, as the latter peered through the window in the coach-door,
with a smirk and a waggish wave of his hand. The American by main strength
of will-power mastered an impulse to enter and wring his neck, and returned
to the girl, more disturbed than he cared to let her know.

There resulted from his review of the case but one plan for outwitting Mr.
Hobbs, and that lay in trusting to his confidence that Kirkwood and Dorothy
Calendar would proceed as far toward Ostend as the train would take
them--namely, to the limit of the run, Bruges.

Thus inspired, Kirkwood took counsel with the girl, and when the train
paused at Ghent, they made an unostentatious exit from their coach, finding
themselves, when the express had rolled on into the west, upon a station
platform in a foreign city at nine minutes past one o'clock in the
morning--but at length without their shadow. Mr. Hobbs had gone on to
Bruges.

Kirkwood sped his journeyings with an unspoken malediction, and collected
himself to cope with a situation which was to prove hardly more happy for
them than the espionage they had just eluded. The primal flush of triumph
which had saturated the American's humor on this signal success, proved but
fictive and transitory when inquiry of the station attendants educed the
information that the two earliest trains to be obtained were the 5:09 for
Dunkerque and the 5:37 for Ostend. A minimum delay of four hours was to be
endured in the face of many contingent features singularly unpleasant to
contemplate. The station waiting-room was on the point of closing for the
night, and Kirkwood, already alarmed by the rapid ebb of the money he had
had of Calendar, dared not subject his finances to the strain of a night's
lodging at one of Ghent's hotels. He found himself forced to be cruel to
be kind to the girl, and Dorothy's cheerful acquiescence to their sole
alternative of tramping the street until daybreak did nothing to alleviate
Kirkwood's exasperation.

It was permitted them to occupy a bench outside the station. There the
girl, her head pillowed on the treasure bag, napped uneasily, while
Kirkwood plodded restlessly to and fro, up and down the platform, communing
with the Shade of Care and addling his poor, weary wits with the problem
of the future,--not so much his own as the future of the unhappy child for
whose welfare he had assumed responsibility. Dark for both of them, in his
understanding To-morrow loomed darkest for her.

Not until the gray, formless light of the dawn-dusk was wavering over the
land, did he cease his perambulations. Then a gradual stir of life in the
city streets, together with the appearance of a station porter or two,
opening the waiting-rooms and preparing them against the traffic of the
day, warned him that he must rouse his charge. He paused and stood over
her, reluctant to disturb her rest, such as it was, his heart torn with
compassion for her, his soul embittered by the cruel irony of their estate.

If what he understood were true, a king's ransom was secreted within the
cheap, imitation-leather satchel which served her for a pillow. But it
availed her nothing for her comfort. If what he believed were true, she was
absolute mistress of that treasure of jewels; yet that night she had been
forced to sleep on a hard, uncushioned bench, in the open air, and this
morning he must waken her to the life of a hunted thing. A week ago she had
had at her command every luxury known to the civilized world; to-day she
was friendless, but for his inefficient, worthless self, and in a strange
land. A week ago,--had he known her then,--he had been free to tell her of
his love, to offer her the protection of his name as well as his devotion;
to-day he was an all but penniless vagabond, and there could be no dishonor
deeper than to let her know the nature of his heart's desire.

Was ever lover hedged from a declaration to his mistress by circumstances
so hateful, so untoward! He could have raged and railed against his fate
like any madman. For he desired her greatly, and she was very lovely in his
sight. If her night's rest had been broken and but a mockery, she showed
few signs of it; the faint, wan complexion of fatigue seemed only to
enhance the beauty of her maidenhood; her lips were as fresh and desirous
as the dewy petals of a crimson rose; beneath her eyes soft shadows lurked
where her lashes lay tremulous upon her cheeks of satin.... She was to him
of all created things the most wonderful, the most desirable.

The temptation of his longing seemed more than he could long withstand. But
resist he must, or part for ever with any title to her consideration--or
his own. He shut his teeth and knotted his brows in a transport of desire
to touch, if only with his finger-tips, the woven wonder of her hair.

And thus she saw him, when, without warning, she awoke.

Bewilderment at first informed the wide brown eyes; then, as their
drowsiness vanished, a little laughter, a little tender mirth.

"Good morning, Sir Knight of the Somber Countenance!" she cried, standing
up. "Am I so utterly disreputable that you find it necessary to frown on me
so darkly?"

He shook his head, smiling.

"I know I'm a fright," she asserted vigorously, shaking out the folds of
her pleated skirt. "And as for my hat, it will never be on straight--but
then _you_ wouldn't know."

"It seems all right," he replied vacantly.

"Then please to try to look a little happier, since you find me quite
presentable."

"I do..."

Without lifting her bended head, she looked up, laughing, not ill-pleased.
"_You'd_ say so... really?"

Commonplace enough, this banter, this pitiful endeavor to be oblivious of
their common misery; but like the look she gave him, her words rang in his
head like potent fumes of wine. He turned away, utterly disconcerted for
the time, knowing only that he must overcome his weakness.

Far down the railway tracks there rose a murmuring, that waxed to a
rumbling roar. A passing porter answered Kirkwood's inquiry: it was the
night boat-train from Ostend. He picked up their bags and drew the girl
into the waiting-room, troubled by a sickening foreboding.

Through the window they watched the train roll in and stop.

Among others, alighted, smirking, the unspeakable Hobbs.

He lifted his hat and bowed jauntily to the waiting-room window, making it
plain that his keen eyes had discovered them instantly.

Kirkwood's heart sank with the hopelessness of it all. If the railway
directorates of Europe conspired against them, what chance had they? If the
night boat-train from Ostend had only had the decency to be twenty-five
minutes late, instead of arriving promptly on the minute of 4:45 they two
might have escaped by the 5:09 for Dunkerque and Calais.

There remained but a single untried ruse in his bag of tricks; mercifully
it might suffice.

"Miss Calendar," said Kirkwood from his heart, "just as soon as I get you
home, safe and sound, I am going to take a day off, hunt up that little
villain, and flay him alive. In the meantime, I forgot to dine last night,
and am reminded that we had better forage for breakfast."

Hobbs dogged them at a safe distance while they sallied forth and in a
neighboring street discovered an early-bird bakery. Here they were able to
purchase rolls steaming from the oven, fresh pats of golden butter wrapped
in clean lettuce leaves, and milk in twin bottles; all of which they
prosaically carried with them back to the station, lacking leisure as they
did to partake of the food before train-time.

Without attempting concealment (Hobbs, he knew, was eavesdropping round the
corner of the door) Kirkwood purchased at the ticket-window passages on
the Dunkerque train. Mr. Hobbs promptly flattered him by imitation; and
so jealous of his luck was Kirkwood by this time grown, through continual
disappointment, that he did not even let the girl into his plans until they
were aboard the 5:09, in a compartment all to themselves. Then, having with
his own eyes seen Mr. Hobbs dodge into the third compartment in the rear of
the same carriage, Kirkwood astonished the girl by requesting her to follow
him; and together they left by the door opposite that by which they had
entered.

The engine was running up and down a scale of staccato snorts, in
preparation for the race, and the cars were on the edge of moving,
couplings clanking, wheels a-groan, ere Mr. Hobbs condescended to join them
between the tracks.

Wearily, disheartened, Kirkwood reopened the door, flung the bags in, and
helped the girl back into their despised compartment; the quicker route to
England via Ostend was now out of the question. As for himself, he waited
for a brace of seconds, eying wickedly the ubiquitous Hobbs, who had popped
back into his compartment, but stood ready to pop out again on the least
encouragement. In the meantime he was pleased to shake a friendly foot at
Mr. Kirkwood, thrusting that member out through the half-open door.

Only the timely departure of the train, compelling him to rejoin Dorothy at
once, if at all, prevented the American from adding murder to the already
noteworthy catalogue of his high crimes and misdemeanors.

Their simple meal, consumed to the ultimate drop and crumb while the
Dunkerque train meandered serenely through a sunny, smiling Flemish
countryside, somewhat revived their jaded spirits. After all, they were
young, enviably dowered with youth's exuberant elasticity of mood; the
world was bright in the dawning, the night had fled leaving naught but an
evil memory; best of all things, they were together: tacitly they were
agreed that somehow the future would take care of itself and all be well
with them.

For a time they laughed and chattered, pretending that the present held no
cares or troubles; but soon the girl, nestling her head in a corner of the
dingy cushions, was smiling ever more drowsily on Kirkwood; and presently
she slept in good earnest, the warm blood ebbing and flowing beneath
the exquisite texture of her cheeks, the ghost of an unconscious smile
quivering about the sensitive scarlet mouth, the breeze through the open
window at her side wantoning at will in the sunlit witchery of her hair.
And Kirkwood, worn with sleepless watching, dwelt in longing upon the dear
innocent allure of her until the ache in his heart had grown well-nigh
insupportable; then instinctively turned his gaze upwards, searching his
heart, reading the faith and desire of it, so that at length knowledge and
understanding came to him, of his weakness and strength and the clean love
that he bore for her, and gladdened he sat dreaming in waking the same
clear dreams that modeled her unconscious lips secretly for laughter and
the joy of living.

When Dunkerque halted their progress, they were obliged to alight and
change cars,--Hobbs a discreetly sinister shadow at the end of the
platform.

By schedule they were to arrive in Calais about the middle of the forenoon,
with a wait of three hours to be bridged before the departure of the Dover
packet. That would be an anxious time; the prospect of it rendered both
Dorothy and Kirkwood doubly anxious throughout this final stage of their
flight. In three hours anything could happen, or be brought about. Neither
could forget that it was quite within the bounds of possibilities for
Calendar to be awaiting them in Calais. Presuming that Hobbs had been acute
enough to guess their plans and advise his employer by telegraph, the
latter could readily have anticipated their arrival, whether by sea in the
brigantine, or by land, taking the direct route via Brussels and Lille. If
such proved to be the case, it were scarcely sensible to count upon the
arch-adventurer contenting himself with a waiting rôle like Hobbs'.

With such unhappy apprehensions for a stimulant, between them the man and
the girl contrived a make-shift counter-stratagem; or it were more accurate
to say that Kirkwood proposed it, while Dorothy rejected, disputed, and
at length accepted it, albeit with sad misgivings. For it involved a
separation that might not prove temporary.

Together they could never escape the surveillance of Mr. Hobbs; parted, he
would be obliged to follow one or the other. The task of misleading the
_Alethea's_ mate, Kirkwood undertook, delegating to the girl the duty of
escaping when he could provide her the opportunity, of keeping under
cover until the hour of sailing, and then proceeding to England, with the
gladstone bag, alone if Kirkwood was unable, or thought it inadvisable, to
join her on the boat.

In furtherance of this design, a majority of the girl's belongings were
transferred from her traveling bag to Kirkwood's, the gladstone taking
their place; and the young man provided her with voluminous instructions, a
revolver which she did not know how to handle and declared she would never
use for any consideration, and enough money to pay for her accommodation at
the Terminus Hôtel, near the pier, and for two passages to London. It was
agreed that she should secure the steamer booking, lest Kirkwood be delayed
until the last moment.

These arrangements concluded, the pair of blessed idiots sat steeped in
melancholy silence, avoiding each other's eyes, until the train drew in at
the Gare Centrale, Calais.

In profound silence, too, they left their compartment and passed through
the station, into the quiet, sun-drenched streets of the seaport,--Hobbs
hovering solicitously in the offing.

Without comment or visible relief of mind they were aware that their fears
had been without apparent foundation; they saw no sign of Calendar, Stryker
or Mulready. The circumstance, however, counted for nothing; one or all of
the adventurers might arrive in Calais at any minute.

Momentarily more miserable as the time of parting drew nearer, dumb with
unhappiness, they turned aside from the main thoroughfares of the city,
leaving the business section, and gained the sleepier side streets,
bordered by the residences of the proletariat, where for blocks none but
children were to be seen, and of them but few--quaint, sober little bodies
playing almost noiselessly in their dooryards.

At length Kirkwood spoke.

"Let's make it the corner," he said, without looking at the girl. "It's a
short block to the next street. You hurry to the Terminus and lock yourself
in your room. Have the management book both passages; don't run the risk of
going to the pier yourself. I'll make things interesting for Mr. Hobbs, and
join you as soon as I can, _if_ I can."

"You must," replied the girl. "I shan't go without you."

"But, Dor--Miss Calendar!" he exclaimed, aghast.

"I don't care--I know I agreed," she declared mutinously. "But I won't--I
can't. Remember I shall wait for you."

"But--but perhaps--"

"If you have to stay, it will be because there's danger--won't it? And
what would you think of me if I deserted you then, af-after all y-you've
done?... Please don't waste time arguing. Whether you come at one to-day,
to-morrow, or a week from to-morrow, I shall be waiting.... You may be
sure. Good-by."

They had turned the corner, walking slowly, side by side; Hobbs, for the
first time caught off his guard, had dropped behind more than half a long
block. But now Kirkwood's quick sidelong glance discovered the mate in the
act of taking alarm and quickening his pace. None the less the American was
at the time barely conscious of anything other than a wholly unexpected
furtive pressure of the girl's gloved fingers on his own.

"Good-by," she whispered.

He caught at her hand, protesting. "Dorothy--!"

"Good-by," she repeated breathlessly, with a queer little catch in her
voice. "God be with you, Philip, and--and send you safely back to me...."

And she was running away.

Dumfounded with dismay, seeing in a flash how all his plans might be set at
naught by this her unforeseen insubordination, he took a step or two after
her; but she was fleet of foot, and, remembering Hobbs, he halted.

By this time the mate, too, was running; Kirkwood could hear the heavy
pounding of his clumsy feet. Already Dorothy had almost gained the farther
corner; as she whisked round it with a flutter of skirts, Kirkwood dodged
hastily behind a gate-post. A thought later, Hobbs appeared, head down,
chest out, eyes straining for sight of his quarry, pelting along for dear
life.

As, rounding the corner, he stretched out in swifter stride, Kirkwood was
inspired to put a spoke in his wheel; and a foot thrust suddenly out from
behind the gate-post accomplished his purpose with more success than he
had dared anticipate. Stumbling, the mate plunged headlong, arms and legs
a-sprawl; and the momentum of his pace, though checked, carried him along
the sidewalk, face downwards, a full yard ere he could stay himself.

Kirkwood stepped out of the gateway and sheered off as Hobbs picked
himself up; something which he did rather slowly, as if in a daze, without
comprehension of the cause of his misfortune. And for a moment he stood
pulling his wits together and swaying as though on the point of resuming
his rudely interrupted chase; when the noise of Kirkwood's heels brought
him about face in a twinkling.

"Ow, it's you, eh!" he snarled in a temper as vicious as his countenance;
and both of these were much the worse for wear and tear.

"Myself," admitted Kirkwood fairly; and then, in a gleam of humor: "Weren't
you looking for me?"

His rage seemed to take the little Cockney and shake him by the throat; he
trembled from head to foot, his face shockingly congested, and spat out
dust and fragments of lurid blasphemy like an infuriated cat.

Of a sudden, "W'ere's the gel?" he sputtered thickly as his quick shifting
eyes for the first time noted Dorothy's absence.

"Miss Calendar has other business--none with you. I've taken the liberty of
stopping you because I have a word or two--"

"Ow, you 'ave, 'ave you? Gawd strike me blind, but I've a word for you,
too!... 'And over that bag--and look nippy, or I'll myke you pye for w'at
you've done to me ... I'll myke you pye!" he iterated hoarsely, edging
closer. "'And it over or--"

"You've got another guess--" Kirkwood began, but saved his breath in
deference to an imperative demand on him for instant defensive action.

To some extent he had underestimated the brute courage of the fellow, the
violent, desperate courage that is distilled of anger in men of his kind.
Despising him, deeming him incapable of any overt act of villainy, Kirkwood
had been a little less wary than he would have been with Calendar or
Mulready. Hobbs had seemed more of the craven type which Stryker graced so
conspicuously. But now the American was to be taught discrimination, to
learn that if Stryker's nature was like a snake's for low cunning and
deviousness, Hobbs' soul was the soul of a viper.

Almost imperceptibly he had advanced upon Kirkwood; almost insensibly his
right hand had moved toward his chest; now, with a movement marvelously
deft, it had slipped in and out of his breast pocket. And a six-inch blade
of tarnished steel was winging toward Kirkwood's throat with the speed of
light.

Instinctively he stepped back; as instinctively he guarded with his right
forearm, lifting the hand that held the satchel. The knife, catching in his
sleeve, scratched the arm beneath painfully, and simultaneously was twisted
from the mate's grasp, while in his surprise Kirkwood's grip on the
bag-handle relaxed. It was torn forcibly from his fingers just as he
received a heavy blow on his chest from the mate's fist. He staggered back.

By the time he had recovered from the shock, Hobbs was a score of feet
away, the satchel tucked under his arm, his body bent almost double,
running like a jack-rabbit. Ere Kirkwood could get under way, in pursuit,
the mate had dodged out of sight round the corner. When the American caught
sight of him again, he was far down the block, and bettering his pace with
every jump.

He was approaching, also, some six or eight good citizens of Calais, men of
the laboring class, at a guess. Their attention attracted by his frantic
flight, they stopped to wonder. One or two moved as though to intercept
him, and he doubled out into the middle of the street with the quickness of
thought; an instant later he shot round another corner and disappeared, the
natives streaming after in hot chase, electrified by the inspiring strains
of "Stop, thief!"--or its French equivalent.

Kirkwood, cheering them on with the same wild cry, followed to the farther
street; and there paused, so winded and weak with laughter that he was fain
to catch at a fence picket for support. Standing thus he saw other denizens
of Calais spring as if from the ground miraculously to swell the hue and
cry; and a dumpling of a gendarme materialized from nowhere at all, to fall
in behind the rabble, waving his sword above his head and screaming at the
top of his lungs, the while his fat legs twinkled for all the world like
thick sausage links marvelously animated.

The mob straggled round yet another corner and was gone; its clamor
diminished on the still Spring air; and Kirkwood, recovering, abandoned
Mr. Hobbs to the justice of the high gods and the French system of
jurisprudence (at least, he hoped the latter would take an interest in the
case, if haply Hobbs were laid by the heels), and went his way rejoicing.

As for the scratch on his arm, it was nothing, as he presently demonstrated
to his complete satisfaction in the seclusion of a chance-sent fiacre.
Kirkwood, commissioning it to drive him to the American Consulate, made
his diagnosis _en route_; wound a handkerchief round the negligible wound,
rolled down his sleeve, and forgot it altogether in the joys of picturing
to himself Hobbs in the act of opening the satchel in expectation of
finding therein the gladstone bag.

At the consulate door he paid off the driver and dismissed him; the fiacre
had served his purpose, and he could find his way to the Terminus Hôtel at
infinitely less expense. He had a considerably harder task before him as
he ascended the steps to the consular doorway, knocked and made known the
nature of his errand.

No malicious destiny could have timed the hour of his call more appositely;
the consul was at home and at the disposal of his fellow-citizens--within
bounds.

In the course of thirty minutes or so Kirkwood emerged with dignity from
the consulate, his face crimson to the hair, his soul smarting with
shame and humiliation; and left an amused official representative of his
country's government with the impression of having been entertained to the
point of ennui by an exceptionally clumsy but pertinacious liar.

For the better part of the succeeding hour Kirkwood circumnavigated the
neighborhood of the steamer pier and the Terminus Hôtel, striving to render
himself as inconspicuous as he felt insignificant, and keenly on the
alert for any sign or news of Hobbs. In this pursuit he was pleasantly
disappointed.

At noon precisely, his suspense grown too onerous for his strength of will,
throwing caution and their understanding to the winds, he walked boldly
into the Terminus, and inquired for Miss Calendar.

The assurance he received that she was in safety under its roof did not
deter him from sending up his name and asking her to receive him in the
public lounge; he required the testimony of his senses to convince him that
no harm had come to her in the long hour and a half that had elapsed since
their separation.

Woman-like, she kept him waiting. Alone in the public rooms of the hotel,
he suffered excruciating torments. How was he to know that Calendar had not
arrived and found his way to her?

When at length she appeared on the threshold of the apartment, bringing
with her the traveling bag and looking wonderfully the better for her
ninety minutes of complete repose and privacy, the relief he experienced
was so intense that he remained transfixed in the middle of the floor,
momentarily able neither to speak nor to move.

On her part, so fagged and distraught did he seem, that at sight of his
care-worn countenance she hurried to him with outstretched, compassionate
hands and a low pitiful cry of concern, forgetful entirely of that which he
himself had forgotten--the emotion she had betrayed on parting.

"Oh, nothing wrong," he hastened to reassure her, with a sorry ghost of his
familiar grin; "only I have lost Hobbs and the satchel with your things;
and there's no sign yet of Mr. Calendar. We can feel pretty comfortable
now, and--and I thought it time we had something like a meal."

The narrative of his adventure which he delivered over their _déjeuner à
la fourchette_ contained no mention either of his rebuff at the American
Consulate or the scratch he had sustained during Hobbs' murderous assault;
the one could not concern her, the other would seem but a bid for her
sympathy. He counted it a fortunate thing that the mate's knife had been
keen enough to penetrate the cloth of his sleeve without tearing it; the
slit it had left was barely noticeable. And he purposely diverted the girl
with flashes of humorous description, so that they discussed both meal and
episode in a mood of wholesome merriment.

It was concluded, all too soon for the taste of either, by the waiter's
announcement that the steamer was on the point of sailing.

Outwardly composed, inwardly quaking, they boarded the packet, meeting with
no misadventure whatever--if we are to except the circumstance that, when
the restaurant bill was settled and the girl had punctiliously surrendered
his change with the tickets, Kirkwood found himself in possession of
precisely one franc and twenty centimes.

He groaned in spirit to think how differently he might have been fixed, had
he not in his infatuated spirit of honesty been so anxious to give Calendar
more than ample value for his money!

An inexorable anxiety held them both near the gangway until it was cast off
and the boat began to draw away from the pier. Then, and not till then, did
an unimpressive, small figure of a man detach itself from the shield of a
pile of luggage and advance to the pier-head. No second glance was
needed to identify Mr. Hobbs; and until the perspective dwarfed him
indistinguishably, he was to be seen, alternately waving Kirkwood ironic
farewell and blowing violent kisses to Miss Calendar from the tips of his
soiled fingers.

So he had escaped arrest....

At first by turns indignant and relieved to realize that thereafter they
were to move in scenes in which his hateful shadow would not form an
essentially component part, subsequently Kirkwood fell a prey to prophetic
terrors. It was not alone fear of retribution that had induced Hobbs to
relinquish his persecution--or so Kirkwood became convinced; if the mate's
calculation had allowed for them the least fraction of a chance to escape
apprehension on the farther shores of the Channel, nor fears nor threats
would have prevented him from sailing with the fugitives.... Far from
having left danger behind them on the Continent, Kirkwood believed in his
secret heart that they were but flying to encounter it beneath the smoky
pall of London.




XVII


ROGUES AND VAGABONDS

A westering sun striking down through the drab exhalations of ten-thousand
sooty chimney-pots, tinted the atmosphere with the hue of copper. The
glance that wandered purposelessly out through the carriage windows,
recoiled, repelled by the endless dreary vista of the Surrey Side's
unnumbered roofs; or, probing instantaneously the hopeless depths of some
grim narrow thoroughfare fleetingly disclosed, as the evening boat-train
from Dover swung on toward Charing Cross, its trucks level with the eaves
of Southwark's dwellings, was saddened by the thought that in all the world
squalor such as this should obtain and flourish unrelieved.

For perhaps the tenth time in the course of the journey Kirkwood withdrew
his gaze from the window and turned to the girl, a question ready framed
upon his lips.

"Are you quite sure--" he began; and then, alive to the clear and
penetrating perception in the brown eyes that smiled into his from under
their level brows, he stammered and left the query uncompleted.

Continuing to regard him steadily and smilingly, Dorothy shook her head in
playful denial and protest. "Do you know," she commented, "that this is
about the fifth repetition of that identical question within the last
quarter-hour?"

"How do you know what I meant to say?" he demanded, staring.

"I can see it in your eyes. Besides, you've talked and thought of nothing
else since we left the boat. Won't you believe me, please, when I say
there's absolutely not a soul in London to whom I could go and ask for
shelter? I don't think it's very nice of you to be so openly anxious to get
rid of me."

This latter was so essentially undeserved and so artlessly insincere, that
he must needs, of course, treat it with all seriousness.

"That isn't fair, Miss Calendar. Really it's not."

"What am I to think? I've told you any number of times that it's only an
hour's ride on to Chiltern, where the Pyrfords will be glad to take me in.
You may depend upon it,--by eight to-night, at the latest, you'll have me
off your hands,--the drag and worry that I've been ever since--"

"Don't!" he pleaded vehemently. "Please!... You _know_ it isn't that. I
_don't_ want you off my hands, ever.... That is to say, I--ah--" Here
he was smitten with a dumbness, and sat, aghast at the enormity of his
blunder, entreating her forgiveness with eyes that, very likely, pleaded
his cause more eloquently than he guessed.

"I mean," he floundered on presently, in the fatuous belief that he would
this time be able to control both mind and tongue, "_what_ I mean is I'd be
glad to go on serving you in any way I might, to the end of time, if you'd
give me...."

He left the declaration inconclusive--a stroke of diplomacy that would have
graced an infinitely more adept wooer. But he used it all unconsciously. "O
Lord!" he groaned in spirit. "Worse and more of it! Why in thunder can't I
say the right thing _right_?"

Egotistically absorbed by the problem thus formulated, he was heedless of
her failure to respond, and remained pensively preoccupied until roused by
the grinding and jolting of the train, as it slowed to a halt preparatory
to crossing the bridge.

Then he sought to read his answer in the eyes of Dorothy. But she was
looking away, staring thoughtfully out over the billowing sea of roofs
that merged illusively into the haze long ere it reached the horizon; and
Kirkwood could see the pulsing of the warm blood in her throat and cheeks;
and the glamorous light that leaped and waned in her eyes, as the ruddy
evening sunlight warmed them, was something any man might be glad to live
for and die for.... And he saw that she had understood, had grasped the
thread of meaning that ran through the clumsy fabric of his halting speech
and his sudden silences.

She had understood without resentment!

While, incredulous, he wrestled with the wonder of this fond discovery,
she grew conscious of his gaze, and turned her head to meet it with one
fearless and sweet, if troubled.

"Dear Mr. Kirkwood," she said gently, bending forward as if to read between
the lines anxiety had graven on his countenance, "won't you tell me,
please, what it can be that so worries you? Is it possible that you still
have a fear of my father? But don't you know that he can do nothing
now--now that we're safe? We have only to take a cab to Paddington Station,
and then--"

"You mustn't underestimate the resource and ability of Mr. Calendar," he
told her gloomily; "we've got a chance--no more. It wasn't...." He shut his
teeth on his unruly tongue--too late.

Woman-quick she caught him up. "It wasn't that? Then what was it that
worried you? If it's something that affects me, is it kind and right of you
not to tell me?"

"It--it affects us both," he conceded drearily. "I--I don't--"

The wretched embarrassment of the confession befogged his wits; he felt
unable to frame the words. He appealed speechlessly for tolerance, with a
face utterly woebegone and eyes piteous.

The train began to move slowly across the Thames to Charing Cross.

Mercilessly the girl persisted. "We've only a minute more. Surely you can
trust me...."

In exasperation he interrupted almost rudely. "It's only this: I--I'm
strapped."

"Strapped?" She knitted her brows over this fresh specimen of American
slang.

"Flat strapped--busted--broke--on my uppers--down and out," he reeled off
synonyms without a smile. "I haven't enough money to pay cab-fare across
the town--"

"Oh!" she interpolated, enlightened.

"--to say nothing of taking us to Chiltern. I couldn't buy you a glass of
water if you were thirsty. There isn't a soul on earth, within hail, who
would trust me with a quarter--I mean a shilling--across London Bridge. I'm
the original Luckless Wonder and the only genuine Jonah extant."

With a face the hue of fire, he cocked his eyebrows askew and attempted
to laugh unconcernedly to hide his bitter shame. "I've led you out of
the fryingpan into the fire, and I don't know what to do! Please call me
names."

And in a single instant all that he had consistently tried to avoid doing,
had been irretrievably done; if, with dawning comprehension, dismay
flickered in her eyes--such dismay as such a confession can rouse only in
one who, like Dorothy Calendar, has never known the want of a penny--it
was swiftly driven out to make place for the truest and most gracious and
unselfish solicitude.

"Oh, poor Mr. Kirkwood! And it's all because of me! You've beggared
yourself--"

"Not precisely; I was beggared to begin with." He hastened to disclaim the
extravagant generosity of which she accused him. "I had only three or four
pounds to my name that night we met.... I haven't told you--I--"

"You've told me nothing, nothing whatever about yourself," she said
reproachfully.

"I didn't want to bother you with my troubles; I tried not to talk about
myself.... You knew I was an American, but I'm worse than that; I'm a
Californian--from San Francisco." He tried unsuccessfully to make light of
it. "I told you I was the Luckless Wonder; if I'd ever had any luck I would
have stored a little money away. As it was, I lived on my income, left
my principal in 'Frisco; and when the earthquake came, it wiped me out
completely."

"And you were going home that night we made you miss your steamer!"

"It was my own fault, and I'm glad this blessed minute that I did miss it.
Nice sort I'd have been, to go off and leave you at the mercy--"

"Please! I want to think, I'm trying to remember how much you've gone
through--"

"Precisely what I don't want you to do. Anyway, I did nothing more than any
other fellow would've! Please don't give me credit that I don't deserve."

But she was not listening; and a pause fell, while the train crawled warily
over the trestle, as if in fear of the foul, muddy flood below.

"And there's no way I can repay you...."

"There's nothing to be repaid," he contended stoutly.

She clasped her hands and let them fall gently in her lap. "I've not
a farthing in the world!... I never dreamed.... I'm so sorry, Mr.
Kirkwood--terribly, terribly sorry!... But what can we do? I can't consent
to be a burden--"

"But you're not! You're the one thing that ..." He swerved sharply, at an
abrupt tangent. "There's one thing we can do, of course."

She looked up inquiringly.

"Craven Street is just round the corner."

"Yes?"--wonderingly.

"I mean we must go to Mrs. Hallam's house, first off.... It's too
late now,--after five, else we could deposit the jewels in some bank.
Since--since they are no longer yours, the only thing, and the proper thing
to do is to place them in safety or in the hands of their owner. If you
take them directly to young Hallam, your hands will be clear.... And--I
never did such a thing in my life, Miss Calendar; but if he's got a spark
of gratitude in his make-up, I ought to be able to--er--to borrow a pound
or so of him."

"Do you think so?" She shook her head in doubt. "I don't know; I know so
little of such things.... You are right; we must take him the jewels,
but..." Her voice trailed off into a sigh of profound perturbation.

He dared not meet her look.

Beneath his wandering gaze a County Council steam-boat darted swiftly
down-stream from Charing Cross pier, in the shadow of the railway bridge.
It seemed curious to reflect that from that very floating pier he had
started first upon his quest of the girl beside him, only--he had to
count--three nights ago! Three days and three nights! Altogether incredible
seemed the transformation they had wrought in the complexion of the world.
Yet nothing material was changed.... He lifted his eyes.

Beyond the river rose the Embankment, crawling with traffic, backed by the
green of the gardens and the shimmering walls of glass and stone of the
great hotels, their windows glowing weirdly golden in the late sunlight.
A little down-stream Cleopatra's Needle rose, sadly the worse for London
smoke, flanked by its couchant sphinxes, wearing a nimbus of circling,
sweeping, swooping, wheeling gulls. Farther down, from the foot of that
magnificent pile, Somerset House, Waterloo Bridge sprang over-stream in
its graceful arch.... All as of yesterday; yet all changed. Why? Because a
woman had entered into his life; because he had learned the lesson of love
and had looked into the bright face of Romance....

With a jar the train started and began to move more swiftly.

Kirkwood lifted the traveling bag to his knees.

"Don't forget," he said with some difficulty, "you're to stick by me,
whatever happens. You mustn't desert me."

"You _know_," the girl reproved him.

"I know; but there must be no misunderstanding.... Don't worry; we'll win
out yet, I've a plan."

_Splendide mendax_! He had not the glimmering of a plan.

The engine panting, the train drew in beneath the vast sounding dome of the
station, to an accompaniment of dull thunderings; and stopped finally.

Kirkwood got out, not without a qualm of regret at leaving the compartment;
therein, at least, they had some title to consideration, by virtue of their
tickets; now they were utterly vagabondish, penniless adventurers.

The girl joined him. Slowly, elbow to elbow, the treasure bag between
them, they made their way down toward the gates, atoms in a tide-rip
of humanity,--two streams of passengers meeting on the narrow strip of
platform, the one making for the streets, the other for the suburbs.

Hurried and jostled, the girl clinging tightly to his arm lest they be
separated in the crush, they came to the ticket-wicket; beyond the barrier
surged a sea of hats--shining "toppers," dignified and upstanding, the
outward and visible manifestation of the sturdy, stodgy British spirit of
respectability; "bowlers" round and sleek and humble; shapeless caps with
cloth visors, manufactured of outrageous plaids; flower-like miracles of
millinery from Bond Street; strangely plumed monstrosities from Petticoat
Lane and Mile End Road. Beneath any one of these might lurk the maleficent
brain, the spying eyes of Calendar or one of his creatures; beneath all of
them that he encountered, Kirkwood peered in fearful inquiry.

Yet, when they had passed unhindered the ordeal of the wickets, had run
the gantlet of those thousand eyes without lighting in any pair a spark of
recognition, he began to bear himself with more assurance, to be sensible
to a grateful glow of hope. Perhaps Hobbs' telegram had not reached its
destination, for unquestionably the mate would have wired his chief;
perhaps some accident had befallen the conspirators; perhaps the police had
apprehended them.... No matter how, one hoped against hope that they had
been thrown off the trail.

And indeed it seemed as if they must have been misguided in some
providential manner. On the other hand, it would be the crassest of
indiscretions to linger about the place an instant longer than absolutely
necessary.

Outside the building, however, they paused perforce, undergoing the
cross-fire of the congregated cabbies. It being the first time that he
had ever felt called upon to leave the station afoot, Kirkwood cast about
irresolutely, seeking the sidewalk leading to the Strand.

Abruptly he caught the girl by the arm and unceremoniously hurried her
toward a waiting hansom.

"Quick!" he begged her. "Jump right in--not an instant to spare.--"

She nodded brightly, lips firm with courage, eyes shining.

"My father?"

"Yes." Kirkwood glanced back over his shoulder. "He hasn't seen us yet.
They've just driven up. Stryker's with him. They're getting down." And to
himself, "Oh, the devil!" cried the panic-stricken young man.

He drew back to let the girl precede him into the cab; at the same time
he kept an eye on Calendar, whose conveyance stood half the length of the
station-front away.

The fat adventurer had finished paying off the driver, standing on the deck
of the hansom. Stryker was already out, towering above the mass of people,
and glaring about him with his hawk-keen vision. Calendar had started to
alight, his foot was leaving the step when Stryker's glance singled out
their quarry. Instantly he turned and spoke to his confederate. Calendar
wheeled like a flash, peering eagerly in the direction indicated by the
captain's index finger, then, snapping instructions to his driver, threw
himself heavily back on the seat. Stryker, awkward on his land-legs,
stumbled and fell in an ill-calculated attempt to hoist himself hastily
back into the vehicle.

To the delay thus occasioned alone Kirkwood and Dorothy owed a respite of
freedom. Their hansom was already swinging down toward the great gates of
the yard, the American standing to make the driver comprehend the necessity
for using the utmost speed in reaching the Craven Street address. The man
proved both intelligent and obliging; Kirkwood had barely time to drop down
beside the girl, ere the cab was swinging out into the Strand, to the peril
of the toes belonging to a number of righteously indignant pedestrians.

"Good boy!" commented Kirkwood cheerfully. "That's the greatest comfort of
all London, the surprising intellectual strength the average cabby displays
when you promise him a tip.... Great Heavens!" he cried, reading the girl's
dismayed expression. "A tip! I never thought--!" His face lengthened
dismally, his eyebrows working awry. "Now we are in for it!"

Dorothy said nothing.

He turned in the seat, twisting his neck to peep through the small rear
window. "I don't see their cab," he announced. "But of course they're after
us. However, Craven Street's just round the corner; if we get there
first, I don't fancy Freddie Hallam will have a cordial reception for our
pursuers. They must've been on watch at Cannon Street, and finding we were
not coming in that way--of course they were expecting us because of Hobbs'
wire--they took cab for Charing Cross. Lucky for us.... Or is it lucky?" he
added doubtfully, to himself.

The hansom whipped round the corner into Craven Street. Kirkwood sprang up,
grasping the treasure bag, ready to jump the instant they pulled in toward
Mrs. Hallam's dwelling. But as they drew near upon the address he drew back
with an exclamation of amazement.

The house was closed, showing a blank face to the street--blinds drawn
close down in the windows, area gate padlocked, an estate-agent's board
projecting from above the doorway, advertising the property "To be let,
furnished."

Kirkwood looked back, craning his neck round the side of the cab. At the
moment another hansom was breaking through the rank of humanity on the
Strand crossing. He saw one or two figures leap desperately from beneath
the horse's hoofs. Then the cab shot out swiftly down the street.

The American stood up again, catching the cabby's eye.

"Drive on!" he cried excitedly. "Don't stop--drive as fast as you dare!"

"W'ere to, sir?"

"See that cab behind? Don't let it catch us--shake it off, lose it somehow,
but for the love of Heaven don't let it catch us! I'll make it worth your
while. Do you understand?"

"Yes, sir!" The driver looked briefly over his shoulder and lifted his
whip. "Don't worry, sir," he cried, entering into the spirit of the game
with gratifying zest. "Shan't let 'em over'aul you, sir. Mind your 'ead!"

And as Kirkwood ducked, the whip-lash shot out over the roof with a crack
like the report of a pistol. Startled, the horse leaped indignantly
forward. Momentarily the cab seemed to leave the ground, then settled
down to a pace that carried them round the Avenue Theatre and across
Northumberland Avenue into Whitehall Place apparently on a single wheel.

A glance behind showed Kirkwood that already they had gained, the pursuing
hansom having lost ground through greater caution in crossing the
main-traveled thoroughfare.

"Good little horse!" he applauded.

A moment later he was indorsing without reserve the generalship of their
cabby; the quick westward turn that took them into Whitehall, over across
from the Horse Guards, likewise placed them in a pocket of traffic; a
practically impregnable press of vehicles closed in behind them ere
Calendar's conveyance could follow out of the side street.

That the same conditions, but slightly modified, hemmed them in ahead, went
for nothing in Kirkwood's estimation.

"Good driver!" he approved heartily. "He's got a head on his shoulders!"

The girl found her voice. "How," she demanded in a breath, face blank with
consternation, "how did you dare?"

"Dare?" he echoed exultantly; and in his veins excitement was running like
liquid fire. "What wouldn't I dare for you, Dorothy?"

"What have you not?" she amended softly, adding with a shade of timidity:
"Philip..."

The long lashes swept up from her cheeks, like clouds revealing stars,
unmasking eyes radiant and brave to meet his own; then they fell, even as
her lips drooped with disappointment. And she sighed.... For he was not
looking. Man-like, hot with the ardor of the chase, he was deaf and blind
to all else.

She saw that he had not even heard. Twice within the day she had forgotten
herself, had overstepped the rigid bounds of her breeding in using his
Christian name. And twice he had been oblivious to that token of their
maturing understanding. So she sighed, and sighing, smiled again; resting
an elbow on the window-sill and flattening one small gloved hand against
the frame for a brace against the jouncing of the hansom. It swept on with
unabated speed, up-stream beside the tawny reaches of the river; and for
a time there was no speech between them, the while the girl lost
consciousness of self and her most imminent peril, surrendering her being
to the lingering sweetness of her long, dear thoughts....

"I've got a scheme!" Kirkwood declared so explosively that she caught her
breath with the surprise of it. "There's the Pless; they know me there, and
my credit's good. When we shake them off, we can have the cabby take us to
the hotel. I'll register and borrow from the management enough to pay our
way to Chiltern and the tolls for a cable to New York. I've a friend or two
over home who wouldn't let me want for a few miserable pounds.... So you
see," he explained boyishly, "we're at the end of our troubles already!"

She said something inaudible, holding her face averted. He bent nearer to
her, wondering. "I didn't understand," he suggested.

Still looking from him, "I said you were very good to me," she said in a
quavering whisper.

"Dorothy!" Without his knowledge or intention before the fact, as
instinctively as he made use of her given name, intimately, his strong
fingers dropped and closed upon the little hand that lay beside him. "What
_is_ the matter, dear?" He leaned still farther forward to peer into her
face, till glance met glance in the ending and his racing pulses tightened
with sheer delight of the humid happiness in her glistening eyes. "Dorothy,
child, don't worry so. No harm shall come to you. It's all working out--all
working out _right_. Only have a little faith in me, and I'll _make_
everything work out right, Dorothy."

Gently she freed her fingers. "I wasn't," she told him in a voice that
quivered between laughter and tears, "I wasn't worrying. I was ... You
wouldn't understand. Don't be afraid I shall break down or--or anything."

"I shan't," he reassured her; "I know you're not that sort. Besides,
you'd have no excuse. We're moving along famously. That cabby knows his
business."

In fact that gentleman was minute by minute demonstrating his peculiar
fitness for the task he had so cheerfully undertaken. The superior
horsemanship of the London hackney cabman needs no exploitation, and he
in whose hands rested the fate of the Calendar treasure was peer of his
compeers. He was instant to advantage himself of every opening to forward
his pliant craft, quick to foresee the fortunes of the way and govern
himself accordingly.

Estimating with practised eye the precise moment when the police supervisor
of traffic at the junction of Parliament and Bridge Streets, would see
fit to declare a temporary blockade, he so managed that his was the last
vehicle to pass ere the official wand, to ignore which involves a forfeited
license, was lifted; and indeed, so close was his calculation that he
escaped only with a scowl and word of warning from the bobby. A matter of
no importance whatever, since his end was gained and the pursuing cab had
been shut off by the blockade.

In Calendar's driver, however, he had an adversary of abilities by no means
to be despised. Precisely how the man contrived it, is a question; that he
made a detour by way of Derby Street is not improbable, unpleasant as it
may have been for Stryker and Calendar to find themselves in such close
proximity to "the Yard." At all events, he evaded the block, and hardly
had the chase swung across Bridge Street, than the pursuer was nimbly
clattering in its wake.

Past the Houses of Parliament, through Old Palace Yard, with the Abbey on
their left, they swung away into Abingdon Street, whence suddenly they
dived into the maze of backways, great and mean, which lies to the south of
Victoria. Doubling and twisting, now this way, now that, the driver tooled
them through the intricate heart of this labyrinth, leading the pursuers
a dance that Kirkwood thought calculated to dishearten and shake off the
pursuit in the first five minutes. Yet always, peering back through the
little peephole, he saw Calendar's cab pelting doggedly in their rear--a
hundred yards behind, no more, no less, hanging on with indomitable grit
and determination.

By degrees they drew westwards, threading Pimlico, into Chelsea--once
dashing briefly down the Grosvenor Road, the Thames a tawny flood beyond
the river wall.

Children cheered them on, and policemen turned to stare, doubting whether
they should interfere. Minutes rolled into tens, measuring out an hour;
and still they hammered on, hunted and hunters, playing their game of
hare-and-hounds through the highways and byways of those staid and aged
quarters.

In the leading cab there were few words spoken. Kirkwood and Dorothy alike
sat spellbound with the fascination of the game; if it is conceivable
that the fox enjoys his part in the day's sport, then they were enjoying
themselves. Now one spoke, now another--chiefly in the clipped phraseology,
of excitement. As--

"We're gaining?"

"Yes--think so."

Or, "We'll tire them out?"

"Sure-ly."

"They can't catch us, can they, Philip?"

"Never in the world."

But he spoke with a confidence that he himself did not feel, for hope as
he would he could never see that the distance between the two had been
materially lessened or increased. Their horses seemed most evenly matched.

The sun was very low behind the houses of the Surrey Side when Kirkwood
became aware that their horse was flagging, though (as comparison
determined) no more so than the one behind.

In grave concern the young man raised his hand, thrusting open the trap
in the roof. Immediately the square of darkling sky was eclipsed by the
cabby's face.

"Yessir?"

"You had better drive as directly as you can to the Hotel Pless," Kirkwood
called up. "I'm afraid it's no use pushing your horse like this."

"I'm sure of it, sir. 'E's a good 'oss, 'e is, but 'e carn't keep goin' for
hever, you know, sir."

"I know. You've done very well; you've done your best."

"Very good, sir. The Pless, you said, sir? Right."

The trap closed.

Two blocks farther, and their pace had so sensibly moderated that Kirkwood
was genuinely alarmed. The pursuing cabby was lashing his animal without
mercy, while, "It aren't no use my w'ippin' 'im, sir," dropped through the
trap. "'E's doing orl 'e can."

"I understand."

Despondent recklessness tightened Kirkwood's lips and kindled an unpleasant
light in his eyes. He touched his side pocket; Calendar's revolver was
still there.... Dorothy should win away clear, if--if he swung for it.

He bent forward with the traveling bag in his hands.

"What are you going to do?" The girl's voice was very tremulous.

"Stand a chance, take a losing hazard. Can you run? You're not too tired?"

"I can run--perhaps not far--a little way, at least."

"And will you do as I say?"

Her eyes met his, unwavering, bespeaking her implicit faith.

"Promise!"

"I promise."

"We'll have to drop off in a minute. The horse won't last.... They're in
the same box. Well, I undertake to stand 'em off for a bit; you take the
bag and run for it. Just as soon as I can convince them, I'll follow, but
if there's any delay, you call the first cab you see and drive to the
Pless. I'll join you there."

He stood up, surveying the neighborhood. Behind him the girl lifted her
voice in protest.

"No, Philip, no!"

"You've promised," he said sternly, eyes ranging the street.

"I don't care; I won't leave you."

He shook his head in silent contradiction, frowning; but not frowning
because of the girl's mutiny. He was a little puzzled by a vague
impression, and was striving to pin it down for recognition; but was so
thoroughly bemused with fatigue and despair that only with great difficulty
could he force his faculties to logical reasoning, his memory to respond to
his call upon it.

The hansom was traversing a street in Old Brompton--a quaint, prim by-way
lined with dwellings singularly Old-Worldish, even for London. He seemed
to know it subjectively, to have retained a memory of it from another
existence: as the stage setting of a vivid dream, all forgotten, will
sometimes recur with peculiar and exasperating intensity, in broad
daylight. The houses, with their sloping, red-tiled roofs, unexpected
gables, spontaneous dormer windows, glass panes set in leaded frames, red
brick façades trimmed with green shutters and doorsteps of white stone,
each sitting back, sedate and self-sufficient, in its trim dooryard fenced
off from the public thoroughfare: all wore an aspect hauntingly familiar,
and yet strange.

A corner sign, remarked in passing, had named the spot "Aspen Villas";
though he felt he knew the sound of those syllables as well as he did
the name of the Pless, strive as he might he failed to make them convey
anything tangible to his intelligence. When had he heard of it? At what
time had his errant footsteps taken him through this curious survival of
Eighteenth Century London?

Not that it mattered when. It could have no possible bearing on the
emergency. He really gave it little thought; the mental processes recounted
were mostly subconscious, if none the less real. His objective attention
was wholly preoccupied with the knowledge that Calendar's cab was drawing
perilously near. And he was debating whether or not they should alight
at once and try to make a better pace afoot, when the decision was taken
wholly out of his hands.

Blindly staggering on, wilted with weariness, the horse stumbled in the
shafts and plunged forward on its knees. Quick as the driver was to pull it
up, with a cruel jerk of the bits, Kirkwood was caught unprepared; lurching
against the dashboard, he lost his footing, grasped frantically at the
unstable air, and went over, bringing up in a sitting position in the
gutter, with a solid shock that jarred his very teeth.

For a moment dazed he sat there blinking; by the time he got to his feet,
the girl stood beside him, questioning him with keen solicitude.

"No," he gasped; "not hurt--only surprised. Wait...."

Their cab had come to a complete standstill; Calendar's was no more than
twenty yards behind, and as Kirkwood caught sight of him the fat adventurer
was in the act of lifting himself ponderously out of the seat.

Incontinently the young man turned to the girl and forced the traveling-bag
into her hands.

"Run for it!" he begged her. "Don't stop to argue. You promised--run! I'll
come...."

"Philip!" she pleaded.

"Dorothy!" he cried in torment.

Perhaps it was his unquestionable distress that weakened her. Suddenly she
yielded--with whatever reason. He was only hazily aware of the swish of her
skirts behind him; he had no time to look round and see that she got away
safely. He had only eyes and thoughts for Calendar and Stryker.

They were both afoot, now, and running toward him, the one as awkward as
the other, but neither yielding a jot of their malignant purpose. He held
the picture of it oddly graphic in his memory for many a day thereafter:
Calendar making directly, for him, his heavy-featured face a dull red with
the exertion, his fat head dropped forward as if too heavy for his neck of
a bull, his small eyes bright with anger; Stryker shying off at a discreet
angle, evidently with the intention of devoting himself to the capture of
the girl; the two cabs with their dejected screws, at rest in the middle of
the quiet, twilit street. He seemed even to see himself, standing stockily
prepared, hands in his coat pockets, his own head inclined with a
suggestion of pugnacity.

To this mental photograph another succeeds, of the same scene an instant
later; all as it had been before, their relative positions unchanged, save
that Stryker and Calendar had come to a dead stop, and that Kirkwood's
right arm was lifted and extended, pointing at the captain.

So forgetful of self was he, that it required a moment's thought to
convince him that he was really responsible for the abrupt transformation.
Incredulously he realized that he had drawn Calendar's revolver and pulled
Stryker up short, in mid-stride, by the mute menace of it, as much as by
his hoarse cry of warning:

"Stryker--not another foot--"

With this there chimed in Dorothy's voice, ringing bell-clear from a little
distance:

"Philip!"

Like a flash he wheeled, to add yet another picture to his mental gallery.

Perhaps two-score feet up the sidewalk a gate stood open; just outside it a
man of tall and slender figure, rigged out in a bizarre costume consisting
mainly of a flowered dressing-gown and slippers, was waiting in an attitude
of singular impassivity; within it, pausing with a foot lifted to the
doorstep, bag in hand, her head turned as she looked back, was Dorothy.

[Illustration: A costume consisting mainly of a flowered dressing-gown and
slippers.]

As he comprehended these essential details of the composition, the man in
the flowered dressing-gown raised a hand, beckoning to him in a manner as
imperative as his accompanying words.

"Kirkwood!" he saluted the young man in a clear and vibrant voice, "put
up that revolver and stop this foolishness." And, with a jerk of his
head towards the doorway, in which Dorothy now waited, hesitant: "Come,
sir--quickly!"

Kirkwood choked on a laugh that was half a sob. "Brentwick!" he cried,
restoring the weapon to his pocket and running toward his friend. "Of all
happy accidents!"

"You may call it that," retorted the elder man with a fleeting smile as
Kirkwood slipped inside the dooryard. "Come," he said; "let's get into the
house."

"But you said--I thought you went to Munich," stammered Kirkwood; and so
thoroughly impregnated was his mind with this understanding that it was
hard for him to adjust his perceptions to the truth.

"I was detained--by business," responded Brentwick briefly. His gaze, weary
and wistful behind his glasses, rested on the face of the girl on the
threshold of his home; and the faint, sensitive flush of her face deepened.
He stopped and honored her with a bow that, for all his fantastical attire,
would have graced a beau of an earlier decade. "Will you be pleased to
enter?" he suggested punctiliously. "My house, such as it is, is quite at
your disposal. And," he added, with a glance over his shoulder, "I fancy
that a word or two may presently be passed which you would hardly care to
hear."

Dorothy's hesitation was but transitory; Kirkwood was reassuring her with
a smile more like his wonted boyish grin than anything he had succeeded
in conjuring up throughout the day. Her own smile answered it, and with a
murmured word of gratitude and a little, half timid, half distant bow for
Brentwick, she passed on into the hallway.

Kirkwood lingered with his friend upon the door-stoop. Calendar, recovered
from his temporary consternation, was already at the gate, bending over
it, fat fingers fumbling with the latch, his round red face, lifted to the
house, darkly working with chagrin.

From his threshold, watching him with a slight contraction of the eyes,
Brentwick hailed him in tones of cloying courtesy.

"Do you wish to see me, sir?"

The fat adventurer faltered just within the gateway; then, with a truculent
swagger, "I want my daughter," he declared vociferously.

Brentwick peered mildly over his glasses, first at Calendar, then at
Kirkwood. His glance lingered a moment on the young man's honest eyes, and
swung back to Calendar.

"My good man," he said with sublime tolerance, "will you be pleased to take
yourself off--to the devil if you like? Or shall I take the trouble to
interest the police?"

He removed one fine and fragile hand from a pocket of the flowered
dressing-gown, long enough to jerk it significantly toward the nearer
street-corner.

Thunderstruck, Calendar glanced hastily in the indicated direction.
A blue-coated bobby was to be seen approaching with measured stride,
diffusing upon the still evening air an impression of ineffably capable
self-contentment.

Calendar's fleshy lips parted and closed without a sound. They quivered.
Beneath them quivered his assortment of graduated chins. His heavy and
pendulous cheeks quivered, slowly empurpling with the dark tide of his
apoplectic wrath. The close-clipped thatch of his iron gray mustache, even,
seemed to bristle like hairs upon the neck of a maddened dog. Beneath him
his fat legs trembled, and indeed his whole huge carcass shook visibly, in
the stress of his restrained wrath.

Suddenly, overwhelmed, he banged the gate behind him and waddled off to
join the captain; who already, with praiseworthy native prudence, had
fallen back upon their cab.

From his coign of strategic advantage, the comfortable elevation of
his box, Kirkwood's cabby, whose huge enjoyment of the adventurers'
discomfiture had throughout been noisily demonstrative, entreated Calendar
with lifted forefinger, bland affability, and expressions of heartfelt
sympathy.

"Kebsir? 'Ave a kebsir, do! Try a ride be'ind a real 'orse, sir; don't you
go on wastin' time on 'im." A jerk of a derisive thumb singled out the
other cabman. "'E aren't pl'yin' you fair, sir; I knows 'im,--'e's a
hartful g'y deceiver, 'e is. Look at 'is 'orse,--w'ich it aren't; it's a
snyle, that's w'at it is. Tyke a father's hadvice, sir, and next time yer
fairest darter runs awye with the dook in disguise, chyse 'em in a real
kebsir, not a cheap imitashin.... Kebsir?... Garn, you 'ard-'arted--"

Here he swooped upwards in a dizzy flight of vituperation best unrecorded.
Calendar, beyond an absent-minded flirt of one hand by his ear, as who
should shoo away a buzzing insect, ignored him utterly.

Sullenly extracting money from his pocket, he paid off his driver, and in
company with Stryker, trudged in morose silence down the street.

Brentwick touched Kirkwood's arm and drew him into the house.




XVIII


ADVENTURERS' LUCK

As the door closed, Kirkwood swung impulsively to Brentwick, with the
brief, uneven laugh of fine-drawn nerves.

"Good God, sir!" he cried. "You don't know--"

"I can surmise," interrupted the elder man shrewdly.

"You turned up in the nick of time, for all the world like--"

"Harlequin popping through a stage trap?"

"No!--an incarnation of the Providence that watches over children and
fools."

Brentwick dropped a calming hand upon his shoulder. "Your simile seems
singularly happy, Philip. Permit me to suggest that you join the child in
my study." He laughed quietly, with a slight nod toward an open door at the
end of the hallway. "For myself, I'll be with you in one moment."

A faint, indulgent smile lurking in the shadow of his white mustache, he
watched the young man wheel and dart through the doorway. "Young hearts!"
he commented inaudibly--and a trace sadly. "Youth!..."

Beyond the threshold of the study, Kirkwood paused, eager eyes searching
its somber shadows for a sign of Dorothy.

A long room and deep, it was lighted only by the circumscribed disk of
illumination thrown on the central desk by a shaded reading-lamp, and the
flickering glow of a grate-fire set beneath the mantel of a side-wall. At
the back, heavy velvet portières cloaked the recesses of two long windows,
closed jealously even against the twilight. Aside from the windows, doors
and chimney-piece, every foot of wall space was occupied by towering
bookcases or by shelves crowded to the limit of their capacity with an
amazing miscellany of objects of art, the fruit of years of patient and
discriminating collecting. An exotic and heady atmosphere, compounded of
the faint and intangible exhalations of these insentient things, fragrance
of sandalwood, myrrh and musk, reminiscent whiffs of half-forgotten
incense, seemed to intensify the impression of gloomy richness and
repose...

By the fireplace, a little to one side, stood Dorothy, one small foot
resting on the brass fender, her figure merging into the dusky background,
her delicate beauty gaining an effect of elusive and ethereal mystery in
the waning and waxing ruddy glow upflung from the bedded coals.

"Oh, Philip!" She turned swiftly to Kirkwood with extended hands and a low,
broken cry. "I'm _so_ glad...."

A trace of hysteria in her manner warned him, and he checked himself upon
the verge of a too dangerous tenderness. "There!" he said soothingly,
letting her hands rest gently in his palms while he led her to a chair. "We
can make ourselves easy now." She sat down and he released her hands with a
reluctance less evident than actual. "If ever I say another word against my
luck--"

"Who," inquired the girl, lowering her voice, "who is the gentleman in the
flowered dressing-gown?"

"Brentwick--George Silvester Brentwick: an old friend. I've known him for
years,--ever since I came abroad. Curiously enough, however, this is the
first time I've ever been here. I called once, but he wasn't in,--a few
days ago,--the day we met. I thought the place looked familiar. Stupid of
me!"

"Philip," said the girl with a grave face but a shaking voice, "it was."
She laughed provokingly.... "It was so funny, Philip. I don't know why I
ran, when you told me to, but I did; and while I ran, I was conscious
of the front door, here, opening, and this tall man in the flowered
dressing-gown coming down to the gate as if it were the most ordinary thing
in the world for him to stroll out, dressed that way, in the evening. And
he opened the gate, and bowed, and said, ever so pleasantly, 'Won't you
come in, Miss Calendar?'--"

"He did!" exclaimed Kirkwood. "But how--?"

"How can I say?" she expostulated. "At all events, he seemed to know
me; and when he added something about calling you in, too--he said 'Mr.
Kirkwood '--I didn't hesitate."

"It's strange enough, surely--and fortunate. Bless his heart!" said
Kirkwood.

And, "Hum!" said Mr. Brentwick considerately, entering the study. He had
discarded the dressing-gown and was now in evening dress.

The girl rose. Kirkwood turned. "Mr. Brentwick--" he began.

But Brentwick begged his patience with an eloquent gesture. "Sir," he said,
somewhat austerely, "permit me to put a single question: Have you by any
chance paid your cabby?"

"Why--" faltered the younger man, with a flaming face. "I--why, no--that
is--"

The other quietly put his hand upon a bell-pull. A faint jingling sound was
at once audible, emanating from the basement.

"How much should you say you owe him?"

"I--I haven't a penny in the world!"

The shrewd eyes flashed their amusement into Kirkwood's. "Tut, tut!"
Brentwick chuckled. "Between gentlemen, my dear boy! Dear me! you are slow
to learn."

"I'll never be contented to sponge on my friends," explained Kirkwood in
deepest misery. "I can't tell when--"

"Tut, tut! How much did you say?"

"Ten shillings--or say twelve, would be about right," stammered the
American, swayed by conflicting emotions of gratitude and profound
embarrassment.

A soft-footed butler, impassive as Fate, materialized mysteriously in the
doorway.

"You rang, sir?" he interrupted frigidly.

"I rang, Wotton." His master selected a sovereign from his purse and handed
it to the servant. "For the cabby, Wotton."

"Yes sir." The butler swung automatically, on one heel.

"And Wotton!"

"Sir?"

"If any one should ask for me, I'm not at home."

"Very good, sir."

"And if you should see a pair of disreputable scoundrels skulking, in the
neighborhood, one short and stout, the other tall and evidently a seafaring
man, let me know."

"Thank you, sir." A moment later the front door was heard to close.

Brentwick turned with a little bow to the girl. "My dear Miss Calendar," he
said, rubbing his thin, fine hands,--"I am old enough, I trust, to call you
such without offense,--please be seated."

Complying, the girl rewarded him with a radiant smile. Whereupon, striding
to the fireplace, their host turned his back to it, clasped his hands
behind him, and glowered benignly upon the two. "Ah!" he observed in
accents of extreme personal satisfaction. "Romance! Romance!"

"Would you mind telling us how you knew--" began Kirkwood anxiously.

"Not in the least, my dear Philip. It is simple enough: I possess an
imagination. From my bedroom window, on the floor above, I happen to behold
two cabs racing down the street, the one doggedly pursuing the other. The
foremost stops, perforce of a fagged horse. There alights a young gentleman
looking, if you'll pardon me, uncommonly seedy; he is followed by a young
lady, if she will pardon me," with another little bow, "uncommonly pretty.
With these two old eyes I observe that the gentleman does not pay his
cabby. Ergo--I intelligently deduce--he is short of money. Eh?"

"You were right," affirmed Kirkwood, with a rueful and crooked smile.
"But--"

"So! so!" pursued Brentwick, rising on his toes and dropping back again;
"so this world of ours wags on to the old, old tune!... And I, who in my
younger days pursued adventure without success, in dotage find myself
dragged into a romance by my two ears, whether I will or no! Eh? And now
you are going to tell me all about it, Philip. There is a chair.... Well,
Wotton?"

The butler had again appeared noiselessly in the doorway.

"Beg pardon, sir; they're waiting, sir."

"The caitiffs, Wotton?"

"Yessir."

"Where waiting?"

"One at each end of the street, sir."

"Thank you. You may bring us sherry and biscuit, Wotton."

"Thank you, sir."

The servant vanished.

Brentwick removed his glasses, rubbed them, and blinked thoughtfully at the
girl. "My dear," he said suddenly, with a peculiar tremor in his voice,
"you resemble your mother remarkably. Tut--I should know! Time was when I
was one of her most ardent admirers."

"You--y-you knew my mother?" cried Dorothy, profoundly moved.

"Did I not know you at sight? My dear, you are your mother reincarnate, for
the good of an unworthy world. She was a very beautiful woman, my dear."

Wotton entered with a silver serving tray, offering it in turn to Dorothy,
Kirkwood and his employer. While he was present the three held silent--the
girl trembling slightly, but with her face aglow; Kirkwood half stupefied
between his ease from care and his growing astonishment, as Brentwick
continued to reveal unexpected phases of his personality; Brentwick himself
outwardly imperturbable and complacent, for all that his hand shook as he
lifted his wine glass.

"You may go, Wotton--or, wait. Don't you feel the need of a breath of fresh
air, Wotton?"

"Yessir, thank you, sir."

"Then change your coat, Wotton, light your pipe, and stroll out for half an
hour. You need not leave the street, but if either the tall thin blackguard
with the seafaring habit, or the short stout rascal with the air of mystery
should accost you, treat them with all courtesy, Wotton. You will be
careful not to tell either of them anything in particular, although I don't
mind your telling them that Mr. Brentwick lives here, if they ask. I am
mostly concerned to discover if they purpose becoming fixtures on the
street-corners, Wotton."

"Quite so, sir."

"Now you may go.... Wotton," continued his employer as the butler took
himself off as softly as a cat, "grows daily a more valuable mechanism. He
is by no means human in any respect, but I find him extremely handy to
have round the house.... And now, my dear," turning to Dorothy, "with your
permission I desire to drink to the memory of your beautiful mother and to
the happiness of her beautiful daughter."

"But you will tell me--"

"A number of interesting things, Miss Calendar, if you'll be good enough to
let me choose the time. I beg you to be patient with the idiosyncrasies
of an old man, who means no harm, who has a reputation as an eccentric to
sustain before his servants.... And now," said Brentwick, setting aside his
glass, "now, my dear boy, for the adventure."

Kirkwood chuckled, infected by his host's genial humor. "How do you know--"

"How can it be otherwise?" countered Brentwick with a trace of asperity.
"Am I to be denied my adventure? Sir, I refuse without equivocation. Your
very bearing breathes of Romance. There must be an adventure forthcoming,
Philip; otherwise my disappointment will be so acute that I shall be
regretfully obliged seriously to consider my right, as a householder, to
show you the door."

"But Mr. Brentwick--!"

"Sit down, sir!" commanded Brentwick with such a peremptory note that the
young man, who had risen, obeyed out of sheer surprise. Upon which his host
advanced, indicting him with a long white forefinger. "Would you, sir,"
he demanded, "again expose this little lady to the machinations of that
corpulent scoundrel, whom I have just had the pleasure of shooing off my
premises, because you choose to resent an old man's raillery?"

"I apologize," Kirkwood humored him.

"I accept the apology in the spirit in which it is offered.... I repeat,
now for the adventure, Philip. If the story's long, epitomize. We can
consider details more at our leisure."

Kirkwood's eyes consulted the girl's face; almost imperceptibly she nodded
him permission to proceed.

"Briefly, then," he began haltingly, "the man who followed us to the door
here, is Miss Calendar's father."

"Oh? His name, please?"

"George Burgoyne Calendar."

"Ah! An American; I remember, now. Continue, please."

"He is hounding us, sir, with the intention of stealing some property,
which he caused to be stolen, which we--to put it bluntly--stole from him,
to which he has no shadow of a title, and which, finally, we're endeavoring
to return to its owners."

"My dear!" interpolated Brentwick gently, looking down at the girl's
flushed face and drooping head.

"He ran us to the last ditch," Kirkwood continued; "I've spent my last
farthing trying to lose him."

"But why have you not caused his arrest?" Brentwick inquired.

Kirkwood nodded meaningly toward the girl. Brentwick made a sound
indicating comprehension, a click of the tongue behind closed teeth.

"We came to your door by the merest accident--it might as well have been
another. I understood you were in Munich, and it never entered my head that
we'd find you home."

"A communication from my solicitors detained me," explained Brentwick. "And
now, what do you intend to do?"

"Trespass as far on your kindness as you'll permit. In the first place,
I--I want the use of a few pounds with which to cable some friends in New
York, for money; on receipt of which I can repay you."

"Philip," observed Brentwood, "you are a most irritating child. But I
forgive you the faults of youth. You may proceed, bearing in mind, if you
please, that I am your friend equally with any you may own in America."

"You're one of the best men in the world," said Kirkwood.

"Tut, tut! Will you get on?"

"Secondly, I want you to help us to escape Calendar to-night. It is
necessary that Miss Calendar should go to Chiltern this evening, where she
has friends who will receive and protect her."

"Mm-mm," grumbled their host, meditative. "My faith!" he commented, with
brightening eyes. "It sounds almost too good to be true! And I've been
growing afraid that the world was getting to be a most humdrum and
uninteresting planet!... Miss Calendar, I am a widower of so many years
standing that I had almost forgotten I had ever been anything but a
bachelor. I fear my house contains little that will be of service to a
young lady. Yet a room is at your disposal; the parlor-maid shall show you
the way. And Philip, between you and me, I venture to remark that hot water
and cold steel would add to the attractiveness of your personal appearance;
my valet will attend you in my room. Dinner," concluded Brentwick with
anticipative relish, "will be served in precisely thirty minutes. I shall
expect you to entertain me with a full and itemized account of every phase
of your astonishing adventure. Later, we will find a way to Chiltern."

Again he put a hand upon the bell-pull. Simultaneously Dorothy and Kirkwood
rose.

"Mr. Brentwick," said the girl, her eyes starred with tears of gratitude,
"I don't, I really don't know how--"

"My dear," said the old gentleman, "you will thank me most appropriately
by continuing, to the best of your ability, to resemble your mother more
remarkably every minute."

"But I," began Kirkwood----.

"You, my dear Philip, can thank me best by permitting me to enjoy myself;
which I am doing thoroughly at the present moment. My pleasure in being
invited to interfere in your young affairs is more keen than you can well
surmise. Moreover," said Mr. Brentwick, "so long have I been an amateur
adventurer that I esteem it the rarest privilege to find myself thus on the
point of graduating into professional ranks." He rubbed his hands, beaming
upon them. "And," he added, as a maid appeared at the door, "I have already
schemed me a scheme for the discomfiture of our friends the enemy: a scheme
which we will discuss with our dinner, while the heathen rage and imagine a
vain thing, in the outer darkness."

Kirkwood would have lingered, but of such inflexible temper was his host
that he bowed him into the hands of a man servant without permitting him
another word.

"Not a syllable," he insisted. "I protest I am devoured with curiosity, my
dear boy, but I have also bowels of compassion. When we are well on with
our meal, when you are strengthened with food and drink, then you may
begin. But now--Dickie," to the valet, "do your duty!"

Kirkwood, laughing with exasperation, retired at discretion, leaving
Brentwick the master of the situation: a charming gentleman with a will of
his own and a way that went with it.

He heard the young man's footsteps diminish on the stairway; and again
he smiled the indulgent, melancholy smile of mellow years. "Youth!" he
whispered softly. "Romance!... And now," with a brisk change of tone as
he closed the study door, "now we are ready for this interesting Mr.
Calendar."

Sitting down at his desk, he found and consulted a telephone directory;
but its leaves, at first rustling briskly at the touch of the slender and
delicate fingers, were presently permitted to lie unturned,--the book
resting open on his knees the while he stared wistfully into the fire.

A suspicion of moisture glimmered in his eyes. "Dorothy!" he whispered
huskily. And a little later, rising, he proceeded to the telephone....

An hour and a half later Kirkwood, his self-respect something restored by
a bath, a shave, and a resumption of clothes which had been hastily but
thoroughly cleansed and pressed by Brentwick's valet; his confidence and
courage mounting high under the combined influence of generous wine,
substantial food, the presence of his heart's mistress and the
admiration--which was unconcealed--of his friend, concluded at the
dinner-table, his narration.

"And that," he said, looking up from his savory, "is about all."

"Bravo!" applauded Brentwick; eyes shining with delight.

"All," interposed Dorothy in warm reproach, "but what he hasn't told--"

"Which, my dear, is to be accounted for wholly by a very creditable
modesty, rarely encountered in the young men of the present day. It was, of
course, altogether different with those of my younger years. Yes, Wotton?"

Brentwick sat back in his chair, inclining an attentive ear to a
communication murmured by the butler.

Kirkwood's gaze met Dorothy's across the expanse of shining cloth; he
deprecated her interruption with a whimsical twist of his eyebrows.
"Really, you shouldn't," he assured her in an undertone. "I've done nothing
to deserve..." But under the spell of her serious sweet eyes, he fell
silent, and presently looked down, strangely abashed; and contemplated the
vast enormity of his unworthiness.

Coffee was set before them by Wotton, the impassive, Brentwick refusing
it with a little sigh. "It is one of the things, as Philip knows," he
explained to the girl, "denied me by the physician who makes his life happy
by making mine a waste. I am allowed but three luxuries; cigars, travel
in moderation, and the privilege of imposing on my friends. The first I
propose presently, to enjoy, by your indulgence; and the second I shall
this evening undertake by virtue of the third, of which I have just availed
myself."

Smiling at the involution, he rested his head against the back of the
chair, eyes roving from the girl's face to Kirkwood's. "Inspiration to
do which," he proceeded gravely, "came to me from the seafaring picaroon
(Stryker did you name him?) via the excellent Wotton. While you were
preparing for dinner, Wotton returned from his constitutional with the news
that, leaving the corpulent person on watch at the corner, Captain Stryker
had temporarily, made himself scarce. However, we need feel no anxiety
concerning his whereabouts, for he reappeared in good time and a
motor-car. From which it becomes evident that you have not overrated their
pertinacity; the fiasco of the cab-chase is not to be reënacted."

Resolutely the girl repressed a gasp of dismay. Kirkwood stared moodily
into his cup.

"These men bore me fearfully," he commented at last.

"And so," continued Brentwick, "I bethought me of a counter-stroke. It is
my good fortune to have a friend whose whim it is to support a touring-car,
chiefly in innocuous idleness. Accordingly I have telephoned him and
commandeered the use of this machine--mechanician, too.... Though not a
betting man, I am willing to risk recklessly a few pence in support of my
contention, that of the two, Captain Stryker's car and ours, the latter
will prove considerably the most speedy....

"In short, I suggest," he concluded, thoughtfully lacing his long white
fingers, "that, avoiding the hazards of cab and railway carriage, we motor
to Chiltern: the night being fine and the road, I am told, exceptionally
good. Miss Dorothy, what do you think?"

Instinctively the girl looked to Kirkwood; then shifted her glance to their
host. "I think you are wonderfully thoughtful and kind," she said simply.

"And you, Philip?"

"It's an inspiration," the younger man declared. "I can't think of anything
better calculated to throw them off, than to distance them by motor-car. It
would be always possible to trace our journey by rail."

"Then," announced Brentwick, making as if to rise, "we had best go. If
neither my hearing nor Captain Stryker's car deceives me, our fiery chariot
is panting at the door."

A little sobered from the confident spirit of quiet gaiety in which they
had dined, they left the table. Not that, in their hearts, either greatly
questioned their ultimate triumph; but they were allowing for the element
of error so apt to set at naught human calculations. Calendar himself had
already been proved fallible. Within the bounds of possibility, their turn
to stumble might now be imminent.

When he let himself dwell upon it, their utter helplessness to give
Calendar pause by commonplace methods, maddened Kirkwood. With another
scoundrel it had been so simple a matter to put a period to his activities
by a word to the police. But he was her father; for that reason he must
continually be spared ... Even though, in desperate extremity, she should
give consent to the arrest of the adventurers, retaliation would follow,
swift and sure. For they might not overlook nor gloze the fact that hers
had been the hands responsible for the theft of the jewels; innocent
though she had been in committing that larceny, a cat's-paw guided by an
intelligence unscrupulous and malign, the law would not hold her guiltless
were she once brought within its cognizance. Nor, possibly, would the
Hallams, mother and son.

Upon their knowledge and their fear of this, undoubtedly Calendar was
reckoning: witness the barefaced effrontery with which he operated against
them. His fear of the police might be genuine enough, but he was never for
an instant disturbed by any doubt lest his daughter should turn against
him. She would never dare that.

Before they left the house, while Dorothy was above stairs resuming her
hat and coat, Kirkwood and Brentwick reconnoitered from the drawing-room
windows, themselves screened from observation by the absence of light in
the room behind.

Before the door a motor-car waited, engines humming impatiently,
mechanician ready in his seat, an uncouth shape in goggles and leather
garments that shone like oilskins under the street lights.

At one corner another and a smaller car stood in waiting, its lamps like
baleful eyes glaring through the night.

In the shadows across the way, a lengthy shadow lurked: Stryker, beyond
reasonable question. Otherwise the street was deserted. Not even that
adventitous bobby of the early evening was now in evidence.

Dorothy presently joining them, Brentwick led the way to the door.

Wotton, apparently nerveless beneath his absolute immobility, let them
out--and slammed the door behind them with such promptitude as to give
cause for the suspicion that he was a fraud, a sham, beneath his icy
exterior desperately afraid lest the house be stormed by the adventurers.

Kirkwood to the right, Brentwick to the left of Dorothy, the former
carrying the treasure bag, they hastened down the walk and through the gate
to the car.

The watcher across the way was moved to whistle shrilly; the other car
lunged forward nervously.

Brentwick taking the front seat, beside the mechanician, left the tonneau
to Kirkwood and Dorothy. As the American slammed the door, the car swept
smoothly out into the middle of the way, while the pursuing car swerved in
to the other curb, slowing down to let Stryker jump aboard.

Kirkwood put himself in the seat by the girl's side and for a few moments
was occupied with the arrangement of the robes. Then, sitting back, he
found her eyes fixed upon him, pools of inscrutable night in the shadow of
her hat.

"You aren't afraid, Dorothy?"

She answered quietly: "I am with you, Philip."

Beneath the robe their hands met...

Exalted, excited, he turned and looked back. A hundred yards to the rear
four unwinking eyes trailed them, like some modern Nemesis in monstrous
guise.




XIX

I----THE UXBRIDGE ROAD

At a steady gait, now and again checked in deference to the street traffic,
Brentwick's motor-car rolled, with resonant humming of the engine, down
the Cromwell Road, swerved into Warwick Road and swung northward through
Kensington to Shepherd's Bush. Behind it Calendar's car clung as if towed
by an invisible cable, never gaining, never losing, mutely testifying to
the adventurer's unrelenting, grim determination to leave them no instant's
freedom from surveillance, to keep for ever at their shoulders, watching
his chance, biding his time with sinister patience until the moment when,
wearied, their vigilance should relax....

To some extent he reckoned without his motor-car. As long as they traveled
within the metropolitan limits, constrained to observe a decorous pace
in view of the prejudices of the County Council, it was a matter of no
difficulty whatever to maintain his distance. But once they had won through
Shepherd's Bush and, paced by huge doubledeck trolley trams, were flying
through Hammersmith on the Uxbridge Road; once they had run through Acton,
and knew beyond dispute that now they were without the city boundaries,
then the complexion of the business was suddenly changed.

Not too soon for honest sport; Calendar was to have (Kirkwood would have
said in lurid American idiom) a run for his money. The scattered lights of
Southall were winking out behind them before Brentwick chose to give the
word to the mechanician.

Quietly the latter threw in the clutch for the third speed--and the fourth.
The car leaped forward like a startled race-horse. The motor lilted merrily
into its deep-throated song of the open road, its contented, silken humming
passing into a sonorous and sustained purr.

Kirkwood and the girl were first jarred violently forward, then thrown
together. She caught his arm to steady herself; it seemed the most natural
thing imaginable that he should take her hand and pass it beneath his
arm, holding her so, his fingers closed above her own. Before they had
recovered, or had time to catch their breath, a mile of Middlesex had
dropped to the rear.

Not quite so far had they distanced Calendar's trailing Nemesis of the four
glaring eyes; the pursuers put forth a gallant effort to hold their place.
At intervals during the first few minutes a heavy roaring and crashing
could be heard behind them; gradually it subsided, dying on the wings of
the free rushing wind that buffeted their faces as mile after mile was
reeled off and the wide, darkling English countryside opened out before
them, sweet and wonderful.

Once Kirkwood looked back; in the winking of an eye he saw four faded disks
of light, pallid with despair, top a distant rise and glide down into
darkness. When he turned, Dorothy was interrogating him with eyes whose
melting, shadowed loveliness, revealed to him in the light of the far,
still stars, seemed to incite him to that madness which he had bade himself
resist with all his strength.

He shook his head, as if to say: They can not catch us.

His hour was not yet; time enough to think of love and marriage (as if he
were capable of consecutive thought on any other subject!)--time enough to
think of them when he had gone back to his place, or rather when he should
have found it, in the ranks of bread-winners, and so have proved his right
to mortal happiness; time enough then to lay whatever he might have to
offer at her feet. Now he could conceive of no baser treachery to his
soul's-desire than to advantage himself of her gratitude.

Resolutely he turned his face forward, striving with all his will and might
to forget the temptation of her lips, weary as they were and petulant with
waiting; and so sat rigid in his time of trial, clinging with what strength
he could to the standards of his honor, and trying to lose his dream
in dreaming of the bitter struggle that seemed likely to be his future
portion.

Perhaps she guessed a little of the fortunes of the battle that was being
waged within him. Perhaps not. Whatever the trend of her thoughts, she did
not draw away from him.... Perhaps the breath of night, fresh and clean and
fragrant with the odor of the fields and hedges, sweeping into her face
with velvety caress, rendered her drowsy. Presently the silken lashes
drooped, fluttering upon her cheeks, the tired and happy smile hovered
about her lips....

In something less than half an hour of this wild driving, Kirkwood roused
out of his reverie sufficiently to become sensible that the speed was
slackening. Incoherent snatches of sentences, fragments of words and
phrases spoken by Brentwick and the mechanician, were flung back past his
ears by the rushing wind. Shielding his eyes he could see dimly that the
mechanician was tinkering (apparently) with the driving gear. Then, their
pace continuing steadily to abate, he heard Brentwick fling at the man a
sharp-toned and querulously impatient question: What was the trouble? His
reply came in a single word, not distinguishable.

The girl sat up, opening her eyes, disengaging her arm.

Kirkwood bent forward and touched Brentwick on the shoulder; the latter
turned to him a face lined with deep concern.

"Trouble," he announced superfluously. "I fear we have blundered."

"What is it?" asked Dorothy in a troubled voice.

"Petrol seems to be running low. Charles here" (he referred to the
mechanician) "says the tank must be leaking. We'll go on as best we can and
try to find an inn. Fortunately, most of the inns nowadays keep supplies of
petrol for just such emergencies."

"Are we--? Do you think--?"

"Oh, no; not a bit of danger of that," returned Brentwick hastily. "They'll
not catch up with us this night. That is a very inferior car they have,--so
Charles says, at least; nothing to compare with this. If I'm not in error,
there's the Crown and Mitre just ahead; we'll make it, fill our tanks, and
be off again before they can make up half their loss."

Dorothy looked anxiously to Kirkwood, her lips forming an unuttered query:
What did he think?

"Don't worry; we'll have no trouble," he assured her stoutly; "the
chauffeur knows, undoubtedly."

None the less he was moved to stand up in the tonneau, conscious of the
presence of the traveling bag, snug between his feet, as well as of the
weight of Calendar's revolver in his pocket, while he stared back along the
road.

There was nothing to be seen of their persecutors.

The car continued to crawl. Five minutes dragged out tediously. Gradually
they, drew abreast a tavern standing back a distance from the road,
embowered in a grove of trees between whose ancient boles the tap-room
windows shone enticingly, aglow with comfortable light. A creaking
sign-board, much worn by weather and age, swinging from a roadside post,
confirmed the accuracy of Brentwick's surmise, announcing that here stood
the Crown and Mitre, house of entertainment for man and beast.

Sluggishly the car rolled up before it and came to a dead and silent halt.
Charles, the mechanician, jumping out, ran hastily up the path towards the
inn. In the car Brentwick turned again, his eyes curiously bright in the
starlight, his forehead quaintly furrowed, his voice apologetic.

"It may take a few minutes," he said undecidedly, plainly endeavoring to
cover up his own dark doubts. "My dear," to the girl, "if I have brought
trouble upon you in this wise, I shall never earn my own forgiveness."

Kirkwood stood up again, watchful, attentive to the sounds of night; but
the voice of the pursuing motor-car was not of their company. "I hear
nothing," he announced.

"You will forgive me,--won't you, my dear?--for causing you these few
moments of needless anxiety?" pleaded the old gentleman, his tone
tremulous.

"As if you could be blamed!" protested the girl. "You mustn't think of it
that way. Fancy, what should we have done without you!"

"I'm afraid I have been very clumsy," sighed Brentwick, "clumsy and
impulsive ... Kirkwood, do you hear anything?"

"Not yet, sir."

"Perhaps," suggested Brentwick a little later, "perhaps we had better
alight and go up to the inn. It would be more cosy there, especially if the
petrol proves hard to obtain, and we have long to wait."

"I should like that," assented the girl decidedly.

Kirkwood nodded his approval, opened the door and jumped out to assist her;
then picked up the bag and followed the pair,--Brentwick leading the way
with Dorothy on his arm.

At the doorway of the Crown and Mitre, Charles met them evidently seriously
disturbed. "No petrol to be had here, sir," he announced reluctantly; "but
the landlord will send to the next inn, a mile up the road, for some. You
will have to be patient, I'm afraid, sir."

"Very well. Get some one to help you push the car in from the road,"
ordered Brentwick; "we will be waiting in one of the private parlors."

"Yes, sir; thank you, sir." The mechanician touched the visor of his cap
and hurried off.

"Come, Kirkwood." Gently Brentwick drew the girl in with him.

Kirkwood lingered momentarily on the doorstep, to listen acutely. But the
wind was blowing into that quarter whence they had come, and he could hear
naught save the soughing in the trees, together with an occasional burst
of rude rustic laughter from the tap-room. Lifting his shoulders in dumb
dismay, and endeavoring to compose his features, he entered the tavern.




II----THE CROWN AND MITRE

A rosy-cheeked and beaming landlady met him in the corridor and, all bows
and smiles, ushered him into a private parlor reserved for the party,
immediately bustling off in a desperate flurry, to secure refreshments
desired by Brentwick.

The girl had seated herself on one end of an extremely comfortless lounge
and was making a palpable effort to seem at ease. Brentwick stood at one of
the windows, shoulders rounded and head bent, hands clasped behind his back
as he peered out into the night. Kirkwood dropped the traveling bag beneath
a chair the farthest removed from the doorway, and took to pacing the
floor.

In a corner of the room a tall grandfather's clock ticked off ten
interminable minutes. For some reason unconscionably delaying, the landlady
did not reappear. Brentwick, abruptly turning from the window, remarked
the fact querulously, then drew a chair up to a marble-topped table in the
middle of the floor.

"My dear," he requested the girl, "will you oblige me by sitting over here?
And Philip, bring up a chair, if you will. We must not permit ourselves to
worry, and I have something here which may, perhaps, engage your interest
for a while."

To humor him and alleviate his evident distress of mind, they acceded.
Kirkwood found himself seated opposite Dorothy, Brentwick between them.
After some hesitation, made the more notable by an air of uneasiness
which sat oddly on his shoulders, whose composure and confident mien had
theretofore been so complete and so reassuring, the elder gentleman fumbled
in an inner coat-pocket and brought to light a small black leather wallet.
He seemed to be on the point of opening it when hurried footfalls sounded
in the hallway. Brentwick placed the wallet, still with its secret intact,
on the table before him, as Charles burst unceremoniously in, leaving the
door wide open.

"Mr. Brentwick, sir!" he cried gustily. "That other car--"

With a smothered ejaculation Kirkwood leaped to his feet, tugging at the
weapon in his pocket. In another instant he had the revolver exposed.
The girl's cry of alarm, interrupting the machinist, fixed Brentwick's
attention on the young man. He, too, stood up, reaching over very quickly,
to clamp strong supple fingers round Kirkwood's wrist, while with the other
hand he laid hold of the revolver and by a single twist wrenched it away.

Kirkwood turned upon him in fury. "So!" he cried, shaking with passion.
"This is what your hospitality meant! You're going to--"

"My dear young friend," interrupted Brentwick with a flash of impatience,
"remember that if I had designed to betray you, I could have asked no
better opportunity than when you were my guest under my own roof."

"But--hang it all, Brentwick!" expostulated Kirkwood, ashamed and contrite,
but worked upon by desperate apprehension; "I didn't mean that, but--"

"Would you have bullets flying when she is near?" demanded Brentwick
scathingly. Hastily he slipped the revolver upon a little shelf beneath the
table-top. "Sir!" he informed Kirkwood with some heat, "I love you as my
own son, but you're a young fool!... as I have been, in my time ... and as
I would to Heaven I might be again! Be advised, Philip,--be calm. Can't you
see it's the only way to save your treasure?"

"Hang the jewels!" retorted Kirkwood warmly. "What--"

"Sir, who said anything about the jewels?"

As Brentwick spoke, Calendar's corpulent figure filled the doorway;
Stryker's weather-worn features loomed over his shoulder, distorted in a
cheerful leer.

"As to the jewels," announced the fat adventurer, "I've got a word to say,
if you put it to me that way."

He paused on the threshold, partly for dramatic effect, partly for his own
satisfaction, his quick eyes darting from face to face of the four people
whom he had caught so unexpectedly. A shade of complacency colored his
expression, and he smiled evilly beneath the coarse short thatch of his
gray mustache. In his hand a revolver appeared, poised for immediate use if
there were need.

There was none. Brentwick, at his primal appearance, had dropped a
peremptory hand on Kirkwood's shoulder, forcing the young man back to his
seat; at the same time he resumed his own. The girl had not stirred from
hers since the first alarm; she sat as if transfixed with terror, leaning
forward with her elbows on the table, her hands tightly clasped, her face,
a little blanched, turned to the door. But her scarlet lips were set and
firm with inflexible purpose, and her brown eyes met Calendar's with a look
level and unflinching. Beyond this she gave no sign of recognition.

Nearest of the four to the adventurers was Charles, the mechanician, paused
in affrighted astonishment at sight of the revolver. Calendar, choosing to
advance suddenly, poked the muzzle of the weapon jocularly in the man's
ribs. "Beat it, Four-eyes!" he snapped. "This is your cue to duck! Get out
of my way."

The mechanician jumped as if shot, then hastily, retreated to the table,
his sallow features working beneath the goggle-mask which had excited the
fat adventurer's scorn.

"Come right in, Cap'n," Calendar threw over one shoulder; "come in, shut
the door and lock it. Let's all be sociable, and have a nice quiet time."

Stryker obeyed, with a derisive grimace for Kirkwood.

Calendar, advancing jauntily to a point within a yard of the table,
stopped, smiling affably down upon his prospective victims, and airily
twirling his revolver.

"_Good_ evening, all!" he saluted them blandly. "Dorothy, my child," with
assumed concern, "you're looking a trifle upset; I'm afraid you've been
keeping late hours. Little girls must be careful, you know, or they lose
the bloom of roses in their cheeks.... Mr. Kirkwood, it's a pleasure to
meet you again! Permit me to paraphrase your most sound advice, and remind
you that pistol-shots are apt to attract undesirable attention. It wouldn't
be wise for _you_ to bring the police about our ears. I believe that
in substance such was your sapient counsel to me in the cabin of the
_Alethea_; was it not?... And you, sir!"--fixing Brentwick with a cold
unfriendly eye. "You animated fossil, what d'you mean by telling me to go
to the devil?... But let that pass; I hold no grudge. What might your name
be?"

[Illustration: "_Good_ evening, all!" he saluted them blandly.]

"It might be Brentwick," said that gentleman placidly.

"Brentwick, eh? Well, I like a man of spirit. But permit me to advise
you--"

"Gladly," nodded Brentwick.

"Eh?... Don't come a second time between father and daughter; another man
might not be as patient as I, Mister Brentwick. There's a law in the land,
if you don't happen to know it."

"I congratulate you on your success in evading it," observed Brentwick,
undisturbed. "And it was considerate of you not to employ it in this
instance." Then, with a sharp change of tone, "Come, sir!" he demanded.
"You have unwarrantably intruded in this room, which I have engaged for my
private use. Get through with your business and be off with you."

"All in my good time, my antediluvian friend. When I've wound up my
business here I'll go--not before. But, just to oblige you, we'll get down
to it.... Kirkwood, you have a revolver of mine. Be good enough to return
it."

"I have it here,--under the table," interrupted Brentwick suavely. "Shall I
hand it to you?"

"By the muzzle, if you please. Be very careful; this one's loaded, too--apt
to explode any minute."

To Kirkwood's intense disgust Brentwick quietly slipped one hand beneath
the table and, placing the revolver on its top, delicately with his
finger-tips shoved it toward the farther edge. With a grunt of approval,
Calendar swept the weapon up and into his pocket.

"Any more ordnance?" he inquired briskly, eyes moving alertly from face to
face. "No matter; you wouldn't dare use 'em anyway. And I'm about done.
Dorothy, my dear, it's high time you returned to your father's protection.
Where's that gladstone bag?"

"In my traveling bag," the girl told him in a toneless voice.

"Then you may bring it along. You may also say good night to the kind
gentlemen."

Dorothy did not move; her pallor grew more intense and Kirkwood saw her
knuckles tighten beneath the gloves. Otherwise her mouth seemed to grow
more straight and hard.

"Dorothy!" cried the adventurer with a touch of displeasure. "You heard
me?"

"I heard you," she replied a little wearily, more than a little
contemptuously. "Don't mind him, please, Mr. Kirkwood!"--with an appealing
gesture, as Kirkwood, unable to contain himself, moved restlessly in his
chair, threatening to rise. "Don't say anything. I have no intention
whatever of going with this man."

Calendar's features twitched nervously; he chewed a corner of his mustache,
fixing the girl with a black stare. "I presume," he remarked after a
moment, with slow deliberation, "you're aware that, as your father, I am in
a position to compel you to accompany me."

"I shall not go with you," iterated Dorothy in a level tone. "You may
threaten me, but--I shall not go. Mr. Brentwick and Mr. Kirkwood are taking
me to--friends, who will give me a home until I can find a way to take care
of myself. That is all I have to say to you."

"Bravo, my dear!" cried Brentwick encouragingly.

"Mind your business, sir!" thundered Calendar, his face darkening. Then, to
Dorothy, "You understand, I trust, what this means?" he demanded. "I offer
you a home--and a good one. Refuse, and you work for your living, my girl!
You've forfeited your legacy--"

"I know, I know," she told him in cold disdain. "I am content. Won't you be
kind enough to leave me alone?"

For a breath, Calendar glowered over her; then, "I presume," he observed,
"that all these heroics are inspired by that whipper-snapper, Kirkwood. Do
you know that he hasn't a brass farthing to bless himself with?"

"What has that--?" cried the girl indignantly.

"Why, it has everything to do with me, my child. As your doting parent, I
can't consent to your marrying nothing-a-year.... For I surmise you intend
to marry this Mr. Kirkwood, don't you?"

There followed a little interval of silence, while the warm blood flamed in
the girl's face and the red lips trembled as she faced her tormentor. Then,
with a quaver that escaped her control, "If Mr. Kirkwood asks me, I shall,"
she stated very simply.

"That," interposed Kirkwood, "is completely understood." His gaze sought
her eyes, but she looked away.

"You forget that I am your father," sneered Calendar; "and that you are a
minor. I can refuse my consent."

"But you won't," Kirkwood told him with assurance.

The adventurer stared. "No," he agreed, after slight hesitation; "no,
I shan't interfere. Take her, my boy, if you want her--and a father's
blessing into the bargain. The Lord knows I've troubles enough; a parent's
lot is not what it's cracked up to be." He paused, leering, ironic.
"But,"--deliberately, "there's still this other matter of the gladstone
bag. I don't mind abandoning my parental authority, when my child's
happiness is concerned, but as for my property--"

"It is not your property," interrupted the girl.

"It was your mother's, dear child. It's now mine."

"I dispute that assertion," Kirkwood put in.

"You may dispute it till the cows come home, my boy: the fact will remain
that I intend to take my property with me when I leave this room, whether
you like it or not. Now are you disposed to continue the argument, or may I
count on your being sensible?"

"You may put away your revolver, if that's what you mean," said Kirkwood.
"We certainly shan't oppose you with violence, but I warn you that Scotland
Yard--"

"Oh, that be blowed!" the adventurer snorted in disgust. "I can sail
circles round any tec. that ever blew out of Scotland Yard! Give me an
hour's start, and you're free to do all the funny business you've a mind
to, with--Scotland Yard!"

"Then you admit," queried Brentwick civilly, "that you've no legal title to
the jewels in dispute?"

"Look here, my friend," chuckled Calendar, "when you catch me admitting
anything, you write it down in your little book and tell the bobby on
the corner. Just at present I've got other business than to stand round
admitting anything about anything.... Cap'n, let's have that bag of my
dutiful daughter's."

"'Ere you are." Stryker spoke for the first time since entering the room,
taking the valise from beneath the chair and depositing it on the table.

"Well, we shan't take anything that doesn't belong to us," laughed
Calendar, fumbling with the catch; "not even so small a matter as my own
child's traveling bag. A small--heavy--gladstone bag," he grunted, opening
the valise and plunging in one greedy hand, "will--just--about--do for
mine!" With which he produced the article mentioned. "This for the discard,
Cap'n," he laughed contentedly, pushing the girl's valise aside; and,
rumbling with stentorian mirth, stood beaming benignantly over the
assembled company.

"Why," he exclaimed, "this moment is worth all it cost me! My children,
I forgive you freely. Mr. Kirkwood, I felicitate you cordially on having
secured a most expensive wife. Really--d'you know?--I feel as if I ought to
do a little something for you both." Gurgling with delight he smote his fat
palms together. "I just tell you what," he resumed, "no one yet ever called
Georgie Calendar a tight-wad. I just believe I'm going to make you kids a
handsome wedding present.... The good Lord knows there's enough of this for
a fellow to be a little generous and never miss it!"

The thick mottled fingers tore nervously at the catch; eventually he got
the bag open. Those about the table bent forward, all quickened by the
prospect of for the first time beholding the treasure over which they had
fought, for which they had suffered, so long....

A heady and luscious fragrance pervaded the atmosphere, exhaling from the
open mouth of the bag. A silence, indefinitely sustained, impressed itself
upon the little audience,--a breathless pause ended eventually by a sharp
snap of Calendar's teeth. "_Mmm_!" grunted the adventurer in bewilderment.
He began to pant.

Abruptly his heavy hands delved into the contents of the bag, like the paws
of a terrier digging in earth. To Kirkwood the air seemed temporarily thick
with flying objects. Beneath his astonished eyes a towel fell upon the
table--a crumpled, soiled towel, bearing on its dingy hem the inscription
in indelible ink: "_Hôtel du Commerce, Anvers_." A tooth-mug of substantial
earthenware dropped to the floor with a crash. A slimy soap-dish of the
same manufacture slid across the table and into Brentwick's lap. A battered
alarm clock with never a tick left in its abused carcass rang vacuously as
it fell by the open bag.... The remainder was--oranges: a dozen or more
small, round, golden globes of ripe fruit, perhaps a shade overripe,
therefore the more aromatic.

The adventurer ripped out an oath. "Mulready, by the living God!" he raged
in fury. "Done up, I swear! Done by that infernal sneak--me, blind as a
bat!"

He fell suddenly silent, the blood congesting in his face; as suddenly
broke forth again, haranguing the company.

"That's why he went out and bought those damned oranges, is it? Think of
it--me sitting in the hotel in Antwerp and him lugging in oranges by the
bagful because he was fond of fruit! When did he do it? How do I know? If I
knew, would I be here and him the devil knows where, this minute? When my
back was turned, of course, the damned snake! That's why he was so hot
about picking a fight on the boat, hey? Wanted to get thrown off and take
to the woods--leaving me with _this_! And that's why he felt so awful
done up he wouldn't take a hand at hunting you two down, hey?
Well--by--the--Eternal! I'll camp on his trail for the rest of his
natural-born days! I'll have his eye-teeth for this, I'll--"

He swayed, gibbering with rage, his countenance frightfully contorted, his
fat hands shaking as he struggled for expression.

And then, while yet their own astonishment held Dorothy, Kirkwood,
Brentwick and Stryker speechless, Charles, the mechanician, moved suddenly
upon the adventurer.

There followed two metallic clicks. Calendar's ravings were abrupted as if
his tongue had been paralyzed. He fell back a pace, flabby jowls pale and
shaking, ponderous jaw dropping on his breast, mouth wide and eyes crazed
as he shook violently before him his thick fleshy wrists--securely
handcuffed.

Simultaneously the mechanician whirled about, bounded eagerly across the
floor, and caught Stryker at the door, his dexterous fingers twisting in
the captain's collar as he jerked him back and tripped him.

"Mr. Kirkwood!" he cried. "Here, please--one moment. Take this man's gun,
from him, will you?"

Kirkwood sprang to his assistance, and without encountering much trouble,
succeeded in wresting a Webley from Stryker's limp, flaccid fingers.

Roughly the mechanician shook the man, dragging him to his feet. "Now," he
ordered sternly, "you march to that corner, stick your nose in it, and be
good! You can't get away if you try. I've got other men outside, waiting
for you to come out. Understand?"

Trembling like a whipped cur, Stryker meekly obeyed his instructions to the
letter.

The mechanician, with a contemptuous laugh leaving him, strode back to
Calendar, meanwhile whipping off his goggles; and clapped a hearty hand
upon the adventurer's quaking shoulders.

"Well!" he cried. "And are you still sailing circles round the men
from Scotland Yard, Simmons, or Bellows, or Sanderson, or Calendar, or
Crumbstone, or whatever name you prefer to sail under?"

Calendar glared at him aghast; then heaved a profound sigh, shrugged his
fat shoulders, and bent his head in thought. An instant later he looked up.
"You can't do it," he informed the detective vehemently; "you haven't got a
shred of evidence against me! What's there? A pile of oranges and a peck
of trash! What of it?... Besides," he threatened, "if you pinch me, you'll
have to take the girl in, too. I swear that whatever stealing was done,
she did it. I'll not be trapped this way by her and let her off without a
squeal. Take me--take her; d'you hear?"

"I think," put in the clear, bland accents of Brentwick, "we can consider
that matter settled. I have here, my man,"--nodding to the adventurer as he
took up the black leather wallet,--"I have here a little matter which
may clear up any lingering doubts as to your standing, which you may be
disposed at present to entertain."

He extracted a slip of cardboard and, at arm's length, laid it on the
table-edge beneath the adventurer's eyes. The latter, bewildered, bent over
it for a moment, breathing heavily; then straightened back, shook himself,
laughed shortly with a mirthless note, and faced the detective.

"It's come with you now, I guess?" he suggested very quietly.

"The Bannister warrant is still out for you," returned the man. "That'll be
enough to hold you on till extradition papers arrive from the States."

"Oh, I'll waive those; and I won't give you any trouble, either.... I
reckon," mused the adventurer, jingling his manacles thoughtfully, "I'm a
back-number, anyway. When a half-grown girl, a half-baked boy, a flub like
Mulready--damn his eyes!--and a club-footed snipe from Scotland Yard can
put it all over me this way,... why, I guess it's up to me to go home and
retire to my country-place up the Hudson." He sighed wearily.

"Yep; time to cut it out. But I would like to be free long enough to get in
one good lick at that mutt, Mulready. My friend, you get your hands on him,
and I'll squeal on him till I'm blue in the face. That's a promise."

"You'll have the chance before long," replied the detective. "We received
a telegram from the Amsterdam police late this afternoon, saying they'd
picked up Mr. Mulready with a woman named Hallam, and were holding them
on suspicion. It seems,"--turning to Brentwick,--"they were opening
negotiations for the sale of a lot of stones, and seemed in such a precious
hurry that the diamond merchant's suspicions were roused. We're sending
over for them, Miss Calendar, so you can make your mind easy about your
jewels; you'll have them back in a few days."

"Thank you," said the girl with an effort.

"Well," the adventurer delivered his peroration, "I certainly am blame'
glad to hear it. 'Twouldn't 've been a square deal, any other way."

He paused, looking his erstwhile dupes over with a melancholy eye; then,
with an uncertain nod comprehending the girl, Kirkwood and Brentwick, "So
long!" he said thickly; and turned, with the detective's hand under his arm
and, accompanied by the thoroughly cowed Stryker, waddled out of the room.

III----THE JOURNEY'S END

Kirkwood, following the exodus, closed the door with elaborate care and
slowly, deep in thought, returned to the table.

Dorothy seemed not to have moved, save to place her elbows on the marble
slab, and rest her cheeks between hands that remained clenched, as they had
been in the greatest stress of her emotion. The color had returned to
her face, with a slightly enhanced depth of hue to the credit of her
excitement. Her cheeks were hot, her eyes starlike beneath the woven, massy
sunlight of her hair. Temporarily unconscious of her surroundings she
stared steadfastly before her, thoughts astray in the irridescent glamour
of the dreams that were to come....

Brentwick had slipped down in his chair, resting his silvered head upon its
back, and was smiling serenely up at the low yellow ceiling. Before him on
the table his long white fingers were drumming an inaudible tune. Presently
rousing, he caught Kirkwood's eye and smiled sheepishly, like a child
caught in innocent mischief.

The younger man grinned broadly. "And you were responsible for all that!"
he commented, infinitely amused.

Brentwick nodded, twinkling self-satisfaction. "I contrived it all," he
said; "neat, I call it, too." His old eyes brightened with reminiscent
enjoyment. "Inspiration!" he crowed softly. "Inspiration, pure and simple.
I'd been worrying my wits for fully five minutes before Wotton settled the
matter by telling me about the captain's hiring of the motor-car. Then,
in a flash, I had it.... I talked with Charles by telephone,--his name is
really Charles, by, the bye,--overcame his conscientious scruples about
playing his fish when they were already all but landed, and settled the
artistic details."

He chuckled delightedly. "It's the instinct," he declared emphatically,
"the instinct for adventure. I knew it was in me, latent somewhere, but
never till this day did it get the opportunity to assert itself. A born
adventurer--that's what I am!... You see, it was essential that they should
believe we were frightened and running from them; that way, they would be
sure to run after us. Why, we might have baited a dozen traps and failed
to lure them into my house, after that stout scoundrel knew you'd had the
chance to tell me the whole yarn... Odd!"

"Weren't you taking chances, you and Charles?" asked Kirkwood curiously.

"Precious few. There was another motor from Scotland Yard trailing Captain
Stryker's. If they had run past, or turned aside, they would have been
overhauled in short order."

He relapsed into his whimsical reverie; the wistful look returned to his
eyes, replacing the glow of triumph and pleasure. And he sighed a little
regretfully.

"What I don't understand," contended Kirkwood, "is how you convinced
Calendar that he couldn't get revenge by pressing his charge against Miss
Calendar--Dorothy."

"Oh-h?" Mr. Brentwick elevated his fine white eyebrows and sat up briskly.
"My dear boy, that was the most delectable dish on the entire menu. I have
been reserving it, I don't mind owning, that I might better enjoy the full
relish of it.... I may answer you best, perhaps, by asking you to scan what
I offered to the fat scoundrel's respectful consideration, my dear sir."

He leveled a forefinger at the card.

At first glance it conveyed nothing to the younger man's benighted
intelligence. He puzzled over it, twisting his brows out of alignment.
An ordinary oblong slip of thin white cardboard, it was engraved in fine
script as follows:

MR. GEORGE BURGOYNE CALENDAR

81, ASPEN VILLAS, S. W.

"Oh!" exclaimed Kirkwood at length, standing up, his face bright with
understanding. "_You_--!"

"I," laconically assented the elder man.

Impulsively Kirkwood leaned across the table. "Dorothy," he said tenderly;
and when the girl's happy eyes met his, quietly drew her attention to the
card.

Then he rose hastily, and went over to stand by the window, staring mistily
into the blank face of night beyond its unseen panes.

Behind him there was a confusion of little noises; the sound of a chair
pushed hurriedly aside, a rustle of skirts, a happy sob or two, low voices
intermingling; sighs.... Out of it finally came the father's accents.

"There, there, my dear! My dearest dear!" protested the old gentleman.
"Positively I don't deserve a tithe of this. I--" The young old voice
quavered and broke, in a happy laugh.... "You must understand," he
continued more soberly, "that no consideration of any sort is due me. When
we married, I was too old for your mother, child; we both knew it, both
believed it would never matter. But it did. By her wish, I went back
to America; we were to see what separation would do to heal the wounds
dissension had caused. It was a very foolish experiment. Your mother died
before I could return...."

There fell a silence, again broken by the father. "After that I was in
no haste to return. But some years ago, I came to London to live. I
communicated with the old colonel, asking permission to see you. It was
refused in a manner which precluded the subject being reopened by me: I
was informed that if I persisted in attempting to see you, you would be
disinherited.... He was very angry with me--justly, I admit.... One must
grow old before one can see how unforgivably one was wrong in youth.... So
I settled down to a quiet old age, determined not to disturb you in your
happiness.... Ah--Kirkwood!"

The old gentleman was standing, his arm around his daughter's shoulders,
when Kirkwood turned.

"Come here, Philip; I'm explaining to Dorothy, but you should hear.... The
evening I called on you, dear boy, at the Pless, returning home I received
a message from my solicitors, whom I had instructed to keep an eye on
Dorothy's welfare. They informed me that she had disappeared. Naturally I
canceled my plans to go to Munich, and stayed, employing detectives. One
of the first things they discovered was that Dorothy had run off with an
elderly person calling himself George Burgoyne Calendar--the name I had
discarded when I found that to acknowledge me would imperil my daughter's
fortune.... The investigations went deeper; Charles--let us continue to
call him--had been to see me only this afternoon, to inform me of the plot
they had discovered. This Hallam woman and her son--it seems that they were
legitimately in the line of inheritance, Dorothy out of the way. But the
woman was--ah--a bad lot. Somehow she got into communication with this fat
rogue and together they plotted it out. Charles doesn't believe that the
Hallam woman expected to enjoy the Burgoyne estates for very many days. Her
plan was to step in when Dorothy stepped out, gather up what she could,
realize on it, and decamp. That is why there was so much excitement about
the jewels: naturally the most valuable item on her list, the most easy to
convert into cash.... The man Mulready we do not place; he seems to have
been a shady character the fat rogue picked up somewhere. The latter's
ordinary line of business was diamond smuggling, though he would condescend
to almost anything in order to turn a dishonest penny....

"That seems to exhaust the subject. But one word more.... Dorothy, I am
old enough and have suffered enough to know the wisdom of seizing one's
happiness when one may. My dear, a little while ago, you did a very brave
deed. Under fire you said a most courageous, womanly, creditable thing. And
Philip's rejoinder was only second in nobility to yours.... I do hope to
goodness that you two blessed youngsters won't let any addlepated scruples
stand between yourselves and--the prize of Romance, your inalienable
inheritance!"

Abruptly Brentwick, who was no longer Brentwick, but the actual Calendar,
released the girl from his embrace and hopped nimbly toward the door.
"Really, I must see about that petrol!" he cried. "While it's perfectly
true that Charles lied about it's running out, we must be getting on. I'll
call you when we're ready to start."

And the door crashed to behind him....

Between them was the table. Beyond it the girl stood with head erect, dim
tears glimmering on the lashes of those eyes with which she met Philip's
steady gaze so fearlessly.

Singing about them, the silence deepened. Fascinated, though his heart was
faint with longing, Kirkwood faltered on the threshold of his kingdom.

"Dorothy!... You did mean it, dear?"

She laughed, a little, low, sobbing laugh that had its source deep in the
hidden sanctuary of her heart of a child.

"I meant it, my dearest.... If you'll have a girl so bold and forward, who
can't wait till she's asked but throws herself into the arms of the man she
loves--Philip, I meant it, every word!..."

And as he went to her swiftly, round the table, she turned to meet him,
arms uplifted, her scarlet lips a-tremble, the brown and bewitching lashes
drooping over her wondrously lighted eyes....

After a time Philip Kirkwood laughed aloud.

And there was that quality in the ring of his laughter that caused the
Shade of Care, which had for the past ten minutes been uneasily luffing and
filling in the offing and, on the whole, steadily diminishing and becoming
more pale and wan and emaciated and indistinct--there was that in the
laughter of Philip Kirkwood, I say, which caused the Shade of Care to utter
a hollow croak of despair as, incontinently, it vanished out of his life.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Black Bag, by Louis Joseph Vance

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLACK BAG ***

***** This file should be named 9779-8.txt or 9779-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/7/7/9779/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Leonard Johnson and PG
Distributed Proofreading.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
