The Project Gutenberg EBook of Heathen Master Filcsik, by Kálmán Mikszáth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Heathen Master Filcsik

Author: Kálmán Mikszáth

Translator: William N. Loew

Release Date: March 17, 2010 [EBook #31676]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEATHEN MASTER FILCSIK ***




Produced by Steven desJardins and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Heathen Master Filcsik

Cleveland Ohio
mdccccx




Heathen Master Filcsik,
From the Magyar of Kálmán
Mikszáth: Translated
by William N. Loew∴

[Illustration]

Cleveland Ohio: Printed at The
Clerk's Private Press - mcmx




[Illustration]

_Introductory Note._


Through the kindness of William N. Loew, Esq., of the New York Bar, who
has generously placed the manuscript at our disposal, we are able to
offer a translation of one of the shorter stories by a living Hungarian
writer.

The Magyar literature offers a mine of gold to the translator, but on
account of the difficulties of the language very few have explored it.
With the exception of the great novelist, Maurus Jókai, the works of the
majority of the first class authors are unknown to the average American
reader.

The difficulties of the Magyar tongue have been referred to. It is the
one great literary language of Europe that is of non-Aryan origin. It is
syllabic agglutinative, that is, the word inflections are made up by
adding syllables to the root word that is never lost. The verb is
particularly flexible and many of the tenses cannot be rendered
adequately in English because they are constructed after a different
system. The fine distinctions possible for the Magyar verb can only be
felt, and not translated. This will explain the seeming inconsistency
of the tenses in our story, where presents, futures, and perfects appear
to be used indiscriminately, and yet the whole action has taken place in
the more or less remote past. In this way the translator has endeavored
to convey the vivid action of the original so far as the English verb
system would allow him.

The author, Kálmán Mikszáth, is a follower of Jókai, but without the
great master's originality. He has been called the "Mark Twain" of
Magyar literature, and is looked upon by his compatriots as their
leading humorist. He is a prolific writer of the _feuilliton_, that
peculiar institution of the continental newspaper, and several
collections of these have been published. Some of his works have been
translated into English, but so far as could be learned, not this story
of "Heathen Master Filcsik." His subjects are drawn generally from
scenes relating to North Hungarian peasant life, and are told with a
directness that makes the action move along rapidly. He also uses the
folk lore in his works, the present tale being founded upon older
material current in the country districts. Many of the details of his
stories are left to the reader's imagination; he touches only the high
lights, the shadows must be given form by the reader himself. His humor
manifests itself in the most unexpected ways, even in this grim story of
the unforgiving cobbler, there are touches of a sly, suggestive humor
that brighten the otherwise sombre narrative.

    Cleveland, Ohio,
    March 17th, 1910.





[Illustration]

Heathen Master Filcsik.


There is a foolish rumor current all over Csolt, Majornok and Bodok,
that the famous fur cloak of old Filcsik is only a figment of his
imagination. He speaks constantly of it; he boasts about it; he claims
to wear it somewhere, but, as a matter of fact (so it is said) he has no
fur cloak, and in all likelihood never had one.

Yet he did have one. The people of Gozon (he moved into our midst from
beyond the Bágy) and especially the older ones recollect it well.

It was a long yellow cloak, with a wide collar of black lambskin from
the two ends of which two lamb's feet were hung, hoofs and all, in their
natural state. It was buckled in front by two beautiful silver clasps
and in the corners below each clasp were embroidered two large green
tulips. In addition it was ornamented by the needle worker's art with
many kinds of birds in bright colors, while on the back you discovered
the city of Miskolcz with its rows of houses and many churches. You
could even see plainly a Calvinistic chanticleer on one of the church
towers! It was perfect--a masterpiece of furrier's work, on which its
maker had spared no labor or material.

True, it was not Master Mocsik, the furrier of Gozon, who made it, but
it was the most famous furrier in the city of Miskolcz who had been
entrusted with its construction.

Even if Filcsik picked up half a yard of it in buttoning it, the train
of this ninth wonder of the world still swept the ground, and all who
saw it said that, compared to this fur cloak, that of the muscovite Czar
was but a swaddling garment.

Nonetheless, wonderful though the fur cloak was and however much Stephen
Filcsik prided himself upon its possession, the iron teeth of time had
no respect for it. They dealt it the same scant consideration that they
accorded the winter-coat of the poor young law student, the son of the
village notary. Its brightly colored embroideries faded and its
needlework grew ragged, while its yellow background became soiled and
greasy. Moths ate their share of it and caused dire destruction,
especially in the lining and the collar.

But Filcsik, like the lover-husband who never notices how the rosy bloom
fades from his wife's face, never took notice of its sad transformation;
he only saw his good old fur cloak when he looked at its remnants; and
when he said, "I will put my fur cloak on," he said it without the loss
of a particle of his characteristic old pride.

It hung on a big bright nail all the year round, just opposite his
working stool, so that, even while at his work, he could look up and
admire it.

But it is true that he sat very little on his stool, and he was called
for that reason "the bootmaker to God" because he had practically no
customers at all. The old fellow was lazy. If he occasionally did make a
pair of boots for someone, he acted as though he were doing an act of
charity. "What dost thou wish to walk in boots for?" he would ask his
customers. "Thou art a peasant and to walk bare-footed is good for
thee."

A callous man, he loved nobody, and nothing in this world except that
fur cloak.

     ¶      ¶      ¶

No cruelty ever cried louder to heaven than his, and he directed it
mainly upon his only child, his daughter Therese.

And yet, what was it that she had done? She had refused to marry the
lame miller of Csoltó when her father commanded. He had wanted to plant
in one jar the rezeda flower and the thistle!

Is it any wonder that the melancholy Therese, embittered and bewildered
by her father's treatment, escaped at the first opportunity and eloped
with the young County Justice? It was an almost unheard of indiscretion,
but youth is often guilty of much folly. Yet, though all the world
condemned her, her father should have been the first to forgive her.

Old Filcsik became ruder and more austere, and when Therese came home to
see him and tearfully begged his forgiveness, he turned away and said he
did not know the hussy; took his fur cloak from its big nail and left
the house and returned only when Therese was gone.

Therese never ventured near him again. She saw him only on one other
occasion, while driving through the village with the County Justice.
They saw old Filcsik on his way to the tavern of "The Linen Shirt." "Oh,
father, father, dear!" the girl cried passionately.

Old Filcsik looked up, ceremoniously tipped his hat, and silently turned
and entered the tavern. Surely, there must have been a stone in the
place of the heart of this old man!

Those of the people of Majornok who had an occasion to go to the home of
the Judge could not but envy the lot in life that had fallen to Therese
Filcsik. "Why," they would all exclaim, "she is a gracious lady. She has
learned all the manners of the nobility. And how the neighborhood has
improved since she became the Judge's wife!"

The administration of Justice of Majornok is far better than that in all
the surrounding villages.

Old Filcsik was informed by his neighbors of the messages she had
indirectly sent to him: her father should call on her; she would send a
wagon for him; she would place downy, silk cushions on the seat of the
wagon; that whenever he desired, day and night, he could have honeyed
whiskey, and that he would be honored--the Judge himself would first bow
to him, but only that he should come to her and forgive her because she
was afraid herself to go to him.

But all this seemed to produce no impression on old Filcsik. Yet had he
been but just to her, he could have helped not only his own lot, but he
could have secured forever the prosperity of the noble village itself.

Because (and this is written to you in strict confidence) Majornok is
the most impoverished village of the entire country thereabout. Her
people are poor and the village itself is neglected. It has not a single
paved street--not a bridge, nor a Town Hall to give it dignity.

This is, it is true, in no wise remarkable. None of the county officers
had chanced upon a sweetheart in Majornok, and they therefore built the
country roads and paved the village streets only in that portion of the
county where they frequently went.

There is, for instance, the county road of Csoltó. It is as smooth as a
polished floor and the people of Bágy have pretty Eliza Bitro to thank
for it, while the paved roads of Karancsalja call for blessings upon the
beautiful head of Mistress John Vér.

Well, such is the way of the world. The face of a beautiful woman
glorifies the appearance of an entire neighborhood. But it did not
beautify Majornok. There it was commonly said that the deputy county
engineer, who prepared the maps for the road commissioners from those at
the county seat, had intentionally left the place out, and even that the
honorable representatives and the electors of the county had offered one
hundred and eighty paper gulden to the neighboring county of Hont, if it
would claim Majornok as its own, but Hont county would not have the
place even for money. Why should they have her, that all the fun poked
at, and all disgrace coming from Majornok should revert upon the
honorable county?

But if Filcsik had wanted it, there would have been a country road
leading to and from Majornok, if need be, one constructed of red marble.
All of them would be happy now. But he repelled the good intentions of
his Honor the Squire, though he needed some kind of help badly enough,
for the "bootmaker of God" was very meagerly provided with worldly
goods. One day last week the silver clasps from his fur cloak wandered
into the coffers of Mistress Sadie, the landlady of the inn of "The
Linen Shirt."

But he was not in vain the "bootmaker of God," otherwise He, his only
customer, would not have come to his rescue at a time of his greatest
need. All at once letters began to come to him by mail containing ten,
twenty, or even fifty gulden. Usually it was the letter of some old
customer who informed him that having become well-to-do he now wished,
with expressions of great gratitude, to repay to Master Filcsik some old
debt. There are, after all, many honest men living in this world.

For a time he believed that if the debtors did not owe him anything, it
must have been to his father, whose name too was Steve. The only thing
that was remarkable was, how could his father have given so much away on
credit?

As soon as his suspicion was aroused, so soon did he solve the riddle.
One by one he returned the money letters to the Judge. How does he dare
to send presents to Steve Filcsik? Does not the Judge know that his
grandmother is descended from the famous Becsky family and the like?

The money letters ceased to come thereafter but there came many sad
tidings. Beautiful Therese Filcsik had become mortally ill. All wherein
she had heretofore found pleasure she now rejected; pomp and luxury, the
fine various and delicious meats she turned away from; refused her
medicines and expressed a wish to see her father. Poor Therese! she was
after all not such a bad girl!

And the wish of Therese was so pressing that in the end the Judge
himself was bound to call for old Filcsik. "Well, old man, now you come
with me, you must whether you want to or not; don't deny this request of
your very sick daughter--"

"I have no daughter!"

"You come with me! that is settled!"

"It cannot be: I beg of you respectfully, do not press me; it cannot be,
I have very urgent work."

"Do please, come with me for my sake!" said the Judge amicably.

Filcsik sighed. Probably this was the first occasion in all his life
that he had done so.

"You refuse to come? You discard your only child?"

"Yes, sir, if you please!"

"You! the outcast of society?"

"Well, sir, that is not impossible, such a plain common old bootmaker
like myself is capable of doing anything."

The honorable young Justice now began to use sweet words of persuasion
and promise, but they all rebounded from the marble heart just as did
the threatening words.

"Why don't your grace," he said, "have me arrested and put me in irons?
Then I will have to go along wherever you may wish to take me."

After all, the mighty judge who ruled over all the county, was compelled
to return without the bootmaker.

But the judge had not in vain a hoary veteran Michael Suska, for his
body servant, who concocted a shrewd plan to attain the end desired.

"Gracious Sir! I know this man Filcsik. He would run after us just as a
little pig will run after a sack from which corn is dropping, if--"

"Well, what? speak up!"

"If we would steal his fur cloak. His life and death depend upon that
cloak. He is a very peculiar man--"

"Well, then, see to it that his cloak is stolen away!"

The hoary veteran could not be trusted with a better job. Ever since the
revolution he had no more important task on hand. Oh, well, in those
days--but wherefore speak of his deeds then? No one would believe him
now.

In the meantime the sick lady was restless on her couch amidst silken
pillows, shuddering whenever she heard the noise of approaching wheels.
She half leaned on her arms listening, burying her emaciated hands in
her long black hair which flowed down over her white night gown.

She is provided with all that her longing can desire, yet she is the
poorest being in the world, for she lacks health, and something
else--love.

That love that burned within her for husband is naught to the love that
warms the heart, the filial love for parents, and she never felt as cold
as now.

Nothing does her any good; the voice of the man whom she loved is
painful to her; it were better he were not walking at her side and would
leave her to herself; the bed is hard; in vain it is made of silk and
soft feathers, in vain do the servants fix it and repeatedly put it in
order.

How well would it be if she could lie at home beneath the paternal roof,
however poor that home, beside the capacious stove, and she could hear
at the open window the voice of the evening bells of Majornok, and if
her cold feet were covered with the famous fur cloak of her father.

Of this she spoke, of this she dreamed last night and behold--in the
morning, fate had fulfilled her wish, when she awoke, over the beautiful
red quilt, there lay spread out her old acquaintance the fur cloak.

And those roses and red tulips which render its collar so pretty, throw
their shades over the deathly pale face of Therese. This last enjoyed
pleasure is as sweet as long ago the first might have been.

Michael Suska redeemed his promise soon enough and he speculated well.
When old Filcsik came home in the night time from the tavern of "The
Linen Shirt" he found his house burglariously entered, and his fur cloak
gone. The big nail was empty, bereft and bare of its ornament. It was
then towards the end of October. The winter stood on the threshold of
the season.

Filcsik roamed about in the village with lowering brows, his hat pulled
down sullenly over his eyes. He did not drink; he uttered no word. His
misfortune completely broke him down. He was afraid to look into the
eyes of men, because he feared that from the lips of all would come the
malicious question, "What has become of your famous fur cloak?"

But hope did not forsake him. He felt it that the dear treasure would
ere long come back to him. It could not be lost; whoever stole it could
not use it. The whole county knew it to be his.

And he was not mistaken. The news came that the thieves were caught and
the stolen property recovered and was by that time in the hands of the
County Judge. Within four days the rightful owner could recover it, or
else it would be auctioned off as property found or recovered whose
owner could not be identified.

Immediately he started on his way to the castle to reclaim it; he did
not hesitate a second, he went to demand his own.

The County Judge made no objections, he admitted that the fur cloak was
there and silently beckoned him to follow. Through many bright rooms on
the floors of which fine carpets were spread, Filcsik trod with his
muddy boots behind the Judge until at last they arrived at a dark room.

"There is your fur cloak," the Judge said with trembling voice and
pointed to a corner, "take it!"

The old eyes became but slowly accustomed to the darkness, but he found
his way to the corner whence groans and moans came.

The Judge stepped up and withdrew the bed-curtain, Filcsik staggered
back.

Therese lay there, pale as a broken stemmed lily, her long black
eyelashes closed, her feet covered with the famous tulip embroidered fur
cloak.

She was beautiful even though now dying, an angel saying good-bye to
this world. Where is she hurrying? To the heaven from which she once
came.

It may be that she will never again open those charming eyes of hers,
which could glance so archly, or those lips of hers which to kiss was
such supreme bliss.

Filcsik stood mute, motionless, as if in thought, but only for a minute;
then he boldly stepped up to the dying, and took off that cloak for
which she had pined so much. It may be that she would have no use for it
any more.

The dying angel did not even move. Filcsik's hand did not even tremble.
He did not even cast a last glance on his dying daughter. Mute, without
uttering a syllable, he went out as if nothing could pain him.

He did not even turn back when the Judge, as he was crossing the
threshold, savagely addressed to him the epithet, "Heathen!"

Outside, he hung his rightful property around his neck, and
notwithstanding that it had become dark, he started for home by an
unused route. He did not want to meet with men just then. He probably
felt that he was no longer a man.

From his face naught could be read; seemingly it was calm. Probably it
even expressed some satisfaction on account of the regained fur cloak.
Truly there must be a stone in the place of the heart of this man.

When he reached the rivulet at the foot of the Majornok mountain
opening, (just there where, it is said, the soul of Mistress Gebyi rides
nightly on frightened horses) he stumbled over something in the way.

It was a beggar's bag filled with pieces of dry bread. Its owner must
have prayed successfully--there was enough of the daily bread there even
for tomorrow.

But lo! there lies the owner thereof beneath a tree, a ragged beggar
woman, in her lap a child.

He placed the bag at their side and then lit a match to see better
whether or not they were dead.

Their heavy breathing revealed that both were alive, mother and child;
exhausting fatigue alone could have sent them into such profound
slumber. The cold weather, the bitter wind and the ragged dress are not
favorable to such sleep. Only they can sleep as these do, who are
exhausted. Their faces, especially that of the child, are already blue
from cold and the tiny limbs tremble like frozen jelly.

Filcsik took out his pipe from the pocket of his coat, filled and lit
it, and then sat down on the ground beside the sleepers.

He looked at them a long time. He could see very well; the sky was full
of stars. The stars looked at him and perhaps beckoned to him
encouragingly.

All at once he bent lower over the sleepers; his forehead was
perspiring, his head was bowed down and the famous fur cloak slipped off
his shoulders. It was well, for he was warm anyhow. And then the fur
cloak never burdened him as much as now; it had never been as heavy as
at present.

When it slipped down, he suddenly picked it up and spread it over the
two sleepers.

Then he jumped up and slowly and thoughtfully began to walk towards
home. Once he stood still, then retraced his steps. Did he intend to go
back for it?

No, no! what would those million eyes looking at him from above say to
that!

Now he hurried; he almost ran towards home.

The night was quiet but cold. The old man was without his fur cloak and
yet he felt no cold.

One thought warmed him within, in that place where other men have their
hearts but where, according to general belief, providence had
substituted in him a stone.

Since that time he has had no fur cloak. But for all that he speaks of
it as if he still possessed it. He brags of it, he bets on it.

Men know the fact already and were they not afraid of his vituperative
proclivities they would laugh at him; as it is, they don't concern
themselves about him. God, men, have turned from him because he is a
godless, unchristian fellow. If one of these days he dies on a heap of
straw, a raven or a crow will act as mourner, the ditch of the
churchyard will be his resting place.




[Illustration]

Here endeth this Veracious History of "Heathen Master Filcsik" Wherein
is evidently shown that no matter howsoever hard a man's heart may be
there are times and occasions When, ruled by a Higher Power, he is moved
to do a kindly act. Written originally in the Magyar language by Kálmán
Mikszáth, and translated by Wm. N. Loew. Done into Type by me, Charles
Clinch Chubb, Clerk in Holy Orders, and one hundred Copies printed at
our Press in the Parish of Grace Church, Cleveland, Ohio this
seventeenth day of March, in the year of our Lord, mcmx.

Number 52

[Illustration]




[Transcriber's Note: The following typographical errors have been
corrected: "Filscik" in the sentence beginning "But Filscik, like the
lover-husband" has been changed to "Filcsik", and "delcious" in the
phrase "various and delcious meats" has been changed to "delicious". No
other corrections have been made to the original text.]







End of Project Gutenberg's Heathen Master Filcsik, by Kálmán Mikszáth

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEATHEN MASTER FILCSIK ***

***** This file should be named 31676-0.txt or 31676-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/6/7/31676/

Produced by Steven desJardins and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
