The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Present State of Virginia, by Hugh Jones

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Present State of Virginia

Author: Hugh Jones

Release Date: June 6, 2009 [EBook #29055]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRESENT STATE OF VIRGINIA ***




Produced by Julia Miller, Asad Razzaki and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced
from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)






Transcriber's note:

      Some typographical and punctuation errors have been
      corrected. A complete list follows the text.

      Words italicized in the original are surrounded by
      _underscores_.

      Letters superscripted in the original have been placed
      in {} brackets.


Sabin's Reprints.

No. V.




THE PRESENT STATE OF VIRGINIA.

BY

HUGH JONES, A. M.




  NEW YORK:
  REPRINTED FOR JOSEPH SABIN.
  1865.


TWO HUNDRED COPIES PRINTED.

No. 175 JS

ALVORD, PRINTER.




THE PRESENT STATE OF VIRGINIA.

GIVING

  A particular and short Account of the
    _Indian_, _English_, and _Negroe_ Inhabitants of that
    Colony.

  Shewing their Religion, Manners, Government,
    Trade, Way of Living, &c. with a Description of
    the Country.

  From whence is inferred a short VIEW of
    MARYLAND _and_ NORTH CAROLINA.

    To which are added,
  Schemes and Propositions for the better Promotion of
    Learning, Religion, Inventions, Manufactures, and Trade in
    _Virginia_, and the other _Plantations_.

  For the Information of the _Curious_, and for the Service of such
    as are engaged in the _Propagation of the Gospel_ and _Advancement
    of Learning_, and for the Use of all Persons concerned in the
    Virginia _Trade and Plantation_.

GEN. ix. 27.

_God shall enlarge_ JAPHETH, _and he shall dwell in the Tents of_ SHEM,
_and_ CANAAN _shall be his Servant_.

By _HUGH JONES_, A. M.

Chaplain to the Honourable Assembly, and lately Minister of
_James-Town_, &c. in _Virginia_.

_LONDON_:

Printed for J. CLARKE, at the _Bible_ under the _Royal-Exchange_.
  M DCC XXIV.




THE CONTENTS.


    THE INTRODUCTION                                        Page i

  PART I.

  CHAP. I.

    _Of the Original of the_ Indians, Europeans, _and_
      Negroes.                                                   1

  CHAP. II.

    _Of the Government, Religion, Habits, Wars,
      Lives, Customs_, &c. _of the_ Indians _of_ North
      America                                                    7

    _Of the_ French _Settlements and_ Apelachian _Mountains_    13

    _Of the_ Tramontane _Order and Expedition, and of_
      Christanna                                                14

    _Of_ Indian _Worship and Principles_                        15

    _Of the Conversion of the_ Indians                          19


  PART II.

  CHAP. I.

    _Of the_ English _Settlements in_ Virginia _and_ Maryland   21

  CHAP. II.

    _Of the Metropolis_ Williamsburgh, _the College Capitol,
      Governor's House, and the Church_, &c.                    25

  CHAP. III.

    _Of the Situation and Nature of the Country of_
      Virginia, _and its Coasts_, &c.                           33

  CHAP. IV.

    _Of the_ Negroes, _with the Planting and Management
      of_ Indian _Corn and Tobacco, and of their
      Timber, Stock, Fruits, Provision, Habitations_,
      &c.                                                       36

  CHAP. V.

    _Of the Habits, Customs, Parts, Employments, Trade
      of the_ Virginians; _and of the Weather, Coin,
      Sickness, Liquors, Servants, Poor, Pitch, Tar,
      Oar_, &c.                                                 43

  CHAP. VI.

    _Of_ Germanna, _the_ Palatines, _Wine, Hemp, Flax,
      Silk, Sumack, Trees, Fruits, Coals, Tracts of Land,
      Health, Militia, the_ Mannacan Town, _Titles, Levies,
      Burgesses, Laws, and general Assembly_                    59


  PART III.

    _Of the State of the Church and Clergy in_ Virginia         65


  PART IV.

    _Of Authors concerning_ Virginia, _and its publick
      Officers, Guard-Ships, and the State of_ Maryland
      _and_ North Carolina, &c.                                 75


  APPENDIX.

    1. _Scheme. Of Education in_ Virginia                       83

    2. _Scheme. Of Religion in_ Virginia                        95

    3. _Scheme. Of Arts, Projects, Inventions, and
        Manufactures in_ Virginia                              112

    4. _Scheme. Of Trade in_ Virginia, _and the other
        Plantations_                                           138




INTRODUCTION.


Dedications and Prefaces, which are prefix'd to most Books, being
regarded by few Readers, I think it best for my present Purpose briefly
to mention in an Introduction, what I would have known concerning the
Occasion, Nature, and Use of this Treatise, before I enter upon the main
Work it self.

When I considered the great Benefit that arises to the Publick, from the
large Colony of _Virginia_, I observed, that tho' it be thus
advantageous, yet it is capable of great Improvements still, and
requires several Alterations, both with Regard to its own Welfare, and
the Interest of _Great Britain_. Observing moreover, that few People in
_England_ (even many concerned in publick Affairs of this kind) have
correct Notions of the true State of the Plantations; and having been
eagerly applied to frequently, by Persons of the greatest Figure,
Experience, and Judgment in political and national Concerns, for
Information concerning all the Circumstances of _Virginia_, I was
requested to digest methodically, and publish, what I knew and thought
of these Matters; and being in a great Measure injoined to it by a
_noble Patron_, I have here complied with his Commands, with the best of
my Knowledge and Judgment.

       *       *       *       *       *

For want of better Information, many that are most willing, capable, or
obliged to promote Religion, Learning, Arts and Trade in _Virginia_, are
either at a Loss how to set about it rightly, or else having engaged
themselves therein, have in a great Measure miscarried in their
Attempts, because true and particular Accounts of it are very difficult
to be obtained; and this Country is altered wonderfully, and far more
advanced and improved in all Respects of late Years, since the beginning
of Colonel _Spotswood's_ Lieutenancy, than in the whole Century before
his Government, which he may be esteemed to have discharged with a
commendable, just, and prudent Administration; a prosperous
Administration, glorious for himself, and advantageous both for the
Crown and the Plantation; whilst he was Lieutenant Governor of that
Colony; whilst that Colony was honoured with such an excellent Governor;
whilst that Governor was happy in such a flourishing, large, and fertile
Colony.

       *       *       *       *       *

And as this Country has made such a considerable Progress, under the
Management of the late Governor _Spotswood_; so have we all imaginable
Prospect that it will in the same regular course proceed towards its
greatest Perfection, under the Care and Conduct of the present Governor
Colonel _Drysdale_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Scales of Justice are now fix'd there upon their true Balance, and
the Course of Trade is nearly confined to its right Channel.

       *       *       *       *       *

Arts, Sciences, Trades, and useful Inventions are now planted there in
some Measure, and with due Cultivation may thrive wonderfully.

       *       *       *       *       *

Providence has furnish'd this Province with all Necessaries of Life, and
Industry may supply it with all Conveniences and Advantages, for Profit,
Ease, and Pleasure.

       *       *       *       *       *

The best Measures have been concerted and proposed, and Schemes have
been nicely drawn for the Encouragement of useful Discoveries and
laudable Undertakings, both for the Security and Benefit of the Publick.

       *       *       *       *       *

And as in Blessings temporal, so in spiritual Concernments, might the
_Virginians_ abound, were the Attempts that have been, or may be, made
for the due Regulation of the Church, as well as State, brought to
Maturity: Were the Laws more plain and particular in Relation to
Livings; so that the Labours of the Clergy might be rewarded with less
Trouble and Ill-Will in their Preferment to Parishes, and collecting
their Dues and Salaries; and were the Principles and Practice of
Religion more firmly establish'd, which might easily be done without
interfering with the Interest of the People, or Constitution of the
Government; with but few Corrections and Alterations, and but little
additional Expence.

       *       *       *       *       *

More especially at this eminent Juncture of his _Majesty_'s most
Christian Goodness, in converting his Palace at _Whitehall_ into a
College of Preachers; and founding in the Universities Courts of
Statesmen perfectly instructed in modern Languages and History.

       *       *       *       *       *

For if at _Home_ he has in this Respect, as well as others, excelled his
Royal Predecessors, why may we not hope that his charitable Benefactions
may likewise be extended _Abroad_ to the Church and College of the most
antient and loyal Colony of _Virginia_? Through the Means of such great
and good Governors in Church, as his Grace the _Archbishop of
Canterbury_, and his Lordship the _Bishop of London_; the first of
which eminent Patrons of Religion and Learning is Chancellor of the
College of _William and Mary_ at _Williamsburgh_ in _Virginia_; and to
the other belongs the weighty Care and Charge of the Church and Clergy
of all that and the other _English_ Plantations.

       *       *       *       *       *

Why may we not hope that the College founded and endowed there by King
_William_ and Queen _Mary_ of ever blessed Memory, may _partake of the
royal_ Favours of our present _most gracious Sovereign_? Why may we not
hope that the Church confirmed there in each Reign since Queen
_Elizabeth's_, may be duly regulated by the pious Directions of his
present _Majesty_?

       *       *       *       *       *

_These are Actions_ suitable to the _Genius_ of our _mighty Monarch_:
These are Undertakings worthy of the Negotiation of such pious and
learned Bishops; to whose Consideration the following Sheets are in the
most submissive Manner offered, humbly requesting their Lordship's
Excuse for this presumptive Freedom; occasioned by the zealous Affection
which I have for the Colony, which principally induced me to this Work,
in order to vindicate the Place and People from undeserved Calumny, to
make publick true Informations of them, to proclaim to the World their
just Praises, and to prove as instrumental as possible in the Service
of Religion, Learning, Arts, advantageous Undertakings, and the Trade of
that Plantation; to do which, I think my self strictly obliged by
Gratitude and Conscience.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are several Books upon this Subject, but none descends to the
present State and Circumstances of this Colony, nor proposes what
Methods may seem most conducive to the Promotion of its best Interest in
all Respects; but without particular Knowledge of these Things no useful
Designs can be carried to the best Advantage, neither by the Government,
Societies, Companies, nor by private Persons.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wherefore I composed this as a Supplement to those other Books; treating
herein for the most Part of such Heads, as are altogether omitted, or
but slightly accounted for, or described by others.

       *       *       *       *       *

For though some may have perfect Information and true Notions of these
Things; yet the generality of Mankind are utter Strangers to what I here
specify, and entertain commonly very erroneous and monstrous Thoughts
concerning the Country, Lives, Religion and Government of the
_Virginians_; so that there seemed a great Necessity for a Book of this
kind; which I have made as plain and intelligible as I possibly could,
and composed in the best Method that I could devise for the Service of
the Plantations, more particularly _Virginia_, _Maryland_, and _North
Carolina_, where I have been.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have industriously avoided the ornamental Dress of Rhetorical
Flourishes, esteeming them unfit for the naked Truth of historical
Relations, and improper for the Purpose of general Propositions.

       *       *       *       *       *

Besides its Truth and my real Design of publick Service, this mean Piece
has little to recommend it to the Approbation of Mankind, and to
introduce it to a candid Reception in the World. Nevertheless I venture
to present it with the greatest Submission to the Candour of the Reader,
with Hopes that it may meet with a kind Acceptance; humbly requesting
the following Favours of the Readers, _viz._

       *       *       *       *       *

That they would be pleased to excuse and correct the Errors of the
Press.

       *       *       *       *       *

That if any material Alterations have happened to be made that I know
not of, since I left _Virginia_ (which is above two Years) they will
give favourable Allowances for my Accounts of such Things, and not
censure me as if I endeavoured to impose Falshoods upon the World; and
I hope the same will be granted for any trivial Mistakes which I may
have made through Forgetfulness, or for want of Opportunity of
Consultation and Advice in any small circumstantial Point, or in any
_proper Name_.

       *       *       *       *       *

And lastly, since Improvement might be made for the joint Advantage of
_Virginia_ and _Great Britain_ in so many particular Respects; therefore
I hope what I have instanced in the following _State_ and _Schemes_ will
be look'd upon as sufficient for my Purpose, without making Mention of
several other beneficial Things of the Nature and Use of which I have
but little Knowledge; such as Cotton, Pepper, with the large thick Husks
of Acorns for the Diers Use, with the like.




THE STATE OF VIRGINIA.




PART I.




CHAP. I.

_Of the Original of the_ Indians, Europeans, _and_ Negroes.


One main Cause, why the _Gospel_ is not propagated with better Success
among the _Infidels_, and why it is not more strictly followed by such
_Europeans_ as inhabit the _American Plantations_, is the little right
Knowledge that _Superintendants_ of the _Church_ have of them, from
imperfect Accounts and false Information; for before we can entertain
any tolerable Idea of the Tenents, and Inclinations of any People; it is
requisite we should know something of their Original, Temper, and
Government; for want of which much Cost and Labour have been in vain
expended, and many pious Designs and Projects frustrated.

And as the Progress of Religion, so for the same Causes, and in the same
Manner, is the Improvement of Arts, Sciences, and Trade, much retarded.

I shall therefore exhibit a short View of the present Inhabitants of
_Virginia_; which are _Indians_, _English_, and _Negroes_, with a
Description of the Country: After which their Morals and Manners may
more plainly and briefly be described; from whence may easily be
inferred an Account of _Maryland_ and _North Carolina_, nearly agreeing
with _Virginia_ in many Respects.

The _Indians_ may be term'd _Aborigines_; for to pretend to determine
their Pedigree exactly, with the Time and Manner of seating this unknown
World, to me seems as morally impossible, as it is naturally to account
for the Complexion of their Bodies, and the Temper of their Minds.

So that the best History of them till late Years is but meer Guess-work,
of which my Sentiments are these:

We know that all Nations of the World are the Descendants of _Noah_'s
three Sons, _Shem_, _Ham_, and _Japheth_: From the youngest (from some
promised Blessings) may we suppose the _Europeans_ and _Western
Asiaticks_ to be descended. From _Canaan_ the Son of the middlemost
issued the _Canaanites_, and from some of his Sons might spring the
_Egyptians_, _Moors_, _Negroes_, and other Inhabitants of _Africa_.

From _Shem_ sprung _Eber_, and from _Eber_'s eldest Son _Peleg_ sprung
the _Hebrews_, and from _Eber_'s younger Son _Joktan_ are derived the
_East_, and (I suppose) their Cousins the _West-Indians_ of _America_.
For in _Peleg_'s _Days the Earth was divided_, Gen. x. 25. and his
Brother _Jocktan's Dwelling was from_ Mesha, _as thou goest unto_
Sephar, _a Mount of the_ East, v. 30. _By these were the Nations divided
in the Earth after the Flood_, v. 32.

To me the _Indians_ of _America_ seem to be some of the Posterity of
_Shem_, driven thither by _Providence_, for Causes unknown to us, which
might easily be done (in large Boats or Canoes and Periaguas) from the
Eastern Parts of _Asia_, their Grandfather _Jocktan_'s Country; which is
not improbable: Since a Storm might drive them off from the Shore, and
the trade Winds, which blow constantly one Way half the Year, might
carry them directly to _America_, over the vast _South Sea_ Ocean; in
which Passage their greatest Danger of Death might be Hunger and Thirst;
but they, that know the _Indians_, know also, that they can bear Want a
prodigious while; and what might they not bear, when the Divine Power
was miraculously concerned in it, for Purposes known to the Almighty
only?

Indeed for what we have yet discovered, we don't know, but the Continent
of _America_ may be join'd to _Tartary_; from whence (if so) they might
have an easy, though tedious Conveyance. Be it how it will, I am of
Opinion, that they are descended from _Asia_, and not _Africa_; because
in their copper Colour, long black Hair, strait proper Shape, and
haughty Carriage, they are somewhat like the _East-Indians_; whereas
they seem to be of a different Breed from the _Negroes_, who are
blacker, have uglier Faces and Bodies, and are of a more servile
Carriage, and slavish Temper: Besides, the _Africans_ circumcise, which
with other _Jewish_ Customs, I imagine, they may derive from _Egypt_;
whereas the _Indians_ use no such Practices: Moreover they hate, and
despise the very Sight of a _Negroe_; but they seem to like an
_East-Indian_, and fear and revere the _Whites_.

What some may object in Contradiction to the Universality of the Deluge;
that the Communication between _Asia_ and _America_ was washed away by
it; thence inferring that the _Americans_ are of _Antidiluvian_
Families, may (I presume) be exploded, when we remark, that in most
Places, at a great Depth, and far distant from the Sea, are many great
Beds of strange Shells, and Bones, and Teeth of Fish and Beasts vastly
different from any Land or Water-Animals now found in those, or any
other Parts of the World; so that notwithstanding all the curious
Speculations of Philosophers to reconcile this with Reason, and ascribe
for it natural Causes; yet to me it appears evidently to be a Token, and
Relict of the general Flood of _Noah_. For these Shells and Bones might
be easily preserved from Corruption, and mouldering so long a Time,
whilst covered with a great Thickness of dry Earth, and kept from Air;
to which when they are exposed they soon decay.

The best true Account that we have of the Primitive wild Inhabitants of
the Earth, not civilized by Government, nor assisted by Learning, Arts
and Communication with Strangers, is of the _Canaanites_; whose State of
Nature the _Indians_ still retain, resembling them in most Respects, who
may be their Cousins descended from _Joktan_, and may be some cursed
Generations, for Reasons hidden from us. For which Causes they might be
separated from the rest of Mankind, and be debarred the Light of
_Grace_, and kept in their barbarous Ignorance, for their obstinate
Rebellion against _God_; till of his gracious Goodness and Mercy he be
pleased in his appointed Time to compleat their Conversion, and be more
favourable to them.

I have a much truer and clearer Notion of the _Canaanites_, _Hebrews_,
&c. since I have seen the _Indians_, than I could have before, who
afford living Examples of the primitive _Savages_, and _Idolaters_.

To confirm this, observe; that as the Inhabitants of the Land of
_Canaan_, who were vanquished by the _Israelites_, and were principally
descended from _Canaan_ the fourth Son of accursed _Ham_, being a
Mixture of several remarkable Nations that were great and idolatrous,
and in an especial Manner hateful to God, with frequent Wars and
Barbarities among themselves; in like Manner are the _American Indians_,
as savage, idolatrous, unbelieving, numerous, monstrous, idle and
delighting in War and Cruelty as their antient Relations the Inhabitants
of the Land of _Canaan_; and have as many different Nations, Languages,
and strange Names and Customs as the _Canaanites_, the _Jebusites_, the
_Hittites_, the _Hivites_, the _Perizites_, and the _Gergisites_. The
_Indians_ being subdivided into as many Branches and Sovereignties as
they, intermixt with as hideous Neighbours, as the Gigantick
_Philistines_ of the Race of _Misraim_; with the _Moabites_ and
_Amorites_, Descendants of _Lot_ by his own Daughters; with the
_Midianites_ and _Edomites_, the Posterity of _Midian_ and _Esau_.

The _Senecaa Indians_ in their War Dress may appear as terrible as any
of the Sons of _Anak_. The _Usherees_, _Shuterees_, and _Cherackees_ are
full as formidable as the _Hittites_, _Jebusites_, and _Amalakites_; and
a _Tuskaroodau_ is as savage and strange as any _Canaanite_, that dwelt
by the Sea; and a _Pomunkee_, _Sapony_, or _Sugarr_ is as fierce and
frightful as any _Amorite_ that dwelt upon or beyond the Mountains; and
_Powhatan_, _Oppechancanough_ and _Wickmaunatauchee_ have fought many
Battles not unlike _Og_, _Sihon_, and _Chederlaomer_.

In my mean Judgment it seems not improbable that when _Noah_ had cursed
the Posterity of _Ham_, and reserved different blessings for _Shem_ and
_Japheth_, God set a distinguishing Colour upon their Bodies, and
ingrafted in their Nature various Tempers, and endowed them with
separate Talents. From whence their Posterity are of three different
Complexions and Countenances, as is apparent in _White_, _Black_, and
_Brown_ People, which by Mixtures, or from Climates or otherwise are
subdivided: Particularly the _brown_ Children of _Shem_ have two
peculiar Aspects different from each other, and distinct from all the
rest; one proper to the _Jews_, the Sons of _Peleg_, and the other
belonging to the _East_ and _West-Indies_, the Sons of _Joktan_,
_Peleg_'s younger Brother.

To the _white_ Posterity of _Japheth_, viz. to the _Europeans_ in
particular are _Noah_'s Words (_Gen._ ix. 27.) very applicable, where he
said, _that God should enlarge_ Japheth, _and he should dwell in the
Tents of_ Shem, _and_ Canaan _shall be his Servant_; which seems
fulfilled in our Possession of Lands in the _East_ and _West-Indies_,
the Tents of the Sons of _Shem_, where _Canaan_ or the _Negroe_ is our
Servant and Slave; and as it is said of him in the 25{th} Verse, _a
Servant of Servants is_ Canaan _unto his Brethren_.

For the _Negroes_ seem evidently to be Descendants from some of the Sons
of _Canaan_. For it is not to be supposed that the _Jews_ destroyed them
all, for the _Families of the_ Canaanites _were spread abroad_, Gen. x.
18. so that probably in process of Time they possessed _Africa_. As for
the _Blessing upon_ Shem in the 26{th} Verse, and _Canaan being his
Servant_; this appears to be fulfilled in the _Jews_ in Part, descended
from _Peleg_, _Heber_'s eldest Son; from whom sprung _Abraham_ the
Father of the Faithful, in whose Seed the Lord God of _Shem_ may be said
to be blessed according to _Noah_'s Prophecy, who made Part of _Canaan_
Slaves, and took them Captive. And as for the other Branches of _Shem_'s
Posterity by _Joktan_ (which Sound is not quite lost in either of the
_Indies_) I take them to be the _East_ and _West-Indians_, _Chinese_,
and _Tartars_; and it may be the _Persians_, for whom with their Cousins
the _Jews_, none but God knows what Blessings may still be reserved in
Store, it being to be hoped that they and all the Ends of the World may
be converted, and see and partake of the Salvation of our God; so that
by all may the Lord God of _Shem_ at length be blessed.

_Thus far_, as to my Notions of the Original of the _Indians_, whom I
imagine to be descended from some of the Sons of _Joktan_, second Son of
_Eber_, sprung from _Shem_, _Noah_'s eldest Son: With a Derivation of
the _Whites_ from _Japheth_ the youngest, and the _Negroes_ from some of
the Sons of _Canaan_, Descendant of _Ham_, _Noah's_ second Son.




CHAP. II.

_Of the Government, Religion, Habit, Wars, Lives, Customs, &c. of the_
Indians of North America, _and_ of Christanna.


As to the Government and Life of the _Indians_, they live in a kind of
patriarchal Manner, variously diversify'd, not unlike the Tribes and
Families mentioned in the _Old Testament_. Every small Town is a petty
Kingdom govern'd by an absolute _Monarch_, assisted and advised by his
_great Men_, selected out of the gravest, oldest, bravest, and richest;
if I may allow their Dear-Skins, _Peak_ and _Roenoak_ (black and white
Shells with Holes, which they wear on Strings about their Arms and
Necks) to be Wealth.

Sometimes there are general _Emperors_, who have several petty Kingdoms
in some Measure under their Protection and Power.

They dwell in Towns some twenty, some a hundred Miles, and some farther
from one another, each Town having a particular _Jargon_ and peculiar
Customs; though for the most Part they agree in certain Signs,
Expressions, and Manners.

They are frequently at War with all their Neighbours, or most of them,
and treat their Captive Prisoners very barbarously; either by scalping
them (which I have seen) by ripping off the Crown of the Head, which
they wear on a Thong by their Side as a signal Trophee and Token of
Victory and Bravery. Or sometimes they tie their Prisoners, and lead
them bound to their Town, where with the most joyful Solemnity they kill
them, often by thrusting in several Parts of their Bodies scewers of
Light-wood which burn like Torches. The poor Victim all the while (which
is sometimes two or three Days) not shewing the least Symptom of Grief,
nor Sign of Pain, but bearing it with a scornful Sullenness.

In their Rejoicings and Wardances they with the most antick Gestures, in
the most frightful Dress, with a hideous Noise, enumerate the Enemies,
that they have murder'd, and such like Exploits.

They attack always by Surprize, and will never stand their Ground when
discovered; but fly to Ambush, whither the Enemy may pursue with Peril
of his Life.

They are made for running very swiftly, and are nicely dextrous at
fishing, hunting, and fowling; whereby they support themselves and
Families with Venison, Fish, wild Turkies, _&c._

The Women do all the hard Labour, such as cutting down the Trees,
planting Corn, _&c._ carrying Burthens and all their other Work; the Men
only hunting, fishing and fowling, eating, drinking, dancing and
sleeping.

The Boys still use Bows and Arrows for Exercise, with which they are
very dextrous; but the Men always use Fire-Arms, which with Ammunition
they buy of us with their Dear-Skins, going rarely out unarmed.

They are so wonderfully quick-sighted, that they will swiftly pursue by
_Eye_ the Track of any Thing among the Trees, in the Leaves and Grass,
as an Hound does by the Scent, where _we_ can't perceive the least Mark
or Footstep.

They cohabit in some hundreds of Families, and fix upon the richest
Ground to build their wooden Houses, which they place in a circular
Form, meanly defended with Pales, and covered with Bark; the middle Area
(or _Forum_) being for common Uses and publick Occasions. The Women in
order to plant their _Indian Corn_ and _Tobacco_ (to clear the Ground of
Trees) cut the Bark round; so that they die and don't shade the Ground,
and decay in Time.

Wherever we meet with an old _Indian Field_, or Place where they have
lived, we are sure of the best Ground. They all remove their Habitation
for fear of their Enemies, or for the Sake of Game and Provision.

They have small Sweating Houses like Ovens; out of which when they are
almost smothered with Heat, they run into a River, which they always
contrive to build their Towns near.

This Practice in all Distempers often kills vast Numbers in Sicknesses,
which are new to them.

They have no Notion of providing for Futurity; for they eat Night and
Day whilst their Provision lasts, falling to as soon as they awake, and
falling asleep again as soon as they are well crammed.

Their Fish, Flesh, and Fowl, they either barbacue on an high Gridiron,
or broil on sharp Sticks before a Fire, which they always keep in the
Middle of their Cabbin; and they lie upon Boards and Skins raised like
Benches round about their Room.

Their Drink is Water, unless they can get _Rum_; with which they make
themselves the greatest Beasts, never ceasing as long as they have
Liquor to drink, and can keep awake.

I have known, when Cows have been given them, that they let them go dry
for Laziness in neglecting to milk them, and die in the Winter for want
of Fodder.

They commonly wear a Dear-Skin, putting their Arms thro' the Holes of
the Shoulder, with a Flap ty'd before and behind to cover their
Nakedness; though they buy often _Matchcoats_ or Blankets now, to defend
them from the Wet and Cold, and think themselves very fine in such Coats
as our common Soldiers wear, or of any taudry Colours: Besides this,
some pin Pieces of red or blue Cloth about their Legs, and make
_Moccasons_ or leather Purses for their Feet, with which they can travel
in the Woods, without Danger of Thorns or Stumps. For all the Country is
but one continued Forest, with Patches of some hundred Acres here and
there cleared; either being formerly seated by _Indians_, or the Trees
being burnt in Fire-Hunting, or cut down for Plantations.

Their Children almost as soon as born, are ty'd flat on their Backs to a
Board; and so may be flung on the Ground, or put to lean against any
Thing, or be flung over their Neck in Travelling, or hung upon a Bough,
as Occasion requires.

This occasions them to be exactly strait; so that it is a Miracle to see
a crooked or deformed _Indian_.

Their Hair is very black, coarse and long; and they are all over daubed
frequently with Bear's Oil.

Each Nation has some distinguishing Mark, especially in the Cut or Tie
of their Hair, in which they are very whimsical and comical.

They often wear Shells hanging upon their Breasts, with Feathers or a
Deer's Tail in their bored Ears or Hair, with a Wolf or Fox-Skin for a
Snapsack; with other odd Accoutrements.

In their Opinion, they are finest when dressed most ridiculously or
terribly. Thus some have their Skins all over curiously wrought with
blewish Lines and Figures, as if done with Gun-Powder and Needles, and
all of them delight in being painted; so that when they are very fine,
you may see some of them with their Hair cut off on one Side, and a long
Lock on the other. The Crown being crested and bedaubed with red Lead
and Oil; their Forehead being painted white, and it may be their Nose
black, and a Circle of Blue round one Eye, with the Cheek red, and all
the other Side of the Face yellow, or in some such fantastical Manner.
These Colours they buy of us, being persuaded to despise their own,
which are common and finer.

They are treacherous, suspicious and jealous, difficult to be persuaded
or imposed upon, and very sharp, hard in Dealing, and ingenious in their
Way, and in Things that they naturally know, or have been taught; though
at first they are very obstinate, and unwilling to apprehend or learn
Novelties, and seem stupid and silly to Strangers.

An Instance of their resolute Stupidity and Obstinacy in receiving a new
Custom, I have seen in the prodigious Trouble of bringing them to sell
their Skins, and buy Gunpowder by Weight; for they could not apprehend
the Power and Justice of the Stilliard; but with the Scales at Length
they apprehended it tolerably well; though at first they insisted upon
as much Gunpowder as the Skin weighed, which was much more than their
Demand in Measure. They have Geographical Notions, as to the Situation
of their own Country, and will find the Way to very remote Places in a
surprizing Manner; steering by the Course of the Rivers, _&c._ or by the
Trees, whose _North_ Side is easily known by the Moss.

Thus I know, that _Wickmannatauchee_ (a great King among the _Southern
Indians_) whom I saw just before, and since, when he made his Escape
from his Enemy _Indians_ at _Christanna_, where his _Queen_ and
abundance of his People were slain, and he ty'd in order to be carried
away Prisoner; yet broke loose, and ran directly Home several hundred
Miles stark-naked, without Arms or Provision, in the Month of _March_,
when the Trees afforded no Fruit; neither did he go near any other
Nation, till he got to his own; therefore I suppose Roots were his
Provision, and Water his Liquor, unless by some cunning Method (with
which they abound) he caught Fish, Fowl, or Venison; and as for Fire I
know they can kindle that by rubbing of certain Sticks together.

They count their Time by Days, or by the Return of the Moon, and
_Cohonks_, a sort of wild Geese. They walk one after another in a Line,
are very serious in Debates, speak but one at a Time; and in
Negotiations all agree to what either proposes or approves of, and are
not easily imposed upon; and when affronted, they highly resent
Injuries, and being treacherous are no more to be trusted than tame
_Lions_, who can't wholly lose their savage Hearts.

They have tolerable good Notions of natural Justice, Equity, Honour and
Honesty, to the Rules whereof the great Men strictly adhere; but their
common People will lye, cheat, and steal.

They seldom commit Violence upon the _English_, but when provoked, or
put on by others.

The _French_, that are seated upon the River of St. _Laurence_ and the
_Messisippi_, and the Lakes between them in _Canada_ and _Lovisiana_,
which extend behind all the _English Plantations_ along the Heart of
_North America_ a vast Way, from the most Northern Parts of the _French_
Settlements, which are contiguous quite to the Gulf of _Mexico_, are
numerous, and through the Policy of their late _King_ intermarry with
the _Indians_; by which means being united with them, they often set
them on to destroy the _English_, which may prove dangerous in Case of a
War with _France_.

But to prevent more Mischiefs of this kind, Providence has secured us
from them by a continued Ridge of vast high Hills, called the
_Apelachian Mountains_, running nearly under the _Meridian_, as being
passable but in very few Places; which Mountains through the Care and
Conduct of the _Honourable Colonel Spotswood_ are secured for his
Majesty, tho' not guarded as yet; which might easily be done to the
great Safety and Encouragement of back Settlements in a vast rich
Country Westward of the Settlements of _Virginia_, some hundred of Miles
from the Sea quite to the Mountains, which might prove a Terror to the
_French Indians_ and _Planters_, in Case of Inroads and Irruptions, and
become a Safeguard to the Trade of those Places.

_Governor Spotswood_, when he undertook the great Discovery of the
_Passage_ over the _Mountains_, attended with a sufficient Guard and
Pioneers and Gentlemen, with a sufficient Stock of Provision, with
abundant Fatigue _passed_ these _Mountains_, and cut _his Majesty's
Name_ in a _Rock_ upon the _Highest_ of them, naming it MOUNT GEORGE;
and in Complaisance the Gentlemen from the Governor's Name, called the
Mountain next in Height, _Mount Alexander_.

For this Expedition they were obliged to provide a great Quantity of
Horse-Shoes; (Things seldom used in the lower Parts of the Country,
where there are few Stones:) Upon which Account the Governor upon their
Return presented each of his Companions with a Golden Horse-Shoe, (some
of which I have seen studded with valuable Stones resembling the Heads
of Nails) with this Inscription on the one Side: _Sic juvat transcendere
montes_: And on the other is written the tramontane Order.

This he instituted to encourage Gentlemen to venture backwards, and make
Discoveries and new Settlements; any Gentleman being entitled to wear
this Golden Shoe that can prove his having drank _His Majesty's Health_,
upon MOUNT GEORGE.

He built a Fort called _Christanna_, which tho' not so far back, yet
proved of great Service and Use; where at his sole Expence (I think) I
have seen Seventy Seven _Indian Children_ at a Time at School, under the
careful Management of the worthy Mr. _Charles Griffin_, who lived there
some Years for that Purpose; from whom I have been informed of most of
the _Indian_ Customs and Principles, that I here mention, except such as
I have seen and known my self.

These Children could all read, say their Catechisms and Prayers
tolerably well; but this pious Design being laid aside thro' the
Opposition of Trade and Interest, Mr. _Griffin_ was removed to the
College to teach the _Indians_, instructed there by the Benefaction of
the _Honourable Mr. Boyle_.

The _Indians_ so loved and adored him, that I have seen them hug him and
lift him up in their Arms, and fain would have chosen him for a _King_
of the _Sapony_ Nation.

The _Southern Indians_, that came several hundred Miles to meet the
_Governor_, there to treat of War, and Peace, and Trade, though they had
several murthered by their own _Northern_ Enemies, (even under the
Mouths of our great Guns, and whilst we were there) which made them
somewhat jealous that we had betray'd them; yet left several Children
under his Care, and engaged themselves to send more, though they
themselves would not relinquish their Barbarity; for they in reasoning
with us by Interpreters, asked Leave to be excused from becoming as we
are; for they thought it hard, that we should desire them to change
their Manners and Customs, since they did not desire us to turn
_Indians_: However, they permitted their Children to be brought up in
our Way; and when they were able to judge for themselves, they were to
live as the ENGLISH, or as the INDIANS, according to their best liking.

The _Indians_ have a blind Worship and Sacrifice, Priests, and
Physicians, and Expiation, with howling Lamentations and Purgation at
their Burials: All which I have seen at the Funeral of their Slain at
_Christanna_, whom they buried thus; having made Holes like Saw-Pits,
and lined them with Bark and Sticks, they wrapped the Bodies in the best
Cloth they could buy with the Skins of the Deceased, and laid them in
the Graves, with all the Cloths, Skins and Nicknacks of the Dead: Then
they covered the Body hollow with Sticks, and flung in the Earth with
mournful Noise; so the Bodies lay as in Coffins.

The Priest or Physician in curing the Wounded, made an hideous Noise,
singing certain Charms, with particular Actions and Forms of
Incantation, to which he ascribed the Cure, tho' I believe this is done
only to blind the common _Indians_; for I observed he did not begin his
Operation, till he had been in the Woods. Then he shut us all out for an
Hour, and when we were readmitted, I perceived he had been using certain
Roots and Herbs that I knew not.

Upon Enquiry, we have from them these their Notions of the State of the
Dead.

They believe that they go to _Mohomny_ that lives beyond the Sun, if
they have not been Wicked, nor like Dogs nor Wolves, that is, not
unchast, then they believe that _Mohomny_ sends them to a plentiful
Country abounding with Fish, Flesh and Fowls, the best of their Kind,
and easy to be caught; but if they have been naughty, then he sends them
to a poor barren Country, where be many Wolves and Bears, with a few
nimble Deer, swift Fish and Fowls, difficult to be taken; and when
killed, being scarce any thing but Skin and Bones.

They allow Polygamy, if the Man can maintain his Family, as I have been
informed.

They punish Adultery in a Woman by cutting off her Hair, which they fix
upon a long Pole without the Town; which is such a Disgrace that the
Party is obliged to fly, and becomes a Victim to some Enemy, a Slave to
some Rover, or perishes in the Woods.

They have certain _Hieroglyphical_ Methods of characterizing Things; an
Instance of which I have seen upon the Side of a Tree where the Bark was
taken off.

There was drawn something like a Deer and a River, with certain Strokes
and Dashes; the Deer looking down the River, which we interpreted to be
left for Information to some of their stragling Company, that certain of
them were gone down that River a Hunting, and others were gone different
Ways.

I know by the Boys at the College, that they have an excellent _Genius_
for Drawing; and I fancy by Art they might be made some of the best
Masters of Painting and Limning, to which they seem naturally inclined.

They hate Injury and Oppression; and I have been told they have some
capital Punishments.

Besides the _French_, the _Traders_ of some Companies and Countries
often set the _Indians_ on to injure the _English_ on the Frontiers, out
of a barbarous inhuman Design; and often private Injuries done by some
of our ordinary or vile People (who esteem and use the _Indians_ as
Dogs) are repaid with publick Barbarity.

An Instance of their Resolutions for Satisfaction, we have in the Death
of _Major Wynne_, who was shot by an _Indian_, because one of our
Servants had killed one of their _great Men_; and upon the Trial of the
_Indian_, they pleaded that we were the Aggressors, and that they never
rest without Revenge and Reprisals; and that now they said we and they
were equal, having each lost a _great Man_: Wherefore to avoid more
Bloodshed, there was a Necessity to pardon the _Indian_.

They report that the _Northern Indians_ send out Bodies of young Fellows
yearly, who dare not return without a certain Number of Scalps or
Prisoners, in order to train them up, and qualify them for great and
fighting Men.

Now these, and such as are set on by others, do some Mischief (tho' but
very seldom) in the Frontier Plantations, tho' they be guarded with
Rangers; and these with such as think themselves injured are the
_Indians_ that make Wars, and such Disturbance in the _Northern_ and
_Southern_ Colonies: But the tributary _Indians_, of which there are but
four very small Nations in _Virginia_ on this Side the Mountains, keep
to the Bounds allowed them, and seldom do any Hurt, being sure to be
punished for Offences in a great Measure by our Laws, since we protect
and shelter them, by permitting them to live among us; tho' sometimes
they will pretend to claim their prior Right to all our Lands, as _Blunt
King of the Tuskaroodaus_ did, when he told _Colonel Spotswood_ that the
Country belonged to them before we _English_ came thither; so that he
thought they had a better Title than we, and ought not to be confined to
such narrow Limits for Hunting.

To retort this Argument, the Governor told him that _Mohomny_ took the
Ground from _them_ and gave it _us_, because _we_ did as he bid us, but
_they_ would not.

_Blunt_ answered, that _they_ could not tell what _Mohomny_ would have
them do; and asked how we knew.

The _Governor_ then told him that _Mohomny_ sent his _Son_ to us, who
lived a long time with us, and told us and taught us what we should do;
and then he went back again to his _Father_.

With this _King Blunt_ seemed satisfied and surprized; and after a
Pause, he said, he had talked with several Governors and other
_English_, but he really never before heard that _Mohomny_ had a Son.

I relate this, to shew how by Degrees, after proper Methods, they may be
humoured, and brought to have some Notions of the true Religion, when
their Capacity and Temper is rightly studied and managed; for we must
_give Milk to_ such _Babes_ in Faith.

Some indeed, after seeming Conversion have apostatized and returned to
their own Ways, chiefly because they can live with less Labour, and more
Pleasure and Plenty, as _Indians_, than they can with us; but this might
easily be remedied by making a plentiful Provision for them, especially
those at the _College_, by sending some to Sea, and putting out others
to Trades, and not letting them idle away their Time, nor return to
their Towns so soon, before they be perfect in the Understanding and
Approbation of our Customs and Religion, and have seen some more of the
World, and be handsomly provided for; for then if they returned, they
might do Good to themselves and others.

This might by Degrees convert all the tributary and neighbouring
_Indians_; and the _Northern_ and _Southern Nations_ might be managed by
_Missionaries_ from the Society, and the _College Indians_.

These inland People are vastly numerous, as I have been told by the
Traders, who are sent out amongst them seven or eight hundred Miles,
with about a hundred Horses, and stay there sometimes for Years
together.

The Missionaries that are now sent, generally keep among the _English_,
and rarely see an _Indian_; or when they do, know but little how to
manage them; for you may as well talk Reason, Philosophy, or Divinity to
a _Block_, as to _them_, unless you perfectly understand their Temper,
and know how to humour them.

I believe indeed, Mr. _Andrews_, Missionary to the _Northern Indians_,
in the _late Queen_'s Time, did great Good among them in seven Years: In
which Time, he found out something of their Nature, and translated Part
of our Prayers and Psalms into their Language: Which Book when he gave
me, he told me that it had not the desired Effect, neither did his
Preaching avail as much as could be wished, because Policy and Interest
intervening often superseded the Promotion of the Gospel, and the
debauched Lives and vile Practices of our ordinary People give Examples
very pernicious to Religion; for the _Indians_ think, that _they_ may
surely be allowed the same Liberty as _we_; and if our Folks don't act,
as they say, they should, the _Indians_ may think the _Christian
Profession_ to be a Cheat, when our pretended Principles are
contradicted by our Actions.

I have here specified some general Customs and Notions of the _Indians_,
without a superficial Knowledge of which Things the Government and
Society for propagating the Gospel in Foreign Parts, may be at great
Trouble and Expence, and yet make but small Progress in the Propagation
of Learning, Religion and good Manners among the _Heathen Indians of
America_; who in Gross may all be said to be such, as I have here given
an Account of.




PART II.




CHAP. I.

_Of the_ English _Settlements in_ Virginia.


The first Discovery made for the _English_ in _North-America_, was in
the Year 1584, (a hundred and forty Years ago) by Captain _Philip
Amidas_, and Captain _Arthur Barlow_, by the Protection and
Encouragement of _Queen Elizabeth_; with the Persuasion and Direction of
Sir _Walter Raleigh_.

They anchored at _Roenoak_ Inlet, now belonging to the Government of
_North Carolina_, and from the _Virgin Queen_, and the apparent Purity
of the _Indians_, and primitive Plenty of the Place, that new discover'd
Part of the World was named _Virginia_.

After that, Sir _Richard Greenvile_, Sir _Francis Drake_, and Sir
_Walter Raleigh_ carried on the Project, and made Advancements in it,
with the Leave of the Government; which were promoted and continued by
the _Merchants_ of _London_, _Bristol_, _Exeter_ and _Plymouth_; with
Variety of Accidents, Successes and Disappointments in Respect of their
Trade and Possessions, and War and Peace with the _Indians_; especially
under the Conduct of _Captain Smith_, who was employed by the Company of
Merchants incorporated by _King James_ I. in 1606; and has written a
large History of his particular Transactions.

They then fixed chiefly at, and near _James Town_, on a small Island in
_James River_, till the Year 1609, when they sent out Settlements to
_Nansemond_, _Powhatan_, and the Year after to _Kiquotan_.

After that the Plantations of _Virginia_ were formed into a Government,
managed first by three, and afterwards by one _Governor_, to whose
Assistance in a small Time they added _Counsellors_; and in 1620, they
called an _Assembly of Burgesses_, who being elected by the People, met
the _Governor_ and _Council_ at _James Town_, and debated Matters for
the Improvement and good Government of the Country.

About this Time the _Dutch_ brought over some _Negroes_ for Sale, who
are now wonderfully encreased; besides the constant Supplies of them
imported yearly.

At this Time, they made new Settlements, laid out and apportioned Lands,
some to the _Governor_, some for a _College_ and _Indian School_, some
to the _Church_ and _Glebes_, and some to particular Persons; and
carried on _Salt Works_ and _Iron Works_, besides _Tobacco_.

This Prosperity of the Colony so encouraged its Increase, that one
thousand three hundred People have gone over in one Year to settle
there; upon which they made _County Courts_ for the Tryal of some Causes
and Criminals under the _General Court_ and _Assembly_; but private
Interest and Quarrels byassing the Governors and other Persons
concerned, often introduced ill Success, Faction, and _Indian_ Wars.

The fatal Consequences of this _Male-Administration_ cry'd so loud, that
_King Charles_ I. coming to the Crown of _England_, had a tender Concern
for the poor People, that had been betrayed thither and almost lost:
Upon which he dissolved the Company in 1626, reducing the Country and
Government into his own immediate Direction, appointing the _Governor_
and _Council_ himself, and ordering all _Patents_ and _Processes_ to
issue in his own Name, reserving to himself a _Quit-Rent_ of two
Shillings for every hundred Acres of Land.

In this happy Constitution, the Colony of _Virginia_ has prosperously
encreased gradually and wonderfully, to its present most flourishing
Condition.

Indeed _Bacon_'s Rebellion against the _Governor_ occasioned a great
deal of Bloodshed and Disturbance; but that after his Death soon ceased.

The assured good Report of this vast Tract of Land and happy Climate
encouraged several Gentlemen of Condition and good Descent, to transport
themselves and Families, and settle in this new Paradise; some for the
Sake of Wealth, some for Religion, and others because they could not
well live elsewhere; and others because they dared not, or cared not to
stay at Home.

But one particular Occasion that sent several Families of good Birth and
Fortune to settle there, was the Civil Wars in _England_; for Sir
_William Barkley_ the Governor being strong for the _King_, held out the
last of all the _King's Dominions_ against the _Usurper_; and likewise
proclaimed _King Charles_ II. before the _Restoration_.

This safe Receptacle enticed over several _Cavalier_ Families, where
they made many Laws against _Puritans_, tho' they were free from them;
which had this good Success, that to this Day, the People are as it were
quite free from them, being all of the _Church of England_, without the
odious distinguishing Characters of _High_ or _Low_ among themselves.
Indeed, there are a few _Quakers_ in some of the worst Counties, where
_Clergymen_ are unwilling to settle, such as the lower Parts of
_Nansemond_ County; but these might easily be brought over to the
_Church_; and I am fully persuaded that the Growth of their Doctrine
might be easily nipped in the Bud, by very plain Methods.

Among other Persons of Distinction that went over to settle in
_Virginia_, was the noble _Cæcilius Calvert Lord Baltimore_, a _Roman
Catholick_, who with his Family, Friends and Attendants, was willing to
retire thither for the free Exercise of his Religion.

He obtained a Patent for all that vast Part of _Virginia_, which lies to
the Northward of the great River _Potowmack_; which was confirmed to his
Son and his Heirs in the Year 1633.

This Province was named _Maryland_ from the _Royal Consort of King
Charles_ I. and remains still the Propriety of the present _Lord
Baltimore_ and his Heirs, with the Restriction of their being
_Protestants_; and is perhaps the largest Estate in the World belonging
to any one Person, that is not a Prince.

Though the _Church of England_ be establish'd in _Maryland_; yet it is a
Sanctuary for _Papists_, who are pretty numerous there, and enjoy the
Freedom of their _Priests_ and _Mass_ in a great Measure, without
Molestation.




CHAP. II.

_Of the Metropolis_ Williamsburgh, _and the College, Capitol, and
Governor's House, and the Church_, &c.


The first _Metropolis_, _James Town_, was built in the most convenient
Place for Trade and Security against the _Indians_, but often received
much Damage, being twice burnt down; after which it never recovered its
Perfection, consisting at present of nothing but Abundance of Brick
Rubbish, and three or four good inhabited Houses, tho' the Parish is of
pretty large Extent, but less than others. When the _State House_ and
_Prison_ were burnt down, _Governor Nicholson_ removed the Residence of
the Governor, with the Meeting of _General Courts_ and _General
Assemblies to Middle Plantation_, seven Miles from _James Town_, in a
healthier and more convenient Place, and freer from the Annoyance of
_Muskettoes_.

Here he laid out the _City of Williamsburgh_ (in the Form of a Cypher,
made of _W._ and _M._) on a Ridge at the Head Springs of two great
_Creeks_, one running into _James_, and the other into _York River_,
which are each navigable for Sloops, within a Mile of the Town; at the
Head of which _Creeks_ are good _Landings_, and _Lots_ laid out, and
Dwelling Houses and Ware Houses built; so that this Town is most
conveniently situated, in the Middle of the lower Part of _Virginia_,
commanding two noble Rivers, not above four Miles from either, and is
much more commodious and healthful, than if built upon a River.

Publick Buildings here of Note, are the College, the Capitol, the
Governor's House, and the Church. The Latitude of the _College_ at
_Williamsburgh_, to the best of my Observation, is 37°. 21´. _North_.

The Front which looks due _East_ is double, and is 136 Foot long. It is
a lofty Pile of Brick Building adorn'd with a _Cupola_. At the _North_
End runs back a large Wing, which is a handsome _Hall_, answerable to
which the _Chapel_ is to be built; and there is a spacious _Piazza_ on
the _West_ Side, from one Wing to the other. It is approached by a good
Walk, and a grand Entrance by Steps, with good Courts and Gardens about
it, with a good House and Apartments for the _Indian Master_ and his
Scholars, and Out-Houses; and a large Pasture enclosed like a Park with
about 150 Acres of Land adjoining, for occasional Uses.

The Building is beautiful and commodious, being first modelled by Sir
_Christopher Wren_, adapted to the Nature of the Country by the
_Gentlemen_ there; and since it was burnt down, it has been rebuilt, and
nicely contrived, altered and adorned by the ingenious Direction of
_Governor Spotswood_; and is not altogether unlike _Chelsea Hospital_.

This _Royal Foundation_ was granted and establish'd by _Charter_, _by
King William and Queen Mary_, and endowed by them, with some thousand
Acres of Land, with Duties upon Furs and Skins, and a Penny a Pound for
all Tobacco transported from _Virginia_ and _Maryland_, to the other
Plantations; to which have been made several additional Benefactions, as
that handsom Establishment of Mr. _Boyle_, for the Education of
_Indians_, with the many Contributions of the Country, especially a late
one of 1000 _l._ to buy _Negroes_ for the College Use and Service.

The Society is a Corporation establish'd for a _President_, _six
Masters_ or _Professors_, with a hundred _Scholars_, more or less.

For some Causes that I can't account for, the Revenue is not improved as
much as might be wished; neither is the College brought to that Method
of Education and Advantage, as it might be; tho' 'tis hoped, that in a
few Years it will, like the Palm Tree, grow to the greater Perfection,
under the weighty Obstacles that load it.

The Salary of the President Mr. _James Blair_, has been lately ordered
to be reduced from 150 to 100 _l. per Ann._

The Salary of the Fellows (one of which I have been several Years) is 80
_l. per Ann._ each, with 20 _s._ Entrance, and 20 _s._ a Year for
Pupilage for each Scholar: The Payments are sometimes made in Current
_Spanish Money_, and sometimes in _Sterling_ Bills.

The Nature of the Country scarce yet admits of a Possibility of reducing
the _Collegians_ to the nice Methods of Life and Study observed in
_Oxford_ and _Cambridge_; tho' by Degrees they may copy from thence many
useful Customs and Constitutions.

When the _College_ shall be compleatly finished, and Scholarships
founded, then is the Trust to be transferred from the _Trustees_ to the
_President and Masters_; but at present it is managed by a certain
Number of _Governors_ or _Visitors_, (one of which is chosen yearly
_Rector_) appointed first by the _Trustees_, elected out of the
principal and worthiest Inhabitants.

These appoint a Person, to whom they grant several Privileges and
Allowances to board and lodge the Masters and Scholars at an
extraordinary cheap Rate.

This Office is at present performed in the neatest and most regular and
plentiful Manner, by _Mrs. Mary Stith_, a Gentlewoman of great Worth and
Discretion, in good Favour with the Gentry, and great Esteem and Respect
with the common People.

Great Pity it is, but the noble Design of this College met with more
Friends to encourage, and Benefactors to advance, its flourishing State.

One Happiness is, that it has always a _Chancellor_ in _England_, chosen
by the _Governors_ or _Feoffees_; to whose Patronage and Direction it
may have Recourse upon emergent Occasions.

The last _Chancellor_ was the late _Bishop of London_; and the present
is his _Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury_.

The _Chancellor_ continues in that Office but seven Years; so that it
may happen as soon as he has obtained a perfect Knowledge and
Acquaintance with the Persons and Affairs belonging to the _College_,
his Term is expired: Besides their Business in other momentous Affairs
at Home may divert them, and the Distance of the Country may prevent
them from obtaining true Notions, and exact Accounts of the Nature of
the _Colony_ and the _College_; so that for these Reasons, they can't do
for it the Good, which they otherwise might: For their better
Information, and for Direction of all, in promoting Religion and
Learning in this _Plantation_, I have made Publick this Account of _it_,
and _its_ Inhabitants.

Fronting the _College_ at near its whole Breadth, is extended a noble
Street mathematically streight (for the first Design of the Town's Form
is changed to a much better) just three Quarters of a Mile in Length: At
the other End of which stands the _Capitol_, a noble, beautiful, and
commodious Pile as any of its Kind, built at the Cost of the _late
Queen_, and by the Direction of the _Governor_.

In this is the _Secretary's Office_ with all the Courts of _Justice_ and
_Law_, held in the same Form, and near the same Manner, as in _England_;
except the _Ecclesiastical Courts_.

Here the _Governor_ and _twelve Counsellors_ sit as _Judges_, at the
_General Courts_ in _April_ and _October_, whither Trials and Causes are
removed from Courts, held at the Court-Houses Monthly in every County by
a Bench of _Justices_ and a _County Clerk_.

Here are also held the _Oyer and Terminer Courts_, one in Summer, and
the other in Winter, added by the Charity of the _late Queen_, for the
Prevention of Prisoners lying in Gaol above a Quarter of a Year before
their Trial.

Here are also held _Courts Martial_, by Judges appointed on Purpose, for
the _Trial_ of _Pyrates_; likewise _Courts of Admiralty_, for the Trial
of _Ships_ for illegal Trade.

The Building is in the Form of an =H= nearly; the _Secretary's Office_,
and the _General Court_ taking up one Side below Stairs; the Middle
being an handsom _Portico_ leading to the Clerk of the _Assembly's_
Office, and _the House of Burgesses_ on the other Side; which last is
not unlike the _House of Commons_.

In each Wing is a good Stair Case, one leading to the _Council Chamber_,
where the _Governor_ and _Council_ sit in very great State, in Imitation
of the _King and Council_, or the _Lord Chancellor_ and _House of
Lords_.

Over the _Portico_ is a large Room where _Conferences_ are held, and
_Prayers_ are read by the Chaplain to the General Assembly; which Office
I have had the Honour for some Years to perform. At one End of this is a
Lobby, and near it is the _Clerk of the Council's Office_; and at the
other End are several Chambers for the _Committees_ of _Claims_,
_Privileges_, and _Elections_; and over all these are several good
Offices for the _Receiver General_, for the _Auditor_, _Treasurer_, &c.
and upon the Middle is raised a lofty _Cupola_ with a large Clock.

The whole is surrounded with a neat _Area_, encompassed with a good
Wall, and near it is a strong sweet _Prison_ for _Criminals_; and on the
other Side of an open Court another for _Debtors_, when any are removed
thither from other Prisons in each County; but such Prisoners are very
rare, the Creditors being there generally very merciful, and the Laws so
favourable for Debtors, that some esteem them too indulgent.

The Cause of my being so particular in describing the _Capitol_ is,
because it is the best and most commodious Pile of its Kind that I have
seen or heard of.

Because the _State House_, _James Town_, and the _College_ have been
burnt down, therefore is prohibited in the _Capitol_ the Use of Fire,
Candles, and Tobacco.

Parallel to the main Street mentioned is a Street on each Side of it,
but neither quite so long nor broad; and at proper Distances are small
cross Streets, for the Convenience of Communication.

Near the Middle stands the _Church_, which is a large strong Piece of
Brickwork in the Form of a Cross, nicely regular and convenient, and
adorned as the best Churches in _London_. This from the Parish is called
_Bruton Church_, where I had the Favour of being Lecturer.

Near this is a large Octogon Tower, which is the _Magazine_ or
Repository of Arms and Ammunition, landing far from any House except
_James Town Court-House_; for the Town is half in _James Town County_,
and half in _York County_.

Not far from hence is a large _Area_ for a _Market Place_; near which is
a _Play House_ and good _Bowling Green_.

From the _Church_ runs a Street Northward called _Palace Street_; at the
other End of which stands the _Palace or Governor's House_, a
magnificent Structure, built at the publick Expence, finished and
beautified with Gates, fine Gardens, Offices, Walks, a fine Canal,
Orchards, _&c._ with a great Number of the best Arms nicely posited, by
the ingenious Contrivance of the most accomplished _Colonel Spotswood_.

This likewise has the ornamental Addition of a good _Cupola_ or
_Lanthorn_, illuminated with most of the Town, upon _Birth-Nights_, and
other Nights of occasional Rejoicings.

At the _Capitol_, at publick Times, may be seen a great Number of
handsom, well-dress'd, compleat Gentlemen. And at the _Governor's_ House
upon _Birth-Nights_, and at _Balls_ and _Assemblies_, I have seen as
fine an Appearance, as good Diversion, and as splendid Entertainments in
_Governor Spotswood's Time_, as I have seen any where else.

These Buildings here described are justly reputed the best in all the
_English America_, and are exceeded by few of their Kind in _England_.

In every Part of this Town are excellent Springs of good Water, or else
may be made good Wells; and the Ground falling on both Sides, conveys
the Water and Rain by small Channels into the Creeks; but to make the
main Street exactly level, the Assembly lately gave a considerable Sum,
which was expended in removing Earth in some Places, and building a
Bridge over a low Channel; so that it is now a pleasant, long dry Walk,
broad, and almost level from the _College_ to the _Capitol_.

_Williamsburgh_ is now incorporated and made a _Market Town_, and
governed by a _Mayor and Aldermen_; and is well stock'd with rich
_Stores_, of all Sorts of Goods, and well furnished with the best
Provisions and Liquors.

Here dwell several very good Families, and more reside here in their own
Houses at publick Times.

They live in the same neat Manner, dress after the same Modes, and
behave themselves exactly as the _Gentry in London_; most Families of
any Note having a _Coach_, _Chariot_, _Berlin_, _or Chaise_.

The Number of Artificers is here daily augmented; as are the convenient
_Ordinaries_ or Inns for Accommodation of Strangers.

The Servants here, as in other Parts of the Country, are _English_,
_Scotch_, _Irish_, _or Negroes_.

The Town is laid out regularly in _Lots_ or square Portions, sufficient
each for a House and Garden; so that they don't build contiguous,
whereby may be prevented the spreading Danger of Fire; and this also
affords a free Passage for the Air, which is very grateful in violent
hot Weather.

Here, as in other Parts, they build with Brick, but most commonly with
Timber lined with Cieling, and cased with feather-edged Plank, painted
with white Lead and Oil, covered with Shingles of _Cedar_, &c. tarr'd
over at first; with a Passage generally through the Middle of the House
for an Air-Draught in Summer.

Thus their Houses are lasting, dry, and warm in Winter, and cool in
Summer; especially if there be Windows enough to draw the Air.

Thus they dwell comfortably, genteely, pleasantly, and plentifully in
this delightful, healthful, and (I hope) thriving _City of
Williamsburgh_.




CHAP. III.

_Of the Situation and Nature of the Country of_ Virginia, _and its
Coasts_, &c.


Under the Meridian is extended the Expanse _Bay of Chesapeak_, esteemed
one of the noblest and safest Bays in the World.

The Land on the _East_ Side of it is called the _Eastern Shore_, the
Northern Part of it belonging to _Maryland_, and the Southern containing
_Accomack_ and _Northampton Counties_ belonging to _Virginia_; at the
extreme Point of which lies one of the _Capes of Virginia_, the other
being opposite to it, one called _Cape Henry_, and the other _Cape
Charles_; _without_ these runs a bold Shore Southward, being the Coast
of _North Carolina_.

After Ships are clear of _England_, they need go near neither Land,
Rocks, nor Shoals, but in a direct Course might cross the vast
_Atlantick Ocean_ about a thousand Leagues nearly _W. S. W._ till they
make Land somewhat to the Southward of the Capes; then knowing (by their
Latitude, or Landmarks, or by certain Trees) what Land they are near,
they may easily get within the Capes, unless they happen to be kept off
to Sea for some Time by blustering _Northwesters_; or unless they
carelessly fall upon _Cape Hatteras_, or other Shoals on that Coast, in
known Latitudes; so that this may be esteemed as easy a Voyage as any.

There are belonging to _Virginia_ four principal Rivers (neither of them
inferior upon many Accounts to the _Thames_ or _Severn_) that empty
themselves into the Bay after they have glided some Hundreds of Miles
fromwards the Mountains, the Western Bounds of _Virginia_.

The most Southerly of these Rivers is called _James River_, and the next
_York River_, the Land in the Latitude between these Rivers seeming most
nicely adapted for _sweet scented_, or the finest _Tobacco_; for 'tis
observed that the goodness decreaseth the farther you go to the
Northward of the one, and the Southward of the other; but this may be (I
believe) attributed in some Measure to the Seed and Management, as well
as to the Land and Latitude: For on _York River_ in a small Tract of
Land called _Digges's Neck_, which is poorer than a great deal of other
Land in the same Latitude, by a particular Seed and Management, is made
the famous Crop known by the Name of the _E Dees_, remarkable for its
mild taste and fine Smell.

The next great River is _Rappahannock_, and the fourth is _Potowmack_,
which divides _Virginia_ from the _Province_ of _Maryland_.

These are supplied by several lesser Rivers, such as _Chickahommony_ and
others, _navigable_ for Vessels of great Burthen.

Into these Rivers run abundance of great _Creeks_ or short Rivers,
navigable for _Sloops_, _Shallops_, _Long-Boats_, _Flats_, _Canoes_ and
_Periaguas_.

These _Creeks_ are supplied with the _Tide_, (which indeed does not rise
so high as in _Europe_, so prevents their making good _Docks_) and also
with fresh-Water-runs, replenished with _Branches_ issuing from the
_Springs_, and soaking through the _Swamps_; so that no Country is
better watered, for the Conveniency of which most Houses are built near
some Landing-Place; so that any Thing may be delivered to a Gentleman
there from _London_, _Bristol_, &c. with less Trouble and Cost, than to
one living five Miles in the _Country in England_; for you pay no
Freight for Goods from _London_, and but little from _Bristol_; only the
Party to whom the Goods belong, is in Gratitude engaged to freight
_Tobacco_ upon the Ship consigned to her Owners in _England_.

Because of this Convenience, and for the Goodness of the Land, and for
the sake of Fish, Fowl, _&c._ Gentlemen and Planters love to build near
the Water; though it be not altogether so healthy as the _Uplands_ and
_Barrens_, which serve for _Ranges for Stock_.

In the _Uplands_ near the Ridge generally run the _main Roads_, in a
pleasant, dry, sandy Soil, free from Stones and Dirt, and shaded and
sheltered chiefly by Trees; in some Places being not unlike the Walks in
_Greenwich Park_.

Thus neither the Interest nor Inclinations of the _Virginians_ induce
them to cohabit in Towns; so that they are not forward in contributing
their Assistance towards the making of particular Places, every
Plantation affording the Owner the Provision of a little Market;
wherefore they most commonly build upon some convenient Spot or Neck of
Land in their own Plantation, though Towns are laid out and establish'd
in each County; the best of which (next _Williamsburgh_) are _York_,
_Glocester_, _Hampton_, _Elizabeth Town_, and _Urbanna_.

The Colony now is encreased to _twenty nine Counties_, naturally bounded
(near as much as may be) one with another about as big as _Kent_; but
the frontier Counties are of vast Extent, though not thick seated as
yet.

The whole Country is a perfect Forest, except where the Woods are
cleared for Plantations, and old Fields, and where have been formerly
_Indian Towns_, and _poisoned Fields_ and _Meadows_, where the Timber
has been burnt down in Fire-Hunting or otherwise; and about the Creeks
and Rivers are large rank _Morasses_ or _Marshes_, and up the Country
are poor _Savannahs_.

The Gentlemen's Seats are of late built for the most Part of good Brick,
and many of Timber very handsom, commodious, and capacious; and likewise
the common Planters live in pretty Timber Houses, neater than the _Farm
Houses_ are generally in _England_: With Timber also are built Houses
for the _Overseers_ and _Out-Houses_; among which is the _Kitchen_ apart
from the _Dwelling House_, because of the Smell of hot Victuals,
offensive in hot Weather.




CHAP. IV.

_Of the_ Negroes, _with the Planting and Management of_ Indian _Corn,
Tobacco,_ &c. _and of their Timber, Stock, Fruits, Provision, and
Habitations,_ &c.


The _Negroes_ live in small Cottages called _Quarters_, in about six in
a _Gang_, under the Direction of an _Overseer_ or _Bailiff_; who takes
Care that they _tend_ such Land as the Owner allots and orders, upon
which they raise _Hogs_ and _Cattle_, and plant _Indian Corn_ (or
_Maize_) and _Tobacco_ for the Use of their Master; out of which the
_Overseer_ has a Dividend (or Share) in Proportion to the Number of
_Hands_ including himself; this with several Privileges is his Salary,
and is an ample Recompence for his Pains, and Encouragement of his
industrious Care, as to the Labour, Health, and Provision of the
_Negroes_.

The _Negroes_ are very numerous, some Gentlemen having Hundreds of them
of all Sorts, to whom they bring great Profit; for the Sake of which
they are obliged to keep them well, and not over-work, starve, or famish
them, besides other Inducements to favour them; which is done in a
_great Degree_, to such especially that are laborious, careful, and
honest; tho' indeed some Masters, careless of their own Interest or
Reputation, are too cruel and negligent.

The _Negroes_ are not only encreased by fresh Supplies from _Africa_ and
the _West India_ Islands, but also are very prolifick among themselves;
and they that are born there talk _good English_, and affect our
Language, Habits, and Customs; and tho' they be naturally of a barbarous
and cruel Temper, yet are they kept under by severe Discipline upon
Occasion, and by good Laws are prevented from running away, injuring the
_English_, or neglecting their Business.

Their Work (or Chimerical hard Slavery) is not very laborious; their
greatest Hardship consisting in that they and their Posterity are not at
their own Liberty or Disposal, but are the Property of their Owners; and
when they are free, they know not how to provide so well for themselves
generally; neither did they live so plentifully nor (many of them) so
easily in their own Country, where they are made Slaves to one another,
or taken Captive by their Enemies.

The Children belong to the Master of the Woman that bears them; and such
as are born of a _Negroe_ and an _European_ are called _Molattoes_; but
such as are born of an _Indian_ and _Negroe_ are called _Mustees_.

Their Work is to take Care of the _Stock_, and plant _Corn_, _Tobacco_,
_Fruits_, &c. which is not harder than _Thrashing_, _Hedging_, or
_Ditching_; besides, tho' they are out in the violent Heat, wherein they
delight, yet in wet or cold Weather there is little Occasion for their
working in the Fields, in which few will let them be abroad, lest by
this means they might get sick or die, which would prove a great Loss to
their Owners, a good _Negroe_ being sometimes worth three (nay four)
Score Pounds Sterling, if he be a Tradesman; so that upon this (if upon
no other Account) they are obliged not to overwork them, but to cloath
and feed them sufficiently, and take Care of their Health.

Several of them are taught to be _Sawyers_, _Carpenters_, _Smiths_,
_Coopers_, &c. and though for the most Part they be none of the aptest
or nicest; yet they are by Nature cut out for hard Labour and Fatigue,
and will perform tolerably well; though they fall much short of an
_Indian_, that has learn'd and seen the same Things; and _those Negroes_
make the best Servants, that have been _Slaves_ in their _own Country_;
for they that have been _Kings_ and _great Men_ there are generally
lazy, haughty, and obstinate; whereas the others are sharper, better
humoured, and more laborious.

The _Languages_ of the _new Negroes_ are various harsh _Jargons_, and
their _Religions_ and _Customs_ such as are best described by Mr.
_Bosman_ in his Book intitled (I think) _A Description of the Coasts of_
Africa.

The _Virginia_ Planters readily learn to become good _Mechanicks_ in
Building, wherein most are capable of directing their Servants and
Slaves.

As for Timber they abound with excellent good; having about eight Sorts
of _Oak_, several Kinds of _Walnut-Tree_, and _Hickory_ and _Pignut_,
_Pine_, _Cedar_, and _Cypress_ for _Shingles_; which Covering is
lighter than _Tiles_, and being nailed down, are not easily blown off in
any Tempest or _Gust_.

The Oak, _&c._ is of quick Growth, consequently will not last so long as
ours; though it has a good _Grain_, and is freer from Knots, and will
last long enough for Shipping, and ordinary Uses.

When a _Tract of Land is seated_, they _clear_ it by felling the Trees
about a Yard from the Ground, lest they should shoot again. What Wood
they have Occasion for they carry off, and burn the rest, or let it lie
and rot upon the Ground.

The Land between the Logs and Stumps they _how_ up, planting _Tobacco_
there in the Spring, inclosing it with a slight _Fence_ of cleft Rails.
This will last for _Tobacco_ some Years, if the Land be good; as it is
where _fine Timber_, or _Grape Vines_ grow.

Land when tired is _forced_ to bear _Tobacco_ by penning their Cattle
upon it; but _Cowpen Tobacco_ tastes strong, and that planted in wet
marshy Land is called _Nonburning Tobacco_, which smoaks in the Pipe
like Leather, unless it be of a good Age.

When Land is tired of _Tobacco_, it will bear _Indian Corn_ or _English
Wheat_, or any other _European Grain_ or _Seed_, with wonderful
Increase.

_Tobacco_ and _Indian Corn_ are planted in _Hills_ as Hops, and secured
by _Wormfences_, which are made of Rails supporting one another very
firmly in a particular Manner.

_Tobacco_ requires a great deal of Skill and Trouble in the right
Management of it.

They raise the Plants in _Beds_, as we do Cabbage Plants; which they
_transplant_ and _replant_ upon Occasion after a Shower of Rain, which
they call a _Season_.

When it is grown up they _top_ it, or nip off the Head, _succour_ it, or
cut off the Ground Leaves, _weed_ it, _hill_ it; and when ripe, they
_cut_ it down about six or eight Leaves on a Stalk, which they carry
into airy _Tobacco Houses_; after it is withered a little in the Sun,
there it is hung to dry on _Sticks_, as Paper at the Paper-Mills; when
it is in proper Case, (as they call it) and the Air neither too moist,
nor too dry, they _strike_ it, or take it down, then cover it up in
_Bulk_, or a great Heap, where it lies till they have Leisure or
Occasion to _stem_ it (that is pull the Leaves from the Stalk) or
_strip_ it (that is take out the great Fibres) and _tie_ it up in
_Hands_, or _streight lay it_; and so by Degrees _prize_ or press it
with proper Engines into great Hogsheads, containing from about six to
eleven hundred Pounds; four of which Hogsheads make a _Tun_, by
Dimension, not by Weight; then it is ready for Sale or Shipping.

There are two Sorts of _Tobacco_, viz. _Oroonoko_ the stronger, and
_Sweetscented_ the milder; the first with a sharper Leaf like a Fox's
Ear, and the other rounder and with finer Fibres: But each of these are
varied into several Sorts, much as Apples and Pears are; and I have been
informed by the _Indian Traders_, that the _Inland Indians_ have Sorts
of _Tobacco_ much differing from any planted or used by the _Europeans_.

The _Indian Corn_ is planted in Hills, and weeded much as _Tobacco_.

This Grain is of great Increase and most general Use; for with this is
made good _Bread_, _Cakes_, _Mush_, and _Hommony_ for the _Negroes_,
which with good _Pork_ and _Potatoes_ (red and white, very nice and
different from ours) with other _Roots_ and _Pulse_, are their general
Food.

_Indian Corn_ is the best Food for _Cattle_, _Hogs_, _Sheep_ and
_Horses_; and the _Blades_ and _Tops_ are excellent _Fodder_, when well
cured, which is commonly used, though many raise good _Clover_ and
_Oats_; and some have planted Sanfoin, _&c._

In the _Marshes_, and _Woods_, and _old Fields_ is good _Range_ for
_Stock_ in the Spring, Summer, and Fall; and the _Hogs_ will run fat
with certain Roots of Flags and _Reeds_, which abounding in the
_Marshes_ they root up and eat.

Besides, at the _Plantations_ are standard _Peach-Trees_, and
_Apple-Trees_, planted out in _Orchards_, on Purpose almost for the
_Hogs_.

The _Peaches_ abound, and are of a delicious Taste, and _Apple-Trees_
are raised from the _Seeds_ very soon, which kind of Kernel Fruit needs
no grafting, and is diversify'd into numberless Sorts, and makes, with
good Management, an excellent _Cyder_, not much inferior to that of
_Herefordshire_, when kept to a good Age; which is rarely done, the
_Planters_ being good _Companions_ and _Guests_ whilst the _Cyder_
lasts. Here _Cherries_ thrive much better (I think) than in _England_;
tho' the _Fruit-Trees_ soon decay, yet they are soon raised to great
Perfection.

As for _Wool_, I have had near as good as any near _Leominster_; and it
might be much improved if the _Sheep_ were housed every Night, and
foddered and littered as in _Urchinfield_, where they have by such Means
the finest _Wool_; but to do this, would be of little Use, since it is
contrary to the Interest of _Great Britain_ to allow them Exportation of
their Woollen Manufactures; and what little Woollen is there made might
be nearly had as cheap, and better from _England_.

As for _Provision_, there is Variety of excellent _Fish_ in great Plenty
easily taken; especially _Oysters_, _Sheepsheads_, _Rocks_, _large
Trouts_, _Crabs_, _Drums_, _Sturgeons_, &c.

They have the same tame Fowl as in _England_, only they propagate
better; but they exceed in _wild Geese_ and _Ducks_, _Cohoncks_,
_Blew-Wings_, _Teal_, _Blew-Wings_, _Teal_, _Swans_, and _Mallard_.

Their _Beef_ and _Veal_ is small, sweet, and fat enough; their _Pork_ is
famous, whole _Virginia Shoots_ being frequently _barbacued_ in
_England_; their _Bacon_ is excellent, the _Hams_ being scarce to be
distinguished from those of _Westphalia_; but their _Mutton_ and _Lamb_
some Folks don't like, though others extol it. Their _Butter_ is good
and plentiful enough. Their _Venison_ in the lower Parts of the Country
is not so plentiful as it has been, tho' there be enough and tolerably
good; but in the _Frontier Counties_ they abound with _Venison_, _wild
Turkies_, &c. where the common People sometimes dress _Bears_, whose
Flesh, they say, is not to be well distinguished from good _Pork_ or
_Bacon_.

They pull the _Down_ of their living _Geese_ and wild and tame _Ducks_,
wherewith they make the softest and sweetest _Beds_.

The _Houses_ stand sometimes two or three together; and in other Places
a Quarter, half a Mile, or a Mile, or two, asunder, much as in the
_Country_ in _England_.




CHAP. V.

_Of the_ Habits, Customs, Parts, Imployments, Trade, _&c. of the_
Virginians; _and of the Weather, Coin, Sickness, Liquors, Servants,
Poor, Pitch, Tar, Oar_, &c.


The _Habits_, _Life_, _Customs_, _Computations_, &c. of the _Virginians_
are much the same as about _London_, which they esteem their _Home_; and
for the most Part have contemptible Notions of _England_, and wrong
Sentiments of _Bristol_, and the other _Out-Ports_, which they entertain
from seeing and hearing the common Dealers, Sailors, and Servants that
come from those Towns, and the Country Places in _England_ and
_Scotland_, whose Language and Manners are strange to them; for the
_Planters_, and even the _Native Negroes_ generally talk good _English_
without _Idiom_ or _Tone_, and can discourse handsomly upon _most_
common Subjects; and conversing with Persons belonging to Trade and
Navigation from _London_, for the most Part they are much civilized, and
wear the best of Cloaths according to their Station; nay, sometimes too
good for their Circumstances, being for the Generality comely handsom
Persons, of good Features and fine Complexions (if they take Care) of
good Manners and Address. The Climate makes them bright, and of
excellent Sense, and sharp in Trade, an Ideot, or deformed Native being
almost a Miracle.

Thus they have good natural Notions, and will soon learn Arts and
Sciences; but are generally diverted by Business or Inclination from
profound Study, and prying into the Depth of Things; being ripe for
Management of their Affairs, before they have laid so good a Foundation
of Learning, and had such Instructions, and acquired such
Accomplishments, as might be instilled into such good natural
Capacities. Nevertheless thro' their quick Apprehension, they have a
Sufficiency of Knowledge, and Fluency of Tongue, tho' their Learning for
the most Part be but superficial.

They are more inclinable to read Men by Business and Conversation, than
to dive into Books, and are for the most Part only desirous of learning
what is absolutely necessary, in the shortest and best Method.

Having this Knowledge of their Capacities and Inclination from
sufficient Experience, I have composed on Purpose some short Treatises
adapted with my best Judgment to a Course of Education for the Gentlemen
of the Plantations; consisting in a short _English Grammar_; an
_Accidence to Christianity_; an _Accidence to the Mathematicks_,
especially to _Arithmetick_ in all its Parts and Applications,
_Algebra_, _Geometry_, _Surveying of Land_, and _Navigation_.

These are the most useful Branches of Learning for _them_, and such as
they willingly and readily master, if taught in a plain and short
Method, truly applicable to their _Genius_; which I have endeavoured to
do, for the Use of _them_, and _all others_ of their Temper and Parts.

They are not very easily persuaded to the Improvement of useful
Inventions (except a few, such as Sawing Mills) neither are they great
Encouragers of Manufactures, because of the Trouble and certain Expence
in Attempts of this kind, with uncertain Prospect of Gain; whereas by
their staple Commodity, Tobacco, they are in hopes to get a plentiful
Provision; nay, often very great Estates.

Upon this Account they think it Folly to take off their _Hands_ (or
Negroes) and employ their Care and Time about any thing, that may make
them lessen their Crop of Tobacco.

So that though they are apt to learn, yet they are fond of, and will
follow their own Ways. Humours, and Notions, being not easily brought to
new Projects and Schemes; so that I question, if they would have been
imposed upon by the _Missisippi_ or _South-Sea_ or any other such
monstrous Bubbles.

In their Computations of Time, Weights and Measures both of Length,
Superficies, and Solidity, they strictly adhere to what is legal; not
running into precarious Customs, as they do in _England_. Thus their
Quart is the true _Winchester_, their Hundred is 100, not 112, and they
survey Land by Statute Measure.

Indeed, what _English_ Coin is there, is advanced in Value; so that a
Shilling passes for 14 _d._ and a Guinea goes by Tale for 26 _s._ but
the Current Money is the _Spanish_ which in Reality is about 15 _l. per
Cent._ inferior to our _English_ Coin, as settled by Law; but frequently
the Value of this varies in Respect of Sterling Bills according to the
Circumstances of Trade; Currency and Sterling being sometimes at a
_Par_; but for the Generality 10 _per Cent._ Discount is allowed for
Sterling Bills.

As for Education several are sent to _England_ for it; though the
_Virginians_ being naturally of good Parts, (as I have already hinted)
neither require nor admire as much Learning, as we do in _Britain_: yet
more would be sent over, were they not afraid of the Small-Pox, which
most commonly proves fatal to them.

But indeed when they come to _England_ they are generally put to learn
to Persons that know little of their Temper, who keep them drudging on
in what is of least Use to them, in pedantick Methods, too tedious for
their volatile Genius.

For _Grammar_ Learning taught after the common round-about Way is not
much beneficial nor delightful to them; so that they are noted to be
more apt to spoil their School-Fellows than improve themselves; because
they are imprisoned and enslaved to what they hate, and think useless,
and have not peculiar Management proper for their Humour and Occasion.

A civil Treatment with some Liberty, if permitted with Discretion is
most proper for them, and they have most Need of, and readily take
polite and mathematical Learning; and in _English_ may be conveyed to
them (without going directly to _Rome_ and _Athens_) all the Arts,
Sciences, and learned Accomplishments of the Ancients and Moderns,
without the Fatigue and Expence of another Language, for which most of
them have little Use or Necessity, since (without another) they may
understand their own Speech; and all other Things requisite to be
learn'd by them sooner and better.

Thus the Youth might as well be instructed there as here by proper
Methods, without the Expence and Danger of coming hither; especially if
they make Use of the great Advantage of the _College_ at
_Williamsburgh_, where they may (and many do) imbibe the Principles of
all human and divine Literature, both in _English_ and in the learned
Languages.

By the happy Opportunity of this College may they be advanced to
religious and learned Education, according to the Discipline and
Doctrine of the established _Church of England_; in which Respect this
College may prove of singular Service, and be an advantageous and
laudable Nursery and strong Bulwark against the contagious dissentions
in _Virginia_; which is the most ancient and loyal, the most plentiful
and flourishing, the most extensive and beneficial Colony belonging to
the Crown of _Great Britain_, upon which it is most directly dependant;
wherein is establish'd the _Church of England_ free from Faction and
Sects, being ruled by the Laws, Customs, and Constitutions of _Great
Britain_, which it strictly observes, only where the Circumstances and
Occasion of the Country by an absolute Necessity require some small
Alterations; which nevertheless must not be contrary (though different
from and subservient) to the Laws of _England_.

Though the Violence of neither _Whig_ nor _Tory_ reigns there, yet have
they Parties; for the very best Administration must expect to meet with
some Opposition in all Places; especially where there is a Mixture of
People of different Countries concerned, whose Education and Interest
may propose to them Notions and Views different from each other.

Most other Plantations, especially they that are granted away to
Proprietors, are inferior to _Virginia_: where the seeming Interest and
Humour of the Owners often divert them from Pursuit of the most proper
Methods; besides, they cannot have such a right Claim to the Favour of
the Crown, nor demand its best Protection, since they may often
interfere with its Interest: whereas _Virginia_ is esteemed one of the
most valuable Gems in the Crown of _Great Britain_.

Thus _Virginia_ having to itself (with _Maryland_) the staple Commodity
of Tobacco, has a great Advantage of all other Plantations on the
Continent for the Encouragement of the Crown; whereas others belonging
to Gentlemen, or having no peculiar Trade, cannot expect such Power to
advance and promote their Interest.

To this add, that _Virginia_ equals, if not exceeds, all others in
Goodness of Climate, Soil, Health, Rivers, Plenty, and all Necessaries,
and Conveniencies of Life: Besides she has, among others, these
particular Advantages of her younger Sister _Maryland_, viz. Freedom
from Popery, and the Direction of Proprietors; not but that Part of
_Virginia_, which is between the Rivers _Potowmack_ and _Rappahannock_
belongs to Proprietors, as to the Quit-Rent; yet the Government of these
Counties (called the _Northern Neck_) is under the same Regulation with
the other Parts of the Country.

If _New England_ be called a Receptacle of Dissenters, and an
_Amsterdam_ of Religion, _Pensylvania_ the Nursery of Quakers,
_Maryland_ the Retirement of _Roman_ Catholicks, _North Carolina_ the
Refuge of Run-aways, and _South Carolina_ the Delight of Buccaneers and
Pyrates, _Virginia_ may be justly esteemed the happy Retreat of _true
Britons_ and _true Churchmen_ for the most Part; neither soaring too
high nor drooping too low, consequently should merit the greater Esteem
and Encouragement.

The common Planters leading easy Lives don't much admire Labour, or any
manly Exercise, except Horse-Racing, nor Diversion, except
Cock-Fighting, in which some greatly delight. This easy Way of Living,
and the Heat of the Summer makes some very lazy, who are then said to be
Climate-struck.

The Saddle-Horses, though not very large, are hardy, strong, and fleet;
and will pace naturally and pleasantly at a prodigious Rate.

They are such Lovers of Riding, that almost every ordinary Person keeps
a Horse; and I have known some spend the Morning in ranging several
Miles in the Woods to find and catch their Horses only to ride two or
three Miles to Church, to the Court-House, or to a Horse-Race, where
they generally appoint to meet upon Business; and are more certain of
finding those that they want to speak or deal with, than at their Home.

No People can entertain their Friends with better Cheer and Welcome; and
Strangers and Travellers are here treated in the most free, plentiful,
and hospitable Manner; so that a few Inns or Ordinaries on the Road are
sufficient.

As to the Weather, the Spring and Fall are not unlike those Seasons in
_England_, only the Air is never long foggy, nor very cloudy; but clear,
sometimes of a bluish Colour, occasioned by the thin Smoak, dispersed in
the Air, from the Flames of the Woods and Leaves, which are fired in
Hunting, to drive the Beasts from their lurking Places; or in the Spring
to burn the old Leaves and Grass, that there may be the better Pasture
the next Summer.

The Months of _December_, _January_ and _February_ are generally much
colder, and _June_, _July_ and _August_ are much hotter than in
_England_; tho' sometimes 'tis on a sudden very cool in Summer, and
pretty warm in Winter, the Weather being governed by the Wind; which
with sudden Storms from the _North-West_, and sometimes from the _West_
and _South-West_ bring violent Gusts or Tempests, with Thunder,
Lightning, and Rain very terrible, but soon over.

The _North West_ Winds are exquisitely sharp and cold, proceeding from
Clouds arising from the vast Lakes and prodigious snowy Mountains that
lie to that Quarter; but the Southerly Winds and others are very warm.

The Days and Nights are there always much nearer the Equality of twelve
Hours, than in the Latitude of _England_.

At the sudden Changes of the Weather, from Heat to Cold, People are apt
to take Cold, often neglecting to shift their Cloaths with the Weather;
which with Abundance of Damps and Mists from the Water, and by eating
too plentifully of some delicious Fruits, makes the People subject to
Feavers and Agues, which is the Country Distemper, a severe Fit of which
(called a _Seasoning_) most expect, some time after their Arrival in
that Climate; but the Goodness of God has furnished us with a perfect
_Catholicon_ for that Sickness, _viz._ the _Bark_; which being taken and
repeated in a right Manner, seldom fails of a Cure, unless the morbifick
Matter comes to a Head again from fresh Causes, and so returns with
Mastery; upon which Recourse must be had to the same specifick Remedy;
besides which there are several Ways of Cure, but none so universal and
sure as that.

Some for Want of timely Care, through Ignorance or Obstinacy, will
permit the Distemper to lurk about them so long, till at last it has
reduced them to an irrecoverable, lingering, ill Habit of Body;
especially if they live meanly, drinking too much Water, and eating too
much salt Meat; and this _Cachexy_ generally ends their Lives with a
Dropsy, Consumption, the Jaundice, or some such Illness.

Besides this, some are troubled with the dry Gripes, proceeding from
Colds (I suppose) which take away for a long Time the Use of the Limbs
of some, especially hard Drinkers of Rum; some that have lain out in
mighty cold Weather have been Frost-bitten, and lost their Fingers or
Toes.

There is no Danger of wild Beasts in traveling; for the Wolves and
Bears, which are up the Country, never attack any, unless they be first
assaulted and hurt; and the Wolves of late are much destroyed by Virtue
of a Law, which allows good Rewards for their Heads with the Ears on, to
prevent Imposition and cheating the Publick; for the Ears are crop'd
when a Head is produced.

The Bears are also much destroyed by the Out-Planters, _&c._ for the
Sake of their Flesh and Skins.

As for Rattle-Snakes, _&c._ they make off from you, unless you by
Carelesness chance to tread on them; and then their Bite is found now
not to be mortal, if Remedies can be applied in Time.

The worst Inconveniency in travelling a-cross the Country, is the
Circuit that must be taken to head Creeks, _&c._ for the main Roads wind
along the rising Ground between the Rivers, tho' now they much shorten
their Passage by mending the Swamps and building of Bridges in several
Places; and there are established Ferries at convenient Places, over the
great Rivers; but in them is often much Danger from sudden Storms, bad
Boats, or unskilful or wilful Ferrymen; especially if one passes in a
Boat with Horses, of which I have great Reason to be most sensible by
the Loss of a dear _Brother_ at _Chickohomony Ferry_, in _Feb._ 1723/4.

As for their Drink, good Springs of excellent Water abound every where
almost, which is very cooling and pleasant in Summer, and the general
Drink of abundance: not so much out of Necessity, as Choice.

Some Planters, _&c._ make good small Drink with Cakes of _Parsimmons_ a
kind of Plumbs, which grow there in great Plenty; but the common small
Beer is made of _Molossus_, which makes extraordinary brisk good tasted
Liquor at a cheap Rate, with little Trouble in brewing; so that they
have it fresh and fresh, as they want it in Winter and Summer.

And as they brew, so do they bake daily, Bread or Cakes, eating too much
hot and new Bread, which cannot be wholsom, tho' it be pleasanter than
what has been baked a Day or two.

Some raise Barley and make Malt there, and others have Malt from
_England_, with which those that understand it, brew as good Beer as in
_England_, at proper Seasons of the Year; but the common strong
Malt-Drink mostly used, is _Bristol_ Beer; of which is consumed vast
Quantities there yearly; which being well brew'd and improv'd by
crossing the Sea, drinks exceedingly fine and smooth; but Malt Liquor is
not so much regarded as Wine, Rack, Brandy, and Rum, Punch, with Drams
of Rum or Brandy for the common Sort, when they drink in a Hurry.

The common Wine comes from _Madera_ or _Phial_, which moderately drank
is fittest to cheer the fainting Spirits in the Heat of Summer, and to
warm the chilled Blood in the bitter Colds of Winter, and seems most
peculiarly adapted for this Climate: Besides this, are plentifully drank
with the better Sort, of late Years, all Kinds of _French_, and other
_European_ Wine, especially Claret and Port.

Here is likewise used a great deal of Chocolate, Tea and Coffee, which,
with several Sorts of Apparel, they have as cheap, or cheaper than in
_England_, because of the Debenture of such Goods upon their Exportation
thither: Besides, they are allowed to have Wines directly from
_Madera_, and other Commodities are brought from the _West-Indies_, and
the Continent, which cannot be brought to _England_ without spoiling.

As for grinding Corn, _&c._ they have good Mills upon the Runs and
Creeks: besides Hand-Mills, Wind-Mills, and the _Indian_ Invention of
pounding Hommony in Mortars burnt in the Stump of a Tree, with a Log for
a Pestle hanging at the End of a Pole, fix'd like the Pole of a Lave.

Though they are permitted to trade to no Parts but _Great Britain_,
except these Places: yet have they in many Respects better and cheaper
Commodities than we in _England_, especially of late Years; for the
Country may be said to be altered and improved in Wealth and polite
Living within these few Years, since the Beginning of _Col. Spotswood_'s
Government, more than in all the Scores of Years before that, from its
first Discovery. The Country is yearly supplied with vast Quantities of
Goods from _Great Britain_, chiefly from _London_, _Bristol_,
_Liverpool_, _Whitehaven_, and from _Scotland_.

The Ships that transport these Things often call at _Ireland_ to
victual, and bring over frequently white Servants, which are of three
Kinds. 1. Such as come upon certain Wages by Agreement for a certain
Time. 2. Such as come bound by Indenture, commonly call'd _Kids_, who
are usually to serve four or five Years; and 3. those Convicts or Felons
that are transported, whose Room they had much rather have than their
Company; for abundance of them do great Mischiefs, commit Robbery and
Murder, and spoil Servants, that were before very good: But they
frequently there meet with the End they deserved at Home, though indeed
some of them prove indifferent good. Their being sent thither to work as
Slaves for Punishment, is but a mere Notion, for few of them ever lived
so well and so easy before, especially if they are good for any thing.
These are to serve seven, and sometimes fourteen Years, and they and
Servants by Indentures have an Allowance of Corn and Cloaths, when they
are out of their Time, that they may be therewith supported, till they
can be provided with Services, or otherwise settled. With these three
Sorts of Servants are they supplied from _England_, _Wales_, _Scotland_,
and _Ireland_, among which they that have a Mind to it, may serve their
Time with Ease and Satisfaction to themselves and their Masters,
especially if they fall into good Hands.

Except the last Sort, for the most Part who are loose Villains, made
tame by _Wild_, and then enslaved by his _Forward Namesake_: To prevent
too great a Stock of which Servants and Negroes many Attempts and Laws
have been in vain made.

These if they forsake their Roguery together with the other Kids of the
later _Jonathan_, when they are free, may work Day-Labour, or else rent
a small Plantation for a Trifle almost; or else turn Overseers, if they
are expert, industrious, and careful, or follow their Trade, if they
have been brought up to any; especially Smiths, Carpenters, Taylors,
Sawyers, Coopers, Bricklayers, _&c._ The Plenty of the Country, and the
good Wages given to Work-Folks occasion very few Poor, who are supported
by the Parish, being such as are lame, sick, or decrepit through Age,
Distempers, Accidents, or some Infirmities; for where there is a
numerous Family of poor Children the Vestry takes Care to bind them out
Apprentices, till they are able to maintain themselves by their own
Labour; by which Means they are never tormented with Vagrant, and
Vagabond Beggars, there being a Reward for taking up Run-aways, that
are at a small Distance from their Home; if they are not known, or are
without a Pass from their Master, and can give no good Account of
themselves, especially Negroes.

In all convenient Places are kept Stores or Ware-Houses of all Sorts of
Goods, managed by Store-Keepers or Factors, either for themselves or
others in the Country, or in _Great Britain_.

This Trade is carried on in the fairest and genteelest Way of
Merchandize, by a great Number of Gentlemen of Worth and Fortune; who
with the Commanders of their Ships, and several _Virginians_ (who come
over through Business or Curiosity, or often to take Possession of
Estates, which every Year fall here to some or other of them) make as
considerable and handsom a Figure, and drive as great and advantageous a
Trade for the Advancement of the Publick Good, as most Merchants upon
the _Royal-Exchange_.

At the Stores in _Virginia_, the Planters, _&c._ may be supplied with
what _English_ Commodities they want.

The Merchants, Factors, or Store-Keepers in _Virginia_ buy up the
Tobacco of the Planters, either for Goods or current _Spanish_ Money, or
with _Sterling_ Bills payable in _Great Britain_.

The Tobacco is rolled, drawn by Horses, or carted to convenient Rolling
Houses, whence it is conveyed on Board the Ships in Flats or Sloops,
_&c._

Some Years ago there was made an Act to oblige all Tobacco to be sent to
convenient Ware-Houses, to the Custody and Management of proper
Officers, who were by Oath to refuse all bad Tobacco, and gave printed
Bills as Receipts for each Parcel or Hogshead; which Quantity was to be
delivered according to Order upon Return of those Bills; and for their
Trouble and Care in viewing, weighing, and stamping, the Officers were
allowed 5 _s. per_ Hogshead.

The Intent of this Law was to improve the Commodity, prevent Frauds in
publick Payments; and for Ease of the common Planters, and Expedition
and Conveniency of Shipping.

But though the first Design was for publick Tobacco only, yet the
private Crops of Gentlemen being included in the Law, was esteemed a
great Grievance; and occasioned Complaints, which destroyed a Law, that
with small Amendments might have proved most advantageous.

The Abrogation of this Law reduced the Sailors to their old Slavery of
rolling the Tobacco in some Places; where they draw it for some Miles,
as Gardeners draw a Roller, which makes them frequently curse the
Country, and thro' Prejudice give it a very vile Character.

The Tobacco purchased by the Factors or Store-Keepers, is sent Home to
their Employers, or consign'd to their correspondent Merchants in _Great
Britain_.

But most Gentlemen, and such as are beforehand in the World, lodge Money
in their Merchant's Hands here, to whom they send their Crop of Tobacco,
or the greatest Part of it.

This Money is employed according to the Planter's Orders; chiefly in
sending over yearly such Goods, Apparel, Liquors, _&c._ as they write
for, for the Use of themselves, their Families, Slaves and Plantations;
by which Means they have every Thing at the best Hand, and the best of
its Kind.

Besides _English_ Goods, several Merchants in _Virginia_ import from the
_West-Indies_ great Quantities of Rum, Sugar, Molossus, _&c._ and Salt
very cheap from the _Salt Islands_; which Things they purchase with
Money, or generally with Pork, Beef, Wheat, _Indian-Corn_, and the
like.

In some of the poorer Parts of the Country abounding in Pine, do they
gather up the _Light-wood_, or Knots of the old Trees, which will not
decay, which being piled up (as a Pit of Wood to be burnt to Charcoal)
and encompassed with a Trench, and covered with Earth, is set on Fire;
whereby the Tar is melted out, and running into a hole is taken up, and
filled into Barrels; and being boiled to a greater Consistency becomes
Pitch.

Of Pitch and Tar they send Home great Quantities, though not near so
much at _North Carolina_, which formerly was the _South_ Part of
_Virginia_; but has long since been given away to Proprietors, tho' the
Bounds between the Colony of _Virginia_, and the Government of _North
Carolina_ are disputed; so that there is a very long _List_ of Land
fifteen Miles broad between both Colonies (called the _disputed Bounds_)
in due Subjection to neither; which is an _Asylum_ for the Runagates of
both Countries.

The greatest Part of _Virginia_ is uneven: and near the Water they are
free from great Stones, Rocks, and high Hills; but far in the Country
they have vast Rocks, Stones, and Mountains; and though in the Salts
there is no Stone for Lime nor Building; (but with _Oyster-Shells_ they
make good Lime and enough) yet up the Freshes, and above the Falls of
the Rivers are discovered free and common Stone of several Sorts, among
which may be expected Lime-Stone.

Here are also vast Quantities of _Iron Oar_, and various Kinds of
_Minerals_, whose Nature and Vertues are as yet undiscovered.

_Moses's_ Words of Exhortation to the _Israelites_ for Obedience to
God's Laws, _Deut._ viii. 6, 7, 8, 9, may be applied to the
_Virginians_; and particularly when he saith that God had brought them
into a Land whose Stones are Iron; and for what we know the following
Words may also be applied to them, when he saith out of the Hills of
that Land might be digged _Brass_, for which there is no small Prospect
and Expectation; and in all Probability there may be found the nobler
Metals of _Gold_ and _Silver_, if we did but search for them in the
Bowels of the Earth, if we would but be at the Expence and Trouble to
seek for them.

Why may not our Mountains in _America_, for what we know, be as rich as
those of _Mexico_ and _Peru_ in the same Country? Since the little Hills
so plentifully abound with the belt of Iron; for the digging, melting,
working, and Exportation whereof Providence has furnish'd us with all
wonderful Conveniences; if we would add but a little Expence, Art, and
Industry.

This Iron has been proved to be good, and 'tis thought, will come at as
cheap a Rate as any imported from other Places; so that 'tis to be hoped
_Col. Spotswood's Works_ will in a small Time prove very advantageous to
_Great Britain_, which undoubtedly will be carried to great Perfection
and universal Benefit, by his skilful Management and indefatigable
Application to such noble Undertakings and glorious Projects.




CHAP. VI.

_Of_ Germanna, _the_ Palatines, _Wine_, _Hemp_, _Flax_, _Silk_,
_Sumack_, _Trees_, _Fruits_, _Coals_, _the Tracts of Land_, _Health_,
_Militia_, _the_ Mannacan Town, _Titles_, _Levies_, _Burgesses_, _Laws_,
_and general Assembly_.


Beyond _Col. Spotswood_'s Furnace above the Falls of _Rappahannock_
River within View of the vast _Mountains_, he has founded a Town called
_Germanna_, from some _Germans_ sent over thither by _Queen Anne_, who
are now removed up farther: Here he has Servants and Workmen of most
handy-craft Trades; and he is building a Church, Court-House and
Dwelling-House for himself; and with his Servants and Negroes he has
cleared Plantations about it, proposing great Encouragement for People
to come and settle in that uninhabited Part of the World, lately divided
into a County.

Beyond this are seated the Colony of _Germans_ or _Palatines_, with
Allowance of good Quantities of rich Land, at easy or no Rates, who
thrive very well, and live happily, and entertain generously.

These are encouraged to make Wines, which by the Experience
(particularly) of the late _Col. Robert Beverly_, who wrote the _History
of Virginia_, was done easily and in large Quantities in those Parts;
not only from the Cultivation of the wild Grapes, which grow
plentifully and naturally in all the good Lands thereabouts, and in the
other Parts of the Country; but also from the _Spanish_, _French_,
_Italian_, and _German_ Vines, which have been found to thrive there to
Admiration.

Besides this, these Uplands seem very good for _Hemp_ and _Flax_, if the
Manufacture thereof was but encouraged and promoted thereabouts; which
might prove of wonderful Advantage in our _Naval Stores_ and Linens.

Here may likewise be found as good _Clapboards_, and _Pipe-Staves_,
_Deals_, _Masts_, _Yards_, _Planks_, &c. for Shipping, as we are
supplied with from several other Countries, not in his Majesty's
Dominions.

As for _Trees_, _Grain_, _Pults_, _Fruits_, _Herbs_, _Plants_,
_Flowers_, and _Roots_, I know of none in _England_ either for Pleasure
or Use, but what are very common there, and thrive as well or better in
that Soil and Climate than this for the generality; for though they
cannot brag of Gooseberries and Currants, yet they may of Cherries,
Strawberries, _&c._ in which they excel: Besides they have the Advantage
of several from other Parts of _America_, there being Heat and Cold
sufficient for any; except such as require a continual Heat, as Lemons
and Oranges, Pine-Apples, and the like, which however may be raised
there with Art and Care.

The worst Thing in their Gardens, that I know, is the Artichoak; but
this I attribute to Want of Skill and good Management.

Mulberry Trees and Silkworms thrive there to Admiration, and Experience
has proved that the Silk Manufacture might be carried on to great
Advantage.

There is Coal enough in the Country, but good Fire-Wood being so
plentiful that it encumbers the Land, they have no Necessity for the
Trouble and Expence of digging up the Bowels of the Earth, and conveying
them afterwards to their several Habitations.

There grows Plenty of _Sumack_, so very useful in the Dying Trade.

The Land is taken up in Tracts, and is Freehold by Patent under the
King, paying two Shillings as a yearly _Quit-Rent_ for every hundred
Acres.

Most Land has been long since _taken up_ and _seated_, except it be high
up in the Country.

For surveying of Land, when any is _taken up_, bought, exchanged, or the
Right contested, there is appointed a _Surveyor_ in each County,
nominated and examined by the _Governors of the College_, in whose Gift
those Places are under the _Surveyor General_.

But of this I may be more particular upon another Occasion; only I shall
here observe, that every five or seven Years all People are obliged to
go a _Procession_ round their own Bounds, and renew their Landmarks by
cutting fresh _Notches_ in the boundary Trees.

Sometimes whole Plantations are sold, and at other Times small
Habitations and Lands are let; but this is not very common, most having
Land of their own; and they that have not think to make more Profit by
turning Overseers, or by some other better Ways, than by _Farming_.

Though now Land sells well there, in a few Years it will be more valued,
since the Number of Inhabitants encreases so prodigiously; and the
_Tracts_ being divided every Age among several Children (not unlike
_Gavel Kind_ in _Kent_ and _Urchinfield_) into smaller Plantations; they
at Length must be reduced to a Necessity of making the most of, and
valuing a little, which is now almost set at Nought.

In general the Country of _Virginia_ is plentiful, pleasant and healthy;
especially to such as are not too fond of the Customs and Way of living
they have been used to elsewhere; and to such as will endeavour at first
to bear with some small Matters, and wean themselves, and make every
Change as agreeable as they can.

Without such Proceeding the best Country in the World would not please
them; since wherever they go from Home they must certainly find many
Things different from what they have been accustomed to.

As for Health, I think this Climate as good as any with Care, though
some Constitutions can be well in no Air, let them do what they will,
and the stoutest cannot be always Proof against Sickness, be they in
never so healthy a Country; and in all Places with Care People may enjoy
a good Share of Health, if they have any tolerable good Constitution; if
they avoid Heats and Colds, Intemperance, and all Manner of Excesses.

In each Country is a great Number of disciplin'd and arm'd _Militia_,
ready in Case of any sudden Irruption of _Indians_ or Insurrection of
_Negroes_, from whom they are under but small Apprehension of Danger.

Up _James River_ is a Colony of _French_ Refugees, who at the _Mannacan
Town_ live happily under our Government, enjoying their own Language and
Customs.

The Gentlemen of the Country have no other distinguishing Titles of
Honour, but _Colonels_ and _Majors_ and _Captains_ of the _Militia_,
except _the Honourable the Council_, and some commissioned in Posts by
his Majesty or his Orders, who are nominated _Esquires_: but there is
one _Baronet_'s Family there, _viz._ Sir _William Skipwith_'s.

The Taxes or _Levies_ are either publick, _County_, or _Parish_; which
are levied by the _Justices_ or _Vestries_, apportioning an equal Share
to be paid by all Persons in every Family above Sixteen; except the
_white Women_, and some antiquated Persons, who are exempt.

The Payment is Tobacco, which is sold or applied in _Specie_ to the Use
intended.

The publick Levy is for the Service of the Colony in General, the County
Levy is for the Use of the County, collected by the _Sheriff's_ and
their Offices and _Receivers_; and the Parish Levy is for its own
particular Use, collected by the _Church-Wardens_ for Payment of the
_Minister_, the _Church_, and _Poor_.

There are two _Burgesses_ elected by the _Free-holders_, and sent from
every County; and one for _James Town_, and another for the _College_;
these meet, choose a Speaker, _&c._ and proceed in most Respects as the
_House of Commons_ in _England_, who with the _Upper House_, consisting
of the _Governor and Council_, make Laws exactly as the _King_ and
_Parliament_ do; the Laws being passed there by the _Governor_, as by
the _King_ here.

All the Laws and Statutes of _England_ before _Queen Elizabeth_ are
there in Force, but none made since; except those that mention the
Plantations, which are always specified in _English_ Laws, when Occasion
requires.

The _General Assembly_ has Power to make Laws, or repeal such others, as
they shall think most proper for the Security and Good of the Country,
provided they be not contradictory to the Laws of _England_, nor
interfering with the Interest of _Great Britain_; these Laws are
immediately in Force there, and are transmitted hither to the Lords of
the Plantations and Trade for the _Royal Assent_; after which they are
as obligatory as any Laws can possibly be; but of late all Laws relating
to Trade must be sent Home before they be of any Validity; which makes
some occasional Laws upon certain Emergencies altogether useless; since
the intended Opportunity may be pass'd, before they are returned back to
_Virginia_; and so signify nothing to the Purpose.

All Laws that the _King_ dislikes upon the first Perusal, are
immediately abrogated.

Thus in State Affairs Liberty is granted, and Care is taken to make such
Laws from Time to Time, as are different from the Laws in _England_,
whenever the Interest or Necessity of the Country, or the Nature of the
Climate, and other Circumstances shall require it.




PART III.

_Of the State of the Church and Clergy of_ Virginia.


Though Provision is made, and proper Measures are taken to make
Allowances and Alterations in Matters of _Government_, _State_ and
_Trade_; yet in Matters of _Religion_, there has not been the Care and
Provision that might be wished and expected.

For the Country requires particular Alterations and Allowances in some
indifferent spiritual Concernments, as well as in temporal Affairs,
which might be done without deviating in the least from the Principles
and Practice of the _Establish'd Church of England_; and instead of
encouraging Dissentions, or Heresy, or Schism, or Irreligion, would be a
sure Means always to prevent them, were such small Alterations regularly
established in some Things indifferent, as might best agree with the
Conveniency and Nature of the Colony: for it is impossible for a
_Clergyman_ to perform this Duty according to the literal Direction of
the _Rubrick_; for were he too rigorous in these Respects by disobliging
and quarrelling with his Parish, he would do more Mischief in Religion,
than all his fine Preaching and exemplary Life could retrieve; A short
Narrative of which Case of the Church I transmitted Home to the _late
Bishop of London_, by Order and Appointment of a late _Convention_, in a
_Representation_ of some _Ecclesiastical Affairs_; but the Nature of
this may more fully appear by the following Account.

This, with all the other Plantations, is under the Care of the _Bishop
of London_, who supplies them with what Clergymen he can get from
_England_, _Scotland_, _Ireland_, and _France_. The late Bishop
appointed the Reverend Mr. _James Blair_ to be his Commissary, who is
likewise _President of the College_, and one of the _Council_. He by the
_Bishop_'s Order summoned the Clergy to _Conventions_, where he sate as
_Chairman_; but the Power of _Conventions_ is very little, as is that of
the _Commissary_ at present. _Visitations_ have been in vain attempted;
for the corrupt Abuses and Rigour of Ecclesiastical Courts have so
terrified the People, that they hate almost the very Name, and seem more
inclinable to be ruled by any other Method, rather than the present
spiritual Courts. Differences and great Disputes frequently arise
between the Governor and the People, concerning the Presentation,
Collation, Institution, and Induction to Livings; and it is scarce yet
decided distinctly who have the Right of giving Parishes to Ministers,
whether the Governors or the Vestries, though the best of _Council_ have
been applied to for their Opinion; for their Sentiments are not
obligatory.

The _Vestries_ consist of the Minister, and twelve of the most
substantial and intelligent Persons in each Parish. These at first were
elected by the Parish by Pole, and upon Vacancies are supplied by Vote
of the Vestry; out of them a new Church-Warden is annually chosen, under
(as it were) the Instruction of the old one chosen the Year before. By
the Vestry are all parochial Affairs managed, such as the Church, Poor,
and the Minister's Salary.

The _Clerk_ in Case of the Minister's Death or Absence has great
Business, and is a kind of _Curate_, performing frequently all the
Offices of the _Church_, except the two _Sacraments_ and _Matrimony_;
but 'tis Pity but his Practices were better regulated, and Sets of
Sermons also appointed for his Purpose; for in several Places the
_Clerks_ are so ingenious or malicious, that they contrive to be liked
as well or better than the Minister, which creates Ill-Will and
Disturbance, besides other Harm. In some Places they read the Lessons,
publish Banns, _&c._ when the Minister is present, for his Ease; which
first may not be improper in very hot Weather, or if the Minister be
sick or infirm, if the _Clerk_ can read tolerably well. Likewise might
they be allowed to bury when a Minister cannot possibly be had before
the _Corpse_ would corrupt in hot Weather; but little more should be
granted them, since some Places long accustomed to hear only their Clerk
read Prayers and Sermons at Church, have no right Notions of the Office,
Respect, and Dignity of a _Clergyman_. For registering Births and
Burials, there is a small Allowance which is generally given to the
Clerk, who takes that Trouble off the Minister's Hands. The Use of this
is to know the Number of Tythables, for laying of Levies, and for other
Occasions, and Lists of these Registers are delivered into the Hands of
proper Officers. The Parishes being of great Extent (some sixty Miles
long and upwards) many dead _Corpses_ cannot be conveyed to the Church
to be buried: So that it is customary to bury in Gardens or Orchards,
where whole Families lye interred together, in a Spot generally
handsomly enclosed, planted with Evergreens, and the Graves kept
decently: Hence likewise arises the Occasion of preaching _Funeral
Sermons_ in Houses, where at Funerals are assembled a great Congregation
of Neighbours and Friends; and if you insist upon having the Sermon and
Ceremony at Church, they'll say they will be without it, unless
performed after their usual Custom. In Houses also there is Occasion,
from Humour, Custom sometimes, from Necessity most frequently, to
_baptize_ Children and _church Women_, otherwise some would go without
it. In Houses also they most commonly _marry_, without Regard to the
Time of the Day or Season of the Year. Though the Churches be not
_consecrated_ by Bishops, yet might there be some solemn _Dedication_
prescribed for setting them apart for sacred Uses; which would make
People behave themselves with greater Reverence than they usually do,
and have a greater Value for the House of God and holy Things.

Their _Churches_ were formerly built of Timber, but now they build them
of Brick, very strong and handsome, and neatly adorned; and when any
Church is gone to Decay, or removed to a more convenient Place, they
enclose the old one with a Ditch.

Though Persons are admitted to the Lord's Supper there, that never were
confirmed by the _Bishop_, yet might there be certain Examinations as
preparatory Qualifications, which would lay the Sureties and Parents of
Children baptized, under a Necessity of taking Care of them, as to a
pious Education, and would make them be obliged to know more of their
Duty than they generally do.

For this End I have composed (as I before hinted) an _Accidence to
Christianity_, being a short Introduction to the Principles and
Practices of Christians, collected out of the _Church Catechism_, the
thirty nine _Articles_, _Hammond's Practical Catechism_, _Grotius of the
Truth of the Christian Religion_, and _the whole Duty of Man_.

Out of which may be extracted a brief _Examination for Communicants_
before their first Admittance; which may be done by the _Minister_, if
he had Orders and Directions for it. By this Means the People would
attain to better Notions of Religion (and many more would be
Communicants, who now abstain totally through Fear or Ignorance) were
the first true Principles timely instilled into them in a brief Method;
for any Thing tedious soon tires them, and will not obtain the desired
Effect. In several Respects the Clergy are obliged to omit or alter some
minute Parts of the _Liturgy_, and deviate from the strict _Discipline
and Ceremonies_ of the _Church_; to avoid giving Offence, through
Custom, or else to prevent Absurdities and Inconsistencies. Thus
_Surplices_, disused there for a long Time in most Churches, by bad
Examples, Carelesness and Indulgence, are now beginning to be brought in
Fashion, not without Difficulty; and in some Parishes where the People
have been used to receive the Communion in their Seats (a Custom
introduced for Opportunity for such as are inclined to _Presbytery_ to
receive the _Sacrament_ sitting) it is not an easy Matter to bring them
to the _Lord's Table_ decently upon their Knees.

The last Injunction in the Form of _Publick Baptism_ is most properly
omitted there, wherein the _Godfathers_ and _Godmothers_ are ordered to
take Care that the Child be brought to the _Bishop_ to be _confirmed_,
which for the most Part would prove impracticable.

It would be improper for the _Chaplain of the Honourable the Assembly_
and others, to use the Prayers for the High Court of Parliament
_verbatim_, for they cannot know whether the Parliament sits in
_England_ then; and their Intent is to pray for the _Assembly_ and the
King's Dominions; so that the Prayer must be altered in several
Respects.

'Tis Pity but the Prayer was altered, and allowed for the _Assembly,
Governor and Council_; of which we have an Instance in _Irish Common
Prayer Books_.

Every Minister is a kind of _Independent_ in his own Parish, in Respect
of some little particular Circumstances and Customs, to which they are
often occasionally obliged; but this Liberty without Restraint may prove
of bad Consequence hereafter; when the bad Tenets and Discipline of any
_heterodox_, _libertine_, or _fantastical_ Persons may plead
_Prescription_ for their Establishment, and be difficult to be
eradicated.

In most Parishes are _Schools_ (little Houses being built on Purpose)
where are taught _English_ and _Writing_; but to prevent the sowing the
Seeds of Dissention and Faction, it is to be wished that the _Masters_
or _Mistresses_ should be such as are approved or licensed by the
Minister, and Vestry of the Parish, or Justices of the County; the
Clerks of the Parishes being generally most proper for this Purpose; or
(in Case of their Incapacity or Refusal) such others as can best be
procured.

As for _baptizing Indians and Negroes_, several of the People disapprove
of it; because they say it often makes them proud, and not so good
Servants: But these, and such Objections, are easily refuted, if the
Persons be sensible, good, and understand _English_, and have been
taught (or are willing to learn) the _Principles of Christianity_, and
if they be kept to the Observance of it afterwards; for _Christianity_
encourages and orders them to become more humble and better Servants,
and not worse, than when they were _Heathens_.

But as for _baptizing wild Indians and new Negroes_, who have not the
least Knowledge nor Inclination to know and mind our Religion, Language
and Customs, but will obstinately persist in their own _barbarous Ways_;
I question whether Baptism of such (till they be a little weaned of
their savage Barbarity) be not a _Prostitution_ of a Thing so _sacred_.

But as for the _Children of Negroes_ and _Indians_, that are to live
among _Christians_, undoubtedly they ought all to be baptized; since it
is not out of the Power of their Masters to take Care that they have a
Christian Education, learn their Prayers and Catechism, and go to
Church, and not accustom themselves to lie, swear and steal, tho' such
(as the poorer Sort in _England_) be not taught to read and write; which
as yet has been found to be dangerous upon several political Accounts,
especially Self-Preservation.

In every Parish there is allotted for the Minister a convenient
_Dwelling-House and a Glebe_ of about two hundred and fifty Acres of
Land, with a small Stock of Cattle ready in some Places, as _James
Town_.

The Salary of the Minister is yearly 16000, and in some Parishes 20000
_l._ of Tobacco; out of which there is a Deduction for _Cask_,
_prizing_, _collecting_, &c. about which Allowance there are sometimes
Disputes, as are also Differences often about the Place, Time, and
Manner of delivering it; but all these Things might easily be regulated.

Tobacco is more commonly at 20 _s. per Cent._ than at 10; so that
certainly, (_communibus annis_) it will bring 12 _s._ 8 _d. a hundred_,
which will make 16000 (the least Salary) amount to 100 _l. per Ann._
which it must certainly clear, allowing for all petty Charges, out of
the Lowness of the Price stated, which is less than the _Medium_ between
ten and twenty Shillings; whereas it might be stated above the Medium,
since it is oftener at twenty than ten Shillings.

Besides the Glebe and Salary, there is 20 _s._ for every _Wedding_ by
_License_, and 5 _s._ for every Wedding by _Banns_, with 40 _s._ for a
_Funeral Sermon_, which most of the _middling People_ will have.

This one would think should be sufficient Encouragement for _Clergymen_
of good Lives and Learning (that are not better provided for elsewhere)
to go over and settle there; if they considered rightly the little
Danger and Fatigue they may expose themselves to, the great Good they
may do, and what Advantages they may reap with good Conduct and right
Management of their Fortunes and Conversations.

The Parishes are large, but then the Inhabitants are but thin; and there
are _Chapels of Ease_ in large Parishes, at which there is divine
Service in _Turns_ with the Churches; and frequently upon a _Vacancy_
some neighbouring Clergyman does the Duty of _another Parish_ besides
his own, on some _Week-Day_, for which he has the Salary, till it can be
better supplied.

Many Disputes and Differences arise between some of the Clergy and
People; but this generally proceeds from the uncertain and precarious
Footing of Livings, and some Disputes about the Nature and Manner of the
Payment of the established Salary; which though it may be esteemed
sufficient, yet is not so well regulated, as might be wished and
expected in such a _great Colony_ of so long a _standing_, and free from
the Molestation of Church Faction, and Dissenters.

Besides the Payment of the Salary, the _Surplice Fees_ want a better
Regulation in the Payment; for though the Allowance be sufficient, yet
Differences often and Ill-Will arise about these Fees, whether they are
to be paid in Money or Tobacco, and when; whereas by a small Alteration
and Addition of a few Laws in these and the like Respects, the Clergy
might live more happy, peaceable, and better beloved; and the People
would be more easy, and pay never the more Dues.

The Establishment is indeed Tobacco, but some Parts of the Country make
but mean and poor, so that Clergymen don't care to live in such
Parishes; but there the Payment might be made in Money, or in the
Produce of those Places, which might be equivalent to the Tobacco
Payments; better for the Minister, and as pleasing to the People.

Some Clergymen are indeed unskilful in, and others are not studious of,
reconciling their own Interest and Duty with the Humour and Advantage of
the People, especially at their first coming, when many Things seem very
odd to them; being different to what they have been heretofore
accustomed to.

These Things often occasion Uneasiness to the Ministers themselves, and
the People; but for the Generality they that have a Mind to do their
Duty, and live happily (with some Caution and Care) may live with as
much Satisfaction, Respect, Comfort, and Love, as most _Clergymen_ in
_England_.

'Tis to be hoped and wished, that as the _Government_ of _England_ have
of late taken it into their Consideration to encourage more Clergymen to
go over; so they may give Instructions and Directions for the Advantage
and Happiness of both the Clergy and Laity, by rectifying and settling
some Affairs belonging to the _Church of Virginia_; and providing such
Laws as are wanting or requisite to be altered in Respect of the Clergy;
a full and true Account of whom I have here given (as much as the Scope
of this Treatise would admit of) to the best of my Knowledge.

This I have committed to Paper, for the better Information of such as
may in any Respect be concerned in Affairs relating to _Virginia_,
especially its Government, Religion, and Trade: For without exact
Notions of the Temper, Lives, and Manners of the People, and the Nature
and Produce of the Country, none can frame a correct Judgment of what is
most proper to be added, altered, or continued, nor know what Steps are
to be taken for the Advancement of either the publick or private Good of
that Colony, in Respect either of Church, State, or Trade.

Another Inducement for my writing this, was for the Encouragement and
Intelligence of such good Clergymen and others, as are inclinable to go
and settle there; and for the Information of all that are desirous of
knowing how People live in other Countries, as well as their own;
together with an Intent to vindicate this Country from the unjust
Reflections which are vulgarly cast on it; and to wean the World from
the unworthy despicable Notions, which many entertain concerning his
_Majesty_'s Dominions in _North America_; where is Room and Imployment
enough for all that want Business or a Maintenance at Home, of all
Occupations; and where, if they be not their own Enemies, they might
live much better than ever they did in _England_; which blessed
Opportunity of favourable Providence may give great Comfort to any good
Folks that are in poor unfortunate Circumstances.




PART IV.

_Of Authors concerning_ Virginia, _and its publick Officers,
Guard-Ships, and the State of_ Maryland _and_ North Carolina. _The
Conclusion._


In the _Miscellanea Curiosa_ is publish'd Mr. _Clayton_'s fine
_Description of Virginia_, and _Col. Robert Beverley_ has wrote a good
_History_ of it; but neither is so particular as this, as to its present
Condition; so that as they are Supplements to _Captain Smith's History_,
this may be an _Abridgment and Appendix_ to them _all_.

True Accounts of this Country are difficult to be had; for they that
have lived there any Time in any Repute and Business, seldom come to
settle in _England_; and the Sailors for the greatest Part can give no
more true Relations of the Nature of the Country, than a _Country
Carrier_ can write a Description of _London_, and relate the _Politicks
of Court_, and _Proceedings of Parliament_; for they see and know but
little of the Matter, and that the very worst.

Others, by Reason of their short Stay, or for want either of
Opportunity, Learning, or Capacity, can neither make right Remarks and
correct Observations, nor describe Things in their proper Colours and
true Lustre; and moreover some are prevailed upon through Interest,
Prejudice, Spite, or Fancy, to conceal or misrepresent Things: Besides,
they that have been there formerly know little, but the very worst of
the _present State_ of the Country.

The Laws of that Plantation are collected into a Body and published; and
whatever (of any Moment and worth Notice) is not mentioned in this
Treatise, or in the Books aforementioned, must be supposed to correspond
exactly with the Customs and Things in _Great Britain_, particularly in
and about _London_; from all which any one that is either obliged or
inclin'd may have sufficient Accounts of the large, increasing,
flourishing, and _happy Colony of Virginia_.


The present Governor is the Right Honourable the Earl of _Orkney_, whose
Lieutenant Governor is _Hugh Drysdale_, Esq;

The Council are these Twelve.

  _Edmund Jennings_, Esq; President.
  The Rev. Mr. _James Blair_.
  _Robert Carter_,          }
  _William Bird_,           }
  _Philip Ludwell_,         }
  _John Lewis_,             }
  _John Harrison_,          }
  _Mann Page_,              }  Esquires.
  _Cole Digges_,            }
  _Peter Beverley_,         }
  _John Robinson_,          }
  _John Carter_,            }

  The Secretary is _John Carter_,         }
  The Attorney-General is _John Clayton_, }  Esquires.
  The Receiver General is _John Graham_,  }
  The Auditor is _John Harrison_,         }


_The best List that I can collect or form of the Officers of the
Customs, is this._

                                                                   _l._

                        { Mr. _John Banister_, Collector,     }     40
           {   Upper    { supplied by Col. _William_          }
           { District.  { _Randolph_
  _James   {            { Col. _Francis Lightfoot_, Surveyor  }     --
  River._  {
           {   Lower    { Mr. _Thomas Mitchel_, Collector     }    100
           { District.  {
           {            { Mr. ---- _Irvin_, Surveyor          }     --

  _Elizabeth River_         ________ Surveyor ________              45

  _York                   { Mr. _John Ambler_, Collector            40
   River._                { Mr. _William Robertson_, Surveyor       --

  _Rappahannock           { Sir _William Johnson_, or Mr.       }   80
  River._                 { _Richard Chichister_, Collector     }
                          { Mr. _Christopher Robinson_, Surveyor    --

  _South Potowmack_          ________ Collector ________            80

  _Cape Charles._         Mr. _Griffith Bowen_, Surveyor           100

  _Accomack_ and          { Mr. _Henry Scarburgh_,              }   50
  _Northampton_           { Collector                           }
  Counties.

These have some considerable Perquisites besides their Salaries; for
which they give Attendance and perform their Duty after the same Manner
as the Officers in the Rivers and Ports do in _Great Britain_.

To guard the Coasts from the Ravages of Pyrates, Men of War are
frequently stationed there; but they are not at all under the Direction
of the Governor upon Emergencies, tho' he be titular Admiral of those
Seas; but had he some Command over Men of War, 'tis thought it might be
of great Service to the Country, and Security and Advantage to the
Merchants and others.

_Maryland_ in most Respects in an inferior Degree agrees with
_Virginia_, only their Laws and some Customs are particular; and tho'
the _Church of England_ be the established Church there, and handsom
Provision be made for the Clergy, yet they have many _Papists_, and
several Dissenters; which last may be supposed to be encouraged thro'
_Jesuitical_ Views to distract and subvert the _Church of England_.

As for _North Carolina_ it is vastly inferior, its Trade is smaller, and
its Inhabitants thinner, and for the most Part poorer than _Virginia_;
neither is their Government extraordinary, tho' they have some good
Laws, and there is some good Living in this large Country, in which is
Plenty of good Provision.

As for Churches there are but very few; and I knew of but one Minister
in the whole Government, and he (for what Reasons I know not) had no
great Faculty of influencing the People, and is lately removed thence;
so that much Religion cannot be expected among a Collection of such
People as fly thither from other Places for Safety and Livelihood, left
to their own Liberty without Restraint or Instruction.

Many there have I (with Sorrow) seen ten or fifteen Years old, who have
never had the Opportunity of Baptism, which they joyfully receive.

_Col. Frederick Jones_, one of the _Council_, and in a good Post, and of
a good Estate in _North Carolina_, before his Death applied to me,
desiring me to communicate the deplorable State of their Church to the
_late Bishop of London_; assuring me that if the Society for propagating
the Gospel in Foreign Parts would contribute and direct them, the
Government there would join in establishing by Law such Maintenance as
might be sufficient for some Clergymen to settle among them.

I acted according to his Request, but never heard of the Event of this
Application.

For Want of Clergy the Justices of the Peace _marry_, and other Laymen
perform the _Office of Burial_.

The common _nominal Christians_ live there not much better than
_Heathens_; the pious Endeavours of the Society having been frequently
disappointed either by their not having full Knowledge of the Country
and People (and so pursue not the most proper Methods) or else because
they have had the Misfortune sometimes to pitch upon Persons, that have
not answered the End of their Calling and Mission.

By these Means the State of the Church in _North Carolina_ is very
miserable; which is of greatest Moment, and requires the most charitable
Direction and Christian Assistance; not only for the Conversion of the
_Indians_ and _Baptism of Negroes_ there, but for the Christening and
Recovery to the Practical Profession of the Gospel great Numbers of
_English_, that have but the _bare Name_ of God and Christ; and that too
frequently in nothing but vain Swearing, Cursing, and Imprecations.

May all these vast Countries grow in Grace, and encrease in spiritual
Blessings, and temporal Prosperity.

May all the _Ends of the World_ see and pursue rightly the _Salvation of
God_, and know and believe that there is _none other Name given under
Heaven, by and thro' whom they may be saved, but only the Name of Jesus
Christ_.

May God's Kingdom be established in the true Church _in America_, as
well as _England_; and may it be truly said, _blessed be the Lord God
of_ Shem; for his is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and
ever. _Amen._




APPENDIX.


It being observed by some Gentlemen of Distinction, that in the
foregoing Account of _Virginia_, I hinted at some Things, wherein
Addition, Alteration, or Improvement of some Methods and Laws, seem'd
absolutely requisite for the Advancement of Religion and Learning, and
the Promotion of Arts and Trade; it was therefore thought not improper
to annex the following Schemes upon those Subjects; wherein I deliver my
Sentiments in as free and plain a Manner as I can, specifying what
Redundancies or Deficiencies occur to my Opinion; and humbly
recommending such Measures as my Imagination dictates to be most proper
for the Interest and Prosperity of _Virginia_, &c. in Conjunction with
the publick Good of _Great Britain_.

The first of these Schemes, I submit with the greatest Humility, to the
candid Censure and Consideration of his Grace the Archbishop of
_Canterbury_, to whose Protection _Virginia_ Learning and Education
ought to be recommended, as he is Chancellor of the College of
_William_ and _Mary_.

The next Scheme most properly claims the favourable Patronage of the
Lord Bishop of _London_, to whose careful Management the Church of
_Virginia_ belongs.

The two last are more particularly offered to the Perusal of the Lords
Commissioners of Trade and Plantations, and the worthy _Virginia_
Merchants.

But forasmuch as _Virginia_ is the Scene of Action for all these
Schemes, therefore is each of them humbly presented to the _Virginia_
Gentry; particularly to the honourable the Lieutenant Governor, the
Council, the House of Burgesses, the Clergy and the President, Rector
and Governors of the College of the most antient and loyal Colony of
_Virginia_.

If any thing here offered be dislik'd, I willingly shall submit to
censure when disproved and confuted; mean while hope that nothing here
mentioned or proposed will be taken amiss, since this Work was purposely
undertaken with a sincere Intention of publick Good; therefore I have
Expectation that it will find a kind Reception with all
publick-spirited, and unprejudiced Persons.




SCHEME I.

_Of Education in_ Virginia.


The Royal Founders of _William_ and _Mary_ College, with Prospect of
doing the greatest Good for the Colonies of _Virginia_ and _Maryland_,
conferred this princely Donation upon them; and were seconded with the
ample Benefaction of the honourable Mr. _Boyle_, and the Contributions
of the Country. But this underwent the common Fate of most other
charitable Gifts of this Kind, having met with several Difficulties to
struggle with in its Infancy; but the most dangerous was, that it was as
it were no sooner finished, but it was unfortunately and unaccountably
consumed to Ashes. Yet observe the wonderful _Turns_ of Fortune, and
Power of _Providence_. This College, _Phoenix-like_, as the City of
_London_, revived and improved out of its own Ruins. But though it has
found such unexpected Success, and has proved of very great Service
already; yet is it far short of such Perfection, as it might easily
attain to by the united Power of the Persons concerned about this
important Foundation.

For it is now a College without a Chapel, without a Scholarship, and
without a Statute.

There is a Library without Books, comparatively speaking, and a
President without a fix'd Salary till of late: A Burgess without
certainty of Electors; and in fine, there have been Disputes and
Differences about these and the like Affairs of the College hitherto
without End.

These Things greatly impede the Progress of Sciences and learned Arts,
and discourage those that may be inclined to contribute their Assistance
or Bounty towards the Good of the College.

Nevertheless the Difficulties of this Kind might be removed by some such
Regulations as follow, _viz._

Let none be permitted to teach School in any Parish, but such as shall
be nominated by the Minister and Vestry, and licensed by the President
of the College.

Let such Lads as have been taught to read and instructed in the Grounds
of the _English_ Language in those Schools, be admitted into the
_Grammar_ School at the College, if they pass Examination before the
President and Masters; together with such Youth as shall be sent from
_Maryland_, who have a Right to be educated at this College.

Provided always that the Number of _Grammar_ Scholars shall never exceed
one Hundred.

Let them be boarded and lodged in the Dormitory, as they are at present;
or upon such Terms as may from Time to Time seem most proper to the
President and Masters, or to the Governors, till a Transfer be obtained.

These Lads should be two Years under the Care of the Usher, and two more
under the _Grammar_ Master; and by them instructed in _Latin_ and
_Greek_, in such Methods as the President and Masters shall direct.

And during these four Years, at certain appointed Times they should be
taught to write as they now are in the Writing-School, or in such
Methods as the President and Masters may judge better: There also should
the Writing Master teach them the Grounds and Practice of Arithmetick,
in order to qualify such for Business, as intend to make no farther
Progress in Learning.

Out of the _Grammar_ School should be yearly elected by the President
and Masters [or Professors] five Scholars upon the Foundation, who
should be allowed their Board, Education, and Lodging in proper
Apartments _gratis_; and should also be provided with Cloaths and Gowns,
_&c._ after the Charter-House Method.

These Scholars should continue three Years upon the Foundation; during
which Time, at appointed _Terms_ they should be instructed in Languages,
in Religion, in Mathematicks, in Philosophy, and in History, by the five
Masters or Professors appointed for that Purpose; who with the _Grammar_
Master make up the Number appointed by the Charter.

Besides the Scholars, the Professors should for a certain Sum instruct
such others as may be enter'd Commoners in the College out of the
_Grammar_ School, or from elsewhere, by the Approbation of the President
and Masters, who should be obliged to wear Gowns, and be subject to the
same Statutes and Rules as the Scholars; and as Commoners are in
_Oxford_. These should maintain themselves, and have a particular Table,
and Chambers for their Accommodation.

For to wait at the four high Tables hereafter mentioned, there should be
elected by the President and Masters four Servitors, who should have
their Education, and such Allowances, as the Servitors in _Oxford_.

Such Scholars, Commoners, and Servitors, as have behaved themselves
well, and minded their Studies for three Years, and can pass proper
Examination, and have performed certain Exercises, should have the
Degree of a Batchellor of Arts conferred upon them; should eat at a
Table together, and be distinguished by a peculiar Habit; maintain
themselves, be subject to certain Rules, and pursue proper Studies;
being allowed the Use of the Library as well as the Masters, paying
proper Fees upon their Admission for the Good of the Library.

Out of these Batchellors should be yearly elected by the Presidents and
Masters, one Fellow to be allowed 20 _l._ for his Passage to _England_,
and 20 _l. per Ann._ for three Years after his speedy Entrance and
Continuance in some certain College in _Oxford_ or _Cambridge_; after
which he should commence Master of Arts; which Degree, with all others
in our Universities, should be conferred in the same Manner in this
College by the President and Masters.

Out of the Graduates above Batchellors should the Masters or Professors
be chosen by the Election of the said Masters or Professors, with the
President; who also every seven Years should chose a new Chancellor, to
whose Determination all Disputes and Differences should be referred.

And when the President's Place is vacant, it should be filled by such of
the Masters as has belonged first to the College.

A _Testimonium_ from this College should be of the same Use and Force as
from others in our Universities.

If the present Fund be insufficient to defray the Expence, proper
Improvement should be made of the Revenue, and Application made for
additional Benefactions.

A Body of Statutes should be directly formed and establish'd by the
Visitors, President, and Masters; and a _Transfer_ of the Trust should
be then made.

Such an Establishment would encourage the bright Youth of _Virginia_ to
apply to their Studies, and in some Measure would compel them to improve
themselves; whereas now being left to their own Liberty, they proceed
but superficially, and generally commence _Man_ before they have gone
through the _Schools_ in the College. Here too would be great
Inducements for their Friends to advise and persuade them to go through
with their Learning; when they are certain, that they will thus be
regularly improved, and have Prospect of a cheap Education, and Hopes of
the best Preferment in their Country in Church and State; and have equal
(if not superior) Chance with others for Promotion abroad in the World;
being bred compleat Gentlemen and good Christians, and qualified for the
Study of the Gospel, Law, or Physick; and prepared for undertaking
Trade, or any useful Projects and Inventions.

As for the Accomplishments of Musick, Dancing, and Fencing, they may be
taught by such as the President and Masters shall appoint at such
certain Times, as they shall fix for those Purposes.

'Till these Regulations (or the like) be made, Matters may be carried on
as they are at present; only to me there seems an absolute Necessity now
for a Professor of Divinity, in order to instruct the _Indians_ and
_English_ Youth there in the Grounds of Religion, and read Lectures of
Morality to the senior Lads, and to read Prayers and preach in the
College as Chaplain: This I am certain is very much wanting, and what
the present Income of the College with good Management will easily allow
of; therefore I hope particular Notice will be taken hereof.

There is as yet no great Occasion for the Hall, so that it might be made
a Chapel and Divinity-School, for which Purpose it would serve nobly
with little or no Alterations.

As there is lately built an Apartment for the _Indian_ Boys and their
Master, so likewise is there very great Occasion for a Quarter for the
Negroes and inferior Servants belonging to the College; for these not
only take up a great deal of Room and are noisy and nasty, but also have
often made President and others apprehensive of the great Danger of
being burnt with the College, thro' their Carelessness and Drowsiness.

Another thing prejudicial to the College, is the Liberty allowed the
Scholars, and the negligent Observance of College Hours, and the
Opportunity they have of rambling Abroad.

To remedy this, there is wanting some Contrivance to secure the Youth
within the College at certain Hours; which has hitherto been in vain
attempted, because of the many Servants lodged in the College, and the
several Doors and Ways to get out of it.

Likewise the Privileges and Apartments of the President and Masters, and
House-Keeper, _&c._ ought to be fix'd and ascertain'd; for these being
precarious and doubtful, upon this Account has arose much Difference and
Ill-Will, to the great Scandal of the College, and Detriment of
Learning.

Little additional Charge would put the Government of the College upon a
much better Footing; whereas at present it scarcely merits the name of a
College.

As for Election of a Burgess in Pursuance to a Clause in the Charter, he
ought to be chosen by the President and as many Masters as there shall
actually be at any Time.

The Charter mentions six Masters or Professors, but does not specify the
Professions; it directs to the making of Statutes and founding
Scholarships, but the particulars are left to the Discretion of the
Managers; and some such Establishment as this here mentioned may not be
improper, especially if for greater Encouragement the Surveyors of each
County were to be appointed by the President and Masters, out of such as
have taken a Batchellor of Arts Degree there; and if also the Governor
and Council were to elect a certain Number of Batchellors for Clerks
into the Secretaries Office; out of which Clerks attending and writing
there at certain Times, the County Clerks should be appointed by the
Secretary.

The Office of the President would be to govern the College, be
Treasurer, and Censor, and have a casting Vote in all Debates.

The six Professors or Masters would be

          { Divinity, who should be Chaplain and Catechist.
          { Mathematicks.
          { Philosophy.
  one for { Languages.
          { History.
          { Humanity, who should be _Grammar_ Master.

The under Masters would be the Usher, the _Indian_ Master, and the
Writing-Master.

The Town Masters must be such as occasion requires, for Fencing,
Dancing, and Musick.

There would be three _English_ Fellows.

There would be fifteen Scholars, and a sufficient Number of School-Boys
for a constant Supply.

Besides a Number of Batchellors and Masters of Arts, who would wait till
they came in Fellows or Professors, or got to be made Surveyors or
County Clerks.

For all this there might easily be contrived Room in the College,
especially if a Hall was built in the Place intended for the Chapel.

As also would there be Room enough for the House-Keeper, Officers, and
Servants; especially if a Quarter was built for the Negroes, _&c._

The Tables might then be distinguish'd into four higher or four lower,
_viz._

    The upper Table for the President and Masters.
    The second for the Masters of Arts, _&c._
    The third for the Batchellors of Arts.
    The fourth for the Scholars and Commoners.
    The four lower Tables should be
        The first for the House-Keeper, and the upper School-Boys.
        The second for the Usher, Writing-Master, and the lower
              School-Boys.
        The third for the Servitors and College Officers.
        And the last for the _Indian_ Master and his Scholars.

This Regularity might easily be effected, and would prove not only
decent and creditable, but also useful and advantageous to the Country
and the College.

The Library is better furnished of late than formerly, by the kind Gifts
of several Gentlemen; but yet the Number of Books is but very small, and
the Sets upon each Branch of Learning are very imperfect, and not the
best of the Sort.

To remedy this Defect proper Application should be made to the Societies
and to the superior Clergy in _England_, who would give at least what
Duplicates they have upon such an useful Occasion; and what necessary
Collection of Books cannot be obtain'd by begging, they may buy as soon
as they shall be able to stock their Library; as a great Help to which I
believe considerable Contributions would be made by the Clergy,
Burgesses, and Gentry of the Country, if upon easy Terms they were
allowed the Use of the Library at certain Hours, at such Times as they
shall be at _Williamsburgh_, either for Pleasure or upon Business.

The Office of Librarian is given to Mr. _John Harris_ the Usher, in
order to make his Place more agreeable to his Merit; and if the Gardener
was made to execute the Office of Porter for his present Salary, it
would be no great Hardship upon him, and would be an Ease to the
College; and for the Benefit and Encouragement of the House-Keeper
several small necessary Pensions and Privileges might be contrived more
than what are at present allowed; so that it might be made well worth
the while of a Person of Integrity, Knowledge, and Prudence, to
undertake and carry on so troublesom an Office.

The greater the Number of Collegians, the greater would be the Gain of
the House-Keeper; so that when the College should be full and compleat
as here directed and wished, the Collegians may be boarded upon easier
Terms; boarded I say; because if any but the President dieted
themselves, it would create Confusion; and if any belonging to the
College but such Masters as have Families were permitted to eat
elsewhere, it would not be worth any body's while to lay in Provision,
when they could not tell what Number they must provide for.

As for the _English_ College Customs of _Commons_, &c. it is thought as
yet more adviseable to board in the College than to keep to those
Methods, till the Country affords better Conveniencies and Opportunities
for so doing.

The _Indians_ who are upon Mr. _Boyle_'s Foundation have now a handsom
Apartment for themselves and their Master, built near the College,
which useful Contrivance ought to be carried on to the utmost Advantage
in the real Education and Conversion of the Infidels; for hitherto but
little Good has been done therein, though abundance of Money has been
laid out, and a great many Endeavours have been used, and much Pains
taken for that Purpose.

The young _Indians_, procured from the tributary or foreign Nations with
much Difficulty, were formerly boarded and lodged in the Town; where
abundance of them used to die, either thro' Sickness, change of
Provision, and way of Life; or as some will have it, often for want of
proper Necessaries and due Care taken with them. Those of them that have
escaped well, and been taught to read and write, have for the most Part
returned to their Home, some with and some without Baptism, where they
follow their own savage Customs and heathenish Rites.

A few of them have lived as Servants among the _English_, or loitered
and idled away their Time in Laziness and Mischief.

But 'tis great Pity that more Care is not taken about them, after they
are dismissed from School.

They have admirable Capacities when their Humours and Tempers are
perfectly understood; and if well taught, they might advance themselves
and do great Good in the Service of Religion; whereas now they are
rather taught to become worse than better by falling into the worst
Practices of vile nominal Christians, which they add to their own
_Indian_ Manners and Notions.

To prevent this therefore, let there be chosen continually four _Indian_
Servitors out of the _Indian_ School, as the other four out of the
_Grammar_ School.

Let these be maintained in the _Indian_ House, and wait upon the four
lower Tables: Let them be instructed as the other Servitors, or as their
Genius most aptly may require, but particularly in Religion; and when
they are found qualified let them be sent to _England_, or placed out to
Captains of Ships or Trades, as the Mathematical Boys in
_Christ-Hospital_, for a few Years; then let them return and be allowed
a small Exhibition, and encouraged in their separate Callings and
Occupations; and let them settle some among the _English_, and others
return to their own Nations.

Undoubtedly many of them would become excellent Artists and Proficients
in Trade; and thus when Reason and Experience has convinced them of the
Preference of our Religion and Manners, certainly they may not only save
their own Souls; but also be extreamly instrumental in the Conversion of
their barbarous Friends and Relations.

In proceeding thus, any that seem capable or inclinable to study
Divinity, should by all Means be encouraged and forwarded in it, and
sent over for a small Time to one of our Universities with an Allowance
of _a Fellow_; after which, if such were admitted into Orders, and then
sent out Missionaries among their own Country-Folks, what great Good
might we not expect from such, when throughly converted and instructed
in Christianity, and made truly sensible of the Advantages of Religion,
the deadly State of Infidelity, and the miserable Lives and Customs of
the _Indians_?

In a Work of this Kind undoubtedly several good Christians would
contribute their charitable Assistance; 'till which the present Fund
should be applied in this Method, though the Managers should be obliged
to reduce the Number of _Indian_ Scholars upon this Account; since this
was the main Intent of the Benefaction, and no other Method can well
answer this Design; which may be evidenced by Experience both from the
Colleges of _Virginia_ and _New England_ too, as I have been credibly
informed from good Authors, as well as my own Experience.

By such Methods in Process of Time might the _Indian_ Obstinacy be
mollified, their seeming Dulness might be cleared from Rust; and the
Gates of Heaven be opened for their Admission upon their perfect
Conversion to the Faith of Christ. In such glorious Designs as these
neither should Humour, Interest, nor Prejudice divert any from their
charitable Assistance therein, especially such as are concerned in
Affairs of this Kind, and engaged by Duty to lend their best Aid in
_leading_ the Infidels into the Pale of Christ's Church, and making them
by mild and most gentle Measures to accompany his Flock; since all the
Force in the World would rather _drive_ them from, than guide them, to
the Congregation of the Faithful and Communion of Saints.

By some such prudent and mild Methods alone may they be made to live and
die as true Christians, and not like the most savage Brutes, as they
generally do.

_Thus far_ as to the Education of the young Men in _Virginia_, and the
Instruction most proper for the _Indians_; and as for the Negroes each
Owner ought to take Care that the Children born his Property, and all
his intelligent adult Negroes be taught their Catechism and some short
Prayers, be made to frequent the Church and be baptized, and hindered as
much as may be from Swearing, Lying, Intemperance, Prophaneness, and
Stealing and Cheating.

Finally, as to the Education of Girls, it is great Pity but that good
Boarding Schools were erected for them at _Williamsburgh_ and other
Towns.




SCHEME II.

_Of_ Religion _in_ Virginia.


It is an Opinion as erroneous as common, that any sort of Clergymen will
serve in _Virginia_; for Persons of immoral Lives, or weak Parts and
mean Learning, not only expose themselves, but do great Prejudice to the
Propagation of the Gospel there; and by bad Arguments or worse Example,
instead of promoting Religion, become Encouragers of Vice, Profaneness,
and Immorality. Whereas were such confined to the narrow Limits of a
Parish or two in _England_, where their Knowledge and their Name would
scarce extend farther than the Circumference of their own Country; then
neither could their bad Learning nor Example propagate so much Mischief,
as when sent Abroad into the World among bright and observing People.
Neither do they want quarrelsom and litigious Ministers, who would
differ with their Parishioners about insignificant Trifles, who had
better stay at Home and wrangle with their own Parishes, which is not so
great a Novelty here as there. Neither would they have meer Scholars and
Stoicks, or Zealots too rigid in outward Appearance, as they would be
without loose and licentious Profligates; these do Damage to themselves,
to others, and to Religion.

And as in Words and Actions they should be neither too reserved nor too
extravagant; so in Principles should they be neither too high nor too
low: The _Virginians_ being neither Favourers of Popery nor the
Pretender on the one Side, nor of Presbytery nor Anarchy on the other;
but are firm Adherents to the present Constitution in State, the
_Hanover_ Succession and the Episcopal Church of _England_ as by Law
established; consequently then if these are the Inclinations of the
People, their Ministers ought to be of the same Sentiments, equally
averse to papistical and schismatical Doctrines, and equally free from
_Jacobitish_ and _Oliverian_ Tenets. These I confess are my Principles,
and such as the _Virginians_ best relish, and what every good Clergyman
and true _Englishman_ (I hope) will favour; for such will never refuse
to say with me

    _God bless the Church, and_ GEORGE _its Defender,
     Convert the Fanaticks, and baulk the Pretender_.

For our Sovereign is undoubtedly the Defender and Head of our national
Church of _England_, in which Respect we may pray for the _King and
Church_; but Christ is the Head of the Universal or Catholick Church, in
which Respect we wish Prosperity to the _Church and King_.

Clergymen for _Virginia_ should be of such Parts, Tempers, and Notions
as these. They likewise should be Persons that have read and seen
something more of the World, than what is requisite for an _English_
Parish; they must be such as can converse and know more than bare
Philosophy and speculative Ethicks, and have studied Men and Business in
some measure as well as Books; they may act like Gentlemen, and be
facetious and good-humour'd, without too much Freedom and
Licentiousness; they may be good Scholars without becoming Cynicks, as
they may be good Christians without appearing Stoicks. They should be
such as will give up a small Matter rather than create Disturbance and
Mischief; for in all Parishes the Minister as well as the People should
pass by some little Things, or else by being at Variance the best
Preaching may have the worst Effect; yet they must not condescend too
far, nor part with a material Right, but must be truly zealous and firm
in every good Cause both publick and private. There are many such
worthy, prudent, and pious Clergymen as these in _Virginia_, who meet
with the Love, Reputation, Respect, and Encouragement that such good Men
may deserve and expect: However, there have been some whose Learning,
Actions, and Manners have not been so good as might be wished; and
others by their outward Behaviour have been suspected to have been, some
_Jacobites_, and others _Presbyterians_ inwardly in their Hearts.

In _Virginia_ there is no Ecclesiastical Court, so that Vice,
Prophaneness, and Immorality are not suppressed so much as might be: The
People hate the very Name of the Bishop's Court. There are no
Visitations, so that the Churches are often not in the best Repair, nor
as decently adorned as might be; neither in some Places can the Lord's
Supper be administer'd with such holy Reverence as it should be, for
want of proper Materials and Utensils. The Churches being not
consecrated are not enter'd with such reverent Demeanour, as ought to be
used in God's holy Tabernacle.

For want of Confirmation Persons are admitted to the holy Sacrament with
mean and blind Knowledge, and poor Notions of the divine Mysteries of
the Supper of the Lord; which is an Abuse of a thing so very sacred.

In _North Carolina_ and several Parts of _Virginia_ Children are often
neglected to be baptized till they are grown up, and then perhaps may
never know or never mind that they want to be christen'd; and many
esteem it unnecessary.

The Clerks upon several Occasions performing too great a Share of divine
Services, expose the Church to Shame and Danger, and often bring
Contempt and Disdain upon the Persons and Function of the Ministers.

Ministers are often obliged to bury in Orchards, and preach Funeral
Sermons in Houses, where they also generally marry and christen; and as
for Weddings there is no Regard to the Time of the Day nor the Season of
the Year; and in _North Carolina_ the Justices marry.

Now to remedy all these Grievances and Deficiencies, with all Evils of
the like Kind, there is an absolute Necessity for a Person whose Office
upon this Occasion should be somewhat uncommon, till a Bishop be
established in those Parts; who might pave out a Way for the
Introduction of Mitres into the _English America_, so greatly wanting
there. This Person should have Instructions and Power for discharging
such Parts of the Office, of a Bishop, of a Dean, and of an Arch-Deacon,
as Necessity requires, and the Nature of those sacred Functions will
permit; and from a _Medium_ of these three Functions he might be called
Dean of _Virginia_; under whose Jurisdiction _North Carolina_ might fall
for the present, till the Constitution in Church and State there be
better advanced.

This Person should reside in some Parish in _Virginia_, and be obliged
to make a Progress (for the People will not approve of a Visitation)
each Spring and Fall in _Virginia_ and _North Carolina_, as his
Discretion shall best direct him.

As for a Salary for his travelling Expences 100 _l._ _per Ann._ would
suffice; and that this might not bring any new Charge upon the Publick,
there should be no Fees upon any Account, neither should he put them to
any Expence. This Person should be one that is popular, universally
acquainted with the People, their Temper and Manners, and one respected
and beloved by them; and as a farther Encouragement for him, and to
support the Dignity of his Office, he should have a good convenient
Parish in _Virginia_; and in his Absence the Clergymen there should be
obliged to officiate in his Church in Turns, according to their
Seniority in the Country; for the Detriment that the Parishes would
suffer by the Loss of Service in their Churches one _Sunday_ in several
Years would be nothing, when compared with the Advantage they would
receive in Lieu of it.

As a farther Addition to his Salary and Honour, he might be one of the
Masters of the College, particularly Divinity Professor would be most
suitable with his Character and Office, and more convenient for him,
since he might contrive to make his Progress in the Vacation Time.

This Salary of 100 _l._ _per Ann._ might certainly be easily obtained
from the Government out of the Quit-Rents, or otherwise, as the
Commissary's was; which Office and Name has not appeared well-pleasing
to the People and Clergy, for Reasons I can't account for: neither has
it obtained the Power and good Effect as might have been expected.

This Office of Dean might be try'd for a few Years, and the Dean should
be obliged to transmit Home yearly to his Diocesan the Bishop of
_London_ attested Copies of his Proceedings in his Progress; setting
forth the Particulars of the Attempts that he has made, and the Good he
has done, signed by the Justices and Ministers of the Place or County.
The Expence of this Tryal would be but little, but the Good that might
arise from hence might be unspeakable, and there can be no Hurt in it;
no Incroachment upon the Privilege of the People, nor the Rights of the
several Incumbents.

His Office and Duty should be to register all Letters of Orders and
Credentials of Ministers, sent over by the Bishop of _London_, and also
all Collations to Livings. To examine and confirm all Persons before
they be admitted to the Lord's Supper, which Confirmation (or rather
Approbation) might be done without Imposition of Hands in a peculiar
Form, proper for the Circumstances of this Occasion; and the Ministers
should admit none to the Sacrament without his Certificate of this their
Confirmation.

He should be obliged to send the Ministers in his Progress timely Notice
of his Intention, with a printed Form of his Examination and
Confirmation, with Directions for the Minister to prepare and exhort the
Congregation thereto. In his Progress he should preach at such vacant
Churches as he passes by; baptize all Children and others that require
it; and preach up the absolute Necessity of it. He should have Power to
call a Vestry, and there examine whether the Church, _&c._ be in good
Repair, and fit for the Congregation; whether it be sufficiently
beautified and commodiously built and situated; whether there be
Surplices, Communion-Table and Cloth, and all the Utensils required in
the Canons of the Church of _England_.

He should enquire into the Conduct of the Minister; and likewise should
he inspect into the Management of the Clerk, and prescribe him Rules and
Directions in the Execution of his Office, especially where there is no
Incumbent Minister, which very frequently happens in several Places for
Years together.

He should see that the Lord's Supper be duly and decently administered,
encourage People to frequent Communion, and instruct them in the Nature
of that holy Sacrament; and as for Baptism he should see that it be
rightly performed, and by the Bishop of _London_'s Directions should
prescribe the requisite Alteration in the last Clauses of the Form of
Baptism; as also those Alterations wanting in the Prayer for the General
Assembly, instead _of the Prayer for the Parliament_.

He should also visit such Sick as he passes by, and exhort all to a
timely Repentance, and not (as they too often do) to defer that and the
Sacrament till Death.

He should persuade and advise People as much as may be to christen,
marry, and bury at Church. He should likewise enquire if there be any
notorious and scandalous Livers, who by their wicked Practices give
Offence to their Christian Neighbours.

He should likewise see that the divine Service be performed regularly
and decently according to the Rubric, and exhort and direct thereto;
with Abundance more of such Things as these, which might easily be done,
if attempted in an easy, mild Manner; which might prove of wonderful
Advantage to the Good of Vertue and Religion.

Though the Office of this Dean should be chiefly to inspect, exhort,
reprimand, and represent, besides Confirming, and doing the common
Offices of a Clergyman; yet should he and the Vestry present at the
County Courts any egregious Default or Omission of the Kinds here
mentioned; but here they should be very tender and cautious not to give
general Offence, for Rigour will soon make such an Office odious to the
People, and then it will be but of little Service.

Presentments of this kind (when any) should be made, given in, and
prosecuted in the common Courts, in the same Form and Manner as common
Presentments are; so that here would be no Innovation in the
Proceedings.

In order to create more Respect for sacred Places and Things, the
Churches and Church-Yards there should be solemnly set apart for that
Purpose by the Dean, by some kind of Form of Consecration suitable to be
used by a Person that is no Bishop, and agreeable to the Occasion of the
Thing, and Nature of the Place.

Such a Person as this might do a vast deal of Good, and reduce the
Church Discipline in _Virginia_ to a much better Method than at present
it is in: For tho' the Church of _England_ be there established, yet by
permitting too great Liberty, and by being too indifferent in many such
Respects as are here specified, great Inconveniences have arose; and we
may certainly expect far greater Detriment in the Church from hence,
unless timely Lenitives and proper Remedies be applied, in the best
Methods that can possibly be devised; some such Methods (I conceive) as
these here proposed may not be esteemed least proper; and if they be
rejected or despised, yet I am persuaded that they are not so
insignificant as some may imagine, and not altogether so despicable as
to be quite disregarded; and not thought worthy of the serious Perusal
of any concerned in Affairs of this Nature.

The Method used for obtaining a Living in _Virginia_, is for the Party
to notify his Intentions of going Abroad to the Bishop of _London_, to
produce sufficient Testimonials of his good Life and Principles,
together with his Letters of Orders; which being approved of, he has
then a Licence, and Certificate, and Credentials to the Governor, with
an Order upon the Treasury for 20 _l._ for his Passage; and upon his
Arrival makes Application for some vacant Parish either to the Governor,
to the Parishioners, or to both; upon whose Approbation he is admitted
their Minister. But Variety of Disputes have arose from the uncertain
Interpretation of the _Virginia_ Laws relating to Livings; and though
the Opinion of the best Council has been procured, yet as their
Sentiments could not sufficiently settle it, so have they directly
contradicted each other. Several of the People insist that they have the
Right of Presentation; and on the other hand the Governor has as
strenuously contested with them for his Right of Presentation in Behalf
of the King; so that several that the Parishes have nominated or elected
have been refused; and on the other Side, many appointed and sent by the
Governor have been rejected with Disdain, Disappointment, and Ill-Will.
These Elections of the People are often disagreeable to the Governor's
Choice, and the People on the contrary will refuse whom they say the
Governor may impose upon them, though he comes directly recommended from
the Bishop; but in my Opinion their Election might be better given up,
suppose they had a Right to it, since it often creates such Disturbance;
and in Process of Time, who knows but they may elect and insist upon
Persons unfit for the Ministry, either for their Learning, Lives, or
Doctrines, and not licensed by the Bishop; and may obstinately refuse
any such as comes regularly, and is presented to the Living by the
Governor.

This Presentation by the Governor, who likewise as Ordinary is to
institute and induct, may be termed a Collation; but there of late were
not above three or four Rectors thus collated, or instituted and
inducted in the whole Colony; because of the Difficulties, Surmises,
Disputes, and Jealousies that arise upon such Accounts. But the Clergy
standing upon this Footing are liable to great Inconveniency and Danger;
for upon any small Difference with the Vestry, they may pretend to
assume Authority to turn out such Ministers as thus come in by Agreement
with the Vestry, who have often had the Church Doors shut against them,
and their Salaries stopped, by the Order and Protection of such
Vestry-Men, who erroneously think themselves the _Masters_ of their
_Parson_, and aver, that since they compacted but from Year to Year with
him as some have done, they may turn off this their Servant when they
will; be without one as long as they please, and chose another, whom and
when they shall think most proper and convenient; which Liberty being
granted them (I believe) some few would be content rather never to
appoint a Minister, than ever to pay his Salary.

Among many Instances of these Kinds of Refusals, Ejectments, and
Elections, I shall only instance that of the ingenious Mr. _Bagge_, who
coming to _England_ for Priest's Orders, after he had been Minister of
St. _Ann_'s for a long Time, was refused by them upon his Return, when
the Governor sent him to his own Parish again; whereas they strenuously
stood by Mr. _Rainsford_, whom they had elected and presented to the
Governor. And Mr. _Latané_, a Gentleman of Learning and Vertue, and well
beloved, was almost ejected, nay was shut out of his Church, only upon
account of a small Difference and Dispute with some of his Vestry. The
main Allegation they had against him was that they could not understand
him, (he having a small Tang of the _French_) tho' they had been
hearing him I think upwards of seven Years, without any Complaint of
that kind till that very Time.

Governor _Spotswood_, to his great Honour be it spoken, always stood up
for the Right of Collation, and was hearty in Vindication of the Clergy,
who, as he professed in a Speech to them, certainly had not only his
Protection but also his Affection; so that it is difficult to be
determined in which Respect he chiefly excelled, either in being a
compleat Gentleman, a polite Scholar, a good Governor, or a true
Churchman.

I speak in Behalf of the Right of Presentations belonging to the Crown;
because my Reason tells me that it is most equitable and most convenient
for the Peace and good Government, and for the Security of the Doctrine
and Discipline of the established Church of _England_.

Many Arguments I know are brought against it, both from apparent Reason
and Interest; but all these might easily be confuted by this following
Remark.

When Churches were built and endowed, as these in _Virginia_, by the
Laity, with the Leave of the Bishop or Ordinary in antient Times, the
Presentations to such Ecclesiastical Benefices were often granted away
to the Families that founded such Donations, as Rewards and
Encouragements of such pious Liberalities; whereas all other Preferments
were invested in the Church: This I take to be the Origin of
Lay-Presentations, when Gentlemen reserved this for the Benefit of some
of their Posterity or Family, who might receive a Maintenance from their
Bounty; which they in Reason ought to do preferable to any others who
contributed nothing towards it.

But though the _Virginians_ built and endowed their Churches, yet I
never could find that they had made any such Reserve; so that the Right
of Presentation must belong to the King their chief Ordinary, who never
granted away to them the Title of Donation, but kept it for himself and
Heirs; so though he gives them Leave to make Parishes and establish
Salaries, yet he still imply'd an Obligation in them to give those
Livings to whom he pleases.

This I take to be the Case, and hope I may be excused for delivering my
Opinion by any that may entertain different Sentiments.

Be the Right invested in which it will, either in the Crown or in the
Country, I am certain that it ought to be determined one way or other;
and if it belongs to the People, yet should there be such Regulations
made as might make the Livings certain, and the Lives of the Clergy as
peaceable as may be.

Were the Establishment for the Clergy in _Virginia_ a little more plain
and regular, even without any additional Augmentation of their Salaries,
I am sure it would be for the Good of the Clergy there, and for the
Encouragement of good and ingenious Men to go over and settle there.

Some Parishes are long vacant upon Account of the badness of the
Tobacco, which gives Room for Dissenters, especially Quakers, as in
_Nansemond_ County; but this might be remedied, either by making the
Payments of equal Value in the other Commodities produced there, or else
by a standing Order, which Governor _Spotswood_ proposed, _viz._ that
the Parishes longest vacant should be in their due Course first
supplied; for then the good and bad would have Ministers alike in their
Turns; but the Ministers must run the Risk of their Lot, though the most
deserving should have the worst Parish, and the most unworthy be best
preferred: but the Value of the Parishes being so nearly equivalent to
each other, this small Difference might easily be made up to good Men
some other way; so that this Method may not be impracticable nor
improper.

Some Parishes are not conveniently divided; in some the Churches are not
commodiously placed, and other Parishes are too large, others too small;
but these and the like Disproportions might easily be remedied by the
general Assemblies, if they unanimously set about such Divisions without
being swayed by private Interest; to do which would tend to the general
Good of the Clergy and Laity; but Works of this Nature, where great
Numbers are concerned, are not effected without great Opposition and
Difficulty.

The Buildings upon the Glebes being Timber soon decay, especially upon
Vacancies; but these should be kept in due Repair continually by the
Vestry: Likewise should the Dimensions and Form of the Dwelling-Houses
and Out-Houses be more particularly determined, and made such as might
conveniently and handsomly receive the Ministers and their Families;
which would be very great Inducements for them to relinquish _England_
for the Certainty of good Livings, good Glebes, good Accommodations, and
a kind Reception. The Expence of building and repairing where most of
the Materials are only an Incumbrance, would be but a Trifle to a
Parish; whereas 'tis a great Expence and Trouble to a Stranger to fit up
the Apartments that he finds, which are generally too small and often
very ruinous. Besides this a small Stock of Hogs and Cattle upon the
Glebes would be of excellent Service to Newcomers, till they can be
better furnished; they being obliged to leave behind them the same
Number of the same Animals. Some Glebes, as that at _James Town_, have
this Convenience, and 'tis Pity but more Parishes followed such
Examples: The prime Cost in stocking their Glebes by Degrees would be
insignificant; and the chief Trouble would be for the Church-Wardens to
receive the Stock from the Executors of one Incumbent, and deliver them
again when there comes another.

Other Difficulties that the Clergy meet with there are the Methods of
Payment, the Laws and Customs being not particular enough in this
Respect; so that sometimes Tobacco cannot be got in Time convenient for
the Minister, or is not delivered at a proper Place for his Interest, or
is not at all good of its Kind, or not of the right Sort, or but very
indifferent, such as the Receivers might have refused, or else is not
pressed hard enough, which is a very great Detriment; and sometimes they
will make the Ministers pay for their Cask, or for collecting, pressing,
rolling their Tobacco, and making it heavy and convenient, and that at
an extravagant Rate; and if a Stranger, fearful of being imposed upon,
takes the Management of his Tobacco into his own Hands, he is at a Loss
how to order it aright, being unacquainted with the Nature of the
Commodity, and the Customs of the Country; and if one Difference arises,
it frequently begets wider, though about those Things which might easily
be settled, and are of but little Value in respect of their
Inconveniency; so that the best way to get sweet-scented Tobacco has
been declared by some to use sweet-scented Words.

Now all this should be determined, to avoid future Quarrels of this
kind, which too frequently proceed from such Causes, by fixing the
Times, Places, and Manner of Payment; together with a Regulation of the
Allowances for collecting, pressing, and making Tobacco heavy and
convenient; with an Injunction for the Payment of none but good and
vendible Tobacco for parochial Dues. Whether the Parish or the Minister
be to allow the Expence thereof, it might easily be determined; and if
both are to join in it, this might easily be settled, by which Means
abundance of Variance would be prevented, and the Incomes would be more
certain, and of a good deal greater Value if the Parish did deliver good
heavy Tobacco with Cask to the Minister, at Places most suitable to his
own Conveniency, which I take to be the Intent of the Law, which was
made for the good Payment of the Ministers. The Charge of this would be
but small to a whole Parish, tho' it often falls heavy upon the
Minister, especially when he meets with sharp or cross People; but in
abundance of Parishes the Inhabitants are so good that they never make
any Dispute about these Things, especially when they like their
Minister; for that he may have any Favour of them that he in Reason may
desire.

The Payment of the Surplus Fees also wants a Regulation; for when
Tobacco is dear, some will pay them in Money, but when cheap they will
pay Tobacco, which does not seem equitable; so that in my Opinion these
Payments should always be made at certain appointed Times and in proper
Methods, either in one or the other, and not left to the Humor or
Discretion of the Debtor, since sometimes there is half in half
Difference.

A Settlement of these Things should be made, either for the Advantage of
the Clergy or People, or else a middle Expedient should be found out;
since the Consequences of Disputes and Variance between Ministers and
their Congregations are generally very pernicious to the Welfare,
Happiness, and Tranquility of both Parties; wherefore Remedies should
be applied in Time, especially in such Cases where Delays encrease the
Danger; when ill Customs in Time pleading Prescription are established
as firm as _Median_ Laws, and propagate such ill Habits in the
Constitution, as are most difficult to be extirpated.

As for the Establishment of Episcopacy in _Virginia_, it would be of
excellent Service, if Caution was taken not to transplant with it the
corrupt Abuses of Spiritual Courts, which the People dread almost as
much as an Inquisition; but these their Fears would soon be dissipated,
when by blessed Experience they might feel the happy Influence of that
holy Order among them, free from the terrible Notions that
Misrepresentations of regular Church Government have made them conceive.

I have often heard that there have been Intentions of this Kind; and
that the main Obstacle was the Difficulty of raising a Salary sufficient
to support the Dignity, and recompense the Labours of a Bishop. But this
Impediment may (I presume) with good Contrivance be easily removed; for
I don't at all question that the superior Clergy and Collegians in the
Universities would refuse to contribute half a Crown a Year for this
glorious Undertaking, or that the Inferiors would join their Shillings.
This might be collected into the Treasury _gratis_, by the Officers of
the Taxes, and might be taken off in a few Years, when upon Tryal the
Usefulness of a Bishop upon the Continent of _North America_ was
confirmed by Experience; for then a Maintenance might be contrived by
other Means very easily, there being spare Land enough to be
appropriated for a Barony. And one skilled in Political Arithmetick may
readily compute what a handsom Income this would amount to with Care in
collecting.

A large Tract of Land claimed by _Virginia_ and _North Carolina_, and
under the Government of neither, rightly called the disputed Bounds, is
a kind of _American Mint_, whither several wicked and profligate Persons
retire, being out of the certain Jurisdiction of either Government,
where they may pursue any immoral or vicious Practices without Censure
and with Impunity. But to end Disputes about it, why might not this be
granted to a Bishop of _Virginia_ and _North Carolina_?

The Occasion of these Disputes about the Bounds depends upon a Mistake
or Difference in two Grants, one fixing the Bounds according to a
certain Latitude, and the other specifying the Bounds (as I take it) to
run Westward from _Roon-oak Inlet_, which proves in a Latitude different
from that before mentioned; so that the List between these Parallels of
Latitude, which is about fifteen Miles broad, and indefinitely long is
disputed, the Governments of _Virginia_ and _North Carolina_ each
pretending a Right to it; but this might easily be settled, either by
finding out the true Meaning of the Grants, or what was the Occasion of
the Error, and then determining the Bounds from thence; or if this (or
what is before-mentioned) cannot be done, the Mathematical Professor, or
some other, should be imployed to split the Difference between them,
rather than have continual Disputes between the two Governments, to the
great Detriment of the Religion and Trade of both of them.

No regular Church Government or Salaries have been yet made for the
Clergy in _North Carolina_; but to bring this about, Representations
should be made to the Proprietors; their Directions obtained to the
Governor and Assembly there for their Assistance for this Purpose, in
Conjunction with the Missions, that, by proper Applications, I presume
may be continued from the Society, especially when they are assured that
Measures will be taken to prevent their pious Endeavours to be any more
frustrated there; and besides this I don't think it impracticable for
them to obtain the Impropriation of the two travelling Fellowships, for
Clergymen of a certain College in _Oxford_, to be confined to their
Government for some Years; since at present they have such great
Necessity for Christian Help of this Sort.

Besides, the continual Progress of such a Person as the Dean
before-mentioned for some Years, would be of extraordinary Service in
the present deplorable Circumstances of the Church of Christ in the
Government of _North Carolina_.




SCHEME III.

_Of Arts, Projects, Inventions, and Manufactures in_ Virginia.


It is an undoubted Truth, that in the Multitude of Inhabitants consists
the Welfare, Riches, and Power of any People; especially when all center
in Obedience to the same civil Power, and unanimously join in the
Encouragement of Trade, and industriously unite in the Improvement of
their Manufactures; for then the greater Consumption will be made of
such Things as tend to the publick Good, and the grander Figure will the
Community make, and the greater will be the Exports and Imports of such
Commodities as tend to the Increase of the publick Wealth, and private
Advantage of each particular Member of the Society.

A remarkable Instance of this we have in the _Dutch_, whose Riches and
Grandeur arose from the Increase of their Inhabitants, from their
industrious Improvement of Projects, Inventions, and Manufactures at
Home and Abroad, and carrying on the greatest Trade with indefatigable
Application.

For these Reasons should _Virginia_ be better stocked with Inhabitants,
and more useful Arts and Projects be promoted there, than hitherto have
been. Not that this would be in order for the publick Good of _Virginia_
alone, but of all the _British_ Empire in general; in that there might
be imployed all the idle and superfluous Persons, who for want of
Employment or Aversion to Business, prove as dead Members of the whole
Body; or else by Immorality and Villany prove noxious to others,
destructive to themselves, and a Scandal to Mankind.

What Shoals of Beggars are allowed in _Great Britain_ to suffer their
Bodies to rust and consume with Laziness and Want? And besides Strowlers
what Number of Poor are burdensom to most Parishes? How do our Streets
and Highways swarm with Rogues, and how are we over-stocked (as they
say) with vast Numbers of People of all Trades and Professions? But for
all and more than these might Work enough be found in our Plantations,
where they might be imployed in the Benefit of their Country, for the
Advantage both of the temporal and spiritual Concernments, by being kept
to Business, and getting Money in an honest Way.

It is a monkish Opinion too prevalent with many still, that there is no
good Living without the Bounds of their own Cloyster. And Abundance of
_English_ entertain the _Chinese_ Notion, that they are all Fools and
Beggars that live in any Country but theirs. This home Fondness has been
very prejudicial to the common Sort of _English_, and has in a great
Measure retarded the Plantations from being stock'd with such
Inhabitants as are skilful, industrious, and laborious.

For these Reasons, such Persons of Sense and Resolution as have entered
into Projects for Improvements in the Plantations (who have evinced us,
that all Schemes are not Bubbles) have been obliged for the generality
to make Use of the worst and vilest of Mankind, for the Execution of the
noblest and most useful Undertakings; tho' indeed continually several
People of Sense, Vertue, and Fortune, entertaining tolerable good
Notions of these Affairs, have embarked themselves and Families in such
laudable and useful Designs: But for the generality, the Servants and
inferior Sort of People, who have either been sent over to _Virginia_,
or have transported themselves thither, have been, and are, the poorest,
idlest, and worst of Mankind, the _Refuse of Great Britain_ and
_Ireland_, and the _Outcast of the People_.

These Servants are but an insignificant Number, when compared with the
vast Shoals of _Negroes_ who are imployed as Slaves there to do the
hardest and most Part of the Work; the most laborious of which is the
felling of Trees and the like, to which kind of Slavery (if it must be
so called) our Wood-Cutters in _England_ are exposed; only with this
Difference, that the _Negroes_ eat wholsomer Bread and better Pork with
more Plenty and Ease; and when they are Sick, their Owners Interest and
Purse are deeply engaged in their Recovery, who likewise are obliged to
take all the Care imaginable of the Children of their Slaves for their
own great Profit; so that the _Negroes_, though they work moderately,
yet live plentifully, have no Families to provide for, no Danger of
Beggary, no Care for _the Morrow_.

But to me it seems to be more Prudence and Charity for our own Poor and
Vagabonds to be there imployed and provided for, than for us to maintain
and use such great Numbers of _Africans_. If we can do better without
them certainly we should forbear importing so many (though this may
interfere with the Interest of some), since it would advance the Good of
the Publick; and that we may be without them is plain, since we have
Rogues and Idlers enough of our own to do the same Work, to which if
they were compelled by mild Methods, it would ease the Publick of a
great deal of Charge, Trouble, and Loss, and would highly tend to the
Advancement of the temporal and spiritual Happiness of our _Poor_, and
be very instrumental in the Suppression of Theft and Villany, and for
the Reformation of the most Profligate. Thousands of poor, honest,
unfortunate People of all Trades and Occupations might be there imployed
for the Support of themselves and Interest of Trade, that can find
neither Work nor Maintenance for themselves and Families at Home; and
such as had rather stroll or steal here, might be confined by mild Force
to moderate Labour there, sufficient to support themselves, and benefit
their Imployers.

The _British_ Trade may easily vend their Effects and Manufactures; and
_Virginia_, with the neighbouring Plantations, is capacious enough for
their Reception, plentiful for their Maintenance, and abound with most
Conveniences and Materials for most Kinds of Imployments; where several
Things, upon Account of the Goodness of the Climate, and Fertility of
the Country, may be produced with less Labour and more Plenty than in
_Great Britain_; and innumerable Commodities might there be made by our
own People, that are now imported at extravagant Prices, and excessive
Toil and Danger from other Nations: Nay, we might supply other Nations
with most of those Things which we now fetch from Abroad; so that though
our _Imports_ might decrease a little, yet would our Exports be
abundantly augmented, which undoubtedly would tend much more to the
Advantage of our Country: Even our own _home_ Consumption in most
Respects might be raised much cheaper and better in the Plantations than
here; especially such Things as are with great Toil and Cost forc'd (as
it were) unnaturally out of barren Ground, improper Soil, or a
disagreeable Climate; and the Land and People in such Places might be
occupied in more proper Business, and for more useful Purposes.

But the common People here have such a vain Fondness for their own
Country, and such despicable Notions of _Virginia_, &c. and are under
such dreadful Apprehensions of the imaginary Slavery of the Plantations,
that they choose for the most Part rather to steal, beg, or starve, than
go _Abroad_ to work; and in the mean Time the Magistrates and our Laws
are so mild to them, that like as _Pharaoh_'s lean Kine devoured the fat
ones, they grievously oppress and molest the Rich and the Honest.

But certainly Means might be invented and practised for easing our
Nations of these Burdens, for promoting our Trade and Plantations by
their Industry; and not for the Oppression (whatever some may imagine)
of the Poor and Needy, but for their Maintenance and Felicity. And I
believe this may be done without putting any Stop to the Importation of
_Negroes_, rather than fail, since they might be kept on in their
present Course of Life and Business; only they must raise more _Stock_
and Grain for the Support of the additional _English_, who should stick
solely to the Arts and Employments to which they were bred, or in which
they are most expert. Indeed while Tobacco is the only _Staple_
Commodity of any Consequence to Virginia, the Country may be easily
over-stock'd with _Negroes_, because the Trade can't find _Vent_ for
near all the Tobacco that so many _Hands_ will make; so that the Market
being over-charged, is thus spoiled; for too much of any Commodity is as
bad, if not worse, for the Planter, the Merchant, and the Publick, than
too little. For which Reason the Honourable the Assembly of _Virginia_
has from Time to Time endeavoured to make prudent Provision against
raising too much Tobacco.

For this Cause they lately had a Duty of 5 _l._ a Head for every new
_Negroe_, which Law in a great Measure is now revived; and though this
Addition in the Price of a _Negroe_ made no sensible Decrease in the
Number imported; yet it did this good, _viz._ it brought a great Sum
into the Treasury of the Country, which they have ready to disburse upon
any noble Occasion; such as their late Donation to the College, to
_Williamsburgh_, and their additional Reward for the Apprehension of
Pyrates.

Besides their Attempts for the Prevention of too many _Negroes_, they
have a Law against _Seconds_, which is most serviceable in confining
the Quantity of Tobacco to its proper Bulk. The Intent of this Law is
to prohibit all Persons from manufacturing a second Crop from the Leaves
that sprout out from the Stalk after the first Leaves are cut off; with
a Penalty upon the Offender, and a Reward for the Informer.

The Tobacco and the _Negroe_ Trades might be carried on after the
present Methods, or with any such Regulations as may seem more proper to
those concerned in these Affairs; without any Hindrance to Arts,
Handicrafts, useful Inventions and Cultivations in _Virginia_, for the
Interest and present Trade of the Plantations and _Great Britain_ would
not interfere with such Projects; but on the contrary they would highly
contribute to the mutual Support of each other, with prudent Management
and Care.

The main Difficulty, Trouble, and Expence will chiefly consist in
sending over such Persons as are before-mentioned, and afterwards in
finding them Habitations, Maintenance, and Work when they are settled in
_Virginia_, during the Term of their Service; and after they are free,
with a Livelihood and Imployment for their Posterity.

There can be no Injury in such moderate legal Compulsion as forces
People to be honest and industrious, though it be contrary to their
Inclinations or their false Notions, which ought to be subjected to the
publick Good and Opinion of the Community; and restrained and directed
by the civil Power to pursue such Methods as the Legislature shall judge
most convenient for the united Interest of all the Society or Empire.

Upon this Principle it will be esteemed no Hardship upon our
unfortunate, or lazy, poor, idle Vagrants, nor profligate Wretches, if
the Government obliged them to be transported, and then found Work and a
plentiful Support for them and their Families, since this would tend as
well to their private as the publick Good; it would employ our People
who cannot have Work, or that will not voluntarily labour; it would
secure our Houses and our Pockets, it would ease our Parishes, clear our
Streets, Doors, and Roads, and mightily encrease our Manufactures, and
cultivate our vast Tracts of rich Land that are now but Wildernesses
over-run with large Trees, and inhabited by Deer, Wild-Fowls, _&c._

In order for this some such Laws as the following might suffice. As
first, Persons of any Imployment that can produce sufficient
Certificates of their Honesty, and that after due Application they
cannot get Work, or that they have been reduced to mean Circumstances by
Misfortunes, with such like, should be sent over at the Expence of the
Government, which should also allow them Land and Necessaries for their
Settlement; in Return for which they should do such moderate Work for
the Benefit of the Government, as they shall be ordered for the half of
seven Years, to be thus imployed, _viz._ one Day for themselves, and one
Day for the Government; and so on by Turns, observing _Sunday_ as a Day
of Rest and Devotion. And after the Expiration of these seven Years they
should be free, and might work Journey-Work, or for themselves, and
their Land and Houses should be the Inheritance of them and their Heirs
for ever; paying a small Rent or Fine to the Government for it, besides
the Quit-Rent, out of which Rent and the Produce of their every other
Day's Labour might be allowed a sufficient Salary for Centurions or
Persons to inspect into and direct the Work and Behaviour of these
Servants; and the Overplus certainly would not only pay the Money at
first advanced, but would likewise in a few Years bring in a very great
Income.

But if the Government should decline undertaking this in general, yet
might particular Companies take up Land and advance Money as above
specified, which would in all Probability in a small Time tend to their
great Profit; by carrying on to the best Advantage, in the cheapest way,
their several Manufactures and Arts, imploying therein such unfortunate
poor Persons as are expert in their respective Trades or Callings.

How many honest ingenious People might thus get Work, Maintenance, and
even Estates for themselves and Families, who now lie obscured in
Idleness, and almost devoured by Poverty?

In the next Place, as for Vagrants and Beggars, suppose that all such
Persons that are taken wandering above five Miles from their own Parish
(or less upon Occasion) without a _Pass_ from the Minister and
Church-Wardens, specifying their Business, with Leave for a certain
Time, or without being able to give a good Account of themselves and
their present Imployment; should be put immediately by any House-Keeper
into the Custody of a Constable, who should be obliged to carry them
before the next Justice of the Peace to be examined, and committed to
the next _Bridewell_ or Prison, there to work, till at the next
Quarter-Sessions they be ordered for Transportation, except Infants,
aged and disabled Persons, who should be sent Home to, and maintained by
their own Parishes, if discoverable, or else at the County Charge. These
should serve seven Years for their Maintenance without Wages, with
somewhat less Perquisites and Privileges than those above-mentioned in
all Respects, both during their Service and afterwards; however
sufficient Provision should be made for them, though not so good as for
those others.

In this Class should likewise be included all petty Criminals and
_Bridewell_ Birds, all which should be transported at the Expence of the
County to which they belong, as also should all Convicts and Felons; and
in _Virginia_ should there be appointed proper Persons to take Care of
them, manage, and employ them, who should have Salaries for their
Trouble, paid out of the Returns made by the Labour of the Servants
under their Care; and the Overplus, which in a small Time might prove
very considerable, should belong to the respective County that
transported such Servants, by which Means Funds might easily be raised
in every County or Shire to defray all their publick Expences and
Charges, from the Labour of their Rogues and Beggars, without any
Contribution or Tax of honest and industrious People. But to prevent
Disorder and Mischief among such, they that should be sent over for
little or no Faults but Idleness, should meet with all civil Treatment
and Encouragement, when they did their Endeavours, but undergo the
Severities of _Bridewell_ for their Faults or great Neglect. But such
notorious Villains as are sent over in Chains for Robbery or Murder,
_&c._ should be kept a-part, and in Chains still, and be made Servants
for Life, lest they corrupt the rest, or commit greater Robberies or
Murders than ever they did before; which for want of more Care and
greater Confinement of such Rogues too frequently happen, as they are
now managed.

However, this Rigour might be occasionally abated, when any appear to be
proper Objects of Mercy and Charity; but this should be done with the
Leave of the Government _there_, and Care should be taken of them both
as to their Labour and Provision, and Security should be contrived
against any Danger that may proceed from thence.

I cannot here omit mentioning a late Design of seating all Convicts that
should be imported into _Virginia_, in a County by themselves, under the
Care of proper Overseers, who should confine them from doing any Hurt,
and keep them to their Labour, by such Methods as are used in
_Bridewell_.

The Land intended for this new County is very good, and fit to produce
Hemp and Flax, which they were there solely to cultivate and
manufacture; from whence the County was designed to be called
_Hempshire_.

Tho' this Project was never put in Execution, yet I am of Opinion that
something of this Nature would be very advantageous in securing and
employing our Felons, and for our better Supply of Cordage in our Naval
Stores, and making of Linen of all Sorts.

The last Sort of Servants that I should be for sending over to
_Virginia_ (besides such as are sent by the Methods already in Use) are
the greatest Part of the Parish Poor all over _England_, _Wales_,
_Scotland_, and _Ireland_; so that they should be burdened with none but
such as are very old, very young, or else sickly or disabled, which
would prove a very grateful Ease in most Places, where the general
Complaint is the vast Charge of a numerous Poor; all which might easily
be maintained and employed in _Virginia_, in proper Trades, Inventions,
and Projects, and do great Good to themselves and the Publick.

Here might Work be cut out for Thousands that now pretend to want
Business; and many that now thro' Laziness decline Endeavours to support
themselves and Families, would then seek for Employment, and set to
work in Earnest, being frighten'd into Industry and Labour, through the
dreadful Apprehension of being sent to the Plantations; for such as
could not or would not maintain themselves, and all Girls and Boys that
are in no likelihood of doing this, should have their Names returned to
the Justices by the Church-Wardens and Overseers, at the
Quarter-Sessions, who upon Examination should give Orders for their
Transportation; then would the Parish be eased, and might easily have
honest and laborious People enough to do their Business and Work,
without the Charge of Abundance of lazy or poor People.

These should be sent over at the Expence of the Parish, and their Labour
would soon repay the Cost, and the Overplus might be applied for the
Service of the Parish; so that these would soon maintain the rest of
their Poor, and bring _in_ good Gain to themselves and their
Parishioners in Time, if they were under some such Restrictions, and had
some such Privileges as the first Sort of unfortunate People here
mentioned.

But if these Methods of Transportation be thought impracticable, at the
Expence, and for the Benefit of the Government, the Counties, and the
Parishes, yet might other Contrivances be found to transport the People
above specified, besides the Methods now practiced by some to transport
themselves, and by Mr. _Forward_ and some Merchants for sending over
continually all sorts of Servants; but the present Number is but a
Trifle in respect of what might be sent over, were Laws made for the
better Encouragement thereof, and due Regulations made for the
Employment and Provision of such great Numbers as might yearly be sent
over. For when they are there they need not be employed about Tobacco
and Corn, as they generally are, for that might be compleatly managed
by the _Negroes_; but they should carry on other Inventions, Trades, and
Arts, and be confined to follow their own respective Callings and
Occupations wherein they are most artful; and when their Time is served,
better Care might be taken of them, and such Provision and Privileges
allowed them, that they should be obliged to labour and get plentifully
their own Living in an honest Way.

Now when I come to find Employment for all these People, what a vast
Field is presented to View for their Labour? Nine and Twenty large and
fertile Counties, for the most Part thinly inhabited, with Plenty of all
Sorts of the best Provisions and Materials. Most if not all Sorts of
_English_ Husbandry, I know experimentally, may be carried on there with
much less Labour, and far greater Encrease than in _England_: For
Instance, it is common only by howing up the Ground, and throwing Seed
upon it, and harrowing it in, to reap from sixty to eighty Bushels for
one of _English_ Wheat, of a large full Grain with a thin Rind; and I
have had two Tuns off an Acre of Clover, which we may mow twice; and as
for Barley's being burnt up with dry hot Weather, it often has the same
fate in several Parts of _England_; besides more Experience and
Observation of the Seasons, will make People more expert in the
Management of that, and all other Sorts of Grain, or Seeds, and Grass,
that they have not there brought yet to the greatest Perfection. Several
_English_ Farmers have indeed been baulked of their Expectation, in
Attempts of carrying on their Art to great Advantage in _Virginia_; but
this in a great Measure I attribute to their want of Judgment, and too
strict Observance of the _English_ Customs and Times, without making
proper Allowance for the Difference of Soil, Seasons, and Climates;
besides the vast Expence and Trouble, and the long Time required in
clearing the Ground for their Purpose, in building of Barns,
Farm-Houses, _&c._ so that frequently by that Time that they have
brought their Purposes to Perfection, their Patience begins to be tired,
and their Purses are pretty well emptied; so that at last they run into
the rapid Current of planting Tobacco, which they know will bring them
in certain Gain with but little Expence.

Now for the Conveniency of Husbandry, I know a certain Gentleman, who
employs a great Number of _Negroes_ in clearing Plantations, and
planting Corn and Tobacco, as usual, with this Intention, _viz._ When
these _Negroes_ shall have cleared the Land, planted Hedges, and built
Barns and Farm-Houses gradually in a few Years, without any Hindrance to
their Crops, then he proposed to let these Farms with a Stock of Cattle,
_&c._ ready upon them for a small Rent and Fines, to such poor, honest,
skilful Farmers, as he can procure to come and take them, either upon
long Lease or for Lives; and remove his _Negroes_ upon fresh Land to
prepare more Farms. 'Tis Pity but this Project was frequently practised,
for thereby good Estates might be raised in Families; many an
unfortunate Family might retrieve their bad Circumstances, and find
Employment and great Benefit; and all this carried on with the same
Opportunity of Profit from _Tobacco_, as other Gentlemen Planters have;
nay better, in that the _Hands_ would be still tending fresh Ground.

As for Liquors, they might make as good Malt-Drink, and as cheap there
as any where else; and for Cyder I think it surpasses even
_Herefordshire_ it self, for Plenty and Fairness of Fruit, the Trees
thriving and producing wonderfully, yielding a strong and good tasted
Cyder, when well made and managed, especially if kept in good Vaults.
From Peaches is distilled an excellent Spirit in very great Plenty, very
difficult to be distinguished (when well made) from _Citron Water_. This
they call _Persico_, which with many other _Spirits_ might be made there
to turn to a very good Account, and produced in great Quantities from
their numerous large Orchards of Apples and Peaches. Hogs, horned
Cattle, and Sheep thrive and encrease there mightily; and Salt and Casks
being very cheap, vast Advantage might be made more than is, by raising
of great Stocks, and salting up Beef and Pork for victualling of Ships,
and supplying the _West-Indies_ and other Places with Provisions, which
they might afford to do very cheap, did some of the additional Part of
the Servants before-mentioned make it their Business to tend Flocks and
Herds, and provide better and more Food for them in the Winter, than
what they now usually have. As for the Advantage of Woollen
Manufactures, that is so well known, that I shall say nothing in that
Respect, only that there is in _Virginia_ as good Wool as the finest in
_England_; and I doubt not but with good Management the Climate will
produce as fine as any in _Spain_, since the Sheep in both Places are of
_British_ Original; and in my Opinion it would be a great Advantage
(instead of Detriment) to have fine Wool enough of our own to work up,
without being beholden to _Spain_ for it; especially if we consider that
it might either be sent Home to be wrought in _Britain_, or else we
might send over Numbers of our superfluous Cloth-workers to make it up
there into the same Sorts of Goods, as they make in _England_, which
would be much the cheapest way; and then these Goods should be imported
to the Clothiers _here_, who undoubtedly would have _Call_ enough for
what they can make in _Virginia_ and at Home; for if they see Occasion
they need not encrease the Quantity, but only make Use of Plantation
Wool raised by _Britons_, instead of _Spanish Wool_; and the Decrease of
our Exports to _Spain_ might sufficiently be balanced (if not upon
Account of employing Numbers of our own People, yet) by many other Ways.
Neither can I see any Harm in it, if the carrying on Woollen
Manufactures in _Virginia_ by _English_ People that want Employment, the
Quantity of Woollen Goods were thereby encreased; especially such as are
for Home Consumption, and the Use of the Plantations; for then Rich and
Poor would have their Cloths much cheaper; and if the Draper gained less
by his Countrymen, it might be contrived that he should gain more by
Strangers abroad in other Parts of the World.

More might be said as to the Manufactures of Hemp and Flax, than what I
have mentioned of Wool, because we are in a great Measure obliged for
these to foreign Nations, who in Case of War might pinch us prodigiously
more than they do; more particularly to the great Expence and
Inconveniency of our Shipping, the Glory and Bulwark of the _British_
Nations. Here we have enough of good Land lying waste; and at Home we
have People lying idle sufficient to supply us from _Virginia_, with
Ropes, Cables, and Canvas for our Ships of War and Merchandize, with
Linens for wearing and for houshold Use, were Projects set on Foot, and
rightly carried on for so useful and advantageous Undertakings.

Besides this, there is Pitch and Tar enough, which with careful
Management might be made as good, and afforded as cheap, or cheaper,
than any from other Places.

Then as for Oak no Country has finer nor more Plenty; which though it
will not last long enough for Houses, yet it will for Shipping: Witness
the _New England_ Ships built of the same Sort of Wood; and as for Deal
Planks here may be as good as any; and I question if _Gottenburgh_, or
any other Part of _Europe_ can afford us better Pines for Masts and
Yards (especially for Merchants Use) than what grow in _Virginia_ in
several Places in very great Plenty; so that many Ships might be built
there, which would employ Numbers of Shipwrights from _Great Britain_,
and would stand the Merchants in a great deal less Expence, than if they
were built at Home: Nay, we might even build Ships for several other
Nations, and make them turn to a very good Account, without any Risk of
doing Damage to our publick Safety or Interest.

As for Wine, in all Parts of the Country Grapes grow wild and thrive
extreamly, but at present they are almost only Food for the Birds; few
Attempts having been made for the Cultivation of them and making Wines,
except that of Colonel _Robert Beverley_, which was thus: He having
read, seen, studied, and enquired much concerning the Nature of
Vintages, reduced his Knowledge to Practice for his better Experience
and Certainty, in planting a small Vineyard; and having great Prospect
that this would answer his Purpose, he bragged much of it in Publick;
but being bantered by several Gentlemen, he proposed to give each of
them a Guinea down, if they would give him Ten, if he made a certain
Number of Gallons of pure Wine that Vintage; they accepted the
Proposals, and he distributed (I think) one hundred Guineas, made the
Wine according to the Terms agreed upon, and won his Wager; which Money
he afterwards employed in planting more and greater Vineyards, from
which he made good Quantities of Wine, and would have brought it to very
high Perfection, had he lived some Years longer.

His whole Family, even his _Negroes_ drank scarce any thing but the
small Wines, and the Strong is of a good Body and Flavour; the Red that
I have often drank to me seems to have the Taste of _Claret_ and the
Strength of _Red Port_. Not only red Grapes, but also white ones of all
Sorts from _Europe_ produce and grow there to Admiration; an Instance of
which may be seen at Colonel _William Robinson_'s upon _Rappahannock_
River, who has planted out Abundance; and I don't question but he and
other Gentlemen there will follow Mr. _Beverley_'s Pattern; which if
brought to Perfection might tend to an extraordinary good Account, and
not only prove profitable to the Planter, but also advantageous to
_Britain_, even if we could but make small Quantities of Wine there; but
much more beneficial would it be if there could be made Abundance, as in
all Probability there might be, since the Climate and the Soil seem so
extreamly well adapted for that Purpose; especially up towards the Hills
and Mountains, which at present lye waste. Would it not be very
advantageous to our Nations if we could not only raise much Wine for our
own Use, but also sell great Quantities to our Neighbours? And I know of
but two trifling Obstacles in the way; the one is, that the Clusters of
Grapes rarely ripen together, which might be remedied by picking them at
different Times; the other is, that the Birds devour Abundance; but this
might be prevented by Nets, Guns, _Priapus_, and several other
Contrivances. This would employ great Numbers of People, has upon Trial
been proved to answer Expectation, and might bring vast Profit to the
Planter, to the Merchant, and to the Crown.

To encourage this, I know some that intend to let Land for a small
Acknowledgment in Wine. Much the same might be said of Silk, which long
ago has been made there, and is known by Experience to answer the
Expectation of the Silk Men. For Mulberries of all Sorts thrive there to
Admiration, and the Heat of the Summer has been found to agree with the
Nature of the Silk-Worm extreamly well; so that the only Reason that I
know, why the Gentlemen formerly concerned in making of Silk in
_Virginia_ drop'd their Proceedings, was the great Profit that Tobacco
brought them _in_ in those Days; which being raised there _only_, turned
_then_ to an extraordinary Advantage, much better than any other
Project; but now when _so much_ Tobacco is made, and the Gain so much
less than formerly, I can't imagine why the Silk Trade is not there
revived; which I am very positive would turn to a very great Account, if
carried on by good Managers. To this _Nature_ seems to invite us; for
upon the Leaves of the _Chinckapin_ (which seem somewhat like Mulberry
Leaves) I have frequently found a very large Worm not much unlike the
Silk-Worm, only much bigger.

If the Manufacture of Silk was carried on in _Virginia_, every Body
knows what Profit it must bring to make Silk of the Produce of our own
Dominions, in great Plenty, and at cheaper Rates than we can have it
from _Asia_.

Besides, we may observe that the great Numbers of People employed in
this Manufacture, for the most Part, might be the young, the aged, and
the disabled, who could not work at any thing that required hard Labour
or much Stirring.

As for Hops, _England_ might save a great deal of Trouble and Expence,
and employ their People in better Business than Hop-Yards, if
Hop-Grounds were cultivated in _Virginia_, which is much fitter for the
Purpose.

As for physical Plants and Trees, abundance of Poor might be employed in
_simpling_ and collecting Drugs for the Apothecaries Service, which
abound there; such as Sassafras, Saxafras, Snakeroot, with numberless
more, whose Virtue is unknown; and undoubtedly among such various Sorts
of anonymous Plants and Shrubs, there must be many whose Qualities are
strange to the most skilful _Europeans_, tho' many of them be understood
by the _Indian_ Doctors: If it be not the true _Cortex_, yet they have a
_Bark_ very like it in Colour, Taste, and Operation.

I know that Abundance of Sumack is yearly consumed in _England_; but not
being perfect in the Use and Nature of it, I shall only say that it
grows there in great Plenty; and that the _Indians_ have several fine
Colours both for Dying and Painting, that we know nothing of, as to
their Composition and Use; but Enquiry into these Things, and Experience
might, for what any knows, in a small Time turn to a good Account, both
for the publick Advantage, and for the Interest of particular Persons.

I shall say little of Sawing-Mills, since they are already in Use there,
and the great Benefit of them is so well known. Certainly it must be
improper to bestow much Labour and Expence upon that which might easily
be done for a small Cost, and with much quicker Expedition; yet is this
wonderful and useful Invention prohibited in some Parts of _Great
Britain_, upon Account of a few that pretend they can't get their
Livelihood by any other, but the stupid slavish Work of Sawing: But in
my Opinion we might as well prohibit the Use of Boats in all our Rivers,
because it interferes with the Interest of the Carriers, and hinders the
Consumption of great Quantities of Hay and Oats in the Inns. I wonder
that they don't neglect the Use of Horses, Jacks, Handspikes, and Cranes
in his Majesty's Yards, as well as Sawing-Mills; since each of them
abbreviates Labour and lessens the Expence, requiring fewer People than
must be employed, were it not for those Inventions, so much hated by the
common People; but certainly these might be so employed in other
Business, as to get more Money with less Labour. But to return to
_Virginia_, I am certain that if more Sawing-Mills were set up there, it
would bring great Profit to the Owners, employ many People there, and
make Timber for Ships and Houses come at a much cheaper Rate in
_England_, than it now does, without any Loss to the _English_ landed
Gentlemen or Timber Merchants.

Paper-Mills I believe would answer well there; for there are good Runs
of Water with Timber _for nothing_ for building them, and I am sure the
_Negroes_ would supply them with Rags enough for Trifles; to which add
the Advantage of Water Carriage; these need not interfere with the
_English_ Paper-Mills, but only supply us with such Quantities of Paper,
as we buy from foreign Countries.

As for carrying on the Fishing Trade in _Virginia_, though there be
Plenty of Fish there, yet I believe other Countries where Fisheries are
establish'd, and that have little else to mind and depend upon, would
outdo it in this Respect; only more Whales might be taken upon the
_Eastern_ Shore, and bring good Gain to such People as would make it
their Business; and I don't question but the Sturgeons (with the best of
which the Rivers abound) might with good Management and Industry be made
to surpass all others, both for Cheapness and Goodness, for they are
large, fine, and easily taken; nay, they frequently leap, some ashoar
and some in Boats, as I have been very credibly informed.

Upon the Rivers and Creeks are vast large Marshes, which being drained
and secured with mud Walls, would employ abundance of People, and might
be converted into as good Meadows and as large, as those upon the
_Thames_ about and below _London_. Such Meadows are much wanting there,
and would well recompence the Cost and Trouble of the Undertakers of
such noble Projects; besides this would confine the Rivers to their
proper Channels; whereas now they cover for Miles from each Shoar large
Quantities of flat and shoaly Ground, useless and incommodious. However
impracticable or difficult this Task may appear to some, yet I doubt not
but in Process of Time it may be effected.

The upper Parts of _Virginia_ are deprived of the Advantage of Water
Carriage, because the Rivers above the _Falls_ are generally full of
Trees brought down by Land Floods, with some Rocks here and there; but
they might be made navigable, and cleared very easily with small skilful
Labour, for they are generally broad and fuller of Water than our inland
Rivers where Boats and Barges of great Burden can pass; and _Wears_
might be occasionally made there as up the _Thames_; but the main
Difficulty would be at the _Falls_ or Cataracts, where the Water falls
over vast Rocks with an hideous Noise and great Force. Hither Sloops
can come, where the Goods might be landed with Cranes, and then put on
Board the Boats above the Falls; and by the like Methods might Goods be
sent down. But in Time it may be worth while to _turn_ Part of the
Rivers, and make _Locks_ one above another, whereby Sloops might easily
be let down or taken up, and so pass the Falls; like as the large Boats
of Pleasure and Burden are carried with Profit and Ease thro' Vallies
and over Hills quite a-cross _France_, in the wonderful Canal of
_Languedoc_, which was contrived by the late King, in order to make a
Communication from our Seas, to the _Mediterranean_ through the Heart
(almost) of his Kingdom; which Action has added to his Glory as well as
Profit, and brings in a great Income both to the Crown and to the
Undertaker of this most wonderful Work. If in _England_ we will not
follow this Example by making a Communication from the head Branches of
the _Thames_ into the _Severn_, which is very practicable, the Distance
being but a few Miles; yet I question not but in a few Years they will
be obliged to imitate the _Locks_ of _Languedoc_ at the _Falls_ in
_Virginia_.

In the Rocks up _James_ River, and in other Places is found a Stone
resembling a Diamond, much nearer than any Crystal or _Bristol-Stone_,
being very hard and ornamental.

There has been formerly discovered a Sand taken for Gold Dust; and
towards the Mountains are variety of Stones, some seeming to contain
several Kinds of Metals, and others are good for Building; among which
is the Appearance of Abundance of excellent Marble of several Sorts.
Upon the River Sides is cast up by the Tides abundance of black heavy
Sand resembling Smith's Filings; but the Nature and Vertue of this is
unknown as yet: I believe it is washed from some Veins of Mines at the
Bottoms of the Rivers, or is carried down by the Current, as Gold Dust
in _Africa_, from the upper Parts of the Rivers, and from the Rocks and
Mountains.

In several Places is Coal enough near the Surface of the Earth; and
undoubtedly in Time they will either have Occasion or Vent for it, to
supply other Places, if they will not use it themselves; but if Coal
Works were there carried on to Advantage, _Newcastle_ may witness, what
Numbers of Ships and People are employed in such Affairs, and what vast
Profit accrues from thence.

If our Iron Works in _Virginia_ meet with any tolerable Encouragement,
we shall have no Need to apply to _Spain_ and _Sweden_ for Iron, for we
have there enough to stock all _Europe_; and as I have been informed it
surpasses all other Iron in Goodness and Cheapness. This Manufacture
might be carried on without any Detriment to the Iron Merchants and
Makers in _England_; for they might stint the Quantity, have it all
brought into their Hands, and use _themselves_ what they want instead of
foreign Iron, and vend Abroad the Overplus that they may permit to be
made. Certainly this most useful Commodity would come cheaper from our
own Dominions than from other Countries; and in working it from the
_Oar_ to the _Bar_ would employ great Numbers of People that now beg or
steal for their Living. As for working Iron up into Instruments and
Tools in _Virginia_, I believe they would scarce desire so great
Liberty; unless upon Consideration the Gentlemen concerned in such hard
Ware found it to be for the Interest of themselves, their Workmen, and
the Publick, to send over People to make all Sorts of Utensils in Iron
in _Virginia_, where they may have all Sorts of Provisions and Materials
for their Work much cheaper than in _England_; where they may have Land
to settle for little or nothing; where Wood, Oar, and Water Conveniences
are plentiful. What Detriment would it be to work up Iron there, if it
may be done cheaper, and by the same People, who are so numerous in
_England_ that they can (abundance of them) hardly get Work and a poor
Livelihood? But if it will not be granted that Iron shall be _wrought_
in _Virginia_, yet might it be _cast_ there; if _Forges_ will not be
allowed there, yet might _Furnaces_ be encouraged, from whence our
Merchants may be supplied with better and cheaper Iron than from other
Places; and Recompence might easily be made in the Trade to _Spain_ and
_Sweden_, &c. for the Deficiency that would ensue in the Quantities of
Goods exported thither in Exchange for their Iron.

_Virginia_ is justly esteemed one of the most considerable Branches of
the _British_ Dominions; may it then not be thought very hard that the
_Virginians_ should not only be debarred the Favours allowed other
_Britons_; but also have less Privilege allowed them than is given to
foreign Nations? What then may be the Reason why other Nations are
permitted to import their _bar Iron_, whereas the _Virginians_ shall not
make a _Bar_, and must pay the Duty of foreign Iron for all the _pig_
and _sow_ Iron that they make?

I might mention more Projects, that in all Probability would turn to an
extraordinary Advantage, if carried on in _Virginia_; but I presume
these may suffice as a Specimen to shew how useful and easy it is to
promote many Trades, Arts, and Manufactures there, and what Numbers of
poor, idle, and wicked People may there be employed, and get a plentiful
Maintenance and Settlement for their Families, and by their Labour may
enrich themselves, the Planters and Merchants, benefit our Trade,
encrease the Revenue of the Crown, and advance the Interest and Glory of
_Great Britain_, _Ireland_, and all the _English_ Plantations and
Settlements Abroad.

I shall conclude this Scheme with observing, that the People sent over
for such Employments as are here mentioned, when rightly settled, might
have their Provision much cheaper than in _England_, and might have
their Cloths sent over at the best Hand; and might be seated
conveniently on Tracts of Land taken up, bought, or rented by long and
cheap Leases; which besides the Profit of their Labour would secure
Estates for Thousands of poor miserable Wretches, would advance the
Price of Land, and augment the Income of the Quit-Rents.




SCHEME IV.

_Of Trade in_ Virginia.


The Projects before laid down might be put in Execution without any
Impediment to the planting of Tobacco, Corn, _&c._ in the Methods that
are now practised, and without any Loss to the present _Virginia_ Trade,
and Income to the Crown arising from Tobacco, or Decrease of the vast
Quantities of all Sorts of Commodities yearly transported to that large
Plantation. And till such Designs as are here laid down be put in
Execution, or brought to due Regulation and Perfection, it might not be
Cost and Labour thrown away if the _Virginia_ Gentlemen, Traders and
Planters attempted at some, if not all the Things mentioned for their
Advantage in the last Scheme; especially when Tobacco is so very low,
that it is not worth while to plant too much of it, which frequently
happens. They might soon perceive if these Designs would answer
Expectation; and Trials for Experience at their Leisure would not cost
much; for their Experience, I say, rather than their Satisfaction,
because they may be satisfied as to the Practicableness and Usefulness
of most of these Things, from the repeated Proofs that have been already
made in most of these Commodities, together with many more;
particularly Hides, which I forgot to mention, which are now hardly of
any Use or Value there, but might be tann'd very cheap, because of the
Plenty of Bark; and I believe likewise that good Use might be made of
their Sheep and Calf-Skins, which are now of no Value nor Use worth
speaking of. What Numbers would the Manufacture of these Things employ,
and what Advantage would it bring to the Workmen and the Planters?

But I see that these Propositions may raise the loud Clamours of
Thousands of People concerned in _England_, in the Trades belonging to
all the Commodities here spoken of: In Answer to whose various
Objections it may be replied, that all these Things would be wrought by
their own Countrymen, poor Neighbours, or Friends; that it will ease
them of their Poor, Vagabonds, and Villains: That all these Goods are to
be transported to _England_, so that in reality _Virginia_ would be only
as a Yard or Work-House where these Servants and Journeymen would labour
for the _English_; besides several of these Things are such as we are
wholly or in part supplied with from other Nations; and certainly we had
better have Goods of the Produce of our own People and Countries, than
buy them of Strangers, who make them for us; and if too great Quantities
of any kind should be made, more than our own Consumption requires,
surely it will be very advantageous for us, if we can supply other
Nations with such Goods, the best of their Kind, and at the cheapest
Rate. Whenever any of these Projects should interfere with the Interest
of _Great Britain_, by all Means they should be stop'd; and when
particular Trades or Persons might receive Damage by any of these
Projects carried on in _Virginia_, Amends might be made them by some
other Privileges and Advantages in several other Respects. Such Things
should be encouraged _there_, though they made less of several Kinds
_here_; for Abundance of our People and our Land might be employed more
properly in other Things, rather than in what they are; which might be
much more easy to them, more agreeable to their Soil, and more to the
Interest of themselves and the Publick; especially with Respect to such
Things as would be produced better, with less Labour and more Plenty,
with less Expence and more Profit in _Virginia_ than in _Great Britain_.
Such Things certainly might more properly be manufactured there, and our
Land and our People now employed at Home about those Things should be
put to better Uses and Purposes, more suitable and more beneficial both
for the publick and private Interest. These Measures would create no
Alteration in the present Trade and Methods, but would only augment and
add new Advantages and Improvements to our Merchandize and Manufactures:
Instead of being a Hindrance to the present Customs and Methods, it
would promote the Interest and Trade both of _Great Britain_ and
_Virginia_, and the other Plantations. Would it not be for the Good of
Thousands of unfortunate People, besides for the Benefit of _Virginia_,
if Farmers were there well settled, and Husbandry carried on regularly,
and all Sorts of Grain and Grass brought to Perfection; if greater
Quantities of good Cyder and fine Spirits were made there, not only for
their own Use, but for Transportation to the _West-Indies_; nay, and
thro' _England_ to the _Turkish_ Dominions where Wine is prohibited? How
cheap might Ships be there victualled with the best Provision, and what
Quantities of barrelled Pork and Beef might be exported from
_Virginia_, with _Indian_ Corn, Wheat, Rye, _&c._ and be sent to several
Parts of the World, where such Things turn to very good Account for the
Merchant and Farmer? Many indeed have been baulked in _planting and
husbandry_ there; but such have been chiefly _Londoners_, who are
Strangers to Country Business. Any Person may conceive the great Profit
and Use to Trade in general, by having the Marshes turned into Meadows,
the Rivers confined to deep Channels, by Passages being contrived at the
_Falls_, and the upper Parts of the Rivers being made navigable.
_England_ is the Mart and Store-House, whither the Manufactures and
vendible Goods of _Virginia_ for the most Part should be sent; and after
the _English_ have culled what they like and have Occasion for, surely
they are so skilful in Merchandize, that they could vend to other
Countries the Overplus of these Commodities, and reap sufficient Profit
for their Pains. Thus suppose we should have more of the following
Things than our own Use requires, certainly they might easily and
profitably be disposed of to others; such as the leathern and woollen
Manufactures, hempen and flaxen Goods, Pitch, Tar, Timber for Ship and
House-Carpenters, and Cabinet-Makers, Joyners, _&c._ such as Oak, Deal,
Walnut, Hickory, Cedar, Cypress, Locust, and the like, with Masts,
Yards, Ships, and all Sorts of naval Stores, with Planks, Clapboards,
and Pipestaves; and also Hops, Wine, Hoops, Cask, Silk, Drugs, Colours,
Paper, Train Oil, Sturgeon, with various Sorts of Stones, Minerals, and
Oars, with Cord, Wood, and Coals, and Metals, particularly Iron; which
last, if it meets with proper Encouragement, will soon be made extreamly
useful to the Publick.

I shall not insist at large upon the great Profit accruing from the
Goods sold to the _Indians_, and their Dear-Skins and Furs which we buy.
There is Land, Provision, Materials, and all other Requisites for
carrying on these Things to the greatest Perfection and Profit; and must
not Trade and Shipping be wonderfully benefited and advanced, by
transporting to and fro the Persons and Things before-mentioned?

These Projects would tend to the great Interest of the Plantation, as
well as the Good of Thousands of poor or idle _English_, and the
Advantage of the _English_ Dominions and Trade in general; and besides
the Benefits above-mentioned, we may further observe, that by such Means
our inferior People that now are cloathed with Rags, being promoted to
Circumstances that would afford it, would yearly expend vast Sums in
good Apparel, Houshold Goods, _&c._ which they must be supplied with
from _Great Britain_, whereas now they are not only useless, but even
are noxious Branches of our Society; to which Class we may reduce at
least (I believe) 1/20 Part of our People, who might thus be put in a
Method, not only to maintain themselves handsomly and live well, but
likewise by their Consumption of Goods would support Thousands of
Families in the manufacturing of such Commodities as they may have
Occasion for: And the Addition to our publick Riches, which would be
required in the Advancement of the Fortunes and Estates of all these
mean People, would arise from the Encrease of our foreign Trade, in
supplying other Countries with those Commodities, many of which we now
even buy ourselves; so that in Realty these Folks might be maintained
and provided for well at the Expence of foreign Nations, without the
least Charge or Contribution (in effect) of our own Fellow-Subjects.

_Virginia_ was the first Plantation, and is one of the very best and
largest, depending most directly upon the Crown, and bringing most into
the Treasury upon account of the _Customs_ and _Quit-Rents_; therefore
it has the first Title to claim, and a superior Right to demand such
Encouragement, as may tend to the speedy Promotion of its Trade and
Prosperity. This Colony ought first to be brought to its greatest
Perfection, and then the others may crave the like Assistance, in such
Methods as may best suit with their Occasion and particular
Circumstances; so that in their Course continually all the Plantations
might be made constant and sure Receptacles, and find sufficient
Provision and Employment for all our Poor, our Beggars, and our
notorious Rogues; all which might more effectually and expeditiously be
brought to pass, if our Slave Trade were moderated, if not ended, and
exchanged for some other as advantageous for the Merchant, and the
publick Good; for by what I understand since the Plantations are so well
stock'd with Slaves, and they breed and thrive there so prodigiously,
the Company has not gained very exceedingly by slaving of late Years;
but be their Gain much or little, I am persuaded that if fewer Slaves
were imported to _Virginia_, it would be better for the _Virginia_
Planters and Merchants; and with humble Submission I am of Opinion that
the _African_ Traders might prosecute more gainful Adventures than too
much _slaving_.

But I should not pretend to direct in the Regulation of Trade; only I
shall take Leave to make this Observation as to the Trade of _Virginia_,
viz. It is great Pity but that the publick Tobacco were well ordered;
for the Publick, the County, and the Parish Levies might be paid much
better, there being too frequently Deficiencies, both in the Manner of
the Payment, and the Quality of the Commodity.

This with the _Negroe_ Trade is what the Assembly have often considered
and attempted to rectify; in which Respects their strenuous Endeavours
justly merit the Applause and grateful Acknowledgments of all Persons
interested in these Affairs. As for the _English_ Laws and Duties
relating to Tobacco, they are out of my Sphere; only I know that
frequently the Duty is so high, and the Price so low, that it is very
hard for the _Merchant_; and the _Planter_ and the _Smoaker_ get little
or nothing but their _Labour for their Pains and Expence_; for it has
happened that _Planters_, who have had a great Dependance upon their
Years Crop of Tobacco, for the Support of themselves and Families, have,
instead of clearing any thing, been brought in Debt by it, the Charges
and Duties far over-balancing the Price of the Tobacco; so that though
the _Virginians_ are for the most Part very eager at making Tobacco,
which formerly turned to a vast Account, yet of late Years they
sometimes get little or nothing by it, but Trouble and Loss; because of
the great Expence in making and sending it _Home_ to Market, and the
great Duties which are paid out of it, and the small Price that it
usually bears, especially when there is no great Demand and Call for it.
Besides many Frauds having of late Years crept into the Trade, and
Abundance of Tobacco being counterfeited, and more _run_ in some Parts
and Ports of _Great Britain_, the cunning Dealer often by such Means
ruins the fair Trader, by vending his poor damaged counterfeited or run
Goods at a cheap Rate, thus underselling his Neighbour, imposing upon
the Publick, and defrauding the Government; nay, 'tis said that such
have often doubly cheated the Government, first by running Tobacco, or
entering all light Hogsheads at Importation, which in their Language is
called _Hickory-puckery_; and then again by getting a Debenture for
Tobacco that has been run, or entering all heavy Hogsheads for
Exportation, which they term _Puckery-hickory_; after which it is said
that the same Tobacco has been _runned_ again into some neighbouring
Port.

It must be allowed as a Demonstration that some such Practices have been
used, if upon Enquiry it be discoverable that the Government has lost by
the Customs, when the Amount even of the Debentures has by much exceeded
the Income of the Duties; without any Allowance for the vast Quantity
that is consumed in the Country in smoaking, chewing, Snuff, _&c._

Having here and in the last Scheme spoken of the Vent that might be
contrived for the additional Produce of _Virginia_, I shall add no more
upon that Subject, but subjoin a few Considerations relating to all the
Plantations in general.

The Extent, the Wealth, the numerous Inhabitants, the Hands employed,
the Goods consumed, the Duties and Customs occasioned by the
Plantations, especially such as _Virginia_, are well worthy the most
serious Consideration, and claim the greatest Favour and Encouragement
in the Trade and Manufactures of those Places, which are vastly larger
than all his _Majesty_'s Dominions in _Europe_, and in Time may become
as considerable; they being at present one of the chiefest Causes and
main Supports of our Trade, and bringing as much Money into the
Treasury, and the Purses of Merchants, and other People, as most other
Parts of the World to which we trade.

The Good of the Publick consists as well in the Welfare of the Subject,
as in the Power and Riches of the Prince; Regard being to be had as well
to the Circumstances of the one, as the other. Now the Advancement of
Trade and Manufactures in the Plantations in the highest Degree respects
both the Sovereign and the Subject, in which both the publick and
private Interest is deeply engaged; therefore should the Plantation
Trade and Manufactures be set upon the best Footing imaginable; be
carried on strenuously to the best Advantage; and be granted all
reasonable Favour, Protection, and Encouragement. They are Branches and
chief Members, why then may they not continue justly to partake of the
same Privileges and Advantages that are enjoyed by _England_, which may
truly be esteemed their Head, to which they are inseparably joined, as
being essential Parts of the same _Body Politick_? I need not relate the
Fable of the Head and Members, for every one knows the Moral inferred
from it; how that unless the Members travel and labour for the Service
of the Head and Body, and the Head contrives, and the Body conveys
Nourishment and Sustenance to the Members, the whole Fabrick, both Head,
Body, and Members would soon perish, and moulder to Dust. I presume that
the Application of this to _Great Britain_, and our Trade and
Plantations may not be altogether improper.

There can be no Room for real Apprehension of Danger of a Revolt of the
Plantations in future Ages: Or if any of them should attempt it, they
might very easily be reduced by the others; for _all of them_ will
never unite with one another; for though all the Plantations agree in
this, that they all belong to, and depend entirely upon _Great Britain_;
yet they have each Views different from one another, and as strenuously
pursue their separate Interests, by various and distinct Methods.
Besides, they can't possibly be without _Great Britain_, to which they
owe their being at first made Colonies; and afterwards have been always
supported, maintained and employed by it. They can't live without this
_Mart_ for their Manufactures and Market, for Supply of Goods that they
want; where they have a great Interest, from whence they are descended,
to which they are united by Blood, Religion, Language, Laws, and
Customs, and also they have and may always expect to find greater
Favour, Encouragement, and Protection in _England_, than from any other
Nation in the World. The Plantations cannot possibly subsist without
some Trade, Correspondence, Union, and Alliance in _Europe_, and
absolute Necessity obliges them to fix these perpetually in _Great
Britain_. Upon which, as upon a Stock, they are ingrafted, spring forth,
blossom and bear Fruit abundantly, and being once lop'd off from it,
they would soon wither and perish; thus is it the Interest and Safety,
as well as the Duty and Inclination of the Inhabitants of our
Plantations, always to be subservient to the Government of _England_, by
which they are planted, protected, supported, assisted, and encouraged.

'Tis true indeed, that the _Roman_ Colonies, so famous and flourishing
of old, are long ago all quite extinct; but then this is to be
attributed to the Decline and Destruction of the _Roman_ Empire it self,
and had that continued, in all Probability _England_ it self had still
been a _Roman_ Colony, as it once was; but when the _Romans_ forsook
_England_, then _England_ soon disowned _Rome_, being obliged to apply
for Succour to the _Saxons_, afterwards to the _Danes_, and afterwards
being brought to the _Norman_ Establishment; from whence it has
wonderfully and gradually advanced its own Grandeur, Wealth, Dominions
and Trade, to its present immense and glorious Bulk; in which thriving
and flourishing Course may it still prosperously proceed in the present
Establishment in Church and State, till Time it self shall have an End.

The _Roman_ Colonies were for the greatest Part inhabited by the Nations
to whom the Countries belonged before the Approach of the _Roman_
Legions, who first subdued them, and then made them as Slaves rather
than Fellow Subjects; so that when the Forces that kept them in Awe and
Slavery were removed, they then readily embraced the joyful Opportunity
of recovering their antient Rights and Laws, and reassuming their old
Religions and Liberties, and rescuing themselves and their Country from
Slavery and Bondage, wherewith they had been captivated by the _Roman_
Conquests.

But in our Colonies and Plantations the Case is vastly different; we
have there few or none of the _Indian_ Inhabitants intermix'd with us;
the Country is capacious enough for our Reception in the Islands and
along the Coasts, and there is sufficient Room for the _Indians
backwards_ upon the Continent. Our Colonies are all inhabited for the
most Part by _Britons_ and _Irish_; their Trade and Interest, Customs,
Laws, and Religion are agreeable to, or the same with ours; neither is
there any Necessity for Fleets or Armies to keep them in Subjection and
Awe.

Instead of forsaking _England_, it may be in the Power (as well as it
would be the Interest) of the Plantations to assist _England_ against
any foreign Force, that in future Ages may injure, insult, or molest it.

The greatest Occasion that the Plantations have or may require for
powerful Assistance from _England_, is upon Account of the Pyrates who
abominably infest their Seas and Coasts; but a competent Number of bold
and active _Men of War_ might soon take all those Nests of Robbers; and
Contrivances for proper Employment for such wild and extravagant People,
and more honest Work for Sailors in the Plantations, might in a great
Measure prevent Pyrates. Several come in upon _Acts of Grace_; the rest
might be subdued by Force, and confined to proper Labour and Industry;
and Encouragement and Work might be found for all such as may be
suspected to be inclinable for _the Account_, as they call it; thus if
we cannot, or rather will not execute proper Measures for the
Extirpation of Pyrates in the _American_ Seas, yet certainly we should
put a Stop to their Encrease, and not suffer them to swarm one Year more
than another, which surely may be made very practicable by apt
Endeavours, courageous Care, and good Conduct; as may most remarkably be
evidenced by the well concerted Expedition from _Virginia_ to _North
Carolina_ against _Blackbeard_ and his Crew, and the most successful
Efforts of the celebrated Captain _Ogle_, who made such effectual Use of
his Commission and Opportunity.

A few more such famous Commanders as Captain _Brand_ and Captain _Ogle_
might soon secure our Plantation Merchandize, and clear a free Passage,
and safely guard our Coasts and convoy our Ships, and either totally
abolish all Pyratical Republicks, or else at least put a Curb and
Restraint upon their outrageous Insults. These are Matters of greatest
Consequence to our Plantations, and the trading Part of our Nation; and
therefore ought not to be neglected and slighted, but committed to the
Management of such Persons, of the greatest Honour, Resolution, and
Discretion, who prefer the Publick before their private Trade, mind the
Interest of their Country as much as, or more than their own, that will
make it their chief Business to find, that dare to attack, and are able
to conquer, these bold and desperate Rovers, the greatest of Reprobates.
Such gallant Persons, if they be rare to be found, ought the more to be
rewarded and encouraged, valued and honoured.

The last Thing that I shall mention with Regard to the Advantage of
Trade in _Virginia_, is the absolute Necessity of a better Regulation of
the Post-Office there, for the safe and quicker Conveyance of Letters.

Having thus delivered my Sentiments concerning Learning and Education,
Religion, Arts and Inventions, and Trade in _Virginia_, with some
general Remarks concerning all the Plantations, I draw near a Period
upon these Subjects, supposing that what I have here mentioned may be
enough to inform the Curious, and satisfy the candid Reader; knowing
that I have writ a great deal more than they will relish or approve of,
whose Humour or Interest may clash with my Opinion and Propositions; but
I assure such that I don't vainly imagine that these my private
Sentiments should be obligatory to any that dislike them, or that they
are absolutely necessary to be punctually observed and complied with by
them; but I only humbly offer these my Thoughts to the Consideration of
all such as are concerned or skilled in these Matters; who certainly
have Liberty either to reject them, or approve of them, as they shall
esteem it most reasonable, according to their best Judgment and
Discretion.

I shall only add, that if from these my private Notions and Remarks any
_one_ publick Good may be extracted, it will prove a great Satisfaction
to me, in that the Intent of this Memorial will be answered, tho' but in
a very small Degree, which joyful Satisfaction will be raised in the
same Proportion as the Use of this Treatise encreases; but if at last it
should happen that _no_ Good should proceed from this my weak Endeavour;
nevertheless (I hope) my Labour will not be imputed to me as criminal;
since I have hereby offered my best Service in the Advancement of the
Interest, and for the Promotion of the Good of a Country, to which I am
in the highest Degree obliged.

FINIS.




_ERRATA._


  PAGE 6. Line 2. and p. 22. l. 4. read _Powhatan_.
  p.   7. l.   9. r. _West-Indians_.
  p.   8. l.  22. r. _or sometimes_.
  p.  11. l.   4. for _flung_ r. _slung_.
  p.  16. l.  18. r. _Mohomny_.
  p.  21. l.  22. f. _Professions_ r. _Possessions_.
  p.  22. l.  28. f. _Country_ r. _County_.
  p.  39. l.  19. f. _hired_ r. _tired_.
  p.  42. l.   2. f. _these_ r. _they_.
  p.  45. l.   2. f. _certain_ r. _in hopes_.
  p.  46. l.  24. f. _few_ r. _most_.
  p.  57. l.   4. f. _being_ r. _which being_.
  ibid.   l.   7. f. _the trench_ r. _a hole_.
  p.  60. l.   4. f. _Wines_ r. _Vines_.
  ib.     l.  17. f. _Planks_ r. _Plants_.
  p.  61. l.  28. f. _may_ r. _think to_.
  p   62. l.  30. r. _Mannacan_.
  p.  88. l.   9. r. _President_.
  p.  93. l.  24. r. _a Fellow_.
  p.  96. l.  14. f. _This_ r. _These_.
  ibid.   l.  33. r. _Ethicks_.
  p. 116. l.  24. f. _Passages_ r. _Purposes_.
  p. 129. l.   8. f. _it seems_ r. _seems_.
  p. 132. l.  16. f. _so as_ r. _as_.
  p. 134. l.   4. f. _before_ r. _above_.


_BOOKS printed for_ JOHN CLARKE, _at the_ Bible, _under the_
Royal-Exchange, Cornhill.


An Accidence to the _English_ Tongue, chiefly for the Use of such Boys
and Men as have never learn'd _Latin_ perfectly, and for the Benefit of
the Female Sex: Also for the _Welch_, _Scotch_, _Irish_, and Foreigners,
being a Grammatical Essay upon our Language, considering the true Manner
of Reading, Writing, and Talking proper _English_. By _Hugh Jones_, A.M.
lately Mathematical Professor at the College of _William_ and _Mary_ at
_Williamsburgh_ in _Virginia_, and Chaplain to the honourable the
Assembly of that Colony. 12°. Price 1 _s._ Bound.

The History of _Virginia_ in four Parts.

    I. The History of the first Settlement of _Virginia_, and the
 Government thereof, to the Year 1706.

   II. The natural Production and Conveniences of the Country, suited to
 Trade and Improvement.

  III. The Native _Indians_, their Religion, Laws, and Customs, in War
 and Peace.

   IV. The present State of the Country, as to the Polity of the
 Government, and the Improvement of the Land, to the 10{th} of _June_
 1720. By a Native and Inhabitant of the Place. The second Edition,
 enlarged, _8vo._ pr. 4 _s._ 6 _d._

A general Treatise of the Dominion of the Sea, and a compleat Body of
Sea Laws. _4to._ p. 10 _s._

The Plantation Laws. _8vo._

    *       *       *       *       *
        *       *       *       *
    *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's notes:

ERRATA applied to the text.

Variations in spelling and hyphenation have been retained as in the
original.

The following corrections or modifications have been made to the text:

   Page  6, line 14, Particularly [Original has Parcularly]

   Page 29, line 16, Gaol [Original has Goal]

   Page 83, forteenth line from bottom, Phoenix [original has [oe]
            ligature]





End of Project Gutenberg's The Present State of Virginia, by Hugh Jones

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRESENT STATE OF VIRGINIA ***

***** This file should be named 29055-8.txt or 29055-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/2/9/0/5/29055/

Produced by Julia Miller, Asad Razzaki and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced
from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
