The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life of Mr. Richard Savage, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Life of Mr. Richard Savage
       Who was Condemn'd with Mr. James Gregory, the last Sessions
       at the Old Baily, for the Murder of Mr. James Sinclair,
       at Robinson's Coffee-house at Charing-Cross.

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: August 6, 2011 [EBook #36983]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF MR. RICHARD SAVAGE ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Richard J. Shiffer
and the Distributed Proofreading volunteers at
http://www.pgdp.net for Project Gutenberg.





[Transcriber's Note: Every effort has been made to replicate this text
as faithfully as possible, including obsolete and variant spellings and
other inconsistencies. Text that has been changed to correct an obvious
error is noted at the end of this ebook.]




THE

LIFE

OF

Mr. RICHARD SAVAGE.


Who was Condemn'd with Mr. _James Gregory_, the last Sessions at the
_Old Baily_, for the Murder of Mr. _James Sinclair_, at _Robinson's_
Coffee-house at _Charing-Cross_.


With some very remarkable Circumstances, relating to the _Birth_ and
_Education_, of that Gentleman, which were never yet made publick.

                                        --------_Quis talia fando,
                                        Temperet à Lachrymis?_



_LONDON_:

Printed for, and Sold by _J. Roberts_, at the _Oxford-Arms_ in
_Warwick-Lane_; and by the Booksellers of _London_ and _Westminster_.
1727.

(Price Six Pence.)




THE

LIFE

OF

Mr. RICHARD SAVAGE.


Perhaps no History in the World, either ancient or modern, can produce
an Instance of any one Man's Life fill'd with so many calamitous
Circumstances, as _That_ of the unhappy young Gentleman, who is the
melancholy Subject of the following Sheets; his Misfortunes may be said
to be begun, if not strictly before he had a Being, yet, before his
Birth; for when his Mother, the late Countess of _M----d_, was big with
Child of him, she publickly declared, That the Infant then in her Womb,
did not in the least appertain to her Husband, but to another noble
Earl, upon which a Trial was commenced in the House of Lords, and my
Lord _M----d_, obtained a Divorce, his Lady had her Fortune, which was
very considerable, paid back to her again, with full Liberty of marrying
whom she pleased, which Liberty she made use of in a very short Time,
and my Lord _M----d_ meeting her new Husband, Colonel _B----t_, in the
Court of _Request_ soon after, wish'd him Joy upon it, and said, he
hoped my Lady _M----d_ would make the Colonel a better Wife than she had
done to him. It is very probable that this Divorce gave the Lady a great
deal of Satisfaction: But her Son, being thus bastardized, could not be
born, as otherwise he would have been, a Lord by Courtesy, and Heir to
the Title of an _English_ Earl, with one of the finest Estates in the
Kingdom, which was afterwards, for want of Male-Issue, the Occasion of
engaging two eminent Peers[1] in a Duel, in which they had the
Misfortune to kill each other. Happy we may say it had been, as well for
these Noblemen, as Mr. _Savage_ himself, if he had either not been
illegitimately begotten, or if that Illegitimacy had been prudently
concealed: The being cut off from the certain Inheritance of that great
Wealth and Honour, which, nothing, but his Mother's resentful
Confession, could have hindered him of, would have given any other
Person, when he came to Years of Maturity and Reflection, Sentiments of
a quite different Nature from those which he always, with a Generosity
of Temper peculiar to himself, expressed when that Affair has been
mentioned to him; constantly excusing his Mother for taking any Methods,
how injurious soever they may have been to himself, to be disengaged
from an Husband, whose ill Treatment of her could not suffer her to live
much to her Content with him.

     [1] D. _Hamilton_ and Lord _Mohun_.

But to give the Reader his History in as exact Order of Time as
possible, we shall begin with the Day of his Birth, which was _January
the 10th_, 1697-8. A Day, that he might very reasonably, in the Language
of the despairing _Job_, have repented his ever seeing, when he
considered, as he had too frequently the bitterest Occasions to do, what
an almost uninterrupted Train of Miseries it had introduced him into.
The Reader may easily imagine, that an Affair of this extraordinary
Kind, among Persons of that high Rank, did not a little employ the
Conversation and Scandal of the Town, for which Reason, the Lady
resolving to move out of her Sight, and if possible, by that, out of her
Remembrance, him, who was innocently the Cause of her Reproach,
committed him to the Care of a poor Woman, with Orders to breed him up
as her own, and in a Manner suitable to her Condition, withal, laying a
strict Injunction upon her, never to let him come to the Knowledge of
his real Parents. The Nurse was faithful to the Trust reposed in her, at
the same Time not neglecting to do her Duty to the Infant in a homely
Manner, agreeable to the Disposition of a well-meaning ordinary Person,
and her scanty Allowance from his Mother's Relations; for she did not
appear in the Affair herself, but her Mother, my Lady _Mason_, whether
at her Daughter's Desire, or prompted by her own natural Compassion, I
shall not pretend to determine, transacted every Thing with the _Nurse_,
whose Name was the only one, for many Years, he knew he had any Claim
to, and was called after it accordingly; although his real Father, the
late _Earl Rivers_, was himself one of his God-fathers, and had his
right Name regularly Registered in the Parish Books of St. _Andrew's
Holbourn_; Mrs. _Lloyd_, his God-mother, was as kind to him as the Time
she lived would admit of, but her Death, next to his own Birth, was his
earliest Misfortune; for he not only lost, in all likelihood, a very
good Friend, but could never recover any Part of the 300 Pounds she left
him as a Legacy. When he arrived at Years capable of receiving the first
Rudiments of Learning, and after an Attempt had been made in vain, to
have had him spirited away to one of the _American_ Plantations, he was
sent to a little _Grammar_ School at St. _Alban's_ in _Hertfordshire_.
Here I hope I shall be excused saying, That by the great _Natural
Genius_ he discover'd, this _School_ has had ample Retribution for the
little Assistance he receiv'd from it, for as he never was favour'd with
any Academical Learning, so it was no Secret to those he most familiarly
conversed with, that his Knowledge of the _Classics_ was very slender
and imperfect: Tho', with humble Submission to the Judgment of those
Gentlemen who are such bigotted sticklers for the _Ancients_, he had
something in the Force and Sprightliness of his own Imagination, that
more than made amends for the want of it.

It was while he was at this School, that his Father, _the Earl
Rivers_, died, who had several Times made Enquiry after him, but could
never get any satisfactory Account of him; and when on his Death-Bed, he
more strenuously demanded to know what was become of him, in order to
make him a Partaker in the Distribution of that very handsome Estate he
left among his natural Children, he was positively told he was dead:
Thus was he, whilst, (as he expressed it himself) _legally_ the Son of
one _Earl_, and _naturally_ the Son of another, by the Management of his
own Mother, denied the Benefit of belonging to either of them. In a
Piece that was printed, but, for some weighty Reasons, never made
publick, he tells us, That when he was about _Fifteen_, her Affection
began to awake; and he was sollicited to be bound Apprentice to a
_Shoemaker_, which Proposal he rejected with Scorn, for he had now by
the Death of his Nurse, discover'd some Letters of his Grandmother's,
and by those Means the whole Contrivance that had been carried on to
conceal his Birth. And being now entirely destitute of every the least
Necessary of Life, to whom was it so Natural to apply to as a Mother?
Can a Mother forget her sucking Child! But in this Instance Nature
seem'd to be inverted, the Mother upon no Terms would endure the Sight
of her Son, the Son on all Occasions expressing his Affection for his
Mother, and the strong Desire he had of seeing her; "While Nature acted
so weakly," _says an ingenious Gentleman, writing in Mr._ Savage's
_Behalf_, "on the Humanity of the Parent, she seems on the Son's Side to
have doubled her usual Influence. Even the most shocking personal
Repulses, and a Severity of Contempt and Injuries received at her Hands,
through the whole Course of his Life, were not able to eraze from his
Heart the Impressions of his filial Duty; nor, which is much more
strange, of his Affection; I have known him walk three or four Times in
a dark Evening, through the Street this Mother lives in, only for the
melancholy Pleasure of looking up at her Windows, in hopes to catch a
Moment's Sight of her as she might cross the Room by Candle-light."

Being thus abandoned on all Sides to the Frowns of Fortune and a
capricious World, without any other Friend but his own _Genius_ to
support him, he threw himself upon the barren and unthriving Province of
_Poetry_, a Science how ornamental a Flower soever it may be among the
Qualifications of Men of Ease and Fortune, when display'd only for the
Amusement of a leisure Hour, yet too frequently held in Contempt, when
made the whole Business of a Man's Life, and set to Sale for Bread; and
more especially from the Taste of the present Age, in which the Figure
and Condition of the Author takes up a greater Share of the Reader's
Enquiry, than his Parts or the Matter he writes upon. Had the
unfortunate Gentleman I am speaking of, been invested with either of his
Father's Titles or Estates, I question not but we should have almost
lost the Nobleman in the Honours paid to the _Poet_: But few modern
Authors I fear, who launch into the World, unaided by such Advantages,
will, like _Virgil_, when living, have the same Respect paid to them
that was due to an Emperor, or like _Homer_, have Temples rais'd to
their Memories when dead.

The first _Poem_ Mr. _Savage_ published, was whilst he was very young,
concerning the _Bangorian Controversy_; although there were some pretty
Lines in it, yet as his Judgment ripened, he grew himself ashamed of
this Piece, and contributed all he could to suppress the Edition, so
that, it having but an indifferent Sale, very few of them are in any
body's Hands at present. His next Performance was a _Comedy_, wrote at
the Age of Eighteen, which he offered to the Managers of
_Lincoln's-Inn-Fields_ House, but, they not entirely approving it, he
could not get it acted immediately, but not long after, it was altered
by Mr. _Christopher Bullock_, one of the Managers, and brought upon the
Stage as his own, under the Title of WOMAN'S A RIDDLE, without any
Manner of Benefit or Advantage to the distressed _Author_: This Play was
represented with some Applause in the Year 1716, the Plot is taken from
a _Spanish_ Play called, _La Dama Duende_, and was Dedicated to the then
Marquis of _Wharton_.

Two Years after this he got a _Comedy_ upon the Stage in _Drury-Lane_,
called, LOVE IN A VEIL, built likewise on a _Spanish_ Plot, which he
Dedicated to the Right Honourable George _Lord Lansdown_. This Play was
indeed acted for his own Benefit, but it being very late in the Year,
either _May_ or _June_, the Profits of it hardly answer'd the Trouble he
was at in writing and getting it acted: It brought him acquainted
however with some Persons who were good Friends to him afterwards,
particularly a certain Knight, whose Name is not a little known by his
Writings, and Mr. _Wilks_, one of the Patentees of that House; The first
was so, for a short Time, but the latter, who is very remarkable,
notwithstanding his Profession, for his Humanity and Generosity, has
continu'd his Friendship to him to the last, and done him many very kind
and charitable Offices: The other Gentleman gave him a constant
Allowance, and was for a while so fond of him that, it is said, he
proposed his natural Daughter to him, for a Wife, with a Thousand Pounds
Portion, and his Interest, which was thought to be very good at that
Time, to put him into some small Place in the Government; thinking, as
their Births were alike, he could not reproach her, or use her ill, as
some others might have Cruelty enough to do, upon that Account. But this
was too much good Fortune to fall to the Lot of one who seems to have
been born to taste but little of the Comforts of this Life; for some
malicious Person, (and he must be so to a great Degree, who could think
of injuring the most inoffensive Man living) had framed such a Story to
the Knight of scandalous Things said by Mr. _Savage_ against him and his
Lady, that he withheld his Bounty from him, and was not easily prevail'd
upon to see him afterwards.

Now was he again entirely to seek for every support of Life, when by
the Assistance of the Gentleman, just mention'd for his Humanity, he
obtain'd the Sum of fifty Pounds as a Present, from a Lady, whose Duty
it seem'd to have been to take some Care of him; this Sum he was told
should be made up two Hundred, but it being in the Height of the
_South-Sea Infatuation_, by which this Lady was one of the imaginary
Gainers, when that _Grand Bubble broke_, the other Hundred and Fifty
Pounds _evaporated_ with it; and the poor Gentleman who is the Subject
of our Discourse would have been reduced to as great Extremities as
ever, if his Merit had not recommended him to that Ornament of _English_
Poesy, _Aaron Hill_, Esq; Miserable as he was in every other Part of his
Life, his Intimacy and Friendship with this Gentleman was a Happiness he
has been much envy'd for, by several, whose Accomplishments could not
entitle them to so great a Share of his Esteem as himself.

In the Year 1724 Mr. _Savage_ wrote his Tragedy of _Sir Thomas
Overbury_, which was acted at the _Theatre Royal_ in _Drury-Lane_, and
dedicated to _Herbert Tryst_, of the City of _Hereford_, Esq; In this
Play he perform'd the principal Part himself, with much Applause: In an
Advertisement to the Reader, printed before it, he acknowledges the
Obligations he had to his best and dearest Friend, as he there calls
him, Mr. _Aaron Hill_, for his many judicious Corrections in it. The
_Prologue_ and _Epilogue_ were both wrote by that Gentleman; in the
former are these Lines concerning the _Author_.

    _In a full_ World, _our Author lives_, alone!
    Unhappy--_and, of Consequence_ unknown;
    _Yet, amidst Sorrow, he disdains Complaint;_
    _Nor, languid, in the Race of Life, grows faint._
    _He swims, unyielding_, against _Fortune's Stream_,
    _Nor, to his_ private Sufferings, _stoops his_ Theme:
    _Adopts the Pains, which others undergo_;
    _And for_ your Pleasure, _feels not his_ own Woe.

The next Year he was perswaded by his Friends to publish his _Poems_ by
Subscription, but not being enough in Number to make a compleat Volume,
he was favoured with those of several other Gentlemen, among which, Mr.
_Hill_ has the largest Share. And the Author of a Paper which came out
at that Time, call'd the _Plain Dealer_, recommended his Undertaking in
a very handsome Manner, to the Publick: In which, speaking of him, he
says, Perhaps few Things could be more surprizing than an History of his
Birth and Usage! Of two Fathers, whom he might have claim'd, and _both_
of them _Noble_, he lost the _Title_ of the _one_, and a Provision from
the _other's_ Pity, by the Means alone of his _Mother_! Who, as if she
had resolv'd not to leave him a single Comfort, afterwards robb'd him of
_herself_ too! And in direct Opposition to the Impulse of her natural
Compassion, upon mistaken Notions of a false Delicacy, shut her Memory
against his Wants, and cast him out to the severest Miseries; without
allowing herself to contribute even such small Aid, as might at least
have preserved him from Anguish, and pointed out some Path to his future
Industry.

His good Qualities, which are very numerous, ought the more to be
esteem'd and cherish'd, because he owes them to himself only: Without
the Advantage of Friends, Fortune or Education, he wants neither
Knowledge nor Politeness, to deserve a _Mother's_ Blessing, and adorn,
rather than disgrace her.----I am strongly perswaded, from the
Character, which upon all Occasions, he has taken Pleasure to give of
the Lady's Humanity, with regard to the rest of the World, that nothing
but her having, much too long, already been a Stranger to such a Son,
could make her satisfy'd to continue so.----It is impossible, at least,
that she should not distinguish him, by some kind Notice, some little
Mark of her returning Tenderness, if, without Regard to his Merit, she
knew but his Manner of thinking of her: Which is, itself, a shining
Merit! and a surprising Instance of Generosity! if consider'd against
those Reasons, which might excuse a different Treatment of her.

He writ the following Copy of Verses, and several others, on the same
Subject, at a Time, when, I know not, which was most to be wonder'd at;
That he should be serene enough for _Poetry_, under the Extremity of Ill
Fortune!----Or, that his _Subject_ should be the Praise of her, to whom
he ow'd a Life of Misery!

      _Hopeless, abandon'd, aimless, and oppress'd,_
    _Lost to Delight, and, every way, distress'd:_
    _Cross his cold Bed, in wild Disorder, thrown,_
    _Thus, sigh'd_ Alexis, _Friendless, and alone_--
      _Why do I breathe?--What_ Joy _can_ Being _give_,
    _When she, who gave me Life, forgets I live!_
    _Feels not those Wintry Blasts;--nor heeds my Smart._
    _But shuts me from the Shelter of her Heart!_
    _Saw me expos'd, to Want! to Shame! to Scorn!_
    _To Ills!--which make it_ Misery, _to be_ born!
    _Cast me, regardless on the World's bleak Wild:_
    _And bad me, be a_ Wretch, _while yet, a Child!_
      _Where can he hope for Pity, Peace, or Rest,_
    _Who moves no Softness in a_ Mother's _Breast_?
    _Custom, Law, Reason_, All! _my Cause forsake_,
    _And_ Nature sleeps, _to keep my Woes_ awake!
    _Crimes, which the_ Cruel _scarce believe, can be_,
    _The_ Kind _are guilty of, to ruin_ me!
    _Even She, who bore me, blasts me, with her Hate,_
    _And_, meant _my_ Fortune, makes _herself my Fate_!
      _Yet has this sweet Neglecter of my Woes,_
    _The softest, tend'rest, Breast, that_ Pity _knows_!
    _Her Eyes shed Mercy, wheresoe'er they shine;_
    _And her Soul_ melts, _at every Woe--but mine_.
    _Sure, then! some secret Fate, for Guilt, unwill'd,_
    _Some Sentence, pre-ordain'd to be fulfill'd!_
    _Plung'd me, thus deep, in Sorrow's searching Flood:_
    _And wash'd me from the Mem'ry of her Blood._
      _But, Oh! whatever Cause has mov'd her Hate,_
    _Let me but sigh, in silence, at my Fate._
    _The God_, within, _perhaps, may_ touch _her Breast_:
    _And, when she_ pities, _who can be distress'd_?

These Verses, as I said before, were published in the _Plain Dealer_,
to whom Mr. _Savage_ afterwards wrote a Letter himself, that was printed
in that Paper, in which he says: I am, Sir, that unfortunate _Richard
Savage_, the peculiar Circumstances of whose uncommon Treatment from a
Mother (whose fine Qualities make it impossible to me not to forgive
her, even, while I am miserable, by her Means only) induced you some
Months since, in your _28th Paper_, to publish a few ineffectual Lines,
which I had written, on her surprising Usage of me: To which your
Humanity was pleas'd to add certain Reflections, in my Favour, which I
remember, with due Gratitude; and am encouraged, by that Instance of
your Goodness, to make the present Application.

When you shall have perus'd my extraordinary _Case_, and those
convincing _Original Letters_, which I have entrusted with the
Gentleman, who brings you this, I shall need say no more, to satisfy
you, what _Right_ I have to _complain_, in a more _publick Manner_, than
I have, yet allowed myself to resolve on.--The Papers, in the Order you
will see them, are prepared for a Hand, too _Just_, and too _Powerful_,
to leave me the least Distrust of being, shortly, _less oppressed than I
have been_; but I judged myself obliged to lay them under your Eye, that
you might be sensible, you said less, of my _Wrongs_, and my
_Sufferings_, than the unhappy _Truth_ could have justified.

He afterwards, in the same Letter, mentions his Subscription, and begs
those, who think _him_, or his _Design_ worth their Notice or
Encouragement, to send their Names, and the Number of Books they
subscribe for, to _Button's Coffee-house_. Accordingly when his List of
Subscribers was printed before his Book, the following Names were
distinguished from the rest, and which I mention here, to do them
Honour, as having sent their Subscriptions without any other
Sollicitation; prompted only by the Influence of Compassion, and the
Greatness and Generosity of their own Tempers.

     Her Grace the Dutchess of _Cleveland_.
     The Right Honourable the Lady Viscountess _Cheyney_.
     The Right Honourable the Lady Viscountess _Castlemain_.
     Mrs. _Mary Floyer_.
     The Right Honourable the Earl of _Gainsborough_.
     The Right Honourable the Lady _Gower_.
     The Right Honourable the Lady _Lechmere_.
     The Right Honourable the Lord _Milsington_.
     Mrs. _Sofuel Noel_.
     His Grace the Duke of _Rutland_, for Ten Books.
     Her Grace the Dutchess Dowager of _Rutland_.
     Her Grace the Dutchess of _Rutland_.
     The Right Honourable the Countess of _Strafford_.
     Mr. _John Savage_.
     The Right Honourable the Countess Dowager of _Warwick_.

The Dedication of this Book, was to the Right Honourable the Lady _Mary
Wortley Montague_; wherein he says thus, "Nature seems to have form'd my
Mind as inconsistently, as Fortune has my Condition: She has given me a
_Heart_ that is as _proud_ as my _Father's_; to a Rank in Life, almost
as _low_ as the Humanity of my Mother!"

He had also wrote a long Preface to it, giving some Account of his
_Mother's_ unparallel'd ill Treatment of him; but was prevail'd on
through the Imposition of some very considerable Persons to cancel it;
and about that Time he had a Pension of 50 Pounds a Year settled upon
him. I will not venture to say whether this Allowance came directly from
_her_, or, if so, upon what Motives she was induced to grant it him; but
chuse to leave the Reader to guess at it. This was the first Time that
he may properly be said to have enjoyed any Certainty in Life, and this,
alass! of how short a Duration is it like to be, from the unhappy Affair
that has brought him under the heaviest Sentence of the Law! A Sentence,
which, of all Men living, he was thought, by his whole Acquaintance, the
most unlikely to have incurr'd his good Nature and Meekness of Temper,
having before this fatal Accident, been remarkable, among all who
convers'd with him, if I may be allow'd the Expression, even to a Fault.

The last Piece which he exhibited to the World, was, a _Poem_ Sacred to
the Memory of our late most gracious Sovereign, address'd to the Right
Honourable Mr. _Doddington_, one of the Lords Commissioners of the
Treasury, which Subject, tho' it employ'd several other poetic Genius's;
he is allow'd, by some approv'd Judges in that way of Writing, to have
manag'd with a Delicacy, superior to any of his Competitors. But to come
to the dismal Cause of his present Condition; having for some Time had a
Lodging at _Richmond_ in _Surrey_, for the Benefit of the Air, and the
Conveniencies of his Studies; he came to Town on _Monday_ the 20th Day
of _November_ last, in order to pay off another he had in _Queen-street,
Westminster_, thinking the Expence too great to keep them both; and
falling into Company with Mr. _Merchant_ and Mr. _Gregory_, they all
went together to a Coffee-house near his old Lodgings, where they drank
till pretty late in the Evening; Mr. _Savage_ would willingly have got a
Bed at the Coffee-house for that Night, but there not being a
Conveniency for himself, and Company both, they went away from thence
with a Resolution to waste Time as well as they could till Morning, when
they purposed to go together to _Richmond_. In their Walks, seeing a
Light in _Robinson's_ Coffee-house, they thought that a Place proper to
entertain them, tho' Mr. _Savage_ protested he was entirely ignorant of
the Character of the House, and had never been there in his Life before.
Let it suffice in this Place to say, that the direful Consequence of
their going in there, was from an Insult offer'd by Mr. _Merchant_ to
the Company who were drinking there, a mortal Wound given to Mr.
_Sinclair_, of which he languish'd till the next Day, and then died, and
the Condemnation of Mr. _Savage_ and Mr. _Gregory_ for the said Fact.
They were secur'd for that Night, and in the Morning carried before
_Nathaniel Blackerby_, Esq; and two other of his Majesty's Justices of
the Peace, and by them committed to the _Gate-house_; but Mr. _Sinclair_
dying, they were from thence removed to _Newgate_, between Twelve and
One o' Clock on _Tuesday_ Night.

The Coroner's Inquest having sat upon the Body, did not finish their
Enquiry at their first Meeting, but adjourn'd till the _Tuesday_
following, and then brought in their Verdict _Manslaughter_.

Let the Reader now behold a Man of his unspotted Character, and
inoffensive Behaviour, till this fatal Action, involv'd all on a sudden
in all the wretched Circumstances and Sufferings of the most inhuman
Criminals and abandon'd of Profligates, and admire at the decent
Fortitude and Serenity of Mind, with which, according to the Report of
all who saw him, he supported so shocking and unexpected a Misfortune,
as well before as at the Time of his Trial, which was on _Thursday_ the
7th of this Instant _December_, at the _Old Baily_; where after eight
Hours being taken up in hearing the Evidence on both Sides, he and Mr.
_Gregory_ were found Guilty of the _Murther_, and _Merchant_ of
_Manslaughter_ only.

The whole Trial having already been made publick, it will be needless
to give any Repetition of it here, any farther than this, that upon the
Testimonies of _Nuttal_, a Friend of the Deceas'd, and another Person,
who was drinking with him and Mr. _Sinclair_; together, with those of
the Women of the House, it appear'd the Affront was given by
_Merchant's_ kicking down the Table that belong'd to the Deceased and
his Company, and that in Justification of that Rudeness, Mr. _Savage_
and Mr. _Gregory_ drew their Swords, and Mr. _Sinclair_ receiv'd his
Death Wound from Mr. _Savage_.

Being thus cast out of all possible Hopes of making any farther Defence
by Law for his Life, he was carry'd back to the Prison, where the
Indulgence which he had before obtained from the Keeper, of being
excused from having any Irons, could no longer with Safety, be allowed
him, but he and Mr. _Gregory_ were fetter'd with near fifty Pounds
Weight a-piece. On the _Monday_ following, at the Conclusion of the
Sessions, he was carry'd down to the Court to receive Sentence, as
usual, previous to which he made the following Speech.

     'IT is now, my Lord, too late, to offer any thing by way of
     Defence, or Vindication; nor can we expect ought from your
     Lordships, in this Court, but the Sentence which the Law requires
     you as Judges, to pronounce against Men of our calamitous
     Condition.----But we are also perswaded, that as meer Men, and out
     of this Seat of rigorous Justice, you are susceptive of the tender
     Passions, and too humane, not to commiserate the unhappy Situation
     of those, whom the Law sometimes perhaps----exacts----from you to
     pronounce upon. No doubt you distinguish between Offences, which
     arise out of Premeditation, and a Disposition habituated to Vice or
     Immorality, and Transgressions, which are the unhappy and
     unforeseen Effects of a casual Absence of Reason, and sudden
     Impulse of Passion: We therefore hope you will contribute all you
     can to an Extension of that Mercy, which the Gentlemen of the Jury
     have been pleas'd to shew Mr. _Merchant_, who (allowing Facts as
     sworn against us by the Evidence) has led us into this our
     Calamity, I hope, this will not be constru'd, as if we mean to
     reflect upon that Gentleman, or remove any thing from us upon him,
     or that we repine the more at our Fate because he has no
     Parcipitation of it: No, my Lord! For my Part, I declare nothing
     could more soften my Grief, than to be without any Companion in so
     great a Misfortune.'

Who can read this without wishing it may have its desir'd Effect? No
one, I am sure, who knows him personally but interested his Hopes warmly
and zealously in it. His Friends (for his Calamities had added many to
those who were to his _Merit_ before) were generous Partakers of that
Distress which he bore himself so manfully, and are extreamly Assiduous
in recommending him to the _Mercy_ to the best of Sovereigns. Among
which we think nothing more to the Purpose of these Sheets than the
following Letter, with which we shall conclude, supposed to be wrote by
one of the Gentlemen before-mentioned for having publickly express'd his
Compassion for Mr. _Savage's_ Sufferings.

A LETTER to a Noble Lord in the behalf of Mr. _Savage_ and Mr.
_Gregory_.

     MY LORD,

     I am persuaded, you will not refuse this Letter a reading,
     since the principal Subject of it is Mercy: I would not have took
     this Liberty with your Lordship, was I not throughly convinced that
     your Virtue is equal to your Wisdom, and that you are always ready
     to exert both in a proper Cause. I know, for I have experienced it,
     that you have a Heart which can commiserate the Misfortunes of Man,
     and that you are ever willing to lend a Hand to the sinking Wretch.
     What I now write is with the greatest Confusion of Spirits, and
     with the tenderest Sentiments of Humanity for two unhappy
     Gentlemen, one of which is my Friend; my Friend, my Lord, just on
     the Brink of suffering an ignominious Death. Imagine the Tumult of
     my Soul, when the dreadful Idea is before me: But Friendship is not
     the chief Motive of my Concern for him; he is a Man of Virtue and
     of Honour, sufficient Recommendations for your Lordship to
     intercede for him. Blot out the unhappy Moment which was the Source
     of his present Calamity, and he will appear unsullied in either;
     nor will that appear so black, if Murder in any Case may be
     extenuated; when we consider the Evidences who cast him; three
     Women, my Lord, who have since contradicted what before they had
     sworn; the other Evidence, a Man, by Report of no amiable
     Character; but who are said to have most grosly misrepresented the
     Fact, and to have industriously spread that Misrepresentation: But
     my Intention is not to prove innocent whom the Law has found
     guilty; but to submit the two distressful Gentlemen, who now lie
     under Sentence of Death, as Objects of the Royal Mercy. When the
     Law has found guilty one or more Persons, whom it is consistent
     with Virtue and Wisdom to save, it is the blessed Privilege of the
     Sovereign to turn the Course of the Law, and bid the afflicted
     live. The Reputations of Mr. _Savage_ and Mr. _Gregory_ have been
     always clear; nor are they in any Action of their Lives to be
     lamented by their Friends but on this melancholly Occasion. The
     first I have known and conversed with several Years, and can
     therefore more fully speak him: I have discovered in him a Mind
     uncapable of Evil; I have beheld him sigh for the distressed, when
     more distressed himself; I have seen him give that Relief to
     others, which not long before he has in some degree wanted. He is
     so far from a litigious Man, that he was always more ready to
     stifle the Remembrance of an Injury than to resent it. Much more
     could I say of his virtuous Qualities, without swerving the least
     from Truth; but as his Friends, which are many, are as sensible of
     them as my self, I doubt not but they will be as ready to declare
     them as I am, who can make the most solemn Appeal to Heaven, that I
     have seen repeated Instances of every one of these Virtues, and
     more. In his Death, I am certain, the King would lose a good
     Subject; all good Men, a Friend; and Vice, an Enemy. To enforce
     what I have said, I must beg Leave to use some of Mr. _Savage's_
     own Expressions in his Address to the Court, when he received his
     Sentence: _I am perswaded that, as mere_ Men, _and out of the Seat
     of Justice, the Court is susceptible of the tender Passions, and
     too humane not to commiserate the unhappy Situation of him and his
     Fellow-sufferer_ Mr. Gregory; _and to distinguish between Offences
     which arise out of premeditation and a Disposition habituated to
     Vice or Immorality, and Transgressions which are the unhappy and
     unforeseen Effects of a casual Absence of Reason, and a sudden
     Impulse of passion. I hope the Court will contribute to an
     Extension of that mercy which the Jury had shewed to_ Mr. Merchant,
     _who had, according to the Evidence, led them into this Calamity._
     To this Effect, and in almost the same Words, spoke Mr. _Savage_. I
     am satisfied, your Lordship sees the Force of Reason in his Words;
     and nothing can add more to this Gentleman's Character, or shew the
     Goodness of his Disposition, than when he declared, that _nothing
     could more soften his Grief than to be without any Companion in so
     great a misfortune_. Here I cannot help reviving the Memory of his
     past Misfortunes: Wretched from the Womb, robbed of two Fathers,
     and who never yet was blessed with the Smiles of a Parent! Who that
     is born of a Woman can reflect on his Fate, and refuse a Tear? I
     dare venture to say, that your Lordship, and all virtuous disposed
     Souls, would rejoice to see his past miseries recompensed with his
     Life, which is now in the Hands of the King: And happy for him, and
     his Fellow-sufferer, that Mercy sits in Person on the Throne of
     _Great-Britain_! Since it is plain, the Publick may be a Loser by
     the Death of these Gentlemen, and none but the Grave can be a
     Gainer, there is great Reason to hope for a Pardon, or an extensive
     Reprieve. Once more, my Lord, let me repeat my Intreaty for your
     Intercession for him; restore him once more to Life and Freedom;
     rejoice his Friends, and preserve the Publick a useful Member; and
     forgive, my Lord, the Importunity of

                                   _Your most obliged,_

                                        _and most obedient_

                                            _humble Servant._

     Dec. 13. 1727.


_FINIS._


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

The transcriber made these changes to the text to correct obvious
errors:

  1. p.  8 by Candle-light. --> by Candle-light."
  2. p. 12 Mr Savage --> Mr. Savage
  3. p. 18 Honouroble --> Honourable
  4. p. 19 Humanity of my Mother! --> Humanity of my Mother!"

       *       *       *       *       *





End of Project Gutenberg's The Life of Mr. Richard Savage, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF MR. RICHARD SAVAGE ***

***** This file should be named 36983-8.txt or 36983-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/6/9/8/36983/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Richard J. Shiffer
and the Distributed Proofreading volunteers at
http://www.pgdp.net for Project Gutenberg.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
