The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Strange Adventures of Andrew Battell, by 
Andrew Battell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Strange Adventures of Andrew Battell
       of Leigh, in Angola and the Adjoining Regions

Author: Andrew Battell

Commentator: Anthony Knivet

Editor: Samuel Purchas
        Ernest George Ravenstein

Release Date: November 3, 2012 [EBook #41282]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANDREW BATTELL ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Turgut Dincer, Joseph Cooper and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net






  ┌───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │ Transcriber’s note:                                       │
  │                                                           │
  │ Words with bold characters are enclosed within “+” signs. │
  │                                                           │
  └───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

   WORKS ISSUED BY
   The Hakluyt Society

   THE STRANGE ADVENTURES
   OF
   ANDREW BATTELL.


   SECOND SERIES.
   No. VI.


   THE
   STRANGE ADVENTURES
   OF
   ANDREW BATTELL
   OF LEIGH,
   IN ANGOLA AND THE ADJOINING REGIONS.

   _REPRINTED FROM “PURCHAS HIS PILGRIMES.”_

   Edited, with Notes and a Concise
   HISTORY OF KONGO AND ANGOLA,
   BY
   E. G. RAVENSTEIN.


   Reproduced, by permission of the
   HAKLUYT SOCIETY
   from the edition originally published by the Society
   in 1901
   KRAUS REPRINT LIMITED
   Nendeln/Liechtenstein
   1967


   Printed in Germany

   Lessing-Druckerei—Wiesbaden


COUNCIL OF THE HAKLUYT SOCIETY.


   SIR CLEMENTS MARKHAM, K.C.B., F.R.S., _Pres. R.G.S._, PRESIDENT.
   THE RIGHT HON. THE LORD STANLEY OF ALDERLEY, VICE-PRESIDENT.
   REAR-ADMIRAL SIR WILLIAM WHARTON, K.C.B., VICE-PRESIDENT.
   COMMR. B. M. CHAMBERS, R.N.
   C. RAYMOND BEAZLEY, M.A.
   COLONEL G. EARL CHURCH.
   SIR W. MARTIN CONWAY.
   F. H. H. GUILLEMARD, M.A., M.D.
   EDWARD HEAWOOD, M.A.
   DUDLEY F. A. HERVEY, C.M.G.
   E. F. IM THURN, C.B., C.M.G.
   J. SCOTT KELTIE, LL.D.
   F. W. LUCAS.
   A. P. MAUDSLAY.
   E. J. PAYNE, M.A.
   HOWARD SAUNDERS.
   H. W. TRINDER.
   CHARLES WELCH, F.S.A.

   WILLIAM FOSTER, B.A., _Honorary Secretary_.




CONTENTS.


                                                                     PAGE
   INTRODUCTION                                                         i

   BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                     xviii

   THE STRANGE ADVENTURES OF ANDREW BATTELL OF LEIGH.

   I. Andrew Battell, his voyage to the River of Plate, who being
   taken on to the coast of Brazill was sent to Angola                  1

   II. His trading on the coast; offer to escape; imprisonment;
   exile; escape and new imprisonment; his sending to
   Elamba and Bahia das Vaccas; many strange occurrences                9

   III. Discovery of the Gagas: their wars, man-eating; over-running
   countries. His trade with them, betraying,
   escape to them, and living with them; with many
   strange adventures. And also the rites and manner of
   life observed by the Iagges, or Gagas, which no Christian
   would ever know well but this author                                19

   IV. His return to the Portugals: invasions of diverse countries;
   abuses; flight from them, and living in the woods divers
   months; his strange boat and coming to Loango                       36

   V. Of the province of Engoy, and other regions of Loango;
   with the customs there observed by the King and people              42

   VI. Of the provinces of Bongo, Calongo, Mayombe, Manikesocke,
   Motimbas; of the ape-monster Pongo; their
   Hunting, Idolatries, and divers other observations                  52

   VII. Of the Zebra and Hippopotamus; the Portuguese Wars
   in those parts; the Fishing, Grain, and other things
   remarkable                                                          63


   ON THE RELIGION AND THE CUSTOMS OF THE PEOPLES OF
   ANGOLA, CONGO, AND LOANGO, from _Purchas His
   Pilgrimage_, 1613 (1617)                                            71


   APPENDICES.

   I. ANTHONY KNIVET IN KONGO AND ANGOLA                               89

   II. A SKETCH OF THE HISTORY OF KONGO TO THE END
   OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY                                         102

   III. A LIST OF THE KINGS OF KONGO                                  136

   IV. A SKETCH OF THE HISTORY OF ANGOLA TO THE END
   OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY                                         139

   V. A LIST OF THE GOVERNORS OF ANGOLA                               188


   INDEX AND GLOSSARY                                                 191


   MAPS.

   A GENERAL MAP OF KONGO AND ANGOLA.

   AN ENLARGED MAP OF ANGOLA.


[Illustration]




INTRODUCTION.


Four Englishmen are known to have visited Angola towards the close of
the sixteenth century, namely, Thomas Turner, Andrew Towres, Anthony
Knivet and Andrew Battell. All four were taken by the Portuguese out of
English privateers in South-American waters, and spent years of
captivity as prisoners of war; happy, no doubt, in having escaped the
fate of many of their less fortunate companions, who atoned with their
lives for the hazardous proceedings in which they had engaged.

Thomas Turner,[1] although he furnished Samuel Purchas with a few notes
on Brazil, never placed on record what happened to him whilst in
Portuguese Africa. Towres was sent to prison at Rio de Janeiro for the
heinous offence of eating meat on a Friday; he attempted an escape, was
retaken, and condemned to spend the rest of his captivity in Angola. He
died at Masanganu, as we learn from Knivet. Knivet himself has left us
an account of his adventures in Angola and Kongo; but this account
contains so many incredible statements that it was with some hesitation
we admitted it into this volume, as by doing so we might be supposed to
vouch for the writer’s veracity.

Andrew Battell, fortunately, has left behind him a fairly circumstantial
record of what he experienced in Kongo and Angola. His narrative bears
the stamp of truth, and has stood the test of time. It is unique,
moreover, as being the earliest record of travels in the _interior_ of
this part of Africa; for, apart from a few letters of Jesuit
missionaries, the references to Kongo or Angola printed up to Battell’s
time, were either confined to the coast, or they were purely historical
or descriptive. Neither F. Pigafetta’s famous _Relatione del Reame di
Congo_, “drawn out of the writings and discourses of Duarte Lopez,” and
first published at Rome in 1591, nor the almost equally famous
_Itinerarium_ of Jan Huyghen van Linschoten, of which an English
translation appeared as early as 1598, can be classed among books of
travel.[2] Samuel Braun, of Basel, who served as barber-surgeon on board
Dutch vessels which traded at Luangu and on the Kongo, 1611-13, never
left the coast.[3] Nor did Pieter van der Broeck, who made three voyages
to the Kongo between 1607 and 1612 as supercargo of Dutch vessels,
penetrate inland.[4] Nay, we are even able to claim on behalf of
Battell that he travelled by routes not since trodden by European
explorers.


Of Andrew Battell’s history we know nothing, except what may be gathered
from his “Adventures,” and an occasional reference to him by his friend,
neighbour, and editor, the Rev. Samuel Purchas. He seems to have been a
native of Leigh, in Essex, at the present day a mere fishing village by
the side of its populous upstart neighbour Southend, but formerly a
place of considerable importance. As early as the fifteenth century it
could boast of its guild of pilots, working in harmony with a similar
guild at Deptford Strond, the men of Leigh taking charge of inward bound
ships, whilst Deptford provided pilots to the outward bound. Henry VIII
incorporated both guilds as the “Fraternity of the Most Glorious and
Indivisible Trinity and of St. Clement;” and in the venerable church of
St. Clement, at Leigh, and the surrounding churchyard may still be seen
monuments erected in honour of contemporaries of Battell who were
Brethren of the Trinity House; among whom are Robert Salmon (born 1567,
died 1661) and Robert Chester (died 1632). But there is no tombstone in
memory of Andrew Battell; and if a memorial tablet was ever dedicated to
him, it must have been removed when the church was renovated in 1837.
Nor do the registers of the church afford a clue to Battell’s death, for
the earliest of these documents only dates back to the year 1684. At the
present time no person of the name of Battell lives at Leigh.


Samuel Purchas was Vicar of Eastwood, a small village two miles to the
north of Leigh, from 1604 to 1613. Battell returned to Leigh about 1610,
bringing with him a little negro boy, who claimed to have been kept a
captive by a gorilla (see p. 55). Purchas had many conferences with
Battell, and the information obtained in this manner was incorporated by
him in _Purchas His Pilgrimage_, the first edition of which was
published in 1613,[5] and will be found in this volume, pp. 71-87.
Battell’s papers, however, only reached Purchas after the author’s
death, and were first published by him in _Hakluytus Posthumus, or
Purchas His Pilgrimes_, in 1625.[6] There is reason to fear that Purchas
did not perform his duties as editor, as such duties are understood at
the present day. As an instance, we notice that Battell distinctly told
his editor in private conference (see p. 83) that in his day nothing was
known about the origin of the Jagas, expressly denying that Duarte Lopez
could have any information about it; yet, elsewhere (p. 19), Battell is
made responsible for the statement that they came from Sierra Leone. Nor
is it likely that Battell ever mentioned a lake Aquelunda (p. 74), for
no such lake exists; and Purchas’s authority for its supposed existence
is once more Duarte Lopez or Pigafetta.

Moreover, there is some ground for supposing that Purchas abridged
portions of the MS.; as, for instance, the account of the overland
trading trip to Kongo and Mbata. Perhaps he likewise rearranged parts of
his MS., thus confusing the sequence of events, as will be seen when we
come to inquire into the chronology of Battell’s travels.


There exists no doubt as to the object with which Abraham Cocke sailed
for the Plate River in 1589. Philip of Spain had acceded to the throne
of Portugal in 1580, and that prosperous little kingdom thus became
involved in the disaster which overtook the Armada, which sailed out of
Lisbon in May, 1588. English skippers therefore felt justified in
preying upon Portuguese trade in Brazil, and intercepting Spanish
vessels on their way home from the Rio de la Plata. We do not think,
however, that we do Abraham Cocke an injustice when we assume him to
have been influenced in his hazardous enterprise quite as much by the
lust of gain as by patriotism.

The determination of the chronology of Battell’s adventures presents
some difficulty, as his narrative contains but a single date, namely,
that of his departure from England on May 7th, 1589. There are, however,
incidental references to events the dates of which are known; and these
enable us to trace his movements with a fair amount of confidence,
thus:—

1. Having left Plymouth in May, 1589, we suppose Battell to have reached
Luandu in June, 1590.

2. His journey up to Masanganu, his detention there for two months, and
return to Luandu, where he “lay eight months in a poor estate” (p. 7),
would carry us to the end of June, 1591.

3. Battell tells us that the Governor, D. João Furtado de Mendonça, then
employed him during two years and a half trading along the coast. This,
however, is quite impossible: for Mendonça only assumed office in
August, 1594; but, as he is the only Governor of Battell’s day who held
office for a longer period than two and a half years—his term of office
extending to 1602—and as Battell is not likely to have forgotten the
name of an employer who gave him his confidence, we assume that he
really did make these trading trips, but at a subsequent period. Purchas
may be responsible for this transposition.

4. He made a first attempt to escape (in a Dutch vessel), but was
recaptured, and sent to Masanganu, where he spent “six miserable years,”
1591-96.

5. Second attempt to escape, and detention for three months in irons at
Luandu, up to June, 1596.

6. Campaign in Lamba and Ngazi (see p. 13, _note_). After a field
service of over three years, Battell was sent back to Luandu, wounded.
This would account for his time up to 1598 or 1599.

7. I am inclined to believe that, owing to the confidence inspired by
his conduct in the field, the Governor now employed him on the trading
ships referred to above.

9. Trading trips to Benguella in 1600 or 1601.

10. Battell joins the Jagas, and spends twenty-one months with them.
Incidentally he mentions that the chief, Kafuche, had been defeated by
the Portuguese seven years before that time (he was actually defeated in
April, 1594).

11. Battell was at Masanganu when João Rodrigues Coutinho was Governor
(Coutinho assumed office in 1602).

12. Battell was present at the building of the presidio of Kambambe by
Manuel Cerveira Pereira in 1604; and stayed there till 1606, when news
was received of the death of Queen Elizabeth, and he was promised his
liberty. The Queen died March 24th, 1603.

13. A journey to Mbamba, Kongo, etc., may have taken up six months.

14. The Governor having “denied his word,” and a new Governor being
daily expected, Battell secretly left the city, spent six months on the
Dande, and was ultimately landed at Luangu. (The new Governor expected
was only appointed in August, 1607; and his arrival was actually
delayed.)

15. In Luangu, Battell spent two years and a half—say up to 1610.

Great pains have been taken by me with the maps illustrating this
volume; and, if the outcome of my endeavour does not differ in its broad
features from the maps furnished by M. d’Anville, in 1732, to Labat’s
_Relation Historique de l’Éthiopie Occidentale_, this should redound to
the credit of the great French geographer, but should not be accounted a
proof of lack of industry on my own part. Still, my maps exhibit an
advance in matters of detail, for our knowledge of the country has
increased considerably since the days of d’Anville. They would have
proved still more satisfactory had the Portuguese thought it worth while
to produce a trustworthy map of a colony of which they had claimed
possession during four centuries. It seems almost incredible that even
now many of the routes followed by the Conquistadores and missionaries
of old cannot be laid down upon a modern map for lack of information.
Sonyo, for instance, through which led the high road followed by
soldiers, traders, and missionaries going up to San Salvador (the
present route leaves the Kongo River at Matadi), is almost a _terra
incognita_. I am almost ashamed to confess that I have even failed to
locate the once-famous factory of Mpinda; all I can say is, that it
cannot have occupied the site assigned to it on some Portuguese maps.

I need hardly say that modern research lends no support to the
extravagant claims of certain geographers as to the knowledge of Inner
Africa possessed by the Portuguese in the sixteenth century. Pigafetta’s
fantastic map, with its elaborate system of lakes and rivers, merely
proves the utter incapacity of its author to deal with questions of
critical geography. This has long since been recognised. The map which
accompanies Isaac Vossius’s _De Nili et aliorum Fluminum Origine_ (Hagae
Com., 1659) only shows one lake in Inner Africa, which borders on
“Nimeamaie vel Monemugi,” and may without hesitation be identified with
our Nyasa: for the Monemugi (Muene Muji) is the chief of the Maravi or
Zimbas. The “Iages, gens barbara et inculta,” are placed right in the
centre of Africa. The “Fungeni,” which are shown as neighbours of the
“Macoco,” ought to have been placed to the west of Abyssinia, as they
are the Funj, or Fung, of the Egyptian Sudan. If Ludolfus had carried
out his intention of compiling a map of the whole of Africa (in 1681),
these extravagancies of early map-makers would have been exposed more
fully long since.[7]


In collecting materials for the maps and for the notes illustrating
Battell’s narrative, I felt bound to consult all accessible literary
sources dealing with the history and geography of Kongo and Angola.
Whilst ploughing my way through this mass of material, it struck me that
a concise history of these African countries, from the time of their
discovery to the end of the seventeenth century, might form an
acceptable appendix to Battell’s _Adventures_, and at the same time
increase the bulk of the volume dedicated to him to more respectable
proportions. Much material of use for such a purpose has seen the light
since the publication of J. J. Lopes de Lima’s historical sketches. Yet
I am bound to confess that the result of all this tedious labour is
disappointing. I may have been able to rectify a few dates and facts;
but much remains to be done before we can claim to be in possession of a
trustworthy history of that part of Africa. Possibly my little sketch
may rouse a Portuguese into taking up the work of the late Luciano
Cordeiro. Many documents not yet published should be discoverable in the
archives of Portugal, Spain, and Luandu.[8]

The spelling of the proper names mentioned by Battell is retained, as a
matter of course; but it is obvious that in the historical appendices
the various ways in which native names are spelt had to be reduced to a
common system. Much might be said in favour of accepting the Portuguese
manner of spelling, but after due consideration I decided to adopt the
system now generally followed (even by a few Portuguese writers), viz.,
that all vowels should be sounded as in Italian, and the consonants as
in English, with the only exception that the letter _g_ should always be
hard. I therefore write Sonyo, instead of Sonho, Sogno, or Sonjo, as the
name of that district is spelt according to the nationality of the
writer. In transcribing the native names I have had the unstinted
assistance, among others, of the Rev. Thomas Lewis, of the Baptist
Missionary Society; yet I am fully aware that the spelling adopted for
many names is at least doubtful, if not absolutely incorrect. This
arises quite as much from a defective hearing on the part of my
authorities, as from the illegibility of many early manuscripts or the
carelessness of copyists. All such doubtful cases are dealt with in the
GLOSSARY and INDEX.


In conclusion, I feel bound to acknowledge with gratitude the kindly
assistance rendered me by Mr. R. E. Dennett, who is spending a life-time
in Luangu; Mr. R. C. Phillips, who is thoroughly acquainted with the
Lower Kongo; the Rev. Thomas Lewis, of the Baptist Missionary Society;
Captain Binger, of the French Foreign Office; and last, not least, our
ever-obliging Secretary, Mr. William Foster.

[Illustration]


BIBLIOGRAPHY.

   Only the titles of a few books cited merely by the author’s
   name, or by abbreviated references, are included in this list.


_How cited:_


ALGUNS DOC.—Alguns documentos do archivo nacional da Torre do
Tombo ácerca das navegações e conquistas Portuguezas. Lisboa
(Impr. nac.), 1892.

   A Collection of documents, 1416-1554, edited by José
   Ramos-Coelho. See Index _sub_ Angola, Kongo, Manicongo.


PAIVA MANSO.—Historia do Congo, obra posthuma do (Dr. Levy) Visconde de
Paiva Manso. Lisboa (Typ. da Acad.), 1877.

   A collection of documents, 1492-1722.


BOLETIM.—Boletim da Sociedade de Geographia de Lisboa.

   The volume for 1883 contains documents now in the Bibliothéque
   Nationale (instructions given to B. Dias, 1559; Letters of F.
   Garcia Simões, F. Balthasar Barretta, and other Jesuits).

   Memorias do Ultramar, Viagens explorações e conquistas do
   Portuguezes. Collecção de Documentos por Luciano Cordeira.
   Lisboa (Impr. nac.) 1881.

The following Parts have been published:—


GARCIA MENDES.

   (_a_) 1574-1620. Da Mina ao Cabo Negro segundo Garcia Mendes
   Castello Branco (the writer of these reports was one of the
   companions of Paulo Dias de Novaes).


REBELLO DE ARAGÃO.

   (_b_) 1593-1631. Terras e Minas Africanas segundo Balthazar
   Rebello de Aragão. (He went out to Africa in 1593).


BENGUELLA E SEU SERTÃO.

   (_c_) 1617-1622. Benguella e seu sertão per um Anonymo. (The
   author of this account of the conquest of Benguella may
   possibly have been Manuel Cerveira Pereira).


ESTABELECIMENTOS.

   (_d_) 1607. Estabelecimentos e Resgates Portuguezes na costa
   occidental de Africa por um Anonymo.


ESCRAVOS E MIMAS.

   (_e_) 1516-1619. Escravos e Minas de Africa segundo Diversos.

D. LOPEZ.—Relatione del Reame di Congo e delle circonvicine
contrade tratta dalli Scritti e ragionamente di Odoardo Lopez,
per Filippo Pigafetta. Roma, 1591.

   This work has been translated into Latin, German, Dutch,
   French and English, but has not hitherto found a competent
   editor. I quote the English translation by Mrs. M. Hutchinson,
   published at London in 1881.

   Duarte Lopez went out to Kongo in 1578; and the bulk of this
   volume is based upon information imparted to his editor when
   he was in Rome in 1591. Pigafetta has most unwisely expanded
   the information thus obtained into a description of the
   greater part of Africa.


CAVAZZI.—Istorica descrizione de’ tre regni Congo, Matamba, e Angola,
accuratamente compilata, dal P. Gio. Antonio Cavazzi da Montecuccolo.
Bologna, 1687.

   Cavazzi, a Capuchin, visited Kongo and Angola twice (1654-67,
   1670-) and died at Genoa in 1693. This bulky folio only deals
   with his first visit, and was edited by P. Fortunato
   Alamandini, of Bologna. Labat (“Relation historique de
   l’Éthiopie,” Paris, 1732) has given a useful version of it in
   French, which must, however, be used with some caution. It is
   by far the most important work we have at the hand of one of
   the early Catholic missionaries. W. D. Cooley’s observation
   (“Inner Africa Laid Open,” London, 1852, p. 3), that the works
   published up to the time of Cavazzi “would hardly furnish
   twenty pages of sound geographical intelligence,” can apply
   only to what they say of Inner Africa; whilst Lopez de Lima
   (“Ensaios,” p. xi) is hardly justified in calling Cavazzi a
   “fabulista,” unless that opprobrious term be confined to what
   the friar relates of the miracles wrought by himself and
   others.


DAPPER.—Nauwkeurige beschrijving der Afrikaansche gewesten van Olf.
Dapper. Amst., 1668.

   I quote the German translation (“Beschreibung von Afrika,”
   Amst., 1670).

   This is a very careful compilation; more especially
   interesting, as it contains information on the country
   collected during the Dutch occupation (1642-48), not to be
   found elsewhere.


CADORNEGA.—Historia das guerras de Angola (Historia General Angolana),
por D. A. de Oliveira Cadornega, in 1680-82.

   Cadornega, a native of Villa Viçosa, accompanied D. Pedro
   Cezar de Menezes to Angola in 1639, and died at Luandu in
   1690. His work (in three volumes) only exists in MS. in the
   library of the Academy of Sciences, Lisbon, and in the
   Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris. I have not been able to consult
   it with the minuteness which it deserves. A rough copy of a
   considerable portion of it is to be found in the British
   Museum (_Add. MS._ 15,183, fol. 33). Copious extracts from it
   are given by Paiva Manso and D. José de Lacerda (“Exame das
   Viagens do Dr. Livingstone,” Lisbon, 1867).


CATALOGO.—Catalogo dos Governadores do Reine de Angola (Collecçao de
Noticias para a historia das nações ultramarinas publicada pela Academia
real das Sciencias, tome III, pt. 2). Lisboa, 1826.

   This is an anonymous compilation, continued to the year 1784.
   J. C. Feo Cardozo, in his “Memorias contendo a biographia do
   Vico-Almirante Luiz da Motta Feo e Torres,” Paris, 1825, also
   printed this chronological history, and continued it to the
   year 1825. He has added the map drawn in 1790 by Colonel L. C.
   C. Pinheiro Furtado. The “Catalogue” is useful, but it is not
   free from very serious errors.


BENTLEY.—Dictionary and Grammar of the Kongo Language, by the Rev. W.
Holman Bentley. 1887.


CORDEIRO DA MATTA.—Ensaio de Diccionario Kimbundu-Portugueze coordenado
par L. D. Cordeiro da Matta. Lisboa, 1893.

LOPES DE LIMA, ENSAIO.—Ensaios sobre a Statistica das possessões
Portuguezes (III. Ensaio sobre a Statistice d’Angola e Benguella), por
José Joaquim Lopes de Lima (Imp. nac.), 1846.

   This is a fundamental work. The historical account is
   contained in the Introduction and in chap. v.


LOPES DE LIMA, AN. MAR.—Descobrimento, posse, e conquista do reino do
Congo pelos Portuguezes no Seculo xvi, por J. J. Lopes de Lima (“Annaes
maritimos e coloniaes,” Lisboa, 1845, pp. 93-108).


LOPES DE LIMA.—Successos do Reino do Congo, no seculo xvii, pelo J. J.
Lopes de Lima (_ibid._, pp. 194-99).


[Illustration]




THE STRANGE ADVENTURES

OF

ANDREW BATTELL OF LEIGH IN ESSEX,

SENT BY THE PORTUGALS PRISONER TO ANGOLA, WHO LIVED THERE, AND IN THE
ADJOINING REGIONS, NEAR EIGHTEEN YEARS.




§ I.

_Andrew Battel, his Voyage to the River of Plate, who being taken on the
coast of Brasill, was sent to Angola._


[_From the Thames to Cape Palmas._]

In the year 1589, Abraham Cocke[9] of Limehouse, began his voyage toward
the River of Plate, with two pinnaces[10] of fifty tons apiece: the one
was called the _May-Morning_, the other the _Dolphin_.

We sailed from the river Thames the twentieth of April; and the six and
twentieth of the same month we put into Plimmoth [Plymouth], where we
took in some provision for the voyage. The seventh of May we put to sea,
and with foul weather were beaten back again into Plimmoth, where we
remained certain days, and then proceded on our voyage: And running
along the coast of Spain and Barbary we put into the road of Sancta
Cruz,[11] and there set our Light-horse-man[12] together which we
carried in two pieces. Abraham Cocke made great account hereof, thinking
that this boat should have made his voyage. This done, we put to sea,
and running along the coast of Guinea we were becalmed, because we were
so near the coast.


[_St. Thomé and the Gulf of Guinea._]

Here our men fell sick of the scurvy, in such sort, that there were very
few sound. And being within three or four degrees of the equinoctial
line we fell with the Cape de las Palmas, where we had some refreshing,
wherewith our men recovered. The people of the Cape de las Palmas [Cabo
das Palmas] made much of us, saying that they would trade with us; but
it was but to betray us, for they are very treacherous, and were like to
have taken our boat, and hurt some of our men. From this Cape we lay
south-west off;[13] but the current and the calms deceived us, so that we
were driven down to the isle of St. Thomé,[14] thinking that we had
been further off to the Sea than we were. And being in distress for wood
and water, we went in on the south end between San Tome and the islands
das Rolas,[15] where we rode very smooth, and with our light-horse-man
went on shore, thinking to have watered, but we found none in the
island. Here we had great store of plantains and oranges. We found a
village of negroes, which are sent from San Tome, for the Portugals of
San Tome do use, when their slaves be sick or weak, to send them thither
to get their strength again. For the islands are very fruitful, and
though there be no fresh water, yet they maintain themselves with the
wine of the palm-trees. Having refreshed ourselves with the fruit of
this island, we burned the village. And running on the east side of San
Tome we came before the town;[16] but we durst not come near, for the
castle shot at us, which hath very good ordnance in it.

Then we lay east and by south toward the main, and in four and twenty
hours we had sight of the Cape de Lopo Gonsalves:[17] and being within
three leagues of the said cape we cast about and stood again toward the
island of San Tome, and turned up on the west side of the island; and
coming to a little river, which runneth out of the mountains, we went on
shore with our Light-horse-man, with six or seven butts to fill with
water. But the governor had ambushed one hundred men of the island; and
when we were on shore they came upon us, and killed one of our men and
hurt another: wherefore we retired to our boat and got aboard.


[_Across the Atlantic to the Brazils._]

Then Abraham Cocke determined to fetch the coast of Brasil, and lay
west-south-west into the sea: and being some fifty leagues off, we fell
into a shoal of dolphins,[18] which did greatly relieve us, for they did
follow our ship all the way, till we fell [in] with the land, which was
some thirty days. And running along the coast of Brasil till we came to
Ilha Grande,[19] which standeth in five [_sic_] degrees southward of the
line, we put in betwixt the island and the main, and haled our ships on
shore, and washed them, and refreshed ourselves, and took in fresh
water. In this island are no inhabitants, but it is very fruitful. And
being here some twelve days there came in a little pinnace which was
bound to the River of Plate, which came in to water and to get some
refreshments: and presently we went aboard, and took the Portugal
merchant out of the pinnace, which told Abraham Cocke, that within two
months there should two pinnaces come from the River of Plate, from the
town of Buenos Aires.


[_The Rio de la Plata._]

From this town there come every year four or five caravels to Bahia[20]
in Brasil, and to Angola in Africa, which bring great store of treasure,
which is transported overland out of Peru into the River of Plate. There
Abraham Cocke, desirous to make his voyage, took some of the
_Dolphin’s_ men into his ship, and sent the _Dolphin_ home again, which
had not as yet made any voyage. This Portugal merchant carried us to a
place in this island, where there was a banished man,[21] which had
planted great store of plantains, and told us that we might, with this
fruit, go to the River of Plate: for our bread and our victuals were
almost all spent.

With this hard allowance we departed from this island, and were
six-and-thirty days before we came to the Isle of Lobos Marinos,[22]
which is in the mouth of the River of Plate. This island is half a mile
long, and hath no fresh water, but doth abound with seals and
sea-morses,[23] in such sort that our light-horseman could not get on
shore for them, without we did beat them with our oars: and the island
is covered with them. Upon these seals we lived some thirty days, lying
up and down in the river, and were in great distress of victuals. Then
we determined to run up to Buenos Aires, and with our light-horseman to
take one of the pinnaces that rid at the town. And, being so high up the
river as the town, we had a mighty storm at south-west,[24] which drove
us back again, and we were fain to ride under the Isla Verde[25]—that
is, the green island—which is in the mouth of the river on the north
side.


[_A Prisoner of the Portuguese._]

Here we were all discomforted for lack of victuals and gave over the
voyage, and came to the northward again, to the isle of Sant Sebastian,
lying just under the tropic of Capricorn.[26] There we went on shore to
catch fish, and some went up into the woods to gather fruit, for we were
all in a manner famished. There was at that time a canoe fraught with
Indians, that came from the town of Spiritu Sancto.[27] These Indians
landed on the west side of the island, and came through the woods and
took five of us, and carried us to the River of Janeiro [Rio de
Janeiro]. After this mischance our captain, Abraham Cocke, went to sea,
and was never heard of more.[28]


[_Transported to Angola—A Voyage to the Zaire._]

When we that were taken had remained four months in the River of
Janeiro, I and one Torner[29] were sent to Angola in Africa, to the city
of Saint Paul,[30] which standeth in nine degrees to the southward of
the equinoctial line. Here I was presently taken out of the ship and put
into prison, and sent up the River Quansa,[31] to a town of garrison,
which is 130 miles up the river. And being there two months the pilot of
the governor’s pinnace died: then I was commanded to carry her down to
the city, where I presently fell sick, and lay eight months in a poor
estate, for they hated me because I was an Englishman. But being
recovered of my sickness, Don John Hurtado de Mendoça,[32] who then was
governor, commanded me to go to the river of Congo, called Zaire, in a
pinnace, to trade for elephants’ teeth,[33] wheat,[34] and oil of the
palm-tree. The river Zaire[35] is fifty leagues from the city, to the
northward, and is the greatest river in all that coast. In the mouth of
that river is an island, called the Isle de Calabes, which had at that
time a town in it. Here we laded our pinnace with elephants’ teeth,
wheat, and oil of the palm, and so returned to the city again.




§ II.

   _His trading on the coast; offer to escape; imprisonment;
   exile; escape and new imprisonment; his sending to Elamba and
   Bahia das Vaccas; many strange occurrences._


[_Trading in Loango._]

When I was sent to Longo [Loango], which is fifteen leagues to the
northward of the River Zaire, and carried all commodities fit for that
country, as long glass beads, and round blue beads, and seed beads, and
looking-glasses, blue and red coarse cloth, and Irish rugs, which were
very rich commodities. Here we sold our cloth at a great rate, for we
had for one yard of cloth three elephants’ teeth, that weighed 120
pounds; and we bought great store of palm-cloth[36] and elephants’
tails.[37] So, in little time we laded our pinnace. For this voyage I
was very welcome to the governor, who promised me my liberty if I would
serve him. So I went in his pinnace two years and a half upon the coast.


[_An Attempted Escape._]

Then there came a ship of Holland to the city, the merchant of which
ship promised to carry me away. And, when they were ready to depart I
went secretly on board, but I was betrayed by Portugals which sailed in
the ship, and was fetched on shore by sergeants of the city and put in
prison, and lay with great bolts of iron two months, thinking that the
governor would have put me to death. But at last I was banished for ever
to the Fort of Massangano, to serve in the conquest of those parts. Here
I lived a most miserable life for the space of six years without any
hope to see the sea again.


[_A Second Attempt at Escape._]

In this fort there were Egyptians and Moriscoes that were banished as
myself. To one of these Egyptians[38] I brake my mind, and told him that
it were better for us to venture our lives for our liberty than to live
in that miserable place. This Egyptian was as willing as myself, and
told me he would procure ten of his consorts to go with us. So we got
three Egyptians and seven Portugals. That night we got the best canoe
that we could find, and went down the river Cuanza, and being as far
down as Mani Cabech,[39] which is a little lord in the province of
Elamba [Lamba], we went on shore with our twelve muskets, powder and
shot. Here we sunk our canoe, because they should not know where we
went on shore. We made a little fire in the wood, and scorched Guinea
wheat,[40] which we [had] brought from Massangano, to relieve us, for we
had none other food.

As soon as it was night, we took our journey all that night and the next
day, without any water at all. The second night we were not able to go,
and were fain to dig and scrape up roots of trees, and suck them to
maintain life. The third day we met with an old negro which was
travelling to Mani Cabech. We bound his hands behind him, and made him
lead us the way to the Lake of Casansa.[41] And, travelling all that day
in this extreme hot country we came to the Bansa [mbanza], or town, of
Mani Casansa, which lyeth within the land twelve leagues from the city
of San Paulo. Here we were forced to ask water, but they would give us
none. Then we determined to make them flee their houses with our shot;
but seeing that we were desperately bent they called their Lord, Mani
Casansa, who gave us water and fair speeches, desiring us to stay all
night, only to betray us; but we departed presently, and rested that
night in (_sic_) the lake of Casansa.

The fourth day, at night, we came to the river which is towards the
north,[42] and passed it with great danger. For there are such abundance
of crocodiles in this river that no man dare come near the riverside
when it is deep. The fifth day, at night, we came to the river Dande,
and travelled so far to the eastward that we were right against the
Serras, or mountains of Manibangono,[43] which is a lord that warreth
against the King of Congo, whither we intended to go. Here we passed the
river, and rested half the night. And being two leagues from the river
we met with negroes, which asked us whither we travelled. We told them
that we were going to Congo. These negroes said that we were in the
wrong way, and that they were Masicongos,[44] and would carry us to
Bambe,[45] where the Duke of Bambe lay.

So we went some three miles east, up into the land, till we perceived
that we were in the wrong way, for we travelled by the sun, and would go
no further that way, and turned back again to the westward; they stood
before us with their bows, arrows and darts, ready to shoot at us. But
we, determining to go through them, discharged six muskets together and
killed four, which did amaze them, and made them to retire. But they
followed us four or five miles, and hurt two of our company with their
arrows. The next day we came within the borders of Bamba, and travelled
all that day. At night we heard the surge of the sea. The seventh day,
in the morning, we saw the captain of the city come after us with
horsemen and great store of negroes. Hereupon our company being
dismayed, seven of our faint-hearted Portugals hid themselves in the
thickets. I, and the four Egyptians, thought to have escaped, but they
followed us so fast that we were fain to go into a little wood. As soon
as the captain had overtaken us he discharged a volley of shot into the
wood, which made us lose one another.


[_Surrenders to a Portuguese Captain._]

Thus, being all alone, I bethought myself that if the negroes did take
me in the woods they would kill me: wherefore, thinking to make a better
end among the Portugals and Mulatoes, I came presently out of the wood
with my musket ready charged, making none account of my life. But the
captain, thinking that we had been all twelve together, called to me and
said: “Fellow Soldier, I have the governor’s pardon; if you will yield
yourselves you shall have no hurt.” I, having my musket ready, answered
the captain that I was an Englishman, and had served six years at
Massangono, in great misery; and came in company with eleven Portugals
and Egyptians, and here am left all alone; and rather than I will be
hanged, I will die amongst you. Then the captain came near unto me and
said: “Deliver thy musket to one of the soldiers; and I protest, as I am
a gentleman and a soldier, to save thy life for thy resolute mind.”
Whereupon I yielded up my musket and myself.

Then the captain commanded all the soldiers and negroes to search the
woods, and to bring them out alive or dead, which was presently done.
Then they carried us to the city of San Paulo, where I and the three
Egyptians lay in prison three months with collars of iron, and great
bolts upon our legs, and hardly escaped.


[_A campaign in Lamba._][46]

At that time the governor sent four hundred men, that were banished out
of Portugal, up into the country of Elambe. Then I was with
proclamation through the city banished for ever to the wars, and marched
with them to Sowonso,[47] which is a lord that obeyeth the Duke of
Bamba; from thence to Samanibansa, and then to Namba Calamba, which is a
great lord, who did resist us. But we burnt his town, and then he obeyed
us, and brought three thousand warlike negroes to us. From thence [we
marched] to Sollancango, a little lord, that fought very desperately
with us, but was forced to obey; and then to Combrecaianga,[48] where we
remained two years. From this place we gave many assaults and brought
many lords to subjection. We were fifteen thousand strong, and marched
to the Outeiro,[49] or mountain, of Ingombe. But first we burnt all
Ingasia, which was his country, and then we came to the chief town of
Ingombe, which is half a day’s journey to go up.[50]

This lord came upon us with more than twenty thousand bows, and spoilt
many of our men. But with our shot we made a great spoil among them,
whereupon he retired up into the mountain, and sent one of his captains
to our general, signifying that the next day he would obey him. The next
day he entered our camp with great pomp, with drums, petes,[51] and
Pongoes,[52] or waits, and was royally received; and he gave great
presents, and greatly enriched the general, and them which marched up.
Upon the top of the mountain is a great plain, where he hath his chief
town; very fresh, full of palm-trees, sugar-canes, potatoes, and other
roots, and great store of oranges and lemons. Here is a tree that is
called _Engeriay_,[53] that beareth a fruit as big as a pome-water,[54]
and hath a stone in it, present remedy (_sic_) for the wind colic, which
was strange to the Portugals. Here is a river of fresh water, that
springeth out of the mountains and runneth all along the town. We were
here five days, and then we marched up into the country, and burned and
spoiled for the space of six weeks, and then returned to Engombe again,
with great store of margarite stones,[55] which are current money in
that land. Here we pitched our camp a league from this pleasant
mountain, which remained twelve months: but I was shot in my right leg,
and many Portugals and Mulatoes were carried to the city to be cured.


[_A Voyage to Benguella._]

Then the governor sent a fregatte to the southward, with sixty soldiers,
myself being one of the company, and all kinds of commodities. We turned
up to the southward until we came into twelve degrees. Here we found a
fair sandy bay. The people of this place brought us cows and sheep,
wheat[56] and beans; but we staid not there, but came to Bahia das
Vaccas: that is, the Bay of Cows, which the Portugals call Bahia de
Torre,[57] because it hath a rock like a tower. Here we rode on the
north side of the rock, in a sandy bay, and bought great store of cows,
and sheep—bigger than our English sheep—and very fine copper. Also, we
bought a kind of sweet wood, called _Cacongo_,[58] which the Portugals
esteem much, and great store of wheat and beans. And having laded our
bark we sent her home; but fifty of us staid on shore, and made a little
fort with rafters of wood, because the people of this place are
treacherous, and not to be trusted. So, in seventeen days we had five
hundred head of cattle; and within ten days the governor sent three
ships, and so we departed to the city.

In this bay may any ship ride without danger, for it is a smooth coast.
Here may any ship that cometh out of the East Indies refresh themselves.
For the Portugals carracks[59] now of late come along the coast, to the
city, to water and refresh themselves. These people are called
_Endalanbondos_,[60] and have no government among themselves, and
therefore they are very treacherous, and those that trade with these
people must stand upon their own guard. They are very simple, and of no
courage, for thirty or forty men may go boldly into the country and
fetch down whole herds of cattle. We bought the cattle for blue glass
beads of an inch long, which are called _Mopindes_,[61] and paid fifteen
beads for one cow.

This province is called Dombe,[62] and it hath a ridge of high _serras_,
or mountains, that stretch from the _serras_ or mountains of Cambambe,
wherein are mines, and lie along the coast south and by west. Here is
great store of fine copper, if they would work in their mines; but they
take no more than they wear for a bravery. The men of this place wear
skins about their middles and beads about their necks. They carry darts
of iron, and bow and arrows in their hands. They are beastly in their
living, for they have men in women’s apparel, whom they keep among their
wives.

Their women wear a ring of copper about their necks, which weigheth
fifteen pound at the least; about their arms little rings of copper,
that reach to their elbows; about their middle a cloth of the _Insandie_
tree, which is neither spun nor woven;[63] on their legs rings of copper
that reach to the calves of their legs.




§ III.

   _Discovery of the Gagas: their wars, man-eating; over-running
   countries. His trade with them, betraying, escape to them, and
   living with them; with many strange adventures. And also the
   rites and manner of life observed by the Iagges or Gagas,
   which no Christian could ever know well but this author._[64]


[_A Second Voyage to Benguella._]

In our second voyage, turning up along the coast, we came to the Morro,
or cliff of Benguelle,[65] which standeth in twelve degrees of southerly
latitude. Here we saw a mighty camp on the south side of the river
Cova.[66] And being desirous to know what they were, we went on shore
with our boat; and presently there came a troop of five hundred men to
the waterside. We asked them who they were. Then they told us that they
were the Gagas, or Gindes, that came from Sierra de lion [Serra
Leôa],[67] and passed through the city of Congo, and so travelled to
the eastward of the great city of Angola, which is called Dongo.[68] The
great Gaga, which is their general, came down to the waterside to see
us, for he had never seen white men before. He asked wherefore we came.
We told him that we came to trade upon the coast. Then he bade us
welcome, and called us on shore with our commodities. We laded our ship
with slaves in seven days, and bought them so cheap that many did not
cost one real, which were worth in the city [of Loanda] twelve milreis.

[In a marginal note, Purchas adds:—

   “He, in discourse with me, called them Iagges, and their chief
   the great Iagge. I think he writ them Gagas for Giagas, by
   false spelling.”]


[_Among the Jagas._]

Being ready to depart, the great Giaga staid us, and desired our boat to
pass his men over the river Cova, for he determined to overrun the realm
of Benguele, which was on the north side of the river Cova. So we went
with him to his camp, which was very orderly, entrenched with piles of
wood; we had houses provided for us that night, and many burthens
[loads] of palm-wine, cows, goats and flour.

In the morning, before day, the general did strike his _gongo_,[69]
which is an instrument of war that soundeth like a bell, and presently
made an oration with a loud voice, that all the camp might hear, that he
would destroy the Benguelas, with such courageous and vehement speeches
as were not to be looked for among the heathen people. And presently
they were all in arms, and marched to the river side, where he had
provided _Gingados_.[70] And being ready with our boat and _Gingados_,
the general was fain to beat them back because of the credit who should
be first. We carried over eighty men at once, and with our muskets we
beat the enemy off, and landed, but many of them were slain. By twelve
of the clock all the Gagas were over.

Then the general commanded all his drums, _tavales_,[71] _petes_,
_pongos_, and all his instruments of warlike music to strike up, and
gave the onset, which was a bloody day for the Benguelas. These
Benguelas presently broke, and turned their backs, and a very great
number of them were slain, and were taken captives, man, woman and
child. The prince, Hombiangymbe, was slain, which was ruler of this
country, and more than one hundred of his chief lords, and their heads
presented and thrown at the feet of the great Gaga. The men, women and
children that were brought in captive alive, and the dead corpses that
were brought to be eaten, were strange to behold. For these Gagas are
the greatest cannibals and man-eaters that be in the world, for they
feed chiefly upon man’s flesh [notwithstanding of their] having all the
cattle of that country.

They settled themselves in this country and took the spoil of it. We had
great trade with these Gagas, five months, and gained greatly by them.
These Gagas were not contented to stay in this place of Benguela,
although they lacked almost nothing. For they had great store of cattle
and wheat, and many other commodities; but they lacked wine, for in
these parts there are no palm-trees.

After the five months were expired they marched toward the province of
Bambala,[72] to a great lord that is called Calicansamba, whose country
is five days up into the land. In these five months’ space we made three
voyages to the city of San Paul, and coming the fourth time we found
them not.


[_March into the Interior._]

Being loth to return without trade, we determined to go up into the land
after them. So we went fifty on shore, and left our ship riding in the
Bay of Benguela to stay for us. And marching two days up into the
country we came to a great lord which is called Mofarigosat; and coming
to his first town we found it burnt to the ground, for the Gagas had
passed and taken the spoil. To this lord we sent a negro which we had
bought of the Gagas, and [who] lived with us, and bid him say that he
was one of the great Gaga’s men, and that he was left to carry us to the
camp. This lord bade us welcome for fear of the great Gaga, but he
delayed the time, and would not let us pass till the Gaga was gone out
of his country. This lord Mofarigosat, seeing that the Gagas were clear
of him, began to palter with us, and would not let us go out of his land
till we had gone to the wars with him, for he thought himself a mighty
man having us with him. For in this place they never saw [a] white man
before, nor guns. So we were forced to go with him, and destroyed all
his enemies, and returned to his town again. Then we desired him that he
would let us depart; but he denied us, without we would promise him to
come again, and leave a white man with him in pawn.


[_Left as an Hostage._]

The Portugals and Mulatos being desirous to get away from this place,
determined to draw lots who should stay; but many of them would not
agree to it. At last they consented together that it were fitter to
leave me, because I was an Englishman, than any of themselves. Here I
was fain to stay perforce. So they left me a musket, powder and shot,
promising this lord, Mofarigosat, that within two months they would come
again and bring a hundred men to help him in his wars, and to trade with
him. But all was to shift themselves away, for they feared that he would
have taken us all captives. Here I remained with this lord till the two
months were expired, and was hardly used, because the Portugals came not
according to promise.

The chief men of this town would have put me to death, and stripped me
naked, and were ready to cut off mine head. But the Lord of the town
commanded them to stay longer, thinking that the Portugals would come.
And after that I was let loose again, I went from one town to another,
shifting for myself within the liberties of the lord. And being in fear
of my life among them I ran away, purposing to go to the camp of the
Gagas.


[_He joins the Jagas._]

And having travelled all that night, the next day I came to a great town
which was called Cashil, which stood in a mighty overgrown thicket. Here
I was carried into the town, to the lord Cashil. And all the town, great
and small, came to wonder at me, for in this place there was never any
white man seen. Here were some of the great Gaga’s men, which I was glad
to see, and went with these Gagas to Calicansamba, where the camp was.

This town of the lord Cashil is very great and is so overgrown with
_Olicondie_ [_baobab_][73] trees, cedars,[74] and palms, that the
streets are darkened with them. In the middle of the town there is an
image, which is as big as a man, and standeth twelve feet high; and at
the foot of the image there is a circle of elephants’ teeth, pitched
into the ground. Upon these teeth stand great store of dead men’s
skulls, which are [were] killed in the wars, and offered to this image.
They used to pour palm oil at his feet, and kill goats, and pour their
blood at his feet. This image is called Quesango,[75] and the people
have great belief in him, and swear by him; and do believe when they are
sick that Quesango is offended with them. In many places of this town
were little images, and over them great store of elephants’ teeth
piled.[76]

The streets of this town were paled with palm-canes, very orderly.
Their houses were round like a hive, and, within, hanged with fine mats
very curiously wrought. On the south-east end of the town was a mokiso
[_mukishi_] which had more than three tons of elephants’ teeth piled
over him.

From this town of Cashil I travelled up into the country with the
Gagas[77] two days, and came to Calicansamba, where the great Gaga had
his camp, and was welcome to him. Among the cannibal people I determined
to live, hoping in God that they would travel so far to the westward
that we should see the sea again; and so I might escape by some ship.
These Gagas remained four months in this place, with great abundance and
plenty of cattle, corn, wine, and oil, and great triumphing, drinking,
dancing, and banquetting, with man’s flesh, which was a heavy spectacle
to behold.

At the end of four months they marched towards the _Serras_, or
mountains of Cashindcabar, which are mighty high, and have great copper
mines, and they took the spoil all the way as they went. From thence
they went to the river Longa,[78] and passed it, and settled themselves
in the town of Calango,[79] and remained there five or six months. Then
we arose and entered into the province of Tondo,[80] and came to the
river Gonsa [Coanza],[81] and marched on the south side of the river to
a lord that was called Makellacolonge, near to the great city of Dongo.
Here we passed over mighty high mountains, and found it very cold.

Having spent sixteen months among these cannibals, they marched to the
westward again, and came along the river Gonsa, or Gunza, to a lord that
is called Shillambansa,[82] uncle to the King of Angola. We burnt his
chief town, which was after their fashion very sumptuously builded. This
place is very pleasant and fruitful. Here we found great store of wild
peacocks,[83] flying up and down the trees, in as great abundance as
other birds. The old lord Shillambansa was buried in the middle of the
town, and had a hundred tame peacocks kept upon his grave, which
peacocks he gave to his _Mokeso_, and they were called _Angello
Mokeso_,[84] that is, the Devil’s or Idol’s Birds, and were accounted as
holy things. He had great store of copper, cloth, and many other things
laid upon his grave, which is the order of that country.[85]

From this place we marched to the westward, along the river Coanza, and
came right against the _Serras_ or mountains of Cambambe, or Serras de
Prata.[86] Here is the great fall of water, that falleth right down, and
maketh a mighty noise that is heard thirty miles. We entered into the
province of Casama,[87] and came to one of the greatest Lords, which was
called Langere. He obeyed the great Gaga, and carried us to a Lord
called Casoch,[88] which was a great warrior, for he had some seven
years before overthrown the Portugals camp, and killed eight hundred
Portugals and forty-thousand negroes, that were on the Portugals side.
This Lord did stoutly withstand the Gagas, and had the first day a
mighty battle, but had not the victory that day. So we made a sconce of
trees after their fashion, and remained four months in the wars with
them. I was so highly esteemed with the great Gaga, because I killed
many negroes with my musket, that I had anything that I desired of him.
He would also, when they went out to the wars, give charge to his men
over me. By this means I have been often carried away in their arms, and
saved my life. Here we were within three days’ journey of Massangano,
before mentioned, where the Portugals have a fort: and I sought means,
and got to the Portugals again with merchant negroes that came to the
camp to buy slaves.


[_Military Organisation of the Jagas._]

There were in the camp of the Gagas twelve captains. The first, called
Imbe Calandola,[89] their general, a man of great courage. He warreth
all by enchantment, and taketh the Devil’s counsel in all his exploits.
He is always making of sacrifices[90] to the Devil, and doth know many
times what shall happen unto him. He believeth that he shall never die
but in the wars. There is no image among them, but he useth certain
ceremonies. He hath straight laws to his soldiers: for, those that are
faint-hearted, and turn their backs to the enemy, are presently
condemned and killed for cowards, and their bodies eaten. He useth every
night to make a warlike oration upon an high scaffold, which doth
encourage his people.

It is the order of these people, wheresoever they pitch their camp,
although they stay but one night in a place, to build their fort, with
such wood or trees as the place yieldeth: so that the one part of them
cutteth down trees and boughs, and the other part carrieth them, and
buildeth a round circle with twelve gates.[91] So that every captain
keepeth his gate. In the middle of the fort is the general’s house,
intrenched round about, and he hath many porters to keep the door. They
build their houses very close together, and have their bows, arrows, and
darts standing without their doors; and when they give alarm, they are
suddenly all out of the fort. Every company at their doors [gates?] keep
very good watch in the night, playing upon their drums and
_tavales_.[92]


[_A River of Gold._]

These Gagas told us of a river that is to the southward of the Bay of
Vaccas,[93] that hath great store of gold: and that they gathered up
great store of grains of gold upon the sand, which the fresh water
driveth down in the time of rain. We found some of this gold in the
handles of their hatchets, which they use to engrave with copper; and
they called it copper also, and do not esteem it.


[_Palm Wine._]

These Gagas delight in no country, but where there is great store of
Palmares, or groves of palms. For they delight greatly in the wine and
in the fruit of the palm, which serveth to eat and to make oil. And they
draw their wine contrary to the Imbondos.[94] These palm-trees are six
or seven fathoms high, and have no leaves but in the top: and they have
a device to go up to the top of the tree, and lay no hands on it, and
they draw the wine in the top of the tree in a bottle.

But these Gagas cut the palm-trees down by the root, which lie ten days
before they will give wine. And then they make a square hole in the top
and heart of the tree, and take out of the hole every morning a quart,
and at night a quart So that every tree giveth two quarts of wine a day
for the space of six and twenty days, and then it drieth up.


[_Jaga Raids._]

When they settle themselves in any country, they cut down as many palms
as will serve them wine for a month: and then as many more, so that in a
little time they spoil the country. They stay no longer in a place than
it will afford them maintenance. And then in harvest-time they arise,
and settle themselves in the fruitfullest place they can find; and do
reap their enemy’s corn, and take their cattle. For they will not sow,
nor plant, nor bring up any cattle, more than they take by wars.[95]
When they come into any country that is strong, which they cannot the
first day conquer, then their General buildeth his fort, and remaineth
sometimes a month or two quiet. For he saith, it is as great wars to
the inhabitants to see him settled in their country, as though he fought
with them every day. So that many times the inhabitants come and assault
him at his fort: and these Gagas defend themselves and flesh[96] them on
for the space of two or three days. And when their General mindeth to
give the onset, he will, in the night, put out some one thousand men:
which do ambush themselves about a mile from their fort. Then in the
morning the great Gaga goeth with all his strength out of the fort, as
though he would take their town. The inhabitants coming near the fort to
defend their country, being between them, the Gagas give the watchword
with their drums, and then the ambushed men rise, so that very few
escape. And that day their General overunneth the country.


[_Dress and Ornaments._]

The great Gaga Calando[97] hath his hair very long, embroidered with
many knots of Banba[98] shells, which are very rich among them, and
about his neck a collar of _masoes_,[99] which are also shells, that are
found upon that coast, and are sold among them for the worth of twenty
shillings a shell: and about his middle he weareth _landes_, which are
beads made of the ostrich eggs.[100] He weareth a palm-cloth about his
middle, as fine as silk. His body is carved and cut with sundry works,
and every day anointed with the fat of men.[101] He weareth a piece of
copper cross his nose[102], two inches long, and in his ears also. His
body is always painted red and white. He hath twenty or thirty wives,
which follow him when he goeth abroad; and one of them carrieth his bows
and arrows; and four of them carry his cups of drink after him. And when
he drinketh they all kneel down, and clap their hands and sing.[103]

Their women wear their hair with high _trompes_ full of bamba [_mbamba_]
shells, and are anointed with civet.[104] They pull out four of their
teeth, two above and two below, for a bravery. And those that have not
their teeth out are loathsome to them, and shall neither eat nor drink
with them. They wear great store of beads about their necks, arms, and
legs; about their middles, silk cloths.


[_Infanticide._]

The women are very fruitful, but they enjoy none of their children: for
as soon as the woman is delivered of her child, it is presently buried
quick [alive], so that there is not one child brought up in all this
generation.[105] But when they take any town they keep the boys and
girls of thirteen or fourteen years of age as their own children. But
the men and women they kill and eat. These little boys they train up in
the wars, and hang a collar about their necks for a disgrace, which is
never taken off till he proveth himself a man, and bring his enemy’s
head to the General: and then it is taken off and he is a freeman, and
is called _Gonso_ or soldier.[106] This maketh them all desperate, and
forward to be free, and counted men: and so they do increase. In all
this camp there were but twelve natural Gagas that were their captains,
and fourteen or fifteen women. For it is more than fifty years since
they came from Serra de Lion, which was their native country. But their
camp is sixteen thousand strong, and sometimes more.[107]


[_Human Sacrifices._][108]

When the great Gaga Calandola undertaketh any great enterprise against
the inhabitants of any country, he maketh a sacrifice to the Devil, in
the morning, before the sun riseth. He sitteth upon a stool, having upon
each side of him a man-witch: then he hath forty or fifty women which
stand round about him, holding in each hand a _zevra_ [zebra][109] or
wild horse’s tail, wherewith they do flourish and sing. Behind them are
great store of petes, ponges, and drums, which always play. In the midst
of them is a great fire; upon the fire an earthen pot with white
powders, wherewith the men-witches do paint him on the forehead,
temples, ’thwart the breast and belly, with long ceremonies and
inchanting terms. Thus he continueth till sun is down. Then the witches
bring his _Casengula_,[110] which is a weapon like a hatchet, and put it
into his hand, and bid him be strong against his enemies: for his
_mokiso_ is with him. And presently there is a man-child brought, which
forthwith he killeth. Then are four men brought before him; two whereof,
as it happeneth, he presently striketh and killeth; the other two he
commandeth to be killed without the fort.

Here I was by the men-witches ordered to go away, as I was a Christian,
for then the Devil doth appear to them, as they say. And presently he
commandeth five cows to be killed within the fort, and five without the
fort: and likewise as many goats, and as many dogs, and the blood of
them is sprinkled in the fire, and their bodies are eaten with great
feasting and triumph. And this is used many times by all the other
captains of their army.


[_Burial of the Dead._]

When they bury the dead they make a vault in the ground, and a seat for
him to sit.[111] The dead hath his head newly embroidered, his body
washed, and anointed with sweet powders. He hath all his best robes put
on, and is brought between two men to his grave, and set in seat as
though he were alive. He hath two of his wives set with him, with their
arms broken, and then they cover over the vault on the top. The
inhabitants when they die are buried after the same fashion, and have
the most part of their goods buried with them. And every month there is
a meeting of the kindred of the dead man, which mourn and sing doleful
songs at his grave for the space of three days, and kill many goats, and
pour their blood upon his grave, and palm-wine also; and use this
ceremony as long as any of their kindred be alive.[112] But those that
have no kindred think themselves unhappy men, because they have none to
mourn for them when they die. These people are very kind one to another
in their health; but in their sickness they do abhor one another, and
will shun their company.




§ IV.

   _His return to the Portugals: invasions of diverse countries;
   abuses; flight from them and living in the woods diverse
   months; his strange boat, and coming to Loango._


[_João Rodrigues Coutinho’s Campaign, 1602._]

Being departed from the Gagas I came to Masangano, where the Portugals
have a town of garrison. There was at that time a new Governor, which
was called Sienor Iuan Coutinho,[113] who brought authority to conquer
the mines or mountains of Cambamba; and to perform that service the King
of Spain had given him seven years’ custom off all the slaves and goods
that were carried thence to the West Indies, Brazil, or whithersoever,
with condition that he should build three castles, one in Demba,[114]
which are the salt mines, the other in Cambamba, which are the silver
mines, and the other in Bahia das Vaccas, or the Bay of Cows.

This gentleman was so bountiful at his coming that his fame was spread
through all Congo, and many mulatoes and negroes came voluntarily to
serve him. And being some six months in the city he marched to the
Outaba of Tombo,[115] and there shipped his soldiers in pinnaces, and
went up the river Consa or Coanza, and landed at the Outaba of
Songo,[116] sixty miles from the sea. This lord Songo is next to Demba,
where the salt-mines be. In this place there is such store of salt that
most part of the country are perfect clear salt, without any earth or
filth in it, and it is some three feet under the earth as it were ice;
and they cut it out in stones of a yard long, and it is carried up into
the country, and is the best commodity that a man can carry to buy
anything whatsoever.

Here the Governor staid ten days, and sent a pinnace to Masangano for
all the best soldiers that were there. So the captain of the castle sent
me down among a hundred soldiers, and I was very well used by the
Governor; and he made me a sergeant of a Portugal company, and then he
marched to Machimba,[117] from thence to Cauo, and then to Malombe, a
great lord. Here we were four days, and many lords came and obeyed us.
From thence we marched to a mighty lord called Angoykayongo,[118] who
stood in the defence of his country with more than sixty thousand men.
So we met with him, and had the victory, and made a great slaughter
among them. We took captives all his women and children, and settled
ourselves in his town, because it was a very pleasant place, and full of
cattle and victuals. And being eight days in this town the Governor
sickened and died, and left a captain in his room to perform the
service.


[_Manuel Cerveira Pereira carries on the war._]

After we had been two months in the country of Angoykayongo we marched
towards Cambambe, which was but three days’ journey, and came right
against the Serras da Prata, and passed the river Coanza, and presently
overran the country, and built a fort hard by the riverside. Here I
served two years.

They opened the silver-mines, but the Portugals did not like of them as
yet, because they yielded small share of silver.[119]

This new upstart governor was very cruel to his soldiers, so that all
his voluntary men left him; and by this means he could go no further.

At this time there came news by the Jesuits that the Queen of England
was dead, and that King James had made peace with Spain.[120] Then I
made a petition to the Governor, who granted me licence to go into my
country; and so I departed with the Governor and his train to the city
of St. Paul. But he left five hundred soldiers in the fort of Cambambe,
which they hold still.[121]


[_A Trading Trip to Congo._]

Then I went with a Portugal merchant to the province of Bamba, and from
thence to the Outeiro [“hill”], or city standing upon a mountain of
Congo,[122] from thence to Gongon[123] and Batta,[124] and there we
sold our commodities and returned in six months to the city [Loanda]
again.


[_Final Escape from Captivity._]

Then I purposed to have shipped myself for Spain, and thence homewards.
But the Governor denied his word, and commanded me to provide myself
within two days to go up to the Conquest again. This Governor had served
his three years,[125] and the citizens looked every day for another out
of Portugal. So I determined to absent myself for ten or twenty days,
till the other Governor came, and then to come to the city again. For
every Governor that cometh maketh proclamation for all men that be
absent, to come with free pardon.

The same day, at night, I departed from the city with two negro boys
that I had, which carried my musket and six pounds of powder, and a
hundred bullets, and that little provision of victuals that I could
make. In the morning I was some twenty miles from the city, up along the
river Bengo, and there I staid certain days, and then passed Bengo and
came to the river Dande, which is to the northward, purposing to know
what news was in the city, for I was near the highway of Congo. And one
of my negroes inquired of those that passed, and brought me word that it
was certain that the new Governor came not that year.

Now I was put to my shifts, whether I would go to the city again and be
hanged, or to stay and live in the woods, for I had run away twice
before. So I was forced to live in the woods a month, betwixt the rivers
of Dande and Bengo. Then I went to Bengo again, to Mani Kaswea, and
passed over the river, and went to the lake of Casansa.[126] Here is the
greatest store of wild beasts that is in any place of Angola. About this
lake I staid six months, and lived only upon dried flesh, as buffes
[buffaloes], deer, mokokes,[127] impolancas,[128] and roebucks, and
other sorts, which I killed with my musket, and dried the flesh, as the
savages do, upon an hurdle, three feet from the ground, making
underneath it a great fire, and laying upon the flesh green boughs,
which keep the smoke and heat of the fire down, and dry it. I made my
fire with two little sticks, as the savages used to do. I had sometimes
Guinea wheat [maize] which my negro boy would get of the inhabitants for
pieces of dried flesh.

This lake of Casanze doth abound with fish of sundry sorts. I have taken
up a fish that hath skipped out of the water on shore, four feet long,
which the heathen call Sombo.[129]

Thus, after I had lived six months with the dried flesh and fish, and
seeing no end of my misery, I wrought means to get away.

In this lake are many little island that are full of trees called
_Memba_ [_bimba_][130] which are as light as cork and as soft. Of these
trees I built a _lergado_ [_Jangada_], with a knife of the savages that
I had, in the fashion of a box nailed with wooden pegs, and railed round
about, because the sea should not wash me out; and with a blanket that I
had I made a sail, and prepared three oars to row withall.

This lake of Casanza is eight miles over, and issueth into the river
Bengo. So I entered into my _gingado_ [_Jangada_], and my two negro
boys, and rowed into the river Bengo, and so came down with the current
twelve leagues to the bar. Here I was in great danger, because the sea
was great; and being over the bar I rode into the sea, and then sailed
afore the wind along the coast, which I knew well, minding to go to the
kingdom of Longo [Loango], which is towards the north; and being that
night at sea, the next day I saw a pinnace come before the wind, which
came from the city, and was bound to San Thomé, and she came near to me.
The master was my great friend, for we had been mates together, and for
pity’s sake he took me in, and set me on shore in the port of Longo,
where I remained three years, and was well beloved of the king, because
I killed him deer and fowls with my musket.




§ V.

_Of the Province of Engoy [Ngoyo], and other Regions of Loango, with the
Customs there observed by the King and People._


_[Kabinda.]_

From the Point of the Palmar [Ponta do Palmar],[131] which is the north
side of the river Zaire, is the port of Cabenda [Kabinda],[132] where
many ships use to water and refresh themselves; and it is five leagues
northwards. This place is called, Engoy [Ngoyo], and is the first
province of Longo [Loango], and is full of woods and thickets. And seven
leagues northwards of that place is the river Cacongo,[133] a very
pleasant place and fruitful. Here is great stock of elephants’ teeth,
and a boat of ten tons may go up the river.

The Mombales[134] have great trade with them, and pass the river Zaire
in the night, because then it is calm, and carry great store of
elephants’ teeth to the town of Mani Sonna [Sonyo], and sell them in the
port of Pinda to the Portugals, or any other stranger that first
cometh.[135]

At four leagues from Cacongo is the river of Caye, or Longo Leuyes.[136]
This town of Caye [Kaia] is one of the four seats or lordships of
Longo. And then the Angra, or Gulf, das Almadias.[137] In this gulf, or
bay, are great store of canoes or fishermen, because the sea is smoother
there than upon the coast. And two leagues northward is the port of
Longo [Loango]. And it is a sandy bay, and a ship may ride within a
musket-shot of the shore in four or five fathoms.


[_The Capital of Loango._]

The town of Mani Longo is three miles from the waterside, and standeth
on a great plain. This town is full of palm and plantain-trees and very
fresh, and their houses are built under the trees. The streets are wide
and long, and always clean swept. The King hath his houses on the west
side, and before his door he hath a plain, where he sitteth, when he has
any feastings or matters of wars to treat of. From this plain there
goeth a great wide street, some musket-shot from the place; and there is
a great market every day, and it doth begin at twelve of the clock.

Here is great store of palm-cloths of sundry sorts, which is their
merchandizes; and a great store of victuals, flesh, hens, fish, wine,
oil, and corn. Here is also very fine log wood,[138] which they use to
dye withall—it is the root of the log wood which is the best—and
_molangos_[139] of copper. Here is likewise great store of elephants’
teeth, but they sell none in the market-place.


[_A Royal Audience._]

The King hath ten great houses, and is never certain to be found but in
the afternoon, when he cometh to sit. And then he keepeth always [to]
one house. The house is very long, and at twelve of the clock it is full
of noblemen. They sit upon carpets upon the ground. The house is always
full of people till midnight.

The last king, Gembe [Njimbe],[140] never used to speak in the day, but
always in the night. But this king speaketh in the day: howbeit he
spendeth most of the day with his wives. And when the king cometh in he
goeth to the upper end of the house, where he hath his seat, as it were
a throne. And when the king is set, they clap their hands and salute
him, saying in their language: _Byani Pemba_, _Ampola_, _Moneya_,
_Quesinge_.[141]


[_The King’s Wives._][142]

On the south side of the king’s houses he hath a circuit [compound] or
village, where his wives dwell, and in this circuit no man may come on
pain of death. He hath in this place one hundred and fifty wives and
more. And if any man be taken within this circuit, if he be with a
woman, or do but speak to her, they be both brought into the
market-place and their heads be cut off, and their bodies quartered, and
lie one day in the street. The last king Gymbe [Njimbi], had four
hundred children by his women.


[_The King Drinks!_]

When the king drinketh he hath a cup of wine brought, and he that
bringeth it hath a bell in his hand, and as soon as he hath delivered
the cup to the king, he turneth his face from the king and ringeth the
bell; and then all that be there fall down upon their faces, and rise
not till the king have drunk. And this is very dangerous for any
stranger that knoweth not the fashions, for if any seeth the king drink
he is presently killed, whatsoever he be. There was a boy of twelve
years, which was the king’s son. This boy chanced to come unadvisedly
when his father was in drinking. Presently the king commandeth he should
be well apparelled and victuals prepared. So the youth did eat and
drink. Afterward the king commandeth that he should be cut in quarters
and carried about the city, with proclamation that he saw the king
drink.[143]


[_The King at Dinner._][144]

Likewise for his diet, when it is dinner-time, there is a house of
purpose, where he always eateth, and there his diet is set upon a
_bensa_,[145] like a table. Then he goeth in, and hath the door shut. So
when he hath eaten, then he knocketh and cometh out. So that none see
the king eat nor drink. For it is their belief, that if he be seen
eating or drinking, he shall presently die. And this is an order with
all kings that now are, or shall succeed, unless they abolish this cruel
custom.


[_The King as a Rain-maker._]

The king is so honoured as though he were a god among them, and is
called _Sambe_ and _Pongo,_[146] that is God. And they believe that he
can give them rain when he listeth. So once a year, when it is time to
rain, that is in December, the people come to beg rain and bring their
gifts to the king, for none come empty.[147] Then he appointeth the day,
and all the lords far and near come to the feast with all their troops,
as they go in the wars. And when all the troops of men be before the
king, the greatest Lord cometh forthwith his bows and arrows, and
sheweth his skill with his weapon; and then he hath a merry conceit or
jest that he speaketh before the king, and kneeleth at his feet; and
then the king thanketh him for his love; and in like manner they do all.

The king sitteth abroad in a great place, and hath a carpet spread upon
the ground, which is some fifteen fathoms about, of fine _ensacks_,[148]
which are wrought like velvet, and upon the carpet his seat, which is a
fathom from the ground. Then he commanded his _Dembes_ [Ndamba][149] to
strike up, which are drums, so great, that they cannot carry them, and
others that are very great. He hath also eight _Pongos_,[150] which are
his waits, made of the greatest elephants’ teeth, and are hollowed and
scraped light, which play also. And with the drums and waits they make
an hellish noise. After they have sported and shewed the king pleasure,
he ariseth and standeth upon his throne, and taketh a bow and arrows in
his hand, and shooteth to the sky; and that day there is great
rejoicing, because sometimes they have rain. I was once there when the
king gave rain, and it chanced that day to rain mightily, which made the
people have a great belief in their folly.[151]


[_Albinos._]

Here are sometimes born in this country white children, which is very
rare among them, for their parents are negroes. And when any of them are
born, they are presented unto the king and are called _Dondos_
[_Ndundu_].[152] These are as white as any white man. These are the
king’s witches, and are brought up in witchcraft, and always wait on the
king. There is no man that dare meddle with these _Dondos_. If they go
to the market they may take what they list, for all men stand in awe of
them. The King of Longo had four of them.


[_The Nkishi, or Fetishes._]

The king also is a witch, and believeth in two idols which are in Longo.
The one is called _Mokisso à Longo_, the other is called
_Checocke_.[153] This last is a little black image, and standeth in a
little house at a village called Kinga, which standeth in the
landing-place of Longo. This house of _Checocke_ standeth in the
highway, and they that go by clap their hands, which is the courtesy of
the country. Those that be craftsmen, as fishermen, hunters, and
witches, do offer to this idol, that they may have good luck. This
_Checocke_ doth sometimes in the night come and haunt some of his best
beloved: sometimes a man, sometimes a boy or a woman. And then they be
frantic for the space of three hours; and whatsoever the frantic person
speaketh, that is the will of _Checocke_. And they make a great feast
and dancing at his house.[154]

There is another _Mokisso_ which is also in Kinga, and it is called
_Gomberi_. It is the name of a woman, and is in a house where an old
witch dwelleth, and she is called _Ganga Gomberi_, which is, the Priest
of _Gomberi_. Here once a year is a feast made, and _Ganga Gomberi_
speaketh under the ground.[155] And this is a common thing every year. I
have asked the negroes what it was, and they told me that it was a
strong _Mokisso_ that is come to abide with _Checocke_.


[_Children are born White._]

The children in this country are born white, and change their colour in
two days to a perfect black. As, for example, the Portugals, which dwell
in the kingdom of Congo, have sometimes children by the negro women, and
many times the fathers are deceived, thinking when the child is born it
is theirs, and within two days it proveth the son or daughter of a
negro; which the Portugals do greatly grieve at, for they rejoice when
they have a mulato child, though it be a bastard.


[_The Royal Princes._]

The town of Longo [Loango] standeth in the midst of four Lordships, and
is governed by four Princes, which are the King’s sisters’ sons, for
the King’s sons can never be kings. The first is Mani Cabango,[156] the
second Mani Salag, the third Mani Bock, the fourth Mani Cay. This Mani
Cay is next to be king, and hath his train and court as a Prince. And
when the King dieth he cometh presently into the seat of the King. Then,
Mani Bock cometh to Cay, Mani Salag cometh to Bock, and Mani Cabango
cometh to Salag. And then they provide another to go to Cabango, so
there be four Princes that wait on the King when their turns come.


[_The Kings Mother._]

The mother of these Princes is called Mani Lombo,[157] and she is the
highest and chief woman in all the land. She maketh choice of her
husband, and when she is weary of him she putteth him away, and taketh
another. Her children are greatly honoured, and whosoever passeth by
them kneel down and clap their hands, which is the courtesy of the
country.

These Lordships are champaign grounds, and full of corn and fruit.


[_Palm Cloth._][158]

The men in this kingdom make good store of palm-cloth of sundry sorts,
very fine and curious. They are never idle: for they make fine caps of
needlework as they go in the streets.


[_The Royal Tombs._]

There is a place two leagues from the town of Longo, called
Longeri,[159] where all their kings be buried, and it is compassed round
about with elephants’ teeth pitched in the ground, as it were a Pale,
and it is ten roods in compass.


[_Europeans Committed to the Sea._]

These people will suffer no white man to be buried in their land,[160]
and if any stranger or Portugal come thither to trade, and chance to
die, he is carried in a boat two miles from the shore, and cast into the
sea. There was once a Portugal gentleman, that came to trade with them,
and had his house on shore. This gentleman died, and was buried some
four months. That year it did not rain so soon as it was wont, which
beginneth about December, so that they lacked rain for some two months.
Then their _mokisso_ told them that the Christian, which was buried,
must be taken out of the earth, and cast into the sea; and within three
days it rained, which made them have a great belief in the devil.




§ VI.

   _Of the Provinces of Bongo, Calongo, Mayombe, Manikesocke,
   Motimbas: of the ape-monster Pongo: their Hunting, Idolatries,
   and divers other observations._


[_Bongo._]

To the eastward of Longeri is the Province of Bongo, and it bordereth on
Mococke, [of which] the great Angeca[161] is king. In this place is
great store of iron, and palm-cloth, and elephants’ teeth, and great
store of corn.


[_Cango._]

To the north-east is the great province of Cango,[162] and it is
fourteen days journey from the town of Longo. This place is full of
mountains and rocky ground, and full of woods, and hath great store of
copper. The elephants in this place do excel, and there are so many that
the people of Longo hath great store of elephants’ teeth, and bring them
to the port of Longo.


[_Calongo._]

To the northwards of Longo, three leagues, is the river Quelle:[163] and
on the north side is the province of Calongo [Chilunga]. This country is
always tilled, and full of corn, and is all plain and champaign ground,
and hath great store of honey. Here are two little villages that show at
sea like two hummocks,[164] which are the marks to show the port of
Longo; and fifteen miles northward is the river Nombo,[165] but it hath
no depth for any bark to go in. This province, towards the east,
bordereth upon Bongo; and towards the north upon Mayombe, which is
nineteen leagues from Longo along the coast.


[_Yumbe._][166]

The province of Mayombe is all woods and groves, so overgrown that a man
may travel twenty days in the shadow, without any sun or heat. Here is
no kind of corn nor grain, so that the people liveth only upon plantains
and roots of sundry other sorts, very good, and nuts; nor any kind of
tame cattle, nor hens. But they have great store of elephants’ flesh,
which they greatly esteem, and many kinds of wild beasts; and great
store of fish. Here is a great sandy bay, two leagues to the southward
of Cape Negro, which is the port of Mayombe. Sometimes the Portugals
take logwood[167] in this bay. Here is a great river called Banna.[168]
In the winter it hath no bar, because the general winds cause a great
sea; but when the sun hath his south declination, then a boat may go in,
for then it is smooth because of the rain. This river is very great, and
hath many islands, and people dwelling in them. The woods are covered
with baboons, monkeys, apes and parrots, that it will fear any man to
travel in them alone. Here also are two kinds of monsters, which are
common in these woods, and very dangerous.


[_Gorillas and Chimpanzis._][169]

The greatest of these two monsters is called _Pongo_ [_Mpungu_] in their
language, and the lesser is called _Engeco_. This _Pongo_ is in all
proportions like a man, but that he is more like a giant in stature than
a man; for he is very tall, and hath a man’s face, hollow-eyed, with
long hair upon his brows. His face and ears are without hair, and his
hands also. His body is full of hair, but not very thick, and it is of a
dunnish colour. He differeth not from a man but in his legs, for they
have no calf. He goeth always upon his legs, and carryeth his hands
clasped upon the nape of his neck when he goeth upon the ground. They
sleep in the trees, and build shelters from the rain. They feed upon
fruit they find in the woods and upon nuts, for they eat no kind of
flesh. They cannot speak, and have no more understanding than a beast.

The people of the country, when they travel in the woods, make fires
when they sleep in the night. And in the morning, when they are gone,
the _Pongoes_ will come and sit about the fire till it goeth out, for
they have no understanding to lay the wood together. They go many
together, and kill many negroes that travel in the woods. Many times
they fall upon the elephants, which come to feed where they be, and so
beat them with their clubbed fists and pieces of wood that they will run
roaring away from them.

Those _Pongoes_ are never taken alive, because they are so strong that
ten men cannot hold one of them, but yet they take many of their young
ones with poisoned arrows. The young Pongo hangeth on his mother’s
belly, with his hands clasped fast about her, so that when the country
people kill any of the females, they take the young one which hangeth
fast upon his mother. When they die among themselves, they cover the
dead with great heaps of boughs and wood, which is commonly found in the
forests.

[Purchas adds in a marginal note:

   “He told me in a conference with him that one of these Pongos
   took a negro boy of his, which lived a month with them, for
   they hurt not those which they surprise at unawares, except
   they look on them, which he [the boy] avoided. He said, their
   height was like a man’s, but their bigness twice as great. I
   saw the negro boy.

   “What the other monster [the Engeco] should be he hath
   forgotten to relate, and these papers came to my hand since
   his death, which otherwise, in my often conferences, I might
   have learned. Perhaps he meaneth the Pigmy Pongo-killers
   mentioned.”]


[_Hunting Dogs._]

The Morombes[170] use to hunt with their country-dogs, and kill many
kinds of little beasts, and great store of pheasants. But their dogs be
dumb, and cannot bark at all.[171] They hang wooden clappers about their
necks, and follow them by rattling of the clappers. The huntsmen have
_Petes_ [whistles], which they whistle their dogs withall. These dogs,
in all this country, are very little, with prickt ears, and are for the
most part red and dun. The Portugal mastiff dog, or any other great dog,
are greatly esteemed because they do bark. I have seen a dog sold up in
the country for thirty pounds.


[_The Maramba Fetish._][172]

In the town of Mani Mayombe is a fetish called Maramba, and it standeth
in a high basket made like a hive, and over it a great house. This is
their house of religion, for they believe only in him, and keep his
laws, and carry his reliques always with them. They are for the most
part witches, and use their witchcraft for hunting and killing of
elephants and fishing, and helping of sick and lame men, and to forecast
journeys, whether they shall speed well or evil. By this Maramba are all
thefts and murders tried, for in this country they use sometimes to
bewitch one another to death. And when any dieth, their neighbours are
brought before the Maramba; and if it be a great man that dieth, the
whole town cometh to swear. The order is, when they come before Maramba,
to kneel and clasp Maramba in their arms, and to say: _Emeno, eyge
bembet Maramba_, that is, “I come to be tried, O Maramba.”[173] And if
any of them be guilty, they fall down stark dead for ever. And if any
of them that swear hath killed any man or child before, although it may
be twenty years past, he presently dieth. And so it is for any other
matter.

From this place, as far as it is to Cape de Lopo Gonsalves, they are all
of this superstition. I was twelve months in this place, and saw many
die after this sort.

These people be circumcised,[174] as they are through all Angola, except
the kingdom of Congo, for they be Christians. And those that will be
sworn to Maramba[175] come to the chief Gangas, which are their priests
or men-witches, as boys of twelve years of age, and men and women. Then
the Gangas put them into a dark house, and there they remain certain
days with very hard diet. After this they are let abroad, and commanded
not to speak for certain days, what injury soever they be offered, so
that they suffer great penury before they be sworn. Lastly, they are
brought before Maramba, and have two marks cut upon their shoulders
before, like a half moon, and are sworn by the blood that falleth from
them, that they shall be true to him. They are forbidden some one kind
of flesh and some one kind of fish, with many other toys [trifles]. And
if they eat any of this forbidden meat they presently sicken, and never
prosper.[176] They all carry a relique of Maramba in a little box, and
hang it about their necks, under their left arms.

The Lord of this province of Mayombe hath the ensign or shape of Maramba
carried before him, and whithersoever he goeth; and when he sitteth
down it is set before him; and when he drinketh his palm-wine the first
cup is poured at the foot of the _Mokiso_ or idol, and when he eateth
anything, the first piece he throweth towards his left hand, with
enchanting words.


[_Sette._]

From Cape Negro northward is a great Lord called Mani Seat,[177] which
has the greatest store of elephants’ teeth of any Lord in the kingdom of
Longo, for his people practice nothing else but to kill elephants. And
two of these negroes will easily kill an elephant with their darts. And
here is great store of logwood.


[_Mani Kesock._][178]

There is another Lord, to the eastward, which is called Mani Kesock, and
he is eight days’ journey from Mayombe. Here I was with my two negro
boys to buy elephants’ hairs and tails. And in a month I bought twenty
thousand, which I sold to the Portugals for thirty slaves, and all my
charges borne.

From this place I sent one of my negro boys to Mani Seat with a
looking-glass. He did esteem it much, and sent me four elephants’ teeth
(very great) by his own men, and desired me to cause the Portugals, or
any other ship, to come to the northward of the Cape Negro, and he would
make fires where his landing place is, for there was never yet any
Portugal or other stranger in that place.[179]


[_Pygmy Elephant-Hunters._]

To the north-east of Mani Kesock are a kind of little people called
Matimbas,[180] which are no bigger than boys of twelve years old, but
are very thick, and live only upon flesh, which they kill in the woods
with their bows and darts. They pay tribute to Mani Kesock, and bring
all their elephants’ teeth and tails to him. They will not enter into
any of the Marombos[181] houses, nor will suffer any to come where they
dwell; and if by chance any Maramba, or people of Longo [Loango], pass
where they dwell, they will forsake that place and go to another.

The women carry bow and arrows, as well as the men, and one of these
will walk in the woods alone, and kill the _Pongos_ [gorillas] with
their poisoned arrows. I have asked the Marombos whether the elephant
sheddeth his teeth or no, and they say no! But sometimes they find their
teeth in the woods, but they find their bones also.


[_Poison Ordeals._]

When any man is suspected of any offence he is carried before the king,
or before Mani Bomma [Mamboma],[182] which is, as it were, a judge under
the king. And if it be upon matter that he denieth, and cannot be proved
but by their oath, then the suspected person is thus sworn: they have a
kind of root which they call _Imbondo_ [_mbundu_].[183]

This root is very strong, and is scraped into water. The virtue of this
root is, that if they put too much of it into water, the person that
drinketh it cannot void urine, and so it striketh up into the brain, as
though he were drunk, and he falleth down, as though he were dead. And
those that fall are counted as guilty, and are punished.[184]

[Purchas adds, in a marginal note:—

   “He told me that this root makes the water as bitter as gall
   (he tasted it), and one root will serve to try one hundred.
   They which have drunk and made water are cleared, before
   which, if dizziness take them, they cry: _Undoke_,
   _Undoke_,[185] and presently execute them. See my _Relations_,
   b. 7 c. 10, which I writ from his mouth.[186] Neither may this
   be ascribed to the virtue of the herb, but to the vice of the
   Devil, a murderer and his instrument, the _Ganga_ or
   priest.[187] And therefore that conjecture seems unprobable.
   For how could an ordinary trial of life where are so many so
   perilous; and therefore curious (more than) spectators, nor
   perceive this in so long and frequent experience, which costs
   so many their dearest friends their dearest life? I think
   rather that this was the transcriber’s conjecture. I remember
   no such scruple in his narrations to me. Who knows not the
   Devil’s ambition of Deity, and cruel misanthropy or
   man-hating? This is his apish imitation of Divinity, and those
   rites prescribed for trial in the case of jealousy, Numbers,
   v.[188] In Guinea like trial is made by salt, and also by the
   _Fetisseroes_ pot. In _Benomotapa_ by water also; in the
   _Maramba_ trial before [mentioned (see p. 56)], and _Motamba_
   trial by hot iron in Angola;[189] the ploughshares in olden
   times with us; and the trial of witches in the East parts by
   water, etc., were not unlike in deceivable superstition.”]


[_Death and Witchcraft._][190]

In this country none of any account dieth but they kill another for him,
for they believe they die not of their own natural death, but that some
other hath bewitched them to death. And all those are brought in by the
friends of the dead which they suspect, so that many times there come
five hundred men and women to take the drink made of the foresaid root
_Imbonda_ [_mbundu_]. They are brought all to the high street or
market-place, and there the master of the _Imbonda_ sitteth with his
water, and giveth everyone a cop of water by one measure; and they are
commanded to walk in a certain place till they make water, and then they
be free. But he that cannot urine presently falleth down dead, and all
the people, great and small, fall upon him with their knives and beat
and cut him into pieces. But I think the witch that giveth the water is
partial, and giveth to him whom he will have to die, the strongest
water, but no man can perceive it that standeth by. And this is done at
the town of Longo almost every week in the year.




§ VII.

   _Of the Zebra and Hippopotamus; The Portugal Wars in those
   parts; the Fishing, Grain, and other things remarkable._


[_Domestic Animals._]

In this kingdom there is no kind of tame cattle but goats, for none
other cattle will live here. Oxen and kine have been brought hither, but
they presently die. The hens in this place do so abound that a man may
buy thirty for the worth of sixpence in beads.[191]


[_Wild Birds._]

Here is store of pheasants, and great plenty of partridges and wild
fowl. Here is a kind of fowl that lives in the land bigger than a swan,
and they are like a heron, with long legs and long necks, and it is
white or black, and hath in her breast a bare place without feathers,
where she striketh with her beak. This is the right Pelican, and not
those sea-birds which the Portugals call pelicans, which are white and
as big as geese, and these abound in this country also.


[_The Zebra._]

Here is also the _zevera_ or zebra, which is like a horse, but that his
mane, his tail, his strakes and divers colours down his sides and legs
do make a difference. These _zeveras_ are all wild and live in great
herds, and will suffer a man to come within shot of them, and let them
shoot three or four times at them before they will run away.[192]


[_The Hippopotamus._]

Moreover, there are great store of sea or river horses, which feed
always on the land, and live only by grass, and they be very dangerous
in the water. They are the biggest creature in this country, except the
elephant. They have great virtue in the claws of their left forefoot,
and have four claws on every foot, like the claws of an ox. The
Portugals make rings of them, and they are a present remedy for the
flux.

[Illustration: The Zevera, or Zebra.]


[_Portuguese dealings with the Natives._]

The Portugals make war against the negroes in this manner. They have out
of Congo a nobleman, which is known to be a good Christian and of good
behaviour. He bringeth out of Congo some one hundred negroes that are
his followers. This _Macicongo_ [_mwishi-Kongo_]is made _Tandala_,[193]
or general over the black camp, and hath authority to kill, to put down
Lords and make Lords, and hath all the chief doings with the negroes.
And when any Lord cometh to obey he first cometh to Tandala and bringeth
his present, as slaves, kine and goats. Then the Tandala carrieth him
before the Portugal Governor, and bringeth two slaves for the Governor’s
page, before he goeth in. Then he must have a great gift for the
Governor, which is sometimes thirty or forty slaves, besides cattle. But
when he cometh before the Governor he kneeleth down and clappeth his
hands, and falleth down with his face upon the ground, and then he
riseth and saith: “I have been an enemy, and now I protest to be true,
and never more to lift my hand against you.” Then the Governor calleth a
soldier, which hath deserved a reward, and giveth the Lord to him. This
soldier seeth that he have no wrong; and the Lord acknowledgeth him to
be his master, and he doth maintain the soldier and maketh him rich.
Also, in the wars he commandeth his master’s house to be built before
his own, and whatsoever he hath taken that day in the wars, he passeth
[divideth] with his master. So that there is no Portugal soldier of any
account, but hath his negro _sova_, or Lord.[194]


[_Fishing._]

They use upon this coast to fish with harping irons, and wait upon a
great fish that cometh once a day to fish along the shore, which is like
a grampus. He runneth very near the shore and driveth great shoals of
fish before him; and the negroes run along the shore as fast as they are
able to follow him, and strike their harping irons round about him, and
kill great store of fish, and leave them upon the sand till, the fish
hath done feeding; and then they come and gather their fish up.

This fish will many times run himself on ground, but they will presently
shove him off again, which is as much as four or five men can do. They
call him _Emboa_, which is in their speech a dog, and will by no means
hurt or kill any of them.[195]

Also, they use in the bays and rivers, where shoal water is, to fish
with mats, which are made of long rushes, and they make them of an
hundred fathoms long. The mats swim upon the water, and have long rushes
hanged upon one edge of the mat, and so they draw the mat in compass, as
we do our nets. The fishes, fearing the rushes that hang down, spring
out of the water and fall upon the mat, that lyeth flat on the water,
and so are taken.


[“_Corn._”]

They have four sorts of corn in Longo. The first is called
_Masanga_,[196] and it groweth upon a straw as big as a reed, and hath
an ear a foot long, and is like hempseed. The second is called
_Masembala_.[197] This is of great increase, for of one kernel there
springs four or five canes, which are ten foot high, and they bear half
a pint of corn apiece. This grain is as big as tares, and very good.
Thirdly, they have another that groweth low like grass, and is very like
mustard-seed: and this is the best.[198] They have also the great Guinea
wheat, which they call _Mas-impoto_.[199] This is the least esteemed.


[_Ground-nuts._]

They have very good Peason [peas], somewhat bigger than ours, but they
grow not as ours do; for the pods grow on the roots, underneath the
ground, and by their leaves they know when they be ripe.[200] They have
another kind of Peason, which they call _Wando_.[201] This is a little
tree, and the first year that it is planted it beareth no fruit; but
after, it beareth fruit three years, and then it is cut down.[202]


[_Plantains, or Bananas._]

Their plantain trees bear fruit but once, and then are cut down, and out
of the root thereof spring three or four young trees.


[_Bees and the Baobab._]

They have great store of honey, which hangeth in the _Elicondy_
trees.[203] They gather it with a hollow piece of wood, or chest, which
they hang in the top of the tree, and once a year it is full, by smoke
rewarding the laborious creatures with robbery, exile, death.

[Purchas here adds in the margin, “out of Battell’s own reports”:—

This _Alicunde_ or _Elicondi_ tree is very tall and exceeding great,
some as big as twelve men can fathom, spreading like an oak. Some of
them are hollow, and from the liberal skies receive such plenty of
water, that they are hospitable entertainers of thousands in this
thirsty region. Once have I known three or four thousand remain at one
of these trees, and thence receiving all their watery provision for four
and twenty hours, and yet not empty. The negroes climbed up with pegs
of hardwood (which that softer easily receiveth, the smoothness not
admitting other climbing), and I think that some one tree hold forty
tuns of water.

This tree affords not less bountiful hospitality to the back than belly,
yielding (as her belly to their bellies, so) her back to their backs;
excepting that this is better from the younger trees, whose tenderer
backs being more seasonable for discipline, are so soundly beaten (for
man’s fault, whence came the first nakedness), whereby one fathom cut
from the tree is extended into twenty, and is presently fit for wearing,
though not so fine as the _Iuzanda_[204] tree yields. This tree yields
excellent cloth from the inner bark thereof by like beating.]


[_Palm Trees._]

Of their palm trees, which they keep with watering and cutting every
year, they make velvets, satins, taffetas, damasks, sarsenets, and such
like; out of the leaves, cleansed and purged, drawing long threads and
even, for that purpose. They draw wine (as it is said) from the
palm-tree. There is another kind of palm-tree which beareth a fruit good
for the stomach and for the liver, and most admirable.[205]


[_A Crocodile Story._]

One crocodile was so huge and greedy that he devoured an
_Alibamba_,[206] that is, a chained company of eight or nine slaves,
but the indigestible iron paid him his wages, and murdered the murderer,
found afterwards in his belly. I have seen them watch their prey,
hauling in gennet, man, or other creature, into the water. But one
soldier thus wrapt in shallower water drew his knife, took his taker in
the belly, and slew him.]


[THE END.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




ON THE RELIGION AND THE CUSTOMS OF THE PEOPLES OF ANGOLA, CONGO AND
LOANGO.


   The following notes on the religion and customs of the Negroes
   of Angola, Congo and Loango, are taken from Book vii, chapters
   ix and x, of _Purchas His Pilgrimage, or Relations of the
   World and the Religions observed in all Ages and Places
   discovered from the Creation unto this Present_. London (H.
   Fetherstone), 1617. This account is a compilation. Purchas
   quotes, among others, Duarte Lopez, De Barros, Osorio, Marmol,
   and Du Jarric. In what follows, we confine ourselves to the
   oral information which Purchas received from his friends or
   acquaintances, Andrew Battell and Thomas Turner.


CHAP. IX, § I.—ANGOLA.

[_The Slave Trade._]

Master Thomas Turner, one that had lived a long time in Brasil, and had
also been at Angola, reported to me[207] that it was supposed eight and
twenty thousand slaves (a number almost incredible, yet such as the
Portugals told him) were yearly shipped from Angola and Congo, at the
Haven of Loanda.[208] He named to me a rich Portugal in Brasil, which
had ten thousand of his own, working in his _Ingenios_[209] (of which he
had eighteen) and in his other employments. His name was John du Paus,
exiled from Portugal, and thus enriched in Brasil.[210] A thousand of
his slaves at one time entered into conspiracy with nine thousand other
slaves in the country, and barricaded themselves for their best defence
against their master, who had much ado to reduce some of them into their
former servitude.


[_Fetishes._]

To return to Angola, we may add the report of another of our countrymen,
Andrew Battell (my near neighbour, dwelling at Leigh, in Essex) who
served under Manuel Silvera Pereira,[211] Governor under the King of
Spain, at his city of St. Paul, and with him went far into the country
of Angola, their army being eight hundred Portugals and fifty thousand
Naturals. This Andrew Battell telleth that they are all heathens in
Angola. They had their idols of wood in the midst of their towns,
fashioned like a negro, and at the foot thereof was a great heap of
elephants’ teeth, containing three or four tuns of them: these were
piled in the earth, and upon them were set the skulls of dead men, which
they had slain in the wars, in monument of their victory.[212] The idol
they call _Mokisso_ [_Mukishi_], and some of them have houses built
over them. If any be sick, he accounteth it _Mokisso’s_ hand, and
sendeth to appease his angry God, with pouring wine (which they have of
the palm tree) at his feet.[213] They have proper names of distinction
for their _Mokissos_, as _Kissungo_, _Kalikete_, etc., and use to swear
by them, _Kissungo wy_, that is, by _Kissungo_.[214]


[_Trial by Ordeal._]

They have another more solemn oath in trial of controversies: this trial
is called _Motamba_,[215] for which purpose they lay a kind of hatchet,
which they have, in the fire, and the _Ganga-Mokisso_, or _Mokisso’s_
Priest,[216] taketh the same red-hot, and draweth it near to the skin of
the accused party; and if there be two, he causeth their legs to be set
near together, and draweth this hot iron without touching between them;
if it burns, that party is condemned as guilty, otherwise he is freed.


[_Burial._][217]

For the ceremonies about the dead, they first wash him, then paint him,
thirdly apparel him in new clothes, and then bring him to his grave,
which is made like a vault, after it is digged a little way down,
undermined, and made spacious within; and there set him on a seat of
earth, with his beads (which they use on chains and bracelets for
ornament), and the most part of his goods, with him in his last home.
They kill goats and shed the blood in the graves, and pour wine there in
memorial of the dead.


[_Dogs._][218]

... Andrew Battell saith that the Dogs in these countries are all of one
sort, prick-eared curs of a mean bigness, which they use also to hunt
with, but they open not (for they cannot bark), and therefore they hang
clappers made of little boards about their necks. He hath seen a mastiff
sold for three slaves....


[_Quizama._]

This kingdom [of Angola] hath many lordships subject thereto, as far as
the sea-coast as Cape Negro. Towards a lake called Aquelunda[219] lieth
a country called Quizama, the inhabitants whereof being governed after
the manner of a commonwealth, have showed themselves friendly to the
Portugals, and helped them in their wars against Angola. The houses in
Angola are made in fashion like a bee-hive.


[_Women and the Moon._]

The women at the first sight of the new moon, turn up their bums in
despite, as offended with their menstruous courses, which they ascribe
unto her.


[_Horses’ Tails._][220]

The men sometimes, in a valorous resolution, will devote themselves unto
some haughty attempt in the wars; and, taking leave of the king, will
vow never to return until they bring him a horse-head, or some other
thing, very dangerous in the enterprise, and will either do it or die.
Horse-tails are great jewels, and two slaves will be given for one tail,
which commonly they bring from the River of Plate, where horses are
exceedingly increased and grown wild. They will, by firing the grass
round about, hem the horses about with a fiery circle, the fire still
straightening and growing nearer till they have advantage enough to kill
them. Thus have the European cattle, of horse and kine, so increased in
the other world, as they spare not to kill the one for their hides, and
the other for their tails.


CHAPTER IX, § II.—OF CONGO.

[_A Crocodile Story._][221]

... Andrew Battell told me of a huge crocodile which was reported to
have eaten a whole _Alibamba_, that is, a company of eight or nine
slaves chained together, and at last paid for his greediness: the chain
holding him slave, as before it had the negroes, and by his undigestible
nature devouring the devourer; remaining in the belly of him after he
was found, in testimony of this victory. He hath seen them watch and
take their prey, haling a gennet, man, or other creature into the water.
A soldier thus drawn in by a crocodile, in shallower waters, with his
knife wounded him in the belly, and slew him.


CHAPTER IX, § III.—OF THEIR ... STRANGE TREES....

Having stated that they use in Congo to make “clothes of the _Enzanda_
tree,[222] of which some write the same things that are reported of the
Indian fig-tree,” that it sends forth a hairy substance from the
branches, which no sooner touch the ground but they take root, and grow
up in such sort, that one tree would multiply itself into a wood if
nature set not some obstacle (a marginal note adds that “Andrew Battell
saith that the tree which thus strangely multiplieth itself is called
the _Manga_ tree”[223]). Purchas continues as follows:—

“But more admirable is that huge tree called _Alicunde_,[224] of which
my friend Andrew Battell supposeth some are as big (besides their
wonderful tallness) as twelve men can fathom. It spreads like a oak.
Some of them are hollow, and the liberal clouds into those natural casks
disperse such plenty of water, that one time three or four thousand of
them, in that hot region, continued four and twenty hours at one of
these, which yielded them all drink of her watery store, and was not
emptied. Their negroes climbed up with pegs[225] (for the tree is smooth
and not therefore otherwise to be climbed, and so soft that it easily
receiveth pegs of harder wood, driven into her yielding substance with a
stone), and dipped the water, as it had been out of a well. He supposed
that there is forty tuns of water in some one of them. It yielded them a
good opportunity for honey, to which end the country people make a kind
of chest, with one hole in the same, and hang it upon one of these
trees, which they take down once a year, and with fire or smoke chasing
or killing the bees, take thence a large quantity of honey.[226] Neither
is it liberal alone to the hungry or thirsty appetite, but very
bountifully it clothes their backs, and the bark thereof, which, being
taken from the younger _Alicundes_ [_nkondo_], and beaten, one fathom
which they cut out from the tree will by this means extend itself into
twenty, and presently is cloth fit for wearing, though not so fine as
that which the _Inzanda_[227] tree yieldeth. [It serves them also for
boats, one of which cut out in proportion of a scute[228] will hold
hundreds of men.”][229] In a further marginal note Purchas adds: “These
boats, saith Andrew Battell, are made of another tree, for the
_Alicunde_ is of too spongy a substance for that purpose.”


CHAPTER X, § I.—OF LOANGO.

[_Offerings._]

... Andrew Battell lived among them [the Bramas of Loango][230] for two
years and a half. They are, saith he, heathens, and observe many
superstitions. They have their _Mokissos_ or images [_nkishi_] to which
they offer in proportion to their sorts and suits;[231] the fisher
offereth fish when he sueth for his help in his fishing; the countryman,
wheat; the weaver, _Alibungos_,[232] [that is] pieces of cloth; others
bring bottles of wine; all wanting that they would have, and bringing
what they want, furnishing their _Mokisso_ with those things whereof
they complain themselves to be disfurnished.


[_Funeral Rites._]

Their ceremonies for the dead are divers. They bring goats and let them
bleed at the _Mokisso’s_ foot, which they after consume in a feasting
memorial of the deceased party, which is continued four or five days
together, and that four or five several times in the year, by all his
friends and kindred. The days are known, and though they dwell twenty
miles thence, yet they will resort to these memorial exequies, and,
beginning in the night, will sing doleful and funeral songs till day,
and then kill, as aforesaid, and make merry. The hope of this maketh
such as have store of friends to contemn death; and the want of friends
to bewail him makes a man conceive a more dreadful apprehension of
death.[233]


[_Prohibitions—Taboo._]

Their conceit is so ravished with superstition that many die of none
other death. _Kin_[234] is the name of unlawful and prohibited meat,
which, according to each kindred’s devotion, to some family is some kind
of fish; to another a hen; to another, a buffe [beef]; and so of the
rest: in which they observe their vowed abstinence so strictly that if
any should (though all unawares) eat of his _Kin_, he would die of
conceit, always presenting to his accusing conscience the breach of his
vow, and the anger of _Mokisso_. He hath known divers thus to have died,
and sometimes would, when some of them had eaten with him, make them
believe that they had eaten of their _Kin_, till, having sported himself
with their superstitious agony, he would affirm the contrary.

They use to set in their fields and places where corn or fruits grow, a
basket, with goat’s horns, parrot’s feathers, and other trash: this is
the _Mokisso’s_ Ensign, or token, that it is commended to his custody;
and therefore, the people very much addicted to theft, dare not meddle,
or take anything. Likewise, if a man, wearied with his burthen, lay it
down in the highway, and knit a knot of grass, and lay thereon; or leave
any other note (known to them) to testify that he hath left it there in
the name of his idol, it is secured from the lime-fingers of any
passenger. Conceit would kill the man that should transgress in this
kind.[235]

In the _banza_ [_mbanza_], or chief city, the chief idol is named
_Chekoke_.[236] Every day they have there a market, and the _Chekoke_ is
brought forth by the _Ganga_, or priest, to keep good rule, and is set
in the market-place to prevent stealing. Moreover, the king hath a
Bell,[237] the strokes whereof sound such terror into the heart of the
fearful thief that none dare keep any stolen goods after the sound of
that bell. Our author inhabited in a little reed-house, after the Loango
manner, and had hanging by the walls, in a cloth case, his piece,
wherewith he used to shoot fowls for the king, which, more for the love
of the cloth than the piece, was stolen. Upon complaint, this bell (in
form like a cow-bell) was carried about and rung, with proclamation to
make restitution; and he had his piece next morning set at his door. The
like another, found in a bag of beans of a hundred pound weight, stolen
from him, and recovered by the sound of this bell.


[_Poison Ordeal._][238]

They have a dreadful and deadly kind of trial in controversies, after
this manner: there is a little tree, or shrub, with a small root (it is
called _Imbunda_) about the bigness of one’s thumb, half a foot long,
like a white carrot. Now, when any listeth to accuse a man, or a family,
or whole street, of the death of any of his friends, saying, that such a
man bewitched him, the _Ganga_ assembleth the accused parties, and
scrapes that root, the scrapings whereof he mixeth with water, which
makes it as bitter as gall (he tasted of it); one root will serve for
the trial of a hundred men. The _Ganga_ brews the same together in
gourds, and with plantain stalks hitteth everyone, after they have
drunk, with certain words. Those that have received the drink walk by,
till they can make urine, and then they are thereby free’d. Others
abide till either urine frees them, or dizziness takes them, which the
people no sooner perceive but they cry, _Undoke, Undoke_,[239] that is
“naughty witch”; and he is no sooner fallen by his dizziness, but they
knock him on the head, and dragging him away, hurl him over the cliff.
In every Liberty[240] they have such drinks, which they make in case of
theft, and death of any person. Every week it falls out that some or
other undergoes this trial, which consumeth multitudes of people.


[_Albinos._][241]

There be certain persons called _Dunda_ [_ndundu_], which are born by
negro parents, and yet are, by some unknown cause, white. They are very
rare, and when such happen to be born, they are brought to the king, and
become great witches: they are his councillors, and advise him of lucky
and unlucky days for execution of his enterprises. When the king goes
any whither the _Dundas_ go with him, and beat the ground round about
with certain exorcisms before the king sits down, and then sit down by
him. They will take anything in the market, none daring to contradict
them.


[_The Gumbiri Fetish._]

Kenga is the landing-place of Loanga. They have there an idol called
_Gumbiri_, and a holy house called _Munsa Gumbiri_,[242] kept and
inhabited by an old woman, where once a year is a solemn feast, which
they celebrate with drums, dances, and palm-wines; and then, they say,
he speaketh under the ground. The people call him _Mokisso Cola_,[243]
or a strong _Mokisso_, and say, that he comes to stay with _Chekoke_,
the idol of the banza. That _Chekoke_ is a negro image, made sitting on
a stool; a little house is then made him. They anoint him with _Toccola_
[_tacula_],[244] which is a red colour made of a certain wood, ground on
a stone, and mixed with water, wherewith they daily paint themselves,
from the waist upwards, esteeming it a great beauty; otherwise they
account not themselves ready. It is for like purposes carried from hence
to Angola.


[_Possessed of the Fetish._]

Sometimes it falls out that some man or boy is taken with some sudden
enthusiasm, or ravishment, becoming mad, and making a whooping and great
clamours.

They call them _Mokisso-Moquat_[245] that is, taken of the _Mokisso_.
They clothe them very handsomely, and whatever they bid in that fit (for
it lasteth not very long), they execute as the _Mokisso’s_ charge.


[_The Maramba Fetish._][246]

_Morumba_[247] is thirty leagues northwards from hence, in the Mani
Loango’s dominions, where he [Battell] lived nine months. There is a
house, and in it a great basket, proportioned like to a hive, wherein is
an image called _Morumba_, whose religion extendeth far. They are sworn
to this religion at ten or twelve years old; but, for probation are
first put in a house, where they have hard diet, and must be mute for
nine or ten days, any provocation to speak notwithstanding. Then do
they bring him before _Morumba_, and prescribe him his _Kin_ [kina], or
perpetual abstinence from some certain meat. They make a cut in his
shoulder like to a half moon, and sprinkle the blood at _Morumba’s_
feet, and swear him to that religion. In the wound they put a certain
white powder in token of his late admission; which, so long as it
continueth, doth privilege him to take his meat and drink with
whomsoever he pleaseth, none denying him the same, at free cost.

They also have their fatal trials before this image, where the accused
party, kneeling down and clasping the hive, saith: “_Mene quesa cabamba
Morumba_,” signifying that he comes thither to make trial of his
innocence;[248] and if he be guilty he falls down dead; being free he is
free’d.

Andrew Battell saith he knew six or seven, in his being there, that made
this trial.


CHAP. X, § III.—OF THE GIACCHI, OR IAGGES.[249]

[_Origin of the Jagas._]

... Andrew Battel lived (by occasion of the Portugals treachery) with
the Iagges a longer time than ever any Christian or white man had done,
namely, sixteen months, and served them with their [his] musket in the
wars; neither could Lopez (saith he) have true intelligence whence they
came,[250] for the Christians at that time had but uncertain
conjectures of them: neither after had the Portugals any conversing, but
by way of commerce; but he, being betrayed, fled to them for his life,
and after, by stealth, escaped from them: the only European that ever
lived in their camp.

He saith they are called Iagges by the Portugals, by themselves
Imbangolas*[251] (which name argues them to be of the Imbij and Galæ
before mentioned) and come from Sierra Liona;*[252] that they are
exceeding devourers of man’s flesh, for which they refuse beef and
goats, whereof they take plenty. They have no settled habitation, but
wander in an unsettled course.


[_Infanticide among the Jaga._]

They rise in harvest, and invading some country, there stay as long as
they find the palms, or other sufficient means of maintenance, and then
seek new adventure. For they neither plant nor sow, nor breed up cattle,
and, which is more, strange, they nourish up none of their own children,
although they have ten or twenty wives a man, of the properest and
comeliest slaves they can take. But when they are in travail they dig a
hole in the earth, which presently receiveth in that dark prison of
death the new-born creature, not yet made happy with the light of life.
Their reason is that they will not be troubled with education, nor in
their flitting wanderings be troubled with such cumbersome
burthens.[253]

Once, a secret providence both punisheth the father’s wickedness, and
preventeth a viperous generation, if that maybe a prevention where there
is a succession without generation; and as Pliny saith of the Esseni
(lib. v, c. 15), _Gens æterna est in qua nepto nascitur_. For of the
conquered nations they [the Jaga] preserve the boys from ten to twenty
years of age, and bring them up as the hope of their succession, like
_Negro-azimogli_,[254] with education fitting their designs. These wear
a collar about their neck in token of slavery, until they bring an
enemy’s head slain in battle, and then they are uncollared, free’d, and
dignified with the title of soldiers; if one of them runs away he is
killed and eaten; so that, hemmed in betwixt hope and fear, they grow
very resolute and adventurous, their collars breeding shame, disdain,
and desperate fury, till they redeem their freedom as you have heard.

Elembe,[255] the great Iagge, brought with him twelve thousand of these
cruel monsters from Sierra Liona, and after much mischief and spoil
settled himself in Benguele,[256] twelve degrees from the Zone
southwards, and there breedeth and groweth into a nation. But Kelandula,
sometime his page, proceeds in that beastly life before mentioned, and
the people of Elembe, by great troops, run to him and follow his camp in
hope of spoil.


[_Human Sacrifices._]

They have no _fetissos_, or idols. The great Iagge, or Prince, is master
of all their ceremonies, and a great witch. I have seen this Kelandula
(sayth our author) continue a sacrifice from sun to sun, the rites
whereof are these: himself sat on a stool, in great pomp, with a cap
adorned with peacocks’ feathers (which fowls, in one country called
_Shelambanza_,[257] are found wild; and in one place, empaled about the
grave of the king, are fifty kept and fed by an old woman, and are
called _Ingilla Mokisso_, that is, Birds of Mokisso).[258] Now, about
him thus set, attended forty or fifty women, each of them waving
continually a zebra’s tail in their hands. There were also certain
Gangas, priests or witches. Behind them were many with drums and pipes,
and _pungas_[259] (certain instruments made of elephants’ teeth, made
hollow a yard and a half, and with a hole like a flute, which yield a
loud and harsh sound, that may be heard a mile off). These strike and
sound, and sing, and the women wave (as is said) till the sun be almost
down. Then they bring forth a pot, which is set on the fire with leaves
and roots, and the water therein, and with a kind of white powder the
witches or Gangas spot themselves, one on the one cheek, the other on
the other; and likewise their foreheads, temples, breasts, shoulders,
and bellies, using many enchanting terms, which are holden to be prayers
for victory. At sunset a Ganga brings his _Kissengula_,[260] or
war-hatchet, to the Prince (this weapon they use to wear at their
girdles) and putting the same in his hands bid him to be strong, [that]
their God goes with him, and he shall have victory. After this they
bring him four or five negroes, of which, with a terrible countenance,
the great Iagge with his hatchet kills two, and the other two are
killed without the fort. Likewise, five kine are slain within, and other
five without the fort; and as many goats and as many dogs, after the
same manner.

This is their sacrifice, at the end whereof all the flesh is, in a
feast, consumed. Andrew Battell was commanded to depart when the
slaughter begun, for their devil, or _Mokisso_ (as they said) would then
appear and speak to them.[261]

This sacrifice is called _Kissembula_[262] which they solemnise when
they undertake any great enterprise. There were few left of the natural
Iagges, but of this unnatural brood the present succession was raised.

[Illustration]




APPENDIX I.

ANTHONY KNIVET IN KONGO AND ANGOLA:

BEING

   Extracts from “The Admirable Adventures and Strange Fortunes
   of MASTER ANTONIE KNIVET, which went with MASTER THOMAS
   CANDISH in his Second Voyage to the South Sea, 1591,”
   published in _Purchas His Pilgrimes_, Part IV, lib. vi, c. 7.
   London, 1625.


INTRODUCTION.

Master Anthony Knivet joined the second expedition of Thomas Cavendish,
which left England in August, 1591. He seems to have served on board the
_Roebuck_, of which vessel one Cocke was captain. Nothing in his
narrative enables us to identify this Cocke with the Abraham Cocke of
Limehouse, who was “never heard of more” after he parted from Battell on
the coast of Brazil in 1590, nor with the Abram Cocke who, according to
Knivet, put in at the Ilha Grande in 1598, in the hope of making prizes
of some of the richly-laden Spanish vessels returning from the Rio de la
Plata. Battell, surely, may be supposed to have been acquainted with the
fate of his old shipmate, whilst Knivet gives no hint that the Abram
Cocke of the Ilha Grande was the captain of the _Roebuck_, to whom he
was indebted for his life when Cavendish was about to throw him
overboard in Magellan’s Strait. It is, however, just possible that there
was but one Abraham Cock, who had not been heard of for some time when
Battell returned to England about 1610.[263]

When Cavendish returned from Magellan’s Strait, he put Knivet and
nineteen other sick men ashore near St. Sebastian, to shift for
themselves. Knivet was ultimately taken by the Portuguese; but they
spared his life, and he became the “bond-slave” of Salvador Corrêa de
Sá, the Governor of Rio de Janeiro; and apart from the time he spent
among the cannibal Indians, and on a voyage to Angola, he remained with
his master to the end, and returned with him to Portugal in 1599.

My friend, Colonel G. Earl Church, to whom I applied for an opinion on
the trustworthiness of Knivet’s statements with regard to Brazil, writes
as follows:—

“Yesterday morning I spent at the R. Geo. Soc., refreshing my memory of
Knivet’s extraordinary adventures. One must read them always bearing in
mind the romantic spirit of the age in which they were written, and the
novel surroundings in which every adventurer found himself in the New
World. Giving due weight to all this, I find Knivet’s relation of his
voyages singularly truthful, so far as my knowledge of Brazil goes. What
he states, excepting in two or three minor particulars, clashes with no
geographical, descriptive, or historical point with which I am familiar,
and he often throws in a sentence which relates to facts which no man
could invent, and which makes his narrative impressive with
truthfulness. I utterly discard Cavendish’s opinion of his men and
companions for Cavendish appears to have been one of the most
cold-blooded freebooters who ever cut a throat or raided a settlement
or scuttled a prize.”

I regret not being able to write in terms equally favourable of what
Knivet claims to have experienced during his visit to Angola and Kongo.
Knivet says that he ran away from bondage on June 27th, 1597, and that
he reached the “port of Angola” after a perilous voyage of five months,
that is in November. He then sailed up the Kwanza, and reached
Masanganu, where he remained three months, when he was arrested in
consequence of a requisition of his master and sent back to Brazil,
which he must have reached before June, 1598. We should be quite
prepared to accept this part of his story if his description of
Masanganu did not show that he can never have been there. Knivet,
however, is not content with such modest honours, but claims to have
resided for some time at the court of the King of Kongo, and to have
fallen in the hands of the Portuguese when on his road to Prester John’s
country. By them he was carried to Masanganu, where he lived three
months. These two accounts are absolutely irreconcilable. As to the
author’s astounding geographical misstatements, I refer the reader to
the notes appended to his narrative.


FIRST ACCOUNT (_Purchas_, pp. 1220-2).

Continually I desired my master to give me leave to get my living,
intending to come into my country, but the Governor would not let me go
from him. When I saw no means to get leave of my master, I determined to
run away to Angola, for to serve the King as a soldier in Massangano
till such time that I might pass myself to the King of Anyeca,[264]
which warreth against the Portugals, and so have come through Prester
Johns country into Turkey.

On the seven and twentieth day of June, 1597, I embarked myself unknown
to my master, in a small ship of one Emanuell Andrea, for to come for
Angola. In this voyage we were driven so near the Cape of Good Hope that
we thought all of us should have been cast away, the seas are there so
great; and by reason of the current they brake in such sort that no ship
is able to endure. There we brake both our main mast and our mizzen. It
pleased God to send us the wind Eastward, which brought us to our
desired harbour [of] Angola.[265] We had been five months in our voyage,
and by that means other ships that departed two months after us were
there before us.

When I heard that there were ships of the River of Ienero [Rio de
Janeiro], I durst not go ashore for fear of being known of some of the
Portugals. The next day after that we came into the harbour, there came
a great boat aboard us, to ask if we would sell any Cassava meal. We
told them we would, and asked them whither they went with their boat.
They answered, that they tarried for the tide to go up to the River of
Guansa [Kwanza] to Masangano. Then I thought it a fit time for my
purpose, and so embarked myself in the bark. The Portugals marvelled to
see me go willingly to Masangano; for there men die like chickens, and
no man will go thither if he can chose.

Nine days we were going up the River of Guansa [Kwanza], in which time
two Portugal soldiers died; the country is so hot that it pierceth their
hearts. Three days after I had been in Masangano, Don Francisco de
Mendosa Fortado,[266] the Governor of the city of Kongo, having
received a letter from Salvador Coria de Sasa [Salvador Corrêa de Sá],
who was his great friend, sent a Pursuivant for me, who brought me by
land through the King of Kongo’s country, and in six days we came to a
town called Saint Francis[267] (where the Governor was), hard by the
kingdom of Manicongo.

When I came before the Governor he used me very kindly in words, and
asked me what I meant, to cast myself away wilfully in Masangano. Then I
told him how long I had served Salvador Coria de Sasa; and in how many
dangers I had been for him and his Son, without ever having any
recompence of any of them, and therefore I thought it better to venture
my life in the King’s service, than to live his Bond-slave. The Governor
commanded me to be carried to Angola, and charged a pair of bolts to be
put upon my legs, because I should not run away.

About a fortnight after I was sent back again in a Carvell [caravel] of
Francis Lewes, and in two months we arrived in the River of Jenero [Rio
de Janeiro], and I was carried with my bolts on my legs before the
Governor; when he saw me he began to laugh and to jest with me, saying
that I was welcome out of England. So, after many jests he spake, he
bade pull off my bolts from my legs, and gave me clothes and used me
very well.


SECOND ACCOUNT (_Purchas_, pp. 1233-7).

Angola is a kingdom of itself in Ethiopia, where first the Portugals did
begin to inhabit: The country of Angola cometh along the coast; as
Portugal doth upon Spain, so doth Angola run upon the Kingdom of Longa
[Luangu] and Manicongo.

In Angola the Portugals have a City called the Holy Ghost,[268] where
they have great store of Merchandise, and the Moors do come thither with
all kind of such things as the country yieldeth; some bring elephant’s
teeth, some bring negro slaves to sell, that they take from other
kingdoms which join hard by them; thus do they use once a week, as we
keep markets, so do all the Blackamoors bring hens and hogs, which they
call gula,[269] and hens they call Sange,[270] and a kind of beast that
they take in the wilderness, like a dog, which they call ambroa:[271]
then they have that beast which before I have told you of, called gumbe,
which is bigger than a horse.[272]

The Blackamoors do keep good laws, and fear their King very much; the
King is always attended with the nobles of his realm, and whensoever he
goeth abroad, he has always at the least two hundred archers in his
guard, and ten or twelve more going before him, singing and playing with
pipes made of great canes, and four or five young Moors coming after
him as his pages. After them follow all his noblemen.

When there falleth out any controversy among them, they crave battle of
the King, and then they fight it out before him. They come before the
King and fall flat on their breasts; then they rise up and kneel upon
their knees, stretching out their arms crying, _Mahobeque benge,
benge_;[273] then the King striketh them on the shoulders with a
horse-tail; then they go to the camp, and with their bows they fight it
out till they kill one another. After the battle is done, if any liveth,
he that liveth falleth down before the King in the same manner as he did
when he went to the field; and after a long oration made, he taketh the
horse-tail from the King’s shoulder, and waveth it about the King’s
head, and then layeth it on his shoulder again, and goeth away with
great honour, being accompanied with all the nobles of the Court. The
Moors of Angola do know that there is a God, and do call God
_Caripongoa_,[274] but they worship the sun and the moon.

The country is champaign plain, and dry black earth, and yieldeth very
little corn; the most of anything that it yieldeth is plantons
[plantains], which the Portugals call _baynonas_ [bananas], and the
Moors call them _mahonge_[275] and their wheat they call _tumba_,[276]
and the bread _anou_; and if you will buy any bread of them, you must
say, _Tala cuna auen tumbola gimbo_; that is, _Give me some bread, here
is money_.[277] Their money is called _gullginbo_,[278] a shell of a
fish that they find by the shore-side; and from Brazil the Portugals do
carry great store of them to Angola.

These Moors do esteem very much of red, blue and yellow cloths. They
will give a slave for a span of cloth in breadth, I mean, and the length
of it, of the breadth of the piece; those pieces of cloth they wear
about their middles, and under it they hang the skin of a great weasel
before them, and another behind them, and this is all the garments that
they wear. A weasel in their language is called _puccu_.[279] You can do
a Blackamoor no greater disgrace than to take away his skin from before
him, for he will die with grief if he cannot be revenged.

The Portugals do mark them as we do sheep, with a hot iron, which the
Moors call _crimbo_.[280] The poor slaves stand all in a row one by
another, and sing _Mundele que sumbela he Carey ha belelelle_,[281] and
thus the poor rogues are beguiled, for the Portugals make them believe
that they that have not the mark is not accounted a man of any account
in Brazil or in Portugal, and thus they bring the poor Moors to be in a
most damnable bondage under the cover of love.

The country of Angola yieldeth no stone, and very little wood: the Moors
do make their houses all covered with earth. These houses are no bigger
than a reasonable chamber, and within are many partitions, like the
cabins of a ship, in such sort that a man cannot stand upright in them.
Their beds are made of great bulrushes sewed together with the rinds of
a tree. They do make cloth like spark of velvet (but it is thinner) of
the bark of a tree, and that cloth they do call _mollelleo_.[282]

The elephants do feed in the evening and in the morning in low marshes,
as there be many. The Moors do watch which way they come, and as soon as
the elephants are at meat, they dig great holes in the ground, and cover
them with sticks, and then they cover the pits with earth; and when they
have made all ready they go to the elephants and shoot at them with
their arrows; and as soon as the elephants feel themselves hurt, they
run at whatsoever they see before them, following after the Blackamores
that chase them. Then they fall into the deep pits where, after they are
once in, they cannot get out.

The Moors of Angola are as black as jet; they are men of good stature;
they never take but one wife, whom they call _mocasha_.[283] These Moors
do cut long streaks in their faces, that reach from the top of their
ears to their chins. The women do wear shells of fishes[284] on their
arms, and on the small of their legs. The law amongst them is, that if
any Moor do lie with another’s wife, he shall lose his ears for his
offence. These Moors do circumcise their children, and give them their
names, as we do when we baptize.

Angola may very easily be taken, for the Portugals have no forts to
defend it of any strength.

The King[285] of Congo is the greatest King in all Ethiopia; and doth
keep in the field continually sixty thousand soldiers, that do war
against the King of Vangala,[286] and the King of Angola; this King is a
Christian, and his brother-in-law of arms with the King of Spain. His
servants of his house are most of them all Portugals, and he doth favour
them very much.

The King is of a very liberal condition, and very favourable to all
travellers, and doth delight very much to hear of foreign countries. He
was in a manner amazed to hear how it was possible Her Majesty [Queen
Elizabeth] had lived a maiden Queen so long, and always reigned in peace
with her subjects. When I was brought before the King, and told him of
my country, what plenty of things we had, if the Portugals had not liked
of it, they would interrupt my speech, and the King would show himself
very angry, and tell them that every man was best able to speak of his
country, and that I had no reason but to tell him that which was true.

The King of Congo, when he goeth to the camp to see his army, rideth
upon an elephant in great pomp and majesty; on either side of the
elephant he hath six slaves. Two of them were kings, that he himself had
taken in the field; all the rest were of noble birth; some of them were
brothers to the King of Ancica, and some of them were of the chiefest
blood of the great King of Bengala. These noble slaves, at every command
of the King of Congo, do fall flat on the ground on their breasts. When
the King doth ride, as you have heard, they carry a canopy, as it were a
cloth of state, over his head. His two secretaries, the one a nobleman
of Spain, the other a Moor, do ride next after him. Before him goeth at
the least five hundred archers which are his guard; then there followeth
a Moor, which doth nothing but talk aloud in praise of the King,
telling what a great warrior he hath been, and praising his wisdom for
all things that he hath accomplished very honourably to his great fame
of such as knew him.

When this King of Congo cometh to his host, all the soldiers, as he
passeth, fall flat on their faces to the ground. He never cometh into
his host after any battle, but he dubbeth at the least twenty Knights
Portugals, and as many Moors, giving them very great living according to
their callings, and the service that they have done. The brother of this
King was in Spain at my coming from thence for ambassador from his
brother.[287]

Here the Portugal Captain would have taken me perforce, to have been a
common soldier, but the King commanded that they should let me go
whither I would, and my determination at that time was to have gone for
the country of Prester John [Abyssinia], for I had a great desire to see
the River of Nilo and Jerusalem (for I accounted myself as a lost man,
not caring into what country or kingdom I came) But it was not the will
of God that I should at that time obtain my desire, for travelling
through the kingdom of Congo, to have gone to the kingdom of
Angila,[288] it was my fortune to meet a company of Portugal soldiers
that went to a conquest that the King of Spain had newly taken, called
Masangana; which place is on the borders of Anguca. Here they made me
serve like a drudge, for both day and night I carried some stone and
lime to make a fort.

It lyeth right under the Line, and standeth in a bottom in the middle
of four hills, and about are many fogges [bogs] but not one river.[289]
It is the unfirmest country under the sun. Here the Portugals die like
chickens. You shall see men in the morning very lusty, and within two
hours dead. Others, that if they but wet their legs, presently they
swell bigger than their middles;[290] others break in the sides with a
draught of water. O, if you did know the intolerable heat of the
country, you would think yourself better a thousand times dead, than to
live there a week. There you shall see poor soldiers lie in troops,
gaping like camelians [camels?] for a puff of wind.

Here lived I three months, not as the Portugals did, taking of physick,
and every week letting of blood and keeping close in their houses when
they had any rain, observing hours, and times to go abroad morning and
evening, and never to eat but at such and such times. I was glad when I
had got anything at morning, noon, or night; I thank God I did work all
day from morning till night; had it been rain or never so great heat, I
had always my health as well as I have in England.

This country is very rich. The king had great store of gold[291] sent
him from this place: the time that I was there, the King of Angica had a
great city at Masangana; which city Paulas Dias, Governor of Angola,
took and situated there; and finding hard by it great store of gold,
fortified it with four forts, and walled a great circuit of ground round
about it, and within that wall; now the Portugals do build a city, and
from this city every day they do war against the King of Angica, and
have burnt a great part of his kingdom.

The Angicas[292] are men of goodly stature; they file their teeth before
on their upper jaw, and on their under jaw, making a distance between
them like the teeth of a dog; they do eat man’s flesh; they are the
stubbornest nation that lives under the sun, and the resolutest in the
field that ever man saw; for they will rather kill themselves than yield
to the Portugals. They inhabit right under the line, and of all kinds of
Moors these are the blackest. They do live in the law of the Turks, and
honour Mahomet. They keep many concubines, as the Turks do; they wash
themselves every morning upwards, falling flat on their faces towards
the east. They wear their hair all made in plaits on their heads, as
well men as women; they have good store of wheat, and a kind of grain
like vetches, of which they make bread: they have great store of hens
like partridges, and turkeys, and all their feathers curl on their
backs. Their houses are like the other houses of the kingdoms
aforenamed.

And thus I end, showing you as brief as I can, all the nations and
kingdoms, that, with great danger of my life, I travelled through in
twelve years of my best age, getting no more than my travel for my pain.
From this kingdom, Angica, was I brought in irons again to my master,
Salvador Corea de Sasa, to the City of San Sebastian in Brazil, as you
have heard.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




APPENDIX II.

A SKETCH OF THE HISTORY OF KONGO TO THE END OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.


THE EARLY HISTORY OF KONGO.

If traditions may be accepted where written history fails us, the
foundation of the Empire of Kongo lies back no further than the middle
of the fifteenth century.

The founder of the dynasty and first King of Kongo—Ntotela ntinu
nekongo—was Nimi a Lukeni, the son of Nimi a nzima and of Lukeni lua
nsanzi, the daughter of Nsa ku ki-lau. His father appears to have been a
mere village chief in Kurimba (Corimba),[293] a district of the kingdom
of Kwangu. He had established himself at a ferry on a great river
(_nzari_), now known to us as the Kwangu, and levied a toll upon all
travellers who crossed the stream. One day the young man’s aunt came
that way, and claimed exemption on the ground of being the old chief’s
sister. Her brother was absent, and not only was the claim denied, but
young Nimi a Lukeni, notwithstanding that she was with child, caused her
to be disembowelled. The younger members of his clan looked upon this
act of brutality as one of bravery, and shielded him against his
father’s just wrath. He then placed himself at their head, assumed the
title of _ntinu_ (king), and started westward upon a career of conquest.

The country he was about to invade was inhabited by a people kindred to
those of Angola and of the country to the north of the Zaire, split up
into numerous small clans[294] ruled by independent kinglets. This, no
doubt, would account for the rapidity and the extent of his conquests,
which have been matched however, in our own days, by the Makololo.

Having defeated Mbumbulu mwana Mpangala of Mpemba-kasi, he founded his
capital—Mbazi a nkanu—[295] upon a rock within that chief’s territory.
By degrees he extended his conquests southward to the Kwanza and even
beyond, installed his uncle Nsa ku ki-lau as ruler of the important
province of Mbata, bestowed large territories upon others of his
adherents, and even restored some of their father’s territories to the
children of the Mwana Mpangala. His “sons,” attended by the great Nganga
Ngoyo, he sent across the Zaire, and they became the founders of the
“kingdoms” of Kakongo and Luangu; whilst a third son, by a slave woman,
is supposed to be the ancestor of the “counts” of Sonyo or Soyo.[296]
Anciently the King of Kakongo, before he assumed his kingship, was bound
to marry a princess of the blood royal of Kongo, whilst he of Luangu
married a princess of Kakongo; yet the ruler of Luangu was highest in
rank, for he enjoyed the title of _nunu_ (“aged person”), whilst his
brother of Kakongo had to be contented with the inferior title of
_nkaji_ (“spouse”). The Kings were elected by the feudal princes, but
their choice was limited to the sons of princesses, as in a great part
of negro Africa.[297]

Of the early institutions of Kongo we know next to nothing, though we
may presume that the law of succession was originally the same there as
in the sister-states to the north, for the first Ntotela was succeeded
by two nephews (Nanga kia ntinu and another, whose name has not reached
us). But even thus early, and anterior to the introduction of
Christianity, the old law of succession was broken through, for Nkuwu a
ntinu, the fourth Ntotela, was a son of Ntinu Nimi a Lukeni, and was
succeeded by a son of his own, Nzinga a Nkuwa, the first Christian
Ntotela, better known in history as John I.

If Dapper may be believed, it was the custom to bury twelve virgins with
the earlier kings—a distinction much sought after, as in other parts of
Africa; but the people of Kongo have never been charged with
cannibalism, nor its rulers with the bloody rites practised by the Jaga.


CÃO’S DISCOVERY OF THE KONGO, 1482.[298]

It was towards the end of 1482, that the natives at the mouth of the
River Kongo for the first time saw rising above the horizon the white
wings of a European vessel, ascending, as it were, from the Land of
Spirits; and we can imagine their surprise when they for the first time
beheld the bleached faces of its inmates. Yet they came on board,
offering ivory in exchange for cloth. The interpreters from the Guinea
coast who were with Cão naturally failed to make themselves understood,
but they learnt from signs that far inland there dwelt a powerful king.
Cão at once despatched some Christian negroes in search of this
potentate. They were the bearers of suitable presents, and were
instructed to assure the King of the friendly intentions of his
visitors, whose only desire it was to trade with him.

Before continuing his voyage, Cão set up the first of the stone pillars,
or _padroes_, which he had on board. He then sailed south along the
coast, noting its prominent features, but curiously missed the Kwanza
or River of Angola, although its clayey waters discolour the sea for ten
or fifteen miles. On a low foreland, Cabo do Lobo,[299] ten miles beyond
the cliffs named by him Castello d’Alter Pedroso, he set up a second
pillar, to mark the furthest point reached by him.

On again returning to the Kongo, he was annoyed to find that his
messengers had not returned; and as he was naturally anxious to make
known in Portugal his discovery of a magnificent river and a powerful
kingdom, he left them behind him, and seized instead four unsuspecting
visitors to his ship as “hostages;” giving their friends to understand
that they should be restored to them after the lapse of fifteen months,
when they would be exchanged for his own men. These latter appear to
have been treated with distinction at first, but when the King heard of
Cão’s high-handed proceedings he refused to admit them any longer to his
presence, and even threatened them with death, should his own people not
be restored.

Among the hostages carried off by Cão there was a man of some
distinction in his own country, Nsaku (Caçuto) by name, who picked up
Portuguese quickly, and much pleased King John by the information he was
able to give. He, as well as his companions, were much petted in
Portugal, and, in defiance of all sumptuary laws, were dressed in fine
cloths and silks.

Cão himself, soon after his arrival, in April, 1484, was appointed a
cavalier in the Royal household, granted an annuity of 18,000 reals, and
on the 14th of that month he was “separated from the common herd,” and
granted a coat-of-arms charged with the two pillars erected by him
during this memorable voyage.


CÃO’S SECOND VOYAGE, 1485-6.

Cão’s departure on a second voyage was much delayed, either because the
King’s Council were opposed to these adventures, which strained the
resources of a small kingdom like Portugal, or—and this is more
likely—because it was desired that a change in the Royal Arms, which was
only made in June, 1485, should be recorded on the stone pillars which
Cão was to take with him.

Great was the rejoicing when Cão’s “fleet” appeared in the Kongo, and
the hostages, loud in praise of the good treatment they had received,
were once more among their friends. Cão at once forwarded rich presents
to the King, with an invitation to throw aside all fetishes, and to
embrace the only true and saving faith; promising that, on his return
from a voyage to the south, he would personally visit the capital of his
kingdom. This promise Cão was not permitted to fulfil, for having set up
a pillar on Monte Negro (15° 40´ S.) and another on Cape Cross (21°
50´),[300] he died a short distance beyond. Of the details of his death
we know nothing.[301] It seems, however, that the loss of their
commander induced a speedy return home: for Cão’s vessels must have
arrived in Portugal before August, 1487, as in that month Dias sailed on
his famous voyage, taking with him the negroes whom Cão had kidnapped to
the south of the Kongo, with a view to their learning Portuguese, and
being employed as interpreters in future voyages.

Cão, therefore, never saw the King of Kongo; and there are good grounds
for believing that Nsaku who was sent by the King to Portugal to ask
for priests, masons, carpenters, agricultural labourers, and women to
make bread, only reached Europe in one of Dias’s vessels, in December,
1488. Nsaku, most certainly, was first introduced to King John at Beja,
in January, 1489, when he and his companions were baptised, the King
himself, the Queen, and gentlemen of title acting as sponsors.(312) He
was sent back to the Kongo with Don Gonçalo de Sousa, in December, 1490,
about two years after he had been baptised.[302]


THE EMBASSY OF 1490-1.[303]

Don João de Sousa, the ambassador, left Portugal on December 19th, 1490,
with a fleet commanded by Gonçalo de Sousa, as captain-major. Among the
pilots were Pero d’Alemquer and Pero Escovar, men famous in the maritime
history of Portugal. Ten Franciscan Friars[304] went out with this
fleet, and so did Nsaku, the ambassador of the King of Kongo. The plague
was raging at Lisbon at the time, and before the vessels reached the
Cape Verde Islands, this dreaded disease had carried off João de Sousa
(the ambassador), the captain-major, and many others. Ruy de Sousa, a
nephew of the captain-major, was then chosen to take the place of D.
João de Sousa.

After a voyage of a hundred days the vessels reached the Kongo, and the
Mwana of Sonyo and his son, who had already been instructed in the
Christian doctrine by a priest from S. Thomé, were baptised on Easter
Sunday, April 3rd, 1491, and were thenceforth known as Don Manuel and
Don Antonio da Silva; for it was the practice of the Portuguese, from
the very beginning, to bestow Portuguese names and titles upon the
negroes who submitted to the sacrament of baptism.

This ceremony performed, Ruy de Sousa started for the King’s
capital,[305] which he reached on April 29th. The King received him
seated on a platform, in a chair inlaid with ivory. He wore a
loin-cloth, presented to him by Cão, copper bracelets, and a cap of
palm-cloth. A zebra tail depended from his left shoulder—a badge of
royalty.[306]

The King was about to join his son Mbemba a Nzinga, Duke of Nsundi, who
had taken the field against the Bateke;[307] but before doing so he was
anxious to be baptised. The foundations of a church having been laid on
Rood Day, May 3rd,[308] the King and his Queen were baptised at once by
Frei João de Santa Maria, and were named Don João and Donna Leonor,
after the King and Queen of Portugal.

The King, marching for the first time under the banner of the Cross, and
supported by the firearms of his Portuguese allies, came back a victor
to his capital. His eldest son and many nobles were then baptised.

When Ruy de Sousa departed, he left behind him Frei Antonio[309] with
other priests, and gave instructions for an exploration of the Kongo
river above the cataracts, which do not appear to have been acted upon.
He also founded a factory near the mouth of the Kongo, where the
enterprising people of S. Thomé had already established commercial
relations, although formal permission to do so was only granted them by
King Manuel on March 26th, 1500. Dom Pedro, a cousin of the King of
Kongo, accompanied him, with nine attendants, who, having been taught to
read and write, returned to their native country with D. João Soares,
early in 1494.[310]

The missionaries lost no time in preaching the doctrines of their
Church; but whilst Don Affonso proved an ardent Christian, who
recklessly destroyed all fetishes discovered in his province of Nsundi,
the King himself soon grew lukewarm, owing to the priests’ interference
with polygamy and other valued social institutions. In the country at
large, the heathen still held their ground.


D. AFFONSO I, 1509-1540.[311]

And thus it happened that when João I died in 1509, the chiefs favoured
his second son, _Mpanzu a nzinga_,[312] a heathen, whilst the dowager
queen and the Count of Sonyo took the part of the elder brother. Don
Affonso, immediately on hearing of his father’s illness, hurried up to
the capital, accompanied by only thirty-six Christians. He found that
his father had died. His brother approached with a mighty army, but five
flaming swords seen in the heavens on the eve of battle gave courage to
his small following, whilst a white cross and the appearance of St.
James at the head of the celestial host struck terror into the hearts of
the assailants. They fled in a panic.[313] Mpanzu himself was taken,
wounded, and decapitated.

Order having been restored throughout the country, King Affonso availed
himself of the presence of Gonçalo Rodriguez Ribeiro, who had come from
Portugal with a number of priests, and was about to return to that
country, to send an embassy to Pope Julius II and King Manuel.[314] The
head of this mission was Don Pedro (de Castro?), a cousin of the King
(who was accompanied by his wife), and with him went D. Manuel, a
brother of the King, and D. Henrique, a son. The presents conveyed to
Portugal included seven hundred copper bracelets, elephant tusks,
slaves, parrots, civet cats and other animals, and native cloth. D.
Henrique remained behind at Rome, where he was ordained and created
Bishop of Utica in 1518.[315]

The mission sent by King Manuel in return was far-reaching in its
effects upon the political development of Kongo.[316] Of its magnitude
we may judge when we learn that it embarked in five vessels. Its leader,
Simão da Silva, dying on the road to S. Salvador, his place was taken by
Alvaro Lopes, the Royal factor. In his company were priests, experienced
soldiers, masons and carpenters to build churches and a royal palace,
and a lawyer (_leterado_) to explain the law books which figured among
the royal gifts, besides horses, mules, cloth, banners, church furniture
and images. The ambassador was instructed to explain the management of
the royal household in Portugal, and King Affonso quickly learnt the
lessons he received, and at once introduced the Portuguese titles of
Duke, Marquis, and Count. The ambassador likewise had with him an
elaborate coat-of-arms for the King,[317] and twenty less ambitious
heraldic designs for his principal noblemen; and the monarch himself
adopted a title closely imitated from that of his “brother” of
Portugal.[318] The ambassador was likewise instructed to make inquiries
about the origin of the Kongo in a lake, and to bring home cargoes of
slaves, copper and ivory.

The King was delighted with all these gifts, not being aware that by
accepting them he virtually acknowledged himself to be a vassal of the
King of Portugal; and he published a long manifesto to his people, in
which he dwelt upon his past career, the blessings of the Christian
faith, and the honours now done him. He actually read the six bulky
folios, but he told Ruy d’Aguiar (in 1516) that if complicated laws like
these were to be introduced in his dominions, not a day would pass
without a legal offence of some kind being committed.[319]

The intercourse between Kongo and Lisbon must have been very active in
those days. We learn, for instance, that in 1526 the King asked for
physicians and apothecaries, and in 1530 he forwarded to his “brother”
Manuel two silver bracelets, which he had received from Matamba. Many
young Kongoese were sent to Portugal to be educated; but, to judge from
a letter written by the King in 1517, the results were not always very
gratifying.[320] Nay, he accuses Antonio Viera, to whom he entrusted
twenty young relations to be taken to Portugal, of having parted with
several among them to Mpanzu-alumbu, his enemy, and of having left
others behind him at S. Thomé.[321] A second embassy left Kongo in 1540,
to do homage to Pope Paul III. It was headed by D. Manuel, a brother of
the King, who had been a member of D. Pedro’s mission. King Affonso
expected the King of Portugal to pay 3,000 cruzados towards the expenses
of this mission, in consideration of the large profits which he derived
from the trade with Kongo.[322]

As a member of the Church militant, King Affonso deserved well of the
priesthood. He ruthlessly ordered all fetishes to be destroyed
throughout his dominions, but supplied their place with images of
saints, crosses, agni dei, and other ecclesiastical paraphernalia, which
he held to be more effectual. The clergy were numerous in his day, and
in addition to secular priests included Franciscans, Dominicans and
Austin Friars. They were wealthy, too, for lands and slaves had been
given them, and Christian churches arose even in remote parts of the
country. A Franciscan friar, Antonio de Dénis (known in the world as D.
Diogo de Vilhegas) had been appointed Bishop of S. Thomé and Kongo,[323]
and took possession of his see in 1534, on which occasion exceptional
honours were shown him. He was a man of energy and much sincerity, but,
unhappily for his Church, survived only a few years. On his death-bed he
desired that D. Henrique, the King’s son, whom he himself had ordained a
priest, when in Rome, and whom the Pope (as already mentioned) had
created Bishop of Utica in 1518, should succeed him in the episcopal
chair. The Pope, however, before he would consent to the appointment of
a native, desired personally to inquire into the matter. D. Henrique
went to Rome, but died on the voyage home, in 1539 or earlier.

King Affonso deserved his reputation as a zealous Christian, and had
certainly proved himself a good friend to the regular and secular clergy
who undertook to convert his people. Yet, as early as 1515, he had
occasion to call upon the King of Portugal to aid him in suppressing the
irregularities of these “unworthy preachers of the Holy Catholic Faith,”
whose inordinate desire of power and covetousness brought scandal upon
the Church, and promised little for the future.[324] Towards the close
of his reign, in 1540, one of these priests, Frei Alvaro, actually
attempted to assassinate the King, in church, and after Mass![325]

The Portuguese living at the time in Kongo were placed under a royal
factor and a Corregedor (magistrate), and enjoyed ex-territorial
jurisdiction. They had a factory at Mpinda, at the mouth of the Kongo,
where the King of Portugal levied heavy duties. The commercial relations
do not appear to have been at all times of the most friendly nature. In
1514 the King complained that Fernão de Mello, the Governor of S. Thomé,
traded with the Mpangu-lungu[326] who were his enemies; and in 1526 he
remonstrated against the conduct of the Portuguese slave-merchants.
Indeed, so preposterous were the claims put forward by the Portuguese
officials, that King Affonso, in 1517, humbly begged to be allowed to
employ a ship of his own when trading; or, at least to be exempted from
paying the heavy duties exacted by a foreign, albeit suzerain, power
upon the outlanders trading in his kingdom. These ill-advised exactions
explain, too, why trade gradually deserted the Kongo, and sought more
favourable openings to the south, at Luandu, as is shown by an inquiry
held in 1548.[327]

The Portuguese made an effort to exploit the mineral wealth of the
country. Ruy Mendes, the “factor of the copper mines,” is stated to have
discovered lead; and Gimdarlach (Durlacher?), a German “fundidor,” in
1593 discovered copper, lead, and silver. The King, however, would not
allow the mines to be worked, for he feared that such a concession might
cost him his kingdom.

Proposals for the exploration of the interior were made, but bore no
fruit. Gregòrio de Quadra, who had spent several years as a prisoner
among the Arabs, was sent to Kongo in 1520, with instructions to make
his way thence to the country of Prester John. The King refused his
consent; Quadra returned to Portugal, and died a monk.[328] Balthasar de
Castro, the companion of Manuel Pacheco in Angola, desired to explore
the upper Kongo in 1526; but neither his scheme nor that of Manuel
Pacheco himself, who was to have built two brigantines, seems to have
been carried out.

Of the domestic wars corned on by the King, we know next to nothing.
Angola and Matamba seem to have been virtually independent in his day,
though the island of Luandu, with its valuable cowry-fishery, was held
by him and his successors until 1649. He conquered, however,
Mpanzu-alumbu (Mpangu-lunga?)[329] on the lower Kongo, a district
inhabited by a predatory tribe.[330] That his successes in these “wars”
were due to his Portuguese mercenaries and their fire-locks is a matter
of course.

Don Affonso died in 1540, or soon afterwards, leaving behind him a son,
D. Pedro, who succeeded him, and three daughters.[331]


D. PEDRO AND HIS SUCCESSORS, 1540-1561.

PEDRO I had been educated in Portugal, and is described by Cavazzi as a
wise prince who had inherited all the virtues of his father, and was a
great friend of the missionaries. His reign was apparently a short
one,[332] and he was succeeded by a cousin, D. FRANCISCO, who only
reigned two or three years, and left the kingdom to a son,[333] D.
DIOGO.[334] Duarte Lopez describes this prince as a man of noble mind,
witty, intelligent, prudent in council, an upholder of the missionaries,
and at the same time a great warrior who, in the course of a few years,
conquered many of the neighbouring countries. His “wars” certainly did
not enlarge the borders of his kingdom, and the only war we know of
ended in disaster. The Portuguese at S. Salvador, jealous of the growing
commercial importance of Luandu, had persuaded the King to send an army
against Ngola Mbandi, they themselves furnishing an auxiliary corps. The
Kongoese, in spite of this, were defeated on the river Dande (about
1556); and Ngola not only appealed to Portugal for protection, but also
allied himself with the Jagas, with whose aid he invaded Kongo (in
1558).

Nor were the relations of D. Diogo with the missionaries quite as
friendly as Lopez would lead us to believe. As early as 1549, D. Diogo
complained of the overbearing conduct of the Jesuits who had arrived in
that year in the company of D. João Baptista, the Bishop of S.
Thomé;[335] the priests, on their side, accused the King of having shown
little respect to the bishop, and of having ordered them to be pulled
out of their pulpits, when they denounced his vices and those of his
people.[336] The Jesuits may have been over-zealous in the performance
of what they conceived to be their duty, and too prone to meddle in
politics; but they seem to have led clean lives, which cannot be said of
all of their clerical brethren. When D. Gaspar Cão,[337] the Bishop of
S. Thomé and Kongo, a man who took the duties of his office seriously,
visited S. Salvador, these priests openly defied his authority. But
after several of the recalcitrant priests had been deported to Portugal,
whilst others had left voluntarily with such wealth as they had been
able to amass, discipline was re-established.[338]


A REIGN OF ANARCHY, 1561-1568.

When Diogo died, about 1561, the Portuguese residents endeavoured to
secure the throne for one of their own creatures, and caused the duly
elected favourite of the people to be assassinated. As a result, the
people of S. Salvador rose upon the Portuguese, many of whom were
killed, not even priests being spared. The accounts[339] of this period
of disorder are too confused to enable us to be certain even of the
names of the reigning kings. D. AFFONSO II, a son (probably
illegitimate) of D. Diogo, ascended the throne of his father, but was
murdered by his brother, D. BERNARDO, who appears to have been the
candidate favoured by the Portuguese. He at once sent Father Estevão de
Laguos on an embassy to Queen Catherine of Portugal, who, in a letter
dated June 26th, 1562,[340] congratulated him upon his accession, whilst
gently chiding him for the murder of his brother. This King was
evidently friendly disposed towards the Portuguese; and Antonio Vieira,
a negro, who had visited Portugal as member of an embassy, when writing
to Queen Catherine in April 1566,[341] suggested that he might be
induced to allow the mines of copper and tin to be worked. D. Bernardo
is stated by the Duke of Mbamba to have fallen in a war with the
Anzicas, “in defence of Christianity and the Fatherland.” He was
succeeded by D. HENRIQUE, a brother of D. Diogo, who, after a short and
troubled reign, died of a wound received in a battle, either against
some revolted vassals,[342] or fighting the Anzicanas.[343] He was the
last king of the original dynasty, for Alvaro I, his successor, was only
a step-son.


D. ALVARO I AND THE AYAKA, 1568-1574.[344]

D. Alvaro, immediately on his accession, sent an embassy to Portugal, to
apologise for the massacre of many Portuguese during the reigns of his
predecessors, which he excused on the ground of the vices and abuses of
the clergy. These excuses were apparently accepted in Portugal,
fortunately for D. Alvaro, for the very next year the dreaded Ayaka[345]
invaded his kingdom by way of Mbata; and, being worsted, the King fled
with his adherents to the Hippopotamus Island,[346] on the lower Kongo,
where they suffered many hardships, and whence he appealed piteously to
the Portuguese for help. This help was not denied him. Francisco de
Gouvea, corregedor of S. Thomé, in 1570, hastened to his aid with six
hundred Portuguese, expelled the Ayaka, reinstated the King in his
capital, and built a wall round S. Salvador for greater security. The
King fully recognised the value of the service that had been rendered
him, for Paulo Dias de Novaes told Garcia Mendes[347] that he
acknowledged himself a vassal of Portugal;[348] and as neither gold or
silver had been discovered in his country, he agreed to pay a tribute in
_njimbos_, which he actually did for a few years.

No sooner was Alvaro once more seated securely upon his throne than he
sent the Count of Sonyo against Ngola (1572). Several encounters took
place in Musulu and Mbuila (Ambuila); but in the end Ngola was allowed
to retain his father’s conquests, the river Dande being fixed upon as
the boundary between the two kingdoms. Kongo, however, retained
possession of the valuable island of Luandu.

Among other events of this reign we should mention a second visit of D.
Gaspar Cão, the bishop, shortly before his death (in 1574); and the
scandal caused by the burial of a notorious infídel, D. Francisco Mbula
matadi, in the church of S. Cruz, the roof of which was taken off by
night, and the body, carried away by the Devil![349]

D. Alvaro only enjoyed his prosperity for a short time, for when Paulo
Dias landed at Luandu, in 1575, he was already dead.[350]


D. ALVARO II, 1574-1614.

Alvaro II, a son of Alvaro I, is described by Bishop D. Manuel Baptista
as a “zealous Christian, father and friend of all;”[351] but it is
evident that he looked not with overmuch favour upon the Portuguese
residents in his country, and he is charged, in a memoir addressed by
Domingos d’Abreu Brito to King Philip I, in 1592 with having plotted
with the kings of Ndongo and Matamba against the Portuguese. An army
which he sent ostensibly to the aid of the Portuguese in 1583 retired,
apparently without striking a blow, whilst he furnished a contingent to
the forces of Matamba which invaded Angola in 1590. He hindered, by
specious excuses, the completion of a stone fort at Mpinda, which had
been commenced in 1609 by Antonio Gonçalves Pitta, until all the workmen
had died. He favoured Dutch traders to the great detriment of the
Portuguese; and we know from Samuel Braun,[352] that an effort was made
in 1612 to expel the Dutch from the Kongo, and that it would have been
successful, had not the natives sided with these heretical enemies,
whose dealings appeared to them to be more generous. Moreover, the King,
although he had promised Sebastian da Costa (1580) that he would allow
the supposed silver mines to be sought for, eventually refused his
consent.[353]

Turning to Church affairs, we hear of the usual applications for
missionaries, and of several episcopal visitations by D. F. Antonio de
Goiva (1578), D. Manuel de Ulhoa, D. Miguel Baptista Rangel, and D.
Manuel Baptista. D. Manuel de Ulhoa presided over a synod at S.
Salvador, in 1585, and laid down statutes for the government of his see.
D. Miguel Baptista Rangel was the first Bishop of Kongo, which had been
separated from the diocese of S. Thomé by a Bull of May 20th, 1596. His
successor, D. Manuel Baptista, resided for several years in Kongo, where
he died in 1621; and a letter addressed to King Philip II, in 1612,[354]
speaks of the results of over a century of missionary effort as
insignificant, and describes the people as incurable barbarians, full of
vice.


D. PEDRO II AFFONSO, 1622-1624.

BERNARDO II, a son of Alvaro II, only reigned for a few months, for he
was killed by his brother, ALVARO III, and a complaint addressed to him
by the Governor of Angola about the admission of heretical Dutchmen to
trade in Sonyo was answered by his successor. This Alvaro III, the
fratricide, is nevertheless described by Cavazzi as having been “wise,
modest, courageous, and above all a zealous Christian.” It was during
his reign, in 1619, that the Jesuits founded a college at S. Salvador. A
proposed mission of Italian Capuchins came to nothing, for King Philip
of Spain, by royal letters of September 22nd, 1620, forbade foreign
missionaries to enter Portuguese colonies without first obtaining a
royal license.[355] Alvaro III died on May 26th, 1622, and was succeeded
by D. PEDRO II AFFONSO, whom Cavazzi describes as a son of Alvaro III;
whilst a Jesuit canon of S. Salvador,[356] who wrote an interesting life
of this prince in 1624, makes him out to have been a son of Mbiki a
ntumba, Duke of Nsundi, and a descendant, in the female line, of the
first King of Kongo. If this biographer can be trusted, he was a man of
much promise, and of a mild, forgiving temper; for although the Duke of
Mbamba had sought his life, he conferred upon him the marquisate of
Wembo. His reign was a short and troubled one. In August, 1622, the Duke
of Mbata had been killed by rebels, and his vassal, the King of Kwangu
(Ocango), had suffered a defeat. João Corrêa de Souza, the Governor of
Angola, summoned him to surrender Luandu Island and all the copper
mines; and this being refused, the Portuguese under Luiz Gomez, aided by
the Jagas, crossed the Dande at Ikau and invaded Nambu a ngongo, and (in
December) also Mbumbi, where the Duke of Mpemba and many others were
killed and eaten by the Jagas, in spite of their being Christians. The
people of the invaded districts revenged themselves by killing the
Portuguese living in their midst, the King vainly endeavouring to
protect them. These invaders had scarcely been driven off, when Captain
Silvestre Soares, with a body of Jagas, entered Ngombe and Kabanda. But
that which gave most pain to the King was the destruction of the kingdom
of Bangu, and the murder of its King by the Jagas, with the aid of the
King of “Loango,” which was the “trunk and origin of the kingdom of
Kongo.”[357] In the midst of these afflictions, the King was rejoiced to
learn the arrival of D. Simão Mascarenhas at Luanda; but he met with an
accident, and died on April 13th, 1624, after a short reign of less than
two years, and mourned by six sons and two daughters.[358]


D. PEDRO’S SUCCESSORS, 1624-1641.

GARCIA, the eldest son of D. Pedro, when elected was only twenty years
of age, He was succeeded by D. AMBROSIO, in October, 1626, whose reign,
up till March, 1631, was one continuous warfare with his powerful
vassals. The country became unsafe, and the Portuguese retired for a
time from S. Salvador. ALVARO IV, a son of Alvaro III, made himself
master of the kingdom, and retained possession until his death, February
25th, 1636. He was succeded by his son, ALVARO V, who, doubting the
loyalty of his half-brothers, the Duke of Mbamba and the Marquis of
Kiowa, made war upon them, was defeated and taken prisoner, but
liberated. Unmindful of the generosity of his opponents, he once more
tried the fortune of battle, was taken again, and executed (in August,
1636). The Duke of Mbamba was unanimously elected in his place, and
reigned, as ALVARO VI, until his death on February 22nd, 1641. He waged
two unsuccessful wars against the Count of Sonyo, in 1636 and again in
1637; and was obliged to surrender the district of Makuta (Mocata) to
his adversary.


GARCIA II AFFONSO, O KIMBAKU, 1641-1663,[359]

the half-brother and old companion in arms of Alvaro VI, took possession
of the throne at a critical time; for in August of the year of his
accession, the Dutch captured Luandu, and the fortunes of the Portuguese
were at the lowest ebb. The Dutch lost no time in sending an embassy to
Kongo (1642),[360] and these new allies lent him their assistance in a
small war against Mwana Nsala, who had defied the royal authority.[361]
But they declined to give effective help against a more powerful vassal,
the Count of Sonyo, as it might have interfered with their trade
interests on the Lower Kongo.[362] The King’s army was defeated twice on
April 29th, 1645, when Affonso, the King’s son, was taken prisoner, and
again in July 1648, in the forest of Mfinda angulu. Meanwhile the Dutch
had broken the padrão set up by Cão at the mouth of the Kongo; they had
re-named S. Antonio’s Bay after their river Pampus at Amsterdam; had
gone to S. Salvador; and at least one of them, Johan Herder,[363] had
travelled far inland, and visited the Mwana Nkundi on the Kwangu. The
heretical tracts and books which they liberally distributed were in due
course burnt by the Capuchin friars.

Portugal was, moreover, irritated by the admission of Italian and
Castilian Capuchins, a batch of whom, headed by P. Bonaventura of
Alessano,[364] arrived at S. Salvador, on September 2nd, 1645, without
having previously called at Lisbon. This first mission was followed by
three others in 1648, 1651 and 1654,[365] and mission stations were
established in Mbata, in Nkusu, Nsundi, Mpemba, Mbwela, and Wembo
(Ovando).[366] Among the more noteworthy missionary travels of the time
was that of P. Girolamo of Montesarchio, who visited Konko a bele
(Concobello), in 1652.[367]

Even greater offence was given to Portugal by a mission which the King
despatched to Rome in 1646, and which arrived there, by way of Holland,
in May, 1648. P. Angelo de Valenza, the head of this mission, had been
instructed to beg the Pope to appoint three bishops for Kongo, Matamba
and the Makoko’s country, without reference to the claims of Portugal.
This the Pope declined to do; but to show his pleasure at receiving this
mission, he had a medal struck in memory of its visit, with the
inscription “Et Congo agnovit Pastorem,” and sent the King a Royal crown
blessed by himself. The King, however, when his mission returned (1651),
and when he heard that the Pope had refused to change Kongo from an
elective into a hereditary monarchy, grew wroth. He openly renounced
Christianity, forbade the Capuchins to preach the word of God, and
recalled his native ngangas. But when some bags containing relics and
ornaments, which the King had taken out of the churches, were
miraculously spared by a fire which broke out in his palace, he
reconsidered his position. A reconciliation with the Capuchins was
effected, and soon afterwards the King, in penitential robes, actually
marched at the head of a procession which had been organised to turn
away a threatened plague of locusts; he allowed himself to be crowned by
P. Giannuario of Nola, in the name of his Holiness, and took an active
part in the celebration of the Pope’s jubilee.[368]

Meanwhile the Portuguese had recovered Luandu, and the King was called
upon to pay the penalty for having made friendship with the Dutch
heretics, and admitted foreigners as missionaries. Bartholomeu de
Vasconcellos invaded Kongo. The King at once sent P. Domingos Cardoso, a
Jesuit, and the Capuchin Friar Bonaventura Sardo, to Luandu, where they
had an interview with the Governor (on February 19th, 1649), and
preliminary terms of peace were arranged.[369] The treaty was reported
upon by the _Conselho Ultramarino_, and confirmed in 1651 at Lisbon,
whither Friar Bonaventura[370] of Sorrento had gone to do homage to the
King of Portugal, on behalf of the Prefect of the Capuchins, as also to
plead the cause of his Order in reference to the proposed treaty. The
terms of this treaty, as modified, were as follows:—Castilians or
Dutchmen not to be permitted to reside or travel in Kongo nor their
ships to be admitted, unless provided with a Portuguese passport; the
Capuchin friars to communicate with Rome only by way of Luandu or
Lisbon, and no Castilians to be admitted among them; the Kings of Kongo
and Portugal to mutually assist each other if attacked by an enemy; an
ambassador of the King of Kongo to take up his residence at Luandu, as
also a royal prince, as hostage, or in his absence two or three men of
rank; compensation to be granted for all the losses suffered by the
Portuguese since the arrival of the Dutch, and fugitive slaves to be
surrendered; Portuguese merchants to be exempted from the payment of
tolls; a site to be granted at the mouth of the Kongo for a fortress;
all gold and silver mines to be ceded to the crown of Portugal, and the
country to the south of the river Dande to be ceded absolutely; and
finally the King of Kongo to acknowledge himself a “tributario” of
Portugal.

The King seems to have long hesitated before he ratified this treaty,
for in 1656, Diogo Gomes de Morales was ordered to invade Kongo to
enforce it, and was on the point of crossing the river Loje into Mbamba,
when he was recalled, as envoys from the King had arrived at Luandu,
definitely to arrange the terms of peace.

During the later years of his life, D. Garcia once more fell away from
his Christian teachers, whom he accused of being influenced by political
motives. Suspecting the Duke of Mpemba of a desire to deprive his son of
the succession, he had him executed; and when the native diviners
accused his eldest son, Affonso, of aiming at his life, he had his
second son elected as his successor. He died in 1663.


D. ANTONIO I, 1663-66.

D. Antonio had been enjoined by his dying father to avenge the
humiliation forced upon him by the Portuguese. He inaugurated his reign
by killing his own brother and other relatives, whom he suspected of
disloyalty. The warnings of heaven—fiery balls, an earthquake, which
destroyed part of his capital, a plague, which decimated the
population—were disregarded by him.

He very soon found himself involved in a war with the Portuguese, who
claimed possession of the mines which had been promised by treaty, and
complained of raids made upon friendly chiefs. On July 13th, 1665, the
King called upon his people to rise in defence of their country and
liberty.[371] His diviners had promised him an easy victory. The
Portuguese had recently been reinforced from Brazil, yet the army which
they were able to put into the field only numbered four hundred
Europeans, with two field guns and six thousand negroes. It was
commanded by Luiz Lopez de Sequeira, the captain-major, with whom were
Manuel Rebello de Brito, Diogo Rodriguez de Sá, Simão de Matos and
Antonio Araujo Cabreira, the serjeant-major. The hostile forces met on
January 1st, 1666, at Ulanga, near the Pedras de Ambuilla.[372] Antonio,
seeing the small force opposed to him, hoped to gain an easy victory;
but the Portuguese, formed in square, resisted the onslaught of his
hosts for six hours. At last the King left the ranks, desirous of a
personal encounter with Lopez de Sequeira; but he was shot down, his
head was cut off, and stuck upon a pike. His followers fled in dismay.
The missionaries assert that the Virgin Mary, with her Child, was seen
to stand by the side of the Portuguese leader, directing the battle, and
that a fiery rain fell upon the idolaters.[373]

The Governor of Angola, in commemoration of this victory, built the
chapel of N.S. da Nazareth at Luandu, whilst the King of Portugal amply
rewarded the victors.


A TIME OF ANARCHY, AFTER 1666.

We are indebted to Pedro Mendes for an account of the history of Kongo
from the death of D. Antonio in 1666 to the beginning of the eighteenth
century.[374] During that time, according to this authority, there were
fourteen Kings of Kongo, of whom four were beheaded (or killed) by the
Musurongo, five by the Ezikongo, three died a natural death, and two
were survivors when he wrote, namely, D. Pedro IV, at Salvador, and D.
João at Mbula.[375] At one time there were actually three kings in the
field.

ALVARO VII, a royal prince who had passed his early life in retirement,
but who, on being raised to the throne, turned out a monster of
iniquity, was killed by his own subjects, abetted by the Count of Sonyo
(1666), under whose auspices took place the election of his successor,
D. ALVARO VIII (1666-70), who was in turn removed by the Marquis of
Mpemba. Alvaro VIII[376] had allowed the Portuguese to search for gold,
but this search turned out as fruitless as the search for silver at
Kambambe. Meanwhile D. AFFONSO III AFFONSO had been proclaimed at
Kibangu, the new capital (1667), whilst D. PEDRO III _nsukia ntamba_ was
put up as an opposition King in Mbula. The latter defeated his rival,
who fled beyond the Mbiriji (Ambriz), and died there (of poison?). His
widow, D. Anna, a daughter of a former King, Garcia, retired to Nkondo
(Mucondo), and survived her husband until 1680. The people proclaimed D.
GARCIA III _nenganga mbemba_[377] his successor, whilst the opposition,
at the old capital (S. Salvador), declared D. DANIEL DE GUZMAN,
descendant of Mpanzu (Alvaro I), to be the rightful King. D. Daniel took
the field against D. Garcia III, but, before he reached the residence of
that King, he was overtaken by D. Pedro of Mbula; his army was
dispersed, and himself beheaded. His children sought refuge with the
Count of Sonyo, and by treachery they succeeded in getting D. Pedro into
their power, and killed him. The people of Mbula thereupon raised his
brother, D. JOÃO, to the throne, who survived until after 1710. S.
Salvador, after D. Daniel had deserted it, became the haunt of wild
beasts.

Meanwhile D. RAFAEL, Marquis of Mpemba, who had been proclaimed King
some time anterior to this, had been obliged to seek refuge among the
Portuguese, and his reinstatement was one of the objects of the
disastrous expedition of 1670,[378] by which it was sought to punish
Count Estevão da Silva of Sonyo for his desecration of Christian
churches and the ill-treatment of Portuguese traders: or, rather, his
dealings with heretic competitors.

João Soares de Almeida, the commander of this expedition, had with him
five hundred Portuguese, supported by a strong force of native allies,
among whom was a Jaga Kalandula. He won a battle, in which Estevão was
killed; but Pedro, the brother of the unfortunate Count, rallied the
forces of Sonyo, unexpectedly fell upon the Portuguese near the Mbiriji
(Ambriz), and scarcely a man among them escaped. Count Pedro then
expelled the Italian Capuchins, who were supposed to be friendly to
Portugal, and invited in their stead Belgian members of the same Order,
who arrived in September, 1673, under the lead of P. Wouters. But,
having been accused of stopping the rain, and having in reply
excommunicated the Count, they were speedily expelled.[379] Peace
between Sonyo and Portugal was only restored in 1690, when the former
promised to abolish idolatry and to sell no slaves to heretics.

It was about this period (between 1669 and 1675) that Francisco do
Murça, the captain-major of Dande, visited S. Salvador, and proceeded
thence to Mbata and the Kwangu, where he was told that this river flowed
through the kingdom of the Makoko, and entered the sea at Mpinda, a fact
long before known to the missionaries. These latter had not quite
abandoned the Kongo, notwithstanding these troubles, and in 1668 the
Capuchins still occupied their monasteries at the capital of Mbamba and
at Mpembu;[380] whilst Girolamo Merolla (1682-88) and Antonio Zucchelli
steadily laboured (1700-02) in Sonyo and Luangu.[381]

D. ANDRE succeeded D. Garcia, but died after a short reign. D. MANUEL
_nzinga elenge_, a descendant of Mpanzu, was duly elected, but expelled
by the sons of the late D. Garcia, who raised ALVARO IX to the throne in
his stead. This prince was never recognised by the Count of Sonyo, who
looked upon D. Manuel, who had sought refuge with him, as the legitimate
King. He was reinstated by him for a time, but ultimately fell into the
power of his enemies, and was beheaded.

Alvaro IX was succeeded in 1694 by his brother PEDRO IV _nsanu a
mbemba_, also known as _agoa rosada_,[382] who once more returned to the
ancient capital. He and D. João of Mbula were the only Kings alive in
1701, when the Capuchin Friar Francisco de Pavia, and his colleague
Friar João Maria went throughout the kingdom of Kongo, preaching peace,
and calling upon the leading men to recognise D. Pedro as their King;
and thus put an end to quarrels which had distracted the country for an
entire generation.


A RETROSPECT.

And if we ask to what extent, and in what manner, have the natives of
Kongo been benefited by two centuries of contact with the civilisation
of Europe, and of missionary effort, we feel bound to admit that they
have not been benefited at all—either materially or morally. On the
contrary. There were, no doubt, a few earnest men among the
missionaries, and the Church of Rome deserves some credit for the zeal
with which she addressed herself to the object of converting the
natives. At the same time it cannot be denied that the instruments she
employed, the methods she pursued, and the surrounding circumstances,
were not favourable to success. And success there has been none—at
least, none of an enduring nature—notwithstanding the boastful, if not
absolutely mendacious, reports of her missionaries. The assertion that
there was a time when the whole of Kongo had become Roman Catholic must
raise a smile on the face of those who have attentively studied the
missionary reports. There were eleven churches and a crowd of priests at
the capital; but the outlying provinces were but poorly attended to. The
number of missionaries, even including the native helpers, was never
large enough to administer, even to a tithe of the population, those
rites and sacraments, which the Roman Catholic Church professes to be of
essential importance.[383]

I quite agree with the Rev. J. Leighton Wilson, when he says that the
“great spiritual edifice” [raised by the missionaries] has not only
“crumbled into the dust, but it has left the unfortunate inhabitants of
that country in as deep ignorance and superstition, and perhaps in
greater poverty and degradation, than they would have been if Roman
Catholicism had never been proclaimed among them.”[384] Father José
Antonio de Souza, who resided at S. Salvador from 1881-87, and was
subsequently created Bishop of Mozambique, virtually admits this, for he
says: “Christianity did not penetrate deeply; it passed over the country
like a heavy rain, which scarcely wetted the surface of the land, and
left the subsoil absolutely dry and sterile.”[385] He adds
significantly: “By the side of the missionary stood the slave-trader.”
And surely it was the export slave trade, created by the cupidity of the
Portuguese, but shared in by Dutch, French and English, which undermined
the prosperity of the country, and decimated its population. And the
missionaries never raised a protest against this traffic, although it
was against the tenets of their Church,[386] for they profited by it.
The only thing which they did for the wretched slaves was to endeavour
to secure, as far as possible, that they should not fall into the hands
of heretics; so that at least their souls might be saved, whatever
became of their bodies.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




APPENDIX III.

A LIST OF THE KINGS OF KONGO.

(NTOTELA NTINU MAKONGO.)


   1. Ntinu mini a lukeni.

   2. Nanga kia ntinu, his nephew or cousin.

   3.    —             —

   4. Nkuwu a ntinu, son of No. 1.

   5. João I Nzinga a nkuwu, son of No. 4, baptised May
   3rd, 1491, died 1509.

   6. Mpanzu a nzinga (Mpanzu a kitima?), second son of
   No. 5, 1509.

   7. Affonso I Mbemba a nzinga (Mbemba nelumbu),
   eldest son of No. 5, 1509-40.

   8. Pedro I Nkanga a mbemba, son of No. 7, 1540-44.

   9. Francisco Mpudi a nzinga, 1544-46.

   10. Diogo Nkumbi a mpudi, son of No. 9, 1546-61.

   11. Affonso II Mpemba a nzinga, an illegitimate son of
   No. 10? 1561.

   12. Bernardo I, (bastard) son of No. 10, 1561-67.

   13. Henrique (Nerika) a mpudi, son of No. 9, 1567-68.

   14. Alvaro I o Mpanzu, Mini a lukeni lua mbamba,
   stepson of No. 12, 1568-74.

   15. Alvaro II Nempanzu a Mini, son of No. 14, 1574-1614.


   16. Bernardo II Nenimi a mpanzu, son of No. 15, 1615.

   17. Alvaro III Mbiki a mpanzu, Duke of Mbamba, son of No. 15,
   1615 to May 26th, 1622.

   18. Pedro II Affonso Nkanga a mbiki, son of Mbiki an tumbo,
   Duke of Nsundi, grandson of a daughter of No. 7, 1622 to April
   13th, 1624.

   19. Garcia I Mbemba a nkanga, Duke of Mbamba, son of No. 18,
   April 1624, to June 26th, 1626.

   20. Ambrosio I, October 10th, 1626, to March, 1631.

   21. Alvaro IV, son of No. 17, 1631 to February 25th, 1636.

   22: Alvaro V, son of No. 21, 1636-38.

   23. Alvaro VI, Duke of Mbamba, August, 1638, to February 22nd,
   1641.

   24. Garcia II o kimbaku, (Nkanga a lukeni), Marquis of Kiwa,
   1641-63.

   25. Antonio I Nevita a nkanga, mwana mulaza, son of No. 24,
   1663-66.

   26. Alvaro VII Nepanzu a masundu, 1666-67.

   27. Pedro III Nsukia ntamba of Mbula, 1667-79.

   28. Alvaro VIII, 1667-78.

   29. Affonso III Affonso, 1667-69.

   30. Garcia III Nenganga mbemba, 1669-78.

   31. Rafael I, marquis of Mpemba, 1669-75.

   32. Daniel de Guzman Nemiala nia gimbuilla (?), a descendant
   of No. 14, 1678-80.

   33. João of Mbula, brother of No. 27, 1679—(He was alive in
   1710).

   34. André mulaza, a descendant of No. 25, 1679.

   35. Manuel Nzinga elenge, a descendant of No. 14, 1680-16—.

   36. Alvaro IX Nenimi a mbemba, a descendant both of No. 14 and
   of No. 25.

   37. Pedro IV, Nsanu a mbemba (Agoa rosada), brother of No. 36,
   acceded 1694, and was alive in 1710.

   38. Pedro Constantino Kibangu. He was executed in 1709.

The dates given for Nos. 26-38, are for the most part very uncertain:
Nos. 26, 28, 31, and 32 I believe to have resided at S. Salvador; Nos.
29, 30, 34, 35, 36 and 37, at Kibangu; Nos. 27 and 33, in Mbula.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




APPENDIX IV.

A SKETCH OF THE HISTORY OF ANGOLA TO THE END OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.


EARLY PORTUGUESE VISITORS.

The inhabitants of S. Thomé were granted permission in 1500[387] to
trade as far as the Kongo river; but it is just possible that long
before that time, and notwithstanding an interdict of 1504, they had
felt their way southward along the coast, and had discovered that a
profitable trade, not hampered by the presence of royal officials or
“farmers,” might be carried on at Luandu, and up a river which, after
the King of the country, was called the river of Ngola (Angola).

Several years afterwards, a representative of this Ngola, whilst on a
visit at S. Salvador, suggested that missionaries should be sent to
convert his master. King Manuel was nothing loth to act upon this
suggestion, and entrusted Manuel Pacheco and Balthasar de Castro, both
of whom were old residents in Kongo, with an expedition, whose main
object was to report on the missionary and commercial prospects in
Ngola’s country, to inquire into the existence of reputed silver mines,
and, eventually, to explore the coast as far as the Cape of Good Hope.
On arriving at the bar of Ngola’s river (the Kwanza), B. de Castro was
to go to the King’s court, where, if circumstances were favourable, he
was to be joined by a priest. Pacheco himself was to return to Portugal,
with a cargo of slaves, ivory, and silver.[388]

No report of this mission has hitherto seen the light; but we know that
B. de Castro actually reached Ngola’s residence, and that he was
retained there as a prisoner, until released in 1526, through the
intervention of the King of Kongo. He reported that he never saw silver
or precious stones anywhere in Angola.[389]


THE EARLY HISTORY OF NDONGO (ANGOLA).

Ndongo is the original name of the vast territory now known as Angola,
from the name or title of its ruler (Ngola) when first the Portuguese
became acquainted with it. The early history of this region is involved
in obscurity, but it seems that its chiefs at one time owed allegiance
to the King of Kongo, whose authority was finally shaken off about the
middle of the sixteenth century, the King only keeping possession of
Luandu island and its valuable _njimbu_ fishery.

Cavazzi, Antonio Laudati of Gaeta, Cadornega, and others, have published
long lists of Kings of “Angola;” but nearly all the names they give are
not those of the Kings, but the titles which they assumed,[390] and by
which they were generally known. The full title of the King of Ndongo
was _Ngola kiluanji kia Samba_,[391] and that title is still borne by
the present ruler, who claims to be a descendant of the kings of old,
and whose _Kabasa_[392] on the River Hamba (Va-umba or Umba) still
occupies the locality assigned by the missionaries to Queen Nzinga’s
_Kabasa_, where they built the church of S. Maria of Matamba.

Cavazzi’s Matamba, however, included the whole of Queen Nzinga’s
kingdom, as it existed in his day, whilst the original Matamba, as also
the country known by that name in the present day, had much narrower
limits. It was originally tributary to Kongo, but one of its rulers
assumed the title of _Kambulu_, that is, King, and renounced all
vassalage to his former suzerain. It existed as an independent kingdom
until 1627, when the famous Queen Nzinga took prisoner the dowager
Queen, Muongo Matamba, and incorporated this ancient kingdom in her own
dominions.[393]

It may have been a Ngola kiluanji, described by Cavazzi as the son of
Tumba ria ngola and of a Ngola kiluanji kia Samba, who first invaded
lower Ndongo, and assigned his conquest to one of his sons. But all is
uncertainty, and there exists an inextricable confusion in the names of
the Kings of upper and lower Ndongo as transmitted to us. One thing,
however, is certain, namely, that as early as 1520 the country down to
the sea was held by a king bearing the name or title of Ngola.[394]


THE FIRST EXPEDITION OF PAULO DIAS DE NOVAES, 1560.

In 1556 Ngola Ineve,[395] being threatened by Kongo, sent an ambassador
to Portugal asking for the establishment of friendly relations. This
ambassador arriving in the year of the death of King John III (1557),
action was deferred until 1559, when three caravels were fitted out and
placed under the command of Paulo Dias, a grandson of the discoverer of
the Cape of Good Hope. Dias left Lisbon on December 22nd, 1559, and
called at S. Thomé (where Bishop Gaspar Cão observed that the Jesuits,
who accompanied Dias, would meet with no success as long as commercial
intercourse was prohibited).[396] Dias arrived at the bar of the Kwanza
on May 3rd, and there waited patiently for six months, when Musungu, a
native chief, made his appearance at the head of a crew of painted
warriors, armed with bows and arrows. In his company Dias, accompanied
by the Jesuit fathers and twenty men, travelled up the country for sixty
leagues, when he arrived at the royal residence.[397] The King, not any
longer the Ngola who had asked for missionaries, but his successor,[398]
received his visitors kindly, but would net allow them to depart until
they had helped him against one of his revolted Sobas, called Kiluanji
kia kwangu by Garcia Mendes.[399] Having rendered this service Dias was
dismissed, but the Jesuits remained behind as hostages. Whilst Dias was
absent in Europe, Ngola defeated an army sent against him, and thus
compelled the recognition of the Dande river as his boundary, the
island of Luandu alone, with its productive _njimbu_ fishery, remaining
with Kongo. Ngola ndambi died (in 1568?) before Dias returned.


THE SECOND EXPEDITION OF DIAS, 1574.

After a considerable delay, Dias was sent out as “Conquistador” of the
territory recently visited by him. He left Lisbon on October 23rd, 1574,
with seven vessels and three hundred and fifty men, most of them
cobblers, tailors, and tradesmen.[400] Among his officers were Pedro da
Fonseca, his son-in-law, Luis Serrão, André Ferreira Pereira, and Garcia
Mendes Castellobranco, all of whom subsequently won distinction as
“Conquistadores.” Three Jesuit fathers (with P. Balthasar Barreira as
superior), and three Dominicans accompanied him. These latter, however,
not finding the country to their liking, soon sought more comfortable
quarters in Kongo. Dias was authorised to grant estates (including full
seignorial rights) to all such among his companions as were prepared to
build a small fort at their own expense.

In February, 1575, the fleet sighted the coast near the Kwanza, and
passing over the bar of Kurimba cast anchor in the fine bay of Luandu,
and on February 20th Dias laid the foundations of a church.[401] The
island, at that time, was inhabited by forty Portuguese who had come
from Kongo, and a considerable number of native Christians. Its cowry
fisheries yielded great profit to its owner, the King of Kongo, who was
represented by a governor.[402] Not finding the site originally chosen
for his capital to be suitable, Dias, in 1576, removed to what is now
known as the Morro de S. Miguel, and he named the new colony “Reino de
Sebaste na conquista de Ethiopia,” in honour of the King who fell
gloriously at Al Kasr el Kebir, and its capital S. Paulo de Luandu.

Meanwhile the customary presents were exchanged with the King, whose
name or title seems to have been Ngola a kiluanji. The King’s gifts
included slaves, cattle, copper and silver bracelets, and aromatic
Kakongo wood. The Cardinal King D. Henrique (1578-80) converted the
silver bracelets into a chalice, which he presented to the church of
Belem.

Friendly relations continued for three years. The King had been duly
helped against his rebellious sobas; Pedro da Fonseca lived at the
King’s residence as “ministro conservador” of the Portuguese, and a
brisk trade seems to have sprung up with the new town of S. Paulo de
Luandu, when it was insinuated to the King that the Portuguese
ultimately intended to take possession of his country, and to sell his
subjects abroad as slaves. The _Catalogo_ traces these insinuations to
the jealousy of a Portuguese trader “inspired by the Devil,” and
although neither Garcia Mendes nor Abreu de Brito alludes to this
infamy, their not doing so does not disprove the positive statement of
the _Catalogo_.[403] Moreover, whether the King’s mind was influenced by
envoys from Kongo, or by a traitorous Portuguese, it must be admitted
that the intentions of the Portuguese were not altogether
misrepresented.

At all events, the results were immediately disastrous, for twenty
Portuguese traders, who were at the King’s kabasa at the time, were
murdered, together with one thousand slaves, and their merchandise was
confiscated.


DIAS IN THE FIELD, 1578-89.

Dias, before this happened, had already (in 1577) built the fort of S.
Cruz,[404] ten leagues up the Kwanza, and was at the time at a stockade
on the Penedo de S. Pedro, still higher up on the river.[405] When
there, he was warned not to advance any further, and, suspecting
treachery, he retired with his one hundred and fifty men to Kanzele
(Anzele),[406] where he entrenched himself (in 1578). Twenty days later
he received news of the massacre. Dias at once hastened back to Luandu
for reinforcements, the serjeant-major, Manuel João, meanwhile valiantly
defending the stockade and raiding the neighbourhood.

In September, 1580, Dias again left Luandu with three hundred men.
Slowly he proceeded along the Kwanza by land and in boats, punished the
sobas Muchima, Kitangombe, and Kizua, in Kisama, and defeated the King’s
army at Makunde,[407] where he had his headquarters for two years,
during which time his subordinates, João Serrão, Manuel João, and
others, established his authority among the sobas of Kisama and Lamba
(Ilamba).

In 1582 he removed to Masanganu, at the “meeting of the waters” of the
Lukala and Kwanza. Determined to capture the reputed silver mines of
Kambambe, he set out with Luiz Serrão, eighty Portuguese, and a “guerra
preta” of thirty thousand men. During his forward march he defeated the
soba Mbamba Tungu; and at an entrenched camp at Teka ndungu, on February
2nd, 1584, he inflicted a crushing defeat upon the King’s forces; the
Jesuit Father Balthasar Barreiro claiming no little credit for having
contributed to this victory by his prayers.[408] As a result of this
success, many of the sobas declared in favour of Portugal, but so
inconsiderable were the forces at the command of Dias that he could do
no more than maintain his position at Masanganu. An army under the Duke
of Mbamba, which had been promised to him, was never sent.[409]
Reinforcements, however, arrived in the course of 1584 and 1586,[410]
and Dias fought a battle on the Lukala. But his subordinates did not
always meet with a like success; and João Castanhosa Vellez, with one
hundred Portuguese, was completely routed by the soba Ngola
Kalungu.[411]

As an incident of the governorship of Paulo Dias may be mentioned the
building of a fort at Benguella velho, by his nephew, Antonio Lopes
Peixoto, in 1587. Unhappily, fifty men of the garrison ventured abroad,
unarmed, and fell in an ambush; and of the twenty who had remained in
the fort, and who offered a stout resistance, only two escaped. As a
matter of fact, the losses of human life in these native wars were very
considerable.

Paulo Dias died in the midst of preparations for a fresh expedition
against Ngola, in October, 1589, and was buried in the church of N. S.
da Victoria, which he himself had built at Masanganu.[412]

His soldiers elected Luiz Serrão, the captain-major, to succeed him.


LUIZ SERRÃO AND THE BATTLE OF 1590.

Luiz Serrão, having completed his preparations, started with an army
numbering one hundred and twenty eight Portuguese musketeers (with three
horses), and fifteen thousand native allies armed with bows. With this
utterly insufficient force he crossed the Lukala, and then advanced to
the east. On Friday, December 25th, 1590, when at Ngwalema a kitambu
(Anguolome aquitambo) in Ari,[413] he found himself face to face with
the King of Matamba, whose army had been reinforced by Ngola, the King
of Kongo, the Jaga Kinda,[414] and others. Serrão desired to retire
before this overwhelming host, but his subordinate officers, André
Ferreira Pereira and Francisco de Sequeira, persuaded him to attack the
enemy. He did so, on Monday, December 28th, 1590, and was defeated. The
retreat was effected in good order. The vanguard of forty musketeers
was led by João de Velloria, then came the “guerra preta,” whilst Serrão
himself commanded the rear, and fought almost daily with his pursuers.
The camp at Lukanza, with its valuable contents, had to be abandoned. At
length, on reaching Akimbolo,[415] many leagues to the rear, the
fugitives met Luiz Mendez Rapozo, who had come up from Luandu with
seventy-eight men. At last they reached the old presidio of Mbamba Tungu
and Masanganu; Manuel Jorge d’Oliveira was at once sent down to Luandu
for reinforcements, and on their arrival the siege was raised. L. Serrão
survived this disaster only for a month; and when he died, his officers
elected Luiz Ferreira Pereira, the captain-major, to take his place. The
sobas all around, and in Lamba and Ngulungu, headed by one Muzi Zemba
(Muge Asemba), were in the field, but they were held in check by
Pereira, and the Portuguese name continued to be respected.


THE JAGA.

Jaga or Jaka is a military title,[416] and by no means the name of a
people. The predatory man-eating bands at whose head they invaded the
agricultural districts towards the sea coast, included elements of all
kinds, not unlike the bands of the “Zulu” of our own time; and hence,
one of the names by which they became known in Angola was Bangala.[417]
I have already stated that I do not think that these military leaders,
or Jaga, have anything to do with the tribe of the Ayaka to the east of
Kongo. Still less can we adopt the monstrous notion that the various
inland tribes who, in the course of the sixteenth century, descended
upon the coast of the most opposite parts of Africa, are to be
identified with our Jaga. It was João Bermudes[418] who first identified
the Galla of Abyssinia with the Sumba, who raided the coast of Guinea
about 1570. Duarte Lopez (pp. 66, 67) would have us believe that the
Jaga came out of Moenemuge (Mwene muji), and called themselves
Agag.[419] But the people of Mwene muji, or the land of the Maravi, are
in reality the Zimbas, who raided Kilwa and Mombasa in 1589, whilst
“Agag” looks to me like a corruption of Agau, which is the name of an
Abyssinian tribe.[420] And hence arises this absurd confusion of Father
Guerreiro, who expects us to believe that the Jaga are known in Kongo as
Iacas, in Angola as Gindes,[421] in “India” (that is, on the East coast
of Africa) as Zimbas, in Prester John’s country as Gallas, and in Sierra
Leone as Sumbas! Battell, who reports facts and leaves hypotheses alone,
confesses that in his day nothing was known about the origin of this
dreaded people.[422]

We have already met with Jaga in Kongo, as allies of Ngola. In 1590 they
were fighting Luiz Serrão as the allies of Matamba, and by 1600 they
appear to have advanced as far as the coast of Benguella, where Battell
joined them, and had an opportunity of gaining an intimate knowledge of
their daily life, not enjoyed by any other traveller. H. D. de
Carvalho[423] and A. R. Neves[424] have been at the trouble of
collecting such information on their origin as it is possible to gather
after the lapse of three centuries. Entrusting ourselves to the guidance
of the former of these authors, we learn that Kinguri, the son of the
chief of the Bungo, in Lunda, was excluded by his father from the
succession, in favour of his sister Lueji. Gathering around him his
adherents, he left his native land to found a “state” elsewhere. He
first settled in Kioko, then crossed the Upper Kwanza into Kimbundu
(Binbundu of Bié), and reached Lubolo, where he made friends with the
chief, Ngongo, whose daughter Kulachinga he married. He then crossed the
Kwanza above Kambambe, entered into friendly relations with the
Portuguese, visited the Governor, D. Manuel,[425] and offered to fight
on the side of the Portuguese. He was granted land at Lukamba,[426] on
the river Kamueji. Being dissatisfied with this land, on account of its
sterility, he again turned to the eastward, and, crossing the Lui,
finally settled in the country still occupied by his successors, who
(according to Carvalho), were Kasanje, Ngonga ka mbanda, Kalunga ka
kilombo, Kasanje ka Kulachinga, etc.[427] Having settled down, Kinguri
invited his father-in-law to join him, and his forces were subsequently
increased by some discontented subjects of Queen Nzinga, led by Kalungu.
His followers, being thus a mixture of many tribes, the Jagas were
thenceforth chosen alternately among the three leading families of
Kulachinga (Kinguri’s wife), Ngongo and Kalunga.[428]

It is perfectly clear from this information, collected in Lunda and
Kasanje, that it throws no light upon the original Jaga, although it may
explain the origin of the Jaga still ruling at Kasanje.

The account given by Ladislaus Magyar[429] evidently refers to the same
leader. According to him, a Jaga Kanguri settled in the country now
occupied by the Sonyo three hundred years ago. His people were
cannibals, but the more intelligent among them saw that this practice
would ultimately lead to the destruction of the subject tribes upon whom
they depended for support, and they founded the secret society of the
Empacaceiros[430] for the suppression of cannibalism. Being worsted in a
civil war, they crossed the upper Kwanza into Bié, whilst Kanguri turned
to the north-west and settled in Kasanje.

Cavazzi seems to go further back, for he tells us that Zimbo, who was
the first chief of the Jaga (Aiacca), invaded Kongo, whilst one of his
chiefs, “Dongij” (Ndongo?), invaded Matamba, and that the bloody
“kichile,”[431] or customs, were introduced by Musasa the wife, and
Tembandumba the daughter, of this “Dongij.” The daughter married
Kulambo, whom she poisoned; he was succeeded by Kinguri, who was killed
during an invasion of Angola, Kulachimbo a great warrior, Kassanje, and
many others; the last of whom, Kassanje ka nkinguri, was baptised in
1657.[432]

I confess my inability to evolve the truth out of these conflicting
statements, and can only suppose that the title of “Jaga” was assumed by
the leaders of predatory hordes of very diverse origin, in order to
inspire terror in the hearts of peaceful tribes; just, as in more recent
times, certain tribes in East Africa pretend to be Zulu for a like
reason.


D. FRANCISCO AND D. JERONYMO D’ALMEIDA, 1592-1594.

The new Governor, D. Francisco d’Almeida, arrived at S. Paulo, on June
24th, 1592, accompanied by four hundred foot-soldiers and fifty African
horse, all picked men. Among the volunteers attending him were his
brother, D. Jeronymo, Luis Lopez de Sequeira and Balthasar Rebello de
Aragõa;[433] and perhaps also Domingos d’Abreu de Brito, who, in a
“Summario e descripção do Reino de Angola,” presented to King Philip I,
proposed an expedition across Africa, and the protection of the road to
be opened by a chain of forts.[434]

The new Governor, immediately on his arrival, found himself face to face
with a religious difficulty. The Jesuits, ever since the days of Dias,
expected to be consulted in all government business. They desired to be
appointed “preceptors” (amos) of the native chiefs, their aim being
evidently to create a theocratic government, such as they established
subsequently in Paraguay. They “used their spiritual influence to
induce the conquered sobas to refuse obedience to the civil powers;” and
when d’Almeida made use of the authority conferred upon him at Madrid in
order to crush this “nascent theocracy,” he was excommunicated.[435] He
certainly was unequal to cope with these domineering priests.
Disheartened, he threw up a charge to which he felt unequal, and took
ship for Brazil (April 8th, 1593).[436]

D. Jeronymo, at the urgent request of the Camara, took up the reins of
government, and being of a more conciliatory nature than his brother,
made peace with the Jesuits, and was thus able to take the field. He
started with four hundred men and twenty horses, and received the
submission of the sobas of Kisama, excepting the most powerful among
them. On reaching the salt mines of Ndemba[437] he founded a “presidio,”
and garrisoned it with one hundred men. On his way to the silver-mines
of Kambambe he was struck down with fever, and returned to Luandu,
leaving Balthasar d’Almeida de Sousa and Pedro Alvares Rebello in
command of the troops. They were imprudent, and on April 22nd, 1594,
fell into an ambush prepared for them by the powerful chief Kafuche
kabara (Cafuxe cambara). Only the captain-major, thanks to the swiftness
of his horse, and a few men, escaped this disaster.[438]


JOÃO FURTADO DE MENDONÇA, 1594-1602.

D. Jeronymo was on the point of hurrying up with reinforcements when
João Furtado de Mendonça arrived at Luandu (August 1st, 1594). He
brought with him, not only four hundred men with thirty horses, but also
twelve European women,[439] the first ever seen in Luandu, in whose
honour the town was decorated.

One of the most memorable events of his governorship was a campaign
which he conducted up the river Mbengu. Starting at the worst time of
the year (in March, 1496), he quickly lost two hundred men by fever.
Having brought up fresh recruits from Luandu, he avenged himself for a
disaster brought about by his own ignorance, by an exceptional severity
in his treatment of the “rebels,” many of whom were blown from guns.
This expedition kept the field for several years, and proceeded as far
as Ngazi (Ingasia), the chief of which district was called Ngombe—the
bullock.[440]

Meanwhile, João de Velloria,[441] the captain-major, had severely
punished the rebellious sobas of Lamba. Masanganu was once more
blockaded by the King Ngola (1597), until relieved by Balthasar Rebello
de Aragão. On again descending the Kwanza, he built a presidio in the
territory of the chief Muchima, in Kisama (1559).[442]


THE CAMPAIGN OF 1602-3.[443]

A new Governor, João Rodrigues Coutinho, arrived early in 1602. He was
acceptable to the Jesuits, and soon won the hearts of the people by his
liberality. He had been authorised by the King to bestow five habits of
the Order of Christ, dub five knights, and appoint thirty King’s
chamberlains (moços da camara). Seven years’ receipts of the export duty
on slaves were to be devoted to the building of forts at the salt mines
(Ndemba), Kambambe, and in Benguela.

Six months after his arrival, the Governor took the field against the
powerful chief Kafuche. His force was the most formidable that had ever
been at the disposal of a Governor, numbering no less than eight hundred
Portuguese. It was joined at Songo by a portion of the garrison of
Masanganu. Unhappily, the Governor died before coming in contact with
the enemy, and appointed Manuel Cerveira Pereira as his successor.
Battell calls this man an “upstart,” and he certainly had many enemies;
but he is well spoken of by the Jesuits, and was an able soldier. On
August 10th, 1603, he inflicted a crushing defeat upon Kafuche, at
Agoakaiongo,[444] on the very spot where, seven years before, the
Portuguese had met with a great disaster. Overcoming the stout
resistance of the chiefs of the Museke,[445] he arrived at the head of
the navigation of the Kwanza, and there, at Kambambe, he founded the
Presidio da N.S. do Rozario (1604). Having punished several of the
neighbouring chiefs, including Shila mbanza (Axilambanza), the
father-in-law of King Ngola, and left João de Araujo e Azevedo[446] in
command of the new presidio, Pereira returned to the coast.

S. Paulo de Luandu had by that time grown into a fine town, where
commerce flourished. Unfortunately for the lasting prosperity of the
colony, human beings constituted the most valuable article of export,
and the profits yielded by this slave trade attracted Dutch and French
interlopers, notwithstanding a royal decree of 1605, which excluded all
foreign vessels from the vast territories claimed by Portugal. In 1607
there were four “Presidios” or forts in the interior, namely Muchima,
Agoakaiongo, Masanganu, and Kambambe.[447]


D. MANUEL PEREIRA FORJAZ AND BENTO BANHA CARDOSO, 1607-15.

We have already stated that Manuel Cerveira Pereira had many enemies,
and when D. Manuel Pereira Forjaz, the new Governor, arrived towards the
end of 1607, very serious accusations must have been brought against the
former, for he was at once sent back to Lisbon. There, however, we are
bound to assume that he refuted these accusations, for otherwise it is
not likely that he would have been re-appointed Governor eight years
afterwards: unless, indeed, he had friends at court who profited by his
delinquencies. Forjaz himself showed to little advantage. He superseded
the commandant of Kambambe by one of his own creatures, and the fort
would certainly have been taken by the sobas who blockaded it, had not
Roque de S. Miguel and Rebello de Aragão hastened to its relief. Forjaz,
moreover, is accused of having imposed an annual tax upon the sobas,
yielding from twelve to thirteen thousand cruzados, which seem to have
found their way into his own pockets, and those of his favourites.[448]
When he suddenly died in his bed, on April 11th, 1611, the bishop and
the leading men called upon the captain-major, Bento Banha Cardoso, to
take charge of the government. Cardoso was a man of enterprise, and
successful in his undertakings, but cruel. In 1611 he defeated King
Ngola. The sobas Kilonga and Mbamba Tungu, who fell into his hands, were
beheaded, as were also several of their makotas. To avenge these
executions, fourteen sobas of Ngola and Matamba made an attack upon
Kambambe in the following year; and although that place was valiantly
defended until relieved, it took a year before order was restored in the
surrounding district. To keep these sobas in check, a fort (Mbaka) was
built on the river Lukala (1614), eight leagues from Masanganu.[449] In
Kisama, the territory of Nambua ngongo (Nabo angungo) was raided in the
same year.


AN ATTEMPT TO CROSS AFRICA.

Before proceeding with our account, there remains to be noticed a
serious attempt to cross the whole of Africa from the west coast to
“Manomotapa,” on the Zambezi, which was made by Balthasar Rebello de
Aragão, by order of D. Manuel Pereira Forjaz. Rebello de Aragão himself
furnishes a very short account of this expedition,[450] from which we
learn that he discovered copper and iron, and was told that there was
also silver. The natives bred cattle and cultivated the land, and they
told him of a lake, in lat. 16° S., giving rise to many rivers,
including the Nile. Unfortunately, when he had advanced one hundred and
forty leagues from the sea, and eighty beyond the place he started from
(Kambambe?), he was summoned back, as the fort just named was threatened
by King Ngola.[451]


THE CONQUEST OF BENGUELLA.

In 1615, Manuel Cerveira Pereira[452] returned to the scene of his
former labours, with special instructions to take possession of
Benguella, which for a considerable time past had been visited by
trading vessels. But before he started upon this enterprise, he ordered
his old comrade, João (or Paio?) de Araujo e Azevedo, to deal with
Kakulu Kabasa,[453] Mbumba (Bumba) a ndala, Kilomba kia tubia, and other
revolted chiefs in Angola, whilst he himself penetrated into the country
of the Kakulu Kahenda,[454] who had given offence by assisting fugitive
slaves and interfering with traders.

Having entrusted Antonio Gonçalves Pitta with the government of S.
Paulo, he left that place for the South, on April 11th, 1617, with four
vessels, a patacho, and one hundred soldiers.[455] Finding the site of
the old fort near the Terra das duas Puntas unsuitable, he continued his
voyage along the coast, until he came in sight of a “sombreiro,”
overlooking the Bahia das Vaccas;[456] and there he built the fort of S.
Filippe de Benguella, which in course of time developed into a city of
some importance. The sobas of Ndombe, of whose territory he had
possessed himself, naturally objected to the presence of these uninvited
strangers, but they were compelled to submit after five defeats. The
Jaga on the river Murombo likewise gave in, after three months’
fighting, but soon afterwards broke the peace, and was executed. The
chief Kalunga, at the mouth of the Koporolo (Kuporol), and the
cattle-keeping Mukimba in the neighbouring hills, also submitted. It
scarcely admits of doubt that Pereira, in the course of his many
military excursions, discovered copper, sulphur and salt,[457] but he
was to benefit little by these discoveries. His harsh conduct and greed
had estranged his people. Headed by a priest and by their officers, they
mutinied, put their leader on board a patacho, and shipped him off to S.
Paulo, where no notice was taken of his presence, the Governor being
absent at that time, because of a native war (1618).[458]

Pereira once more returned to Madrid, and having explained matters to
the satisfaction of the authorities, he was sent back, and again reached
S. Felippe de Benguella on August 8th, 1620. He sailed north to Sumba
mbela’s country, at the mouth of the river Kuvu. A couple of days inland
he discovered more copper, three quintals of which he took to S. Paulo.
He died in the midst of his labours. The _Catalogo_ credits him with
having gone inland as far as Kakonda.[459]


THE COLONIAL GOVERNMENT.

We have already learned that the native sobas were handed over to the
mercy of individual “conquistadores,” and Rebello de Aragão declares
that these sobas were being “robbed and maltreated.” They were required
by their masters to pay a tax in slaves, to furnish carriers, and render
all kinds of services,[460] without payment. In addition to this the
Governor, D. M. P. Forjaz, imposed upon them a poll-tax, which produced
from twelve to thirteen thousand cruzados (say £1,650[461]) a year.
Rebello de Aragão maintains that the native wars were largely due to
this pernicious system, which enriched the Governor and his officials,
whilst traders were made to suffer, and ceased to visit the “feiras”
because of the extortionate demands made upon them. At Mpinda nearly all
the “honest” trade had passed into the hands of the Dutch, because of
the monopoly conferred upon Portuguese slave-dealers. He declares that a
tax of 20 per cent. on the salt mined at Ndemba would pay all the
legitimate expenses of government; but that, although the export duty on
slaves yielded from five to six thousand cruzados, there had not yet
been built a decent house for the government offices.

Garcia Mendes Castellobranco, in a memoir[462] addressed to the King in
1620, is equally outspoken with regard to the treatment of the native
chiefs, who, he maintains, ought not to be taxed more heavily than at
the time when they were still subjects of a native king. He, too, refers
to the salt mines as a source of revenue, recommends the levying of a
toll at river crossings, and the expropriation of the uncultivated
territory around S. Paulo.[463]

Many of these abuses may, no doubt, be traced to the demoralising
influence of the slave-trade and the insufficient pay of the officials.
A slave costing £3 7_s._ in the interior (or nothing, if taken in the
course of one of the frequent slave raids) was sold for more than double
that sum on the coast; and whilst money could be made thus easily the
great natural resources of the country were neglected and the
population—which, on the arrival of the Portuguese, is said to have been
very considerable—shrank from year to year.[464]

The export duties on slaves and ivory were farmed out in 1607 to one
Duarte Dias Enriques for twenty million reis annually (about
£6,600).[465]

S. Paulo and Masanganu enjoyed municipal institutions at that time, but
all outside these cities was ruled by military adventurers. The Governor
(in 1607) was paid a salary of £267, but the other officials were
decidedly underpaid; and thus, almost of necessity, were driven to
increase their incomes by illegitimate means.[466]


THE WAR WITH NGOLA NZINGA MBANDI.

Luiz Mendes de Vasconcellos, the new Governor, arrived in November,
1617, and almost immediately found himself involved in a war with the
King of Ndongo. Nzinga mbandi ngola kiluanji,[467] a great tyrant, had
been “removed” by his indignant subjects shortly before the arrival of
the new Governor. He left behind him three daughters, one of whom, born
in 1582, became famous as Queen D. Anna de Souza Nzinga, and two sons,
one by a legitimate wife, the other by a slave woman. It was the latter,
Ngola nzinga mbandi,[468] whom his partisans raised to the throne, which
he reached through rivers of blood, among his victims being his own
brother, a son of his sister, and many of the trusted councillors of his
father. In 1618 the usurper took the field, intending to expel the
Portuguese, who seem to have given provocation by shifting the old
presidio of Mbaka (Ambaca) to a site much higher up the Lukala.[469] The
Governor, ably supported by his captain-major, Pedro de Souza Coelho,
not only defeated the King, but also captured his queen and many other
persons of consideration. The King sued for peace, but as he failed to
surrender the Portuguese whom he had taken prisoner, the war was renewed
in 1619. His allies fared no better than the King himself. His vice-king
of lower Ndongo, Ngola ari,[470] was compelled to pay a tribute of one
hundred slaves annually (in 1620); and while the Governor raided the
territories of Kahibalongo, Ndonga, and Kasa, his lieutenant, Lopo
Soares Laço, destroyed the kilombos of the sobas Ngunza a ngombe and
Bangu.

It had been recognised by this time that many of these punitive
expeditions were provoked by the lawless conduct of white traders,
mulattoes and negros calçados (that is, shoe-wearing negroes), who went
inland on slaving expeditions; and only Pumbeiros descalços, that is,
native agents or traders not yet sufficiently civilised to wear shoes,
should be permitted to do so in future.[471]

When King Ngola nzinga mbandi heard of the arrival of João Corrêa de
Souza, the new Governor, in September, 1621,[472] he at once sent his
sister to Luandu to arrange terms of peace. This woman, then about forty
years of age, proved an excellent diplomatist. When the Governor alluded
to the payment of tribute, she declared that tribute could only be
demanded from a conquered people, and the treaty ultimately signed was
one of reciprocity: fugitive slaves were to be surrendered, and
assistance to be given against common enemies.

Before this able ambassadress left Luandu, she was received into the
bosom of Holy Mother Church, being baptised as D. Anna de Souza (1622);
and on her return home she persuaded her brother to apply for the
services of a priest, or _Mamaganga_.[473] A priest was sent, but he was
a native, who had been ordained at Luandu, and one of the King’s own
subjects. The King looked upon this as an insult; he treated the priest
with great indignity, and once more invaded the Portuguese territory.
Thrice beaten, and deserted by his vassals, he fled to the island of
Ndangi,[474] in the Kwanza river, where he died of poison administered
by his own sister Nzinga, who thus avenged the murder of her son (1623).


QUEEN NZINGA, 1623-1636.

Nzinga at once renounced Christianity, and the bloody rites of the Jaga
were celebrated when she ascended her throne. She inaugurated her reign
by the murder of her brother’s son, of his adherents, and her supposed
enemies. Having reduced her own people to subjection, with the aid of
the Jaga, she declared war upon Portugal. D. Felippe de Souza Ngola ari,
the King of Ndongo recognised by the Portuguese, was at once ordered to
defend the frontier, and, if possible, to invade the territories of his
kinswoman. On consideration, however, it was thought best, in the
interest of trade, to avoid a serious conflict. An officer was sent to
the court of the Queen, offering to restore the lost provinces (and thus
sacrificing their vassal D. Felippe), on condition of her acknowledging
herself a vassal, and paying tribute. These conditions were haughtily
rejected, and the war began in earnest.

João de Araujo e Azevedo was placed at the head of the Portuguese
invading force.[475] He raided the country along the Lukala, and then
turned back upon the Kwanza, occupied the islands of Ukole and Kitaka,
and came up with the Queen’s camp at Ndangi Island. The Queen, having
consulted the spirit of her brother Ngola mbandi,[476] declined to risk
a battle, and fled into Hako (Oacco). The Portuguese followed in
pursuit, passing through Bemba, Malemba and Kipupa, and Little Ngangela
(Ganguella); came up with the Queen’s forces in the territory of soba
Matima (Mathemo), and inflicted a serious defeat upon them. Among the
prisoners taken were the Queen’s sisters, Kambe and Funji, and many
Makotas. The pursuit was continued as far as Kina grande in Ngangela, a
deep and difficult gorge, into which some of the soldiers and the
_guerra preta_ descended by means of ropes. When the Queen fled to the
kingdom of Songo, the Portuguese forces retired to the west (1627).[477]

The two princesses were taken to Luandu, where the Governor, Fernão de
Souza, lodged them in his own house. In baptism (1628), they received
the names of D. Barbara and D. Engracia.

The Portuguese had no sooner retired than Queen Nzinga returned to
Ndangi Island, and having been reinforced by several Jaga, she undertook
the conquest of Matamba. At Makaria ka matamba she took prisoner the
dowager-queen[478] Muongo Matamba, and her daughter. The mother was
branded as a slave, and died of grief; but the daughter was taken into
favour, and was baptised in 1667.

Having thus destroyed the ancient kingdom of Matamba, the Queen once
more invaded Portuguese territory, but she turned back when she heard
that the Jaga Kasanji was raiding her recent conquest, upon which he
claimed to have prior rights.

At the same time she interfered continually with the commerce of the
Portuguese with the interior; and it was only in 1636, when the
Governor, Francisco de Vasconcellos da Cunha, sent D. Gaspar Borgia and
Father Antonio Coelho on a mission to the Jaga in Little Ngangela, and
to the Queen at her Kabasa, in Umba, that peaceable relations were
established. The Queen, however, persistently refused to surrender her
claims to the provinces of Ndongo which had been occupied by the
Portuguese.


MINOR EVENTS, 1624-1641.

Punitive expeditions were frequent. In 1624 the Jaga Kasanji, who had
taken advantage of the conflicts between the Portuguese and Queen Nzinga
to rob Pumbeiros, was severely punished, and Captain Roque de Miguel
returned from this expedition with a large number of captives, who as a
matter of course, were sold into slavery. During the provisional
governorship of the bishop D. Simão de Mascarenhas[479] (1623-4), Lopo
Soares Laço meted out punishment to the Jagas Nzenza a ngombe and
Bangu-Bangu, and to the irrepressible Kafuche.[480] A few years later,
in 1631, the captain-major Antonio Bruto waged a successful war against
rebellious sobas, and more especially impressed the natives by his
victory over the dreaded Mbuila anduwa (Ambuila Dua), who held out for
six months in a rocky stronghold deemed impregnable. The invasion of
Kongo, in 1622, by order of Governor João Corrêa de Souza, who claimed
the surrender of Luandu Island and of all the copper mines, has already
been referred to (see p. 123).

Among the very few measures calculated to promote the material or moral
interests of the colony may be mentioned the establishment of the three
_feiras_, of Ndondo, Beja, and Lukamba, in 1625; the foundation of a
_Santa casa da misericordia_ (Poor-house and hospital) at S. Paulo de
Luandu, by the bishop D. Simão de Mascarenhas; the compulsory
cultivation of the banks of Mbengu (Bengo), when Luandu was threatened
with famine owing to the non-arrival of provision ships from Brazil, in
1629;[481] the reform of the administration of the Royal revenue, by
Fernão de Souza, in the same year; and the creation of a board of
revenue (_Junta da fazenda_), charged with the collection of the tithes
and of the tribute payable by the native chiefs, by Francisco de
Vasconcellos da Cunha, in 1638.

The affairs of the missions will be dealt with subsequently, in a
comprehensive manner, but a difficulty which arose in 1623 between the
Governor, João Corrêa de Souza, and the Jesuits, may be dealt mentioned
at once. In 1619, Gaspar Alvares,[482] a wealthy merchant of Luandu,
placed 20,000 cruzados at the service of the Fathers, in order that they
might found a seminary[483] for the education of twelve natives.
Subsequently he himself became a member of the Society of Loyola, and
devoted the whole of his fortune, amounting to 400,000 cruzados, to its
purposes. The Governor not unnaturally objected to this sudden
enrichment of a Society which had always been a thorn in the side of the
government. Alvares himself escaped to S. Salvador, but the Prefect of
the Jesuits and three Fathers were sent as prisoners to Lisbon, where
they were at once liberated; whilst the Governor himself, who arrived
soon afterwards, perhaps with the intention of justifying his hasty
proceedings, was thrown into prison, and died in the _limoeiro_ in 1626.


THE DUTCH IN ANGOLA.

When Philip of Spain seized upon the crown of Portugal in 1580, that
unfortunate country became at once involved in the troubles between
Spain and the United Netherlands. No sooner had the destruction of the
_Armada_, in 1588, enabled the Dutch to take the offensive on sea, than
they began to compete for a share in the trade of the Portuguese
possessions. The Dutch at first kept on the defensive, but in 1598 they
and the Portuguese came into hostile collision near the Ilha do
Principe; and all efforts to exclude these noxious heretics from sharing
in the trade of the Kongo proved futile, more especially as the natives
themselves preferred their Dutch visitors to the masterful
Portuguese.[484]

An armistice concluded in 1609 expired in 1621. The Dutch West-India
Company was founded in that very year, and thenceforth the Dutch
proceeded aggressively. In 1623 they burnt several _patachos_ off the
mouth of the Kwanza; in 1629 a Dutch squadron cruised during three
months off the coast of Benguella and captured four Portuguese
merchantmen, but failed to force their way into the harbour of Luandu.
In 1633 two Dutch vessels menaced S. Felippe de Benguella, but were
driven off by Lopo Soares Laço, after a stout fight, on November 15th.
In 1637, Bartholomeu de Vasconcellos da Cunha, the Governor’s brother,
captured a Dutch man-of-war of 24 guns. At that time the coast was being
regularly patrolled by Portuguese men-of-war,[485] and in 1638 the
foundations of the Fort S. Miguel were laid on the Morro de S. Paulo,
the original site of the city of S. Paulo.

When Portugal recovered her independence, in December, 1640, D. João IV
of Bragança at once sent Tristão de Mendoza Furtado to the Hague, with
instructions to demand a suspension of hostilities. The West-India
Company, which profited largely from a state of war, declared in favour
of a definite treaty of peace, but objected to the conclusion of an
armistice. The Portuguese envoy had no authority to sign such a treaty;
but after protracted negotiations an armistice for ten years was signed
on June 23rd, 1641, which was to take force outside Europe as soon as it
became known there.

Meantime, the directors of the West-Indian Company had instructed Count
John Moritz of Nassau to take advantage of the momentary weakness of
Portugal, after her war of liberation, to seize all he could before the
terms of the treaty became known.[486] Count Moritz, being desirous to
increase the supply of slaves for the plantations in Brazil, determined
to seize upon Luandu. A fleet of twenty-one vessels was at once fitted
out at Pernambuco, and placed under the command of Cornelis Cornelissen
Jol, surnamed Houtebeen, or “Wooden leg.” It was manned by nine hundred
sailors, and had on board two thousand troops, commanded by Jeems
Hindersen. This formidable armament left Pernambuco in June 30th, 1641,
sighted Cabo Negro on August 5th, and having captured the _Jesus Maria_,
on a voyage from Madeira, was by her piloted into the harbour of Luandu.
On August 24th the Dutch fleet unexpectedly appeared off S. Paulo,
surprising its inhabitants in the midst of their rejoicings at the
accession of the “liberator king.” S. Paulo, at that time, was a city of
twenty thousand inhabitants, including three thousand Portuguese; but
the Governor, Pedro Cezar de Menezes, though he was at the head of nine
hundred white troops, offered only a feeble resistance; and, accompanied
by many of the citizens, he withdrew to the river Mbengu, and
subsequently to Masanganu. The booty which fell into the hands of the
Dutch included thirty ships and ninety-eight cannon.

They lost no time in gaining the goodwill of the neighbouring sobas,
sent an embassy to the King of Kongo (see p. 125), and entertained
offers of alliance from Queen Nzinga. Aki musanu (Aca mochana) and Nambu
a ngongo (Nabo a ngongo), who had risen upon the Portuguese, were joined
by one hundred and fifty Dutchmen, and thus enabled to overcome their
enemies, whose leaders, André da Costa and João Vieira, they killed
(1642).

In the following year (1643) information was received that the truce had
been signed, but the Dutch director very naturally declined to surrender
the town. He agreed, however, to suspend hostilities. Pedro Cezar had
been instructed by his government to avail himself of the first
opportunity to recover the city,[487] and it was evidently with a view
to this eventuality that he established a camp on the river Mbengu. The
Dutch suspected his treacherous design, and at dawn on May 26th, 1643,
they surprised his force. Many Portuguese were killed (including Antonio
Bruto), while Pedro Cezar himself, Bartholomeu de Vasconcellos da Cunha,
and one hundred and eighty seven soldiers were taken prisoner. The
remainder escaped to Masanganu. The forces assembled there under the
captain-major, Antonio de Miranda, were unable to retrieve this
disaster, but the Governor, aided by friends, managed soon afterwards to
escape.

But though unequal to meeting the Dutch in the field, the Portuguese
were still able to enforce their authority upon the natives; and in 1645
Diogo Gomes de Morales led an expedition into Lubolo and Mbalundu
(Bailundo), and reduced the _kolombos_ of thirty “Jagas” to obedience.

In 1645, the Portuguese of Brazil, under the leadership of João
Fernandez Vieira, rose upon their Dutch oppressors, and in the same year
the Dutch occupied S. Felippe de Benguella. The garrison under Antonio
Teixeira de Mendonça, the captain-major, and Antonio Gomez de Gouvea, an
experienced _sertanejo_, or backwoodsman, retired northward along the
coast. On reaching Kikombo Bay, on July 27th, 1645, they met there
Francisco de Sotto-maior, just arrived from Rio de Janeiro with
reinforcements. By advice of Gomez, the troops and stores were landed in
Suto Bay, near Cabo ledo, and conducted by him in three detachments to
Masanganu, without the Dutch becoming aware of their arrival. The
Governor, Pedro Cezar de Menezes, returned by the same route to Rio,
taking with him a cargo of slaves.

These reinforcements arrived just in time to be employed against Queen
Nzinga. That lady had set a black and a white cock to fight each other,
and the defeat of the white cock was looked upon by her as a favourable
augury for venturing an attack upon Masanganu. But Gaspar Borges de
Madureira fell upon her before her forces had been concentrated
(January, 1646). She suffered a severe defeat, notwithstanding the
presence of Dutch auxiliaries. Her sisters once more fell into the hands
of the Portuguese. D. Engracia was strangled soon afterwards for an act
of treachery, whilst D. Barbara was kept in honourable captivity until
1657.[488]

Meanwhile the Dutch had made preparations for an advance up the Kwanza.
They had built Fort Mols at the mouth of the river, and another fort
higher up. The Governor, Francisco de Sotto-maior, having died of fever
in May, 1646, measures for a spirited defence were taken by the three
captains-major, Bartholomeu de Vasconcellos da Cunha, Antonio Teixeira
de Mendonça, and João Juzarte de Andrada. Muchima, which had been
furiously assaulted by the Dutch, was relieved by Diogo Gomes de
Morales. But in the following year the Portuguese suffered a reverse at
Kawala (Caoalla), and Masanganu itself was threatened by the combined
forces of Queen Nzinga, Kongo, and the Dutch.

However a saviour was at hand in this extremity. On August 12th, 1648,
Salvador Corrêa de Sá Benevides,[489] with nineteen vessels, having on
board nine hundred soldiers, cast anchor in the harbour of Luandu, and
summoned the Dutch to surrender within forty-eight hours. On their
refusal he landed his troops, and after a short bombardment of Fort S.
Miguel, to which the Dutch had withdrawn, early on August 15th he
delivered an assault, which cost him one hundred and sixty three men,
but led to the surrender of a garrison numbering one thousand one
hundred men, including French and German mercenaries. When these
prisoners had been joined by the three hundred Dutchmen who were with
Queen Nzinga, and the garrison of Benguella, which surrendered without a
blow, they were shipped off to Europe. The city, in memory of the event,
assumed the name of “S. Paulo da Assumpção de Loanda,” for it was on the
Day of Ascension of the Virgin Mary that a seven years’ captivity ended.
The anniversary of that event is celebrated to the present day by a
religious procession.


RESTORATION OF PORTUGUESE AUTHORITY.

No time was lost in restoring the authority of Portugal throughout the
colony. The King of Kongo was compelled to accept a treaty by which
Luandu Island and the whole of the country to the south of the Dande
river were unconditionally surrendered, and other advantages held out
(p. 128). Queen Nzinga, although she declined the overtures of Captain
Ruy Pegado[490] for a formal treaty, retired inland, and gave no trouble
for a number of years. As to the sobas of Lamba, Kisama, Lubolo, and the
Modiku islands, they were visited by punitive expeditions commanded by
Antonio Teixeira de Moraes, Diogo Mendes de Morales, Vicente Pegado de
Pontes, and Francisco de Aguiar.

Order having been restored, the Governor, Salvador Corrêa de Sá, caused
the ruined buildings to be repaired, and granted crownland to the
inhabitants for houses and gardens. In a very short time prosperity
returned, and the trade of Luandu was as flourishing as ever it had
been.[491]

But although the Portuguese were masters on shore, the Dutch, and
occasionally also French or English “pirates” frequented the coast. In
1650 Alvaro d’Aguiar defeated five of these interlopers, who had made
prizes of two ships on a voyage from Brazil; in 1651 João Duque was
killed in an action with Dutch men-of-war; in 1652 João de Araujo drove
away the Dutch from Mpinda and Luangu; in 1658 the same officer made a
prize of a English slaver off Benguella. A second English slaver was
captured in 1659 by João Cardoso, who also captured a Dutch vessel off
the Kongo in 1661. In 1662 the definite treaty of peace between Portugal
and Holland was signed, and “pirates” are no longer heard of; although
Dutch vessels provided with passes, or favoured by the Governors, seem
to have been admitted to Portuguese ports.


QUEEN NZINGA AND HER SUCCESSORS.

Queen Nzinga, after the return of her General from a raid on the
territory of Mbuila (Imbuille), in 1655, whence he brought a miraculous
crucifix, felt troubled in her conscience; and on consulting the spirits
of five of her ancestors (see p. 166), she learned, to her no small
terror, that they were suffering eternal torments, which she could only
escape by once more embracing the Christian faith, and seeking the
friendship of the Portuguese.[492] Upon this advice she acted. The
negotiations for a treaty were conducted by Captain Manuel Freis Peixoto
and the Capuchin friar Antonio of Gaeta, who came to her Court for that
purpose in 1657. Her sister, D. Barbara, was restored to her on payment
of a ransom of two hundred slaves,[493] and the river Lukala was
thenceforth to form the boundary between the Queen’s dominions and those
of the Portuguese. No tribute was to be paid by her. Friar Antonio had
the honour of once more baptising this ancient lady, then seventy-five
years of age, and also of marrying her, legitimately, to a slave-youth,
Don Salvatore; while her sister, D. Barbara, allied herself unto D.
Antonio Carrasco Nzinga a mona, a foster-brother of the Queen, and the
General-in-Chief of her armies. A church, S. Maria de Matamba, was
specially built for these interesting ceremonies. This remarkable woman
died on December 17th, 1663, after Father Cavazzi had administered to
her the last consolations of religion, and was buried in the church of
St. Anna, which had been built within the precincts of the Royal palace.

When D. Barbara died, on March 24th, 1666, her husband, D. Antonio
Carrasco Nzinga a mona, killed the legitimate heir, D. João Guterres
Ngola kanini, and usurped the throne, but was himself slain in a battle
against D. Francisco Guterres Ngola kanini, in 1680. The conqueror then
attacked the allies of the Portuguese, robbed the pumbeiros, and
beheaded the Jaga Kasanji (1682).[494] Luiz Lopez de Sequeira at once
took the field against him with five hundred and thirty infantry,
thirty-seven horse, and ten thousand _empacaceiros_, and defeated him at
Katole, a place within three days of the Royal _kabasa_. The King
himself lost his life, but so did the leader of the Portuguese[495] and
Vasco de Mello da Cunha. João Antonio de Brito, who took the command
after his leader’s death, remained encamped for thirty days on the site
of the battle; and finding that the enemies did not return, retired to
Mbaka; from which we may judge that the Portuguese, too, suffered heavy
losses. D. Veronica (or Victoria) Guterres, the sister of the late King,
sued for peace, which was readily granted. Fresh complications
threatened in 1689, when the Queen was charged—falsely, it appears—with
having stirred up the soba Kahenda to rebel against his Portuguese
masters; but matters were arranged through the intervention of bishop D.
João Franco de Oliveira. No further trouble seems to have occurred with
the successors of Queen Nzinga until 1744, when the Queen[496] provoked
a war by killing a white trader and robbing pumbeiros: the result of
which was the capture of her capital by Bartholomeu Duarte de Sequeira,
and the cession of the Kinalunga Islands to Portugal.[497]


THE LAST OF THE KINGS OF NDONGO, 1671.

We have seen that D. João de Souza Ngola ari had been installed as the
first King of Ndongo, recognised by the Portuguese (see p. 164), about
1627, and had been succeeded by D. Filippe de Souza, who died in 1660,
and by João II. The hope that this tributary would prove a staunch ally
of the Portuguese was not to be realised, for immediately after the
disastrous campaign against Sonyo (see p. 131), in 1670, D. João Ngola
ari raised the standard of rebellion, and invaded the district of Mbaka.
The Governor, Francisco de Tavora,[498] a future Viceroy of India, who
on account of his youth (he was only 23 years of age) and supposed
prudence had been nick-named _o menino prudente_, despatched his
captain-major, Luiz Lopes de Sequeira, to reduce the rebel to obedience.
Ngola ari met with a defeat on the river Luchilu, close to the Pedras of
Pungu a ndongo, which were considered impregnable. Yet, on a dark night,
on November 18th, 1671, Manuel Cortes, the leader of the _guerra preta_,
surprised this rocky stronghold. The King himself was taken, and
beheaded as a traitor. Thenceforth there was no further need for
punitive expeditions on a large scale.[499]


RELATIONS WITH KONGO.

No sooner had the Portuguese regained possession of S. Paulo than the
King of Kongo was called to account for having sided with the Dutch and
favoured the operations of “foreign” Capuchins. A threatened invasion of
his kingdom (1649) speedily led to the conclusion of a treaty of peace
(see p. 126). But as the supposed gold and silver mines were not ceded,
as promised, the Portuguese once more invaded the country, and in the
bloody battle of Ulanga, in 1666, the King lost his life and crown (p.
129). From that time to the close of the century anarchy reigned in
Kongo. The disastrous expedition against Sonyo in 1670 (see p. 131) was
partly undertaken in order to support one of the many rival kings of
that period.


MINOR PUNITIVE EXPEDITIONS, 1658-95.

João Fernandes Vieira, who had gained fame as the leader of the
Portuguese patriots in Brazil, where the capture of Pernambuco had won
him the surname of _o hero de nossa edade_, arrived as Governor on April
18th, 1658, and before the close of the year, a serious rebellion broke
out in Upper Ngulungu. The captain-major, Bartholomeu de Vasconcellos,
took the field, and compelled Ngolome a kayitu (Golome Acaita), to
surrender his rocky stronghold after a siege of four months; Tanga a
ngongo submitted quietly, but Kiluanji kia kanga (Quiloange Acango),
faced the Portuguese four times, and then retired inland without
yielding submission.

A second expedition, in the same year, traversed the districts to the
south of the Kwanza.[500] It started from Masanganu, and having crossed
the Kwanza into Hako was joined by Ngunza mbambe;[501] it entered the
district of Kabeza, where the Jaga of Rimba brought further
reinforcements. Jaga Ngonga ka anga, the chief of Nsela (Shella), on the
river Kuvu, surrendered his capital, Kangunza, by the advice of his
diviners, without striking a blow, and submitted to be baptised. The
expedition then returned to Mbaka by way of the river Gango and Tamba;
whilst Cavazzi, who accompanied it as chaplain, took a more direct road
through Kabeza.

After the great victory over the King of Kongo in 1666 (see p. 130), a
detachment under Antonio da Silva was sent into the territory of the
Ndembu Mutemu Kingengo, whilst another, under Diogo Gomes Morales,
raided the villages of Nambua nongo, these chiefs having aided the
defeated King.

Kisama, at all times an unruly district, and even now virtually
independent, though situated on the sea and within easy reach of Luandu,
has repeatedly given trouble to the Portuguese. In 1672, the sobas of
the district unsuccessfully assaulted the fort at Muchima. In 1686 they
blockaded that fort, until relieved by João de Figueiredo e Souza. In
1689, the sobas Kimone kia sanga and Muchima interfered with the free
navigation of the Kwanza, and were punished by the Portuguese leader
just named; and in 1695, the rebellion of the soba Katala brought into
the field the captain-major, Manuel de Magalhães Leitão.

A rebellion in Lubolo, in 1677, was suppressed by Luiz Lopez de
Sequeira. The soba Ngunga mbambe was killed, and his allies, Sakeda,
Ngola kitumba, and Ngola Kabuku, were severely punished.

Far more serious was an expedition which the Governor, Gonçalo da Costa
de Alcaçova Carneiro de Menezes, despatched against the ndembu Mbuilu
(Ambuilla), who had expelled the Portuguese residents, robbed the
Pumbeiros, and burnt the church. João de Figueireda e Souza, a trusted
officer, was given the command; and notwithstanding that the garrison of
Masanganu mutinied and refused to join him, he mustered, on May 25th,
1682, a formidable force of six hundred musketeers, forty-two horse, and
a _guerra preta_ of forty thousand men, with two field guns.
Unfortunately, he lost precious time by lingering two months at
Kamolembe, where many of his people died; and when at last ready to
start, he heard that Mbuila had been reinforced by two “armies” sent to
his aid by King Manuel of Kongo[502] and Queen Nzinga, and lost his
head. Fortunately for the Portuguese a stroke of paralysis carried off
this pusillanimous leader, and his place was taken by Pascoal Rodrigues,
a man of much energy, who marched straight upon the mbanza of Mbuilu,
and there achieved a great victory. Mbuilu fled to his neighbour and
ally Ndamba (Dambe). The number of prisoners taken was so great that it
was feared they might endanger the safety of their captors, and they
were mercilessly beheaded, a nephew of Mbuilu alone being sent a
prisoner to Luandu.[503]

When Pascaol Rodrigues fell ill, the Governor appointed João Baptista de
Maia to succeed him. The troops passed the rainy season in barracks. On
the return of fine weather, Mbuilu was pursued into the territory of
Ndamba and killed. The mbanzas and over one hundred and fifty libatas
were burnt. The Ndembu Kabanda, a partisan of Mbuilu, was pursued by
the sergeant-major, Lourenço de Barros Morim, and the leader of the
_guerra preta_, Gonçalo Borges de Barros, and killed with many of his
people. Another ndembu having been installed, and sworn allegiance to
the King of Portugal, the army returned to Mbaka, and thence to Lembo
near Masanganu. The victorious troops were refused admission into the
latter, the garrison of which had mutinied. It was only after the
Governor had promised a pardon to the offenders, with the exception of
the leaders, that order was restored (1693).


BENGUELLA.

S. Filippe de Benguella was founded in 1617 by Manuel Cerveira Pereira,
and in 1661 its fortifications were rebuilt by Gaspar de Almeida Silva,
whilst Manuel de Tovar Froes fought the neighbouring sobas. A further
step in advance was taken in 1682, when the sergeant-major, Pedro da
Silva, founded the presidio of Kakonda a velha, in the territory of the
soba Bongo. Two years later, in 1684, this presidio was surprised by
Bongo, and Manuel da Rocha Soares, its commandant, was killed. Carlos de
Lacerda, who was despatched to avenge this outrage, being compelled to
fall back before superior forces, João Bráz de Goes, the captain-major
of Benguella, himself took the field. The Jaga, deserted by his people,
sought refuge with Ngola njimbu (Golla Gimbo), but was pursued and
captured,[504] and the present presidio was built eighty miles further
inland (1685), in the territory of the soba Kitata. An attempt made by
the soba of Huambo (Hiamba), in 1698, to expel the Portuguese was
frustrated by Antonio de Faria, its commandant. A more formidable attack
by the neighbouring sobas, in 1718, proved equally ineffectual. The
Portuguese had thus gained an advanced post nearly one hundred and
fifty miles from the coast, the possession of which opened up to them
fresh sources for the supply of slaves, and contributed not a little to
the growing prosperity of S. Filippe de Benguella.


ECCLESIASTICAL AFFAIRS.

The Jesuits were the earliest missionaries in Angola; but it would be in
vain to look to them for any precise geographical or historical
information, such as is furnished by members of the Society established
in other parts of the world. They confined their activity to the seat of
Government and its immediate vicinity, and Portuguese authors are severe
upon their love of power and covetousness. Their relations with the
Governors were on many occasions strained, but it cannot be asserted
that the Jesuit Fathers were in every instance in the wrong.[505] As an
illustration of their masterfulness, the following incident may serve.
In 1661, the Governor, João Fernandez Vieira, very properly ordered that
pigs, should no longer be allowed to run about the streets of the
capital. The Jesuits did not deign to take the slightest notice of this
order; and when several of their slaves were arrested for disregarding
it, they protested against this exercise of authority, and actually
excommunicated the Governor. But the Governor was not to be frightened.
He reported the case to his King, D. Affonso VI, and the King in a Royal
rescript of December 9th, 1666, severely reproved the Jesuits for their
insolence; and threatened, in case of similar conduct, to deprive them
of the crown lands, and to take other legal measures against them.

Franciscans (Tertiaries of the Order of St. Joseph) followed the Jesuits
in 1604. Then came the Capuchins, for the most part Italians and
Castilians, in 1651; and lastly barefooted Carmelites (Religiozos de S.
Thereza). Of all these friars the Italian Capuchins alone appear to have
done good work; and to members of their Order, and especially to
Giovanni Antonio Cavazzi, of Montecuccoli, Antonio Laudati, of Gaeta,
and Antonio Zucchelli, of Gradisco, we are indebted for much useful
information regarding the people among whom they laboured. Many of the
other friars seem to have been men whom their superiors in Europe were
glad to part with; and the same may be said with reference to the
secular clergy.

A report of the ecclesiastical affairs of Angola and Kongo, drawn up in
1694 by Gonçalo de Alcaçova Carneiro Carvalho da Costa de Menezes, by
order of the Governor, presents us with a deplorable picture of the
state of affairs in that year. Throughout the country there were only
thirty-six friars[506] and twenty-nine secular clergy; and of these as
many as twenty-nine had taken up their quarters in the capital. Of fifty
churches and chapels, many were without priests, and had fallen into
ruins. The village missions (missões das Sanzalas) had long been given
up, and many baptised negroes had returned to the ancient superstitions.
The author proposes the institution of a court of clerics, in order that
all lapses of this kind might be punished in accordance with the “sacred
canons.” A board of missions (Junta das missões), which had been created
in 1693, and richly endowed,[507] allowed things to drift. Lopes de
Lima[508] ascribes the failure of the Christian missions, first, to the
small number of missionaries and priests; secondly, to the corruption of
the clergy; and thirdly, to the slave-trade.


MEASURES OF ADMINISTRATION.

João Fernandez Vieira must be credited with the first serious attempt to
organise the military forces of the country (1660), by raising a
regiment, or _terço_, of infantry, for Luandu, and a company for each
presidio. These “regulars” were to be supported by the _guerra preta_,
or _empacaceiros_. A company of cavalry was added to the regular troops
in 1672; and the exemption from every kind of military service conferred
upon the inhabitants of Luandu since 1660 was partly abolished in 1695,
and orders given for the organisation of a _terço_ of _ordenanças_
(militia) for Luandu, and of seventeen companies for the districts and
presidios. The fortifications of Luandu had been much improved since the
expulsion of the Dutch. The fort of S. Miguel, at Luandu, which was
begun in 1638, had been completed by D. João de Lencastre in 1689; and
at the close of the century there existed forts, sufficiently strong to
resist native attack, at Muchima, Masanganu, Kambambe, Pungu a ndonga,
Mbaka, S. Filippe de Benguella, and Kakonda.

The only measure bearing upon the civil administration of the country
seems to have been the publication of a _Regimento_ for the guidance of
officers of revenue and of justice, in 1675. At the same time, an extra
export-duty of ten testões[509] was ordered to be paid on every slave,
the proceeds to go towards the dowry of Queen Catherine, the consort of
Charles II of England.

The introduction of copper coins (_makutas_) into Luandu, in 1624,
caused much dissatisfaction, and actually led to a mutiny of the troops,
who not unnaturally felt agrieved at being expected to accept 200 reis
in copper as an equivalent of a native cloth, up to that time valued at
700 reis.[510] The mutiny was suppressed, and the five ringleaders were
executed. In the interior of the country, the ancient currency remained
in force, larger amounts being paid in merchandise (_fazenda de lei_),
whilst smaller sums were paid in _zimbos_ (njimbu) or cowries,
_libongos_ (mbongo, plural jimbongo), or square pieces of native cloth,
or blocks of rock-salt.

The only attempt at geographical exploration was that of José de Roza,
who left Masanganu in 1678, for the lower Zambezi, but turned back after
only a few days’ journey, owing to the hostility of the natives.


At the end of the seventeenth century, Portugal held sway over a
territory of over fifty thousand square miles; she maintained fortified
posts far inland; her traders had penetrated as far as the upper Kwanza;
and on the coast she held the prosperous cities of S. Paulo de Luandu
and S. Filippe de Benguella. But this prosperity depended almost
exclusively upon the slave trade. Scarcely any attempt had been made to
develop the great natural resources of the country, and even the food of
the inhabitants was still largely supplied by the Brazils. The colonists
introduced included too large a criminal element; the Government
officials were more intent upon realising large fortunes[511] than
permanently benefiting the country they had been sent to rule; and even
among the preachers of the gospel were men quite unfit to hold the
office which they filled. And this deplorable state of affairs continued
long beyond the period with which we have dealt. Lopes de Lima[512]
calls D. Francisco Innocencio de Sousa Coutinho, who was appointed in
1764, the “first Governor who undertook to civilise this semi-barbarous
colony; and who during his rule of eight years and a-half, did more in
that sense than all his predecessors had ever thought of.” Up to his
time, “Governors, captains, magistrates, men of the church and the
cloister” were only intent upon dividing the spoils of office, and acted
in the most scandalous manner.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




APPENDIX V.

A LIST OF THE GOVERNORS OF ANGOLA, 1575-1702.

_The date of arrival and departure are given, unless stated otherwise._


   1. Paulo Dias de Novaes, February, 1575; October,
   1589.

   2.[513] Luiz Serrão, captain-major, 1589-91.

   3.[513] André Ferreira Pereira, 1591, to June, 1592.

   4. D. Francisco d’Almeida, June 24th, 1592, to April 8th,
   1593.

   5.[513] D. Jeronymo d’Almeida, 1593-4.

   6. João Furtado de Mendonça, August 1st, 1594, to 1602.

   7. João Rodrigues Coutinho, appointed January 23rd,
   1601; arrived in 1602.

   8[513]. Manuel Cerveira Pereira, 1603-7.

   9. D. Manuel Pereira Forjaz, end of 1607; died April
   11th, 1611.

   10.[513] Bento Banha Cardoso, captain-major, elected April
   15th, 1611 to 1615.

   11. Manuel Cerveira Pereira, second term of office,
   1615 to 1617.

   12. Luiz Mendes de Vasconcellos, November, 1617, to
   1621.

   13. João Corrêa de Souza, September, 1621; departed
   1623.

   14[[513]. Pedro de Souza Coelho, captain-major, during five
   months, 1623.

   15.[513] D. Simão de Mascarenhas, Bishop of Kongo and
   Angola, 1623 to 1624.

   16. Fernão de Souza, appointed October 21st, 1623;
   in possession February, 1624, to 1630.

   17. D. Manuel Pereira Coutinho, 1630 to 1634.

   18. Francisco de Vasconcellos da Cunha, 1634 to 1639.

   19. Pedro Cezar de Menezes, 1639 to 1645.

   20. Francisco de Sotto-maior, September, 1645, to May,
   1646.

   21[513]. Bartholomeu de Vasconcellos da Cunha, Antonio
   Texeira de Mendonça, and João Juzarte de Andrada, the
   captains-major, 1646 to 1648.

   22. Salvador Corrêa de Sá Benevides, August, 1648 to
   1651.

   23. Rodrigo de Miranda Henriques, October, 1651;
   died 1653.

   24.[513] Bartholomeu de Vasconcellos da Cunha, captain-major,
   1653 to 1655.

   25. Luiz Martins de Souza Chichorro, October, 1655 to
   1658.

   He was killed in an engagement with a Dutch corsair, on
   the voyage to Brazil.

   26. João Fernandez Vieira, 1658 to 1661.

   27. André Vidal de Negreiros, May 10th 1661, to
   August, 1666.

   28. Tristão da Cunha, August, 1666, to January, 1667;
   when the people compelled him to depart in the vessel in
   which he had come.

   29.[513] Antonio de Araujo e Azevedo, president of the
   Camara of Luandu, 1667 to 1669.

   30. Francisco de Tavora, August 26th, 1669, to 1676.

   31. Ayres de Saldanha de Menezes e Souza, August
   25th, 1676, to 1680.

   32. João da Silva e Souza, September 11th, 1680, to 1684.

   33. Luiz Lobo da Silva, September 12th, 1684, to 1688.

   34. D. João de Lencastre, September 8th, 1688, to 1691.

   35. Gonçalo da Costa de Alcaçova Carneiro de Menezes,
   November 1st, 1691, to 1694.

   36. Henrique Jaques de Magalhães, November 3rd,
   1694, to 1697.

   37. Luiz Cezar de Menezes, November 9th, 1697, to 1700.

   38. Bernardo de Tavora Souza Tavares, September 5th,
   1700, to 1702.

[Illustration: MAP OF KONGO & ANGOLA

illustrating their HISTORY TO THE CLOSE OF THE 17^{TH} CENTURY]


[Illustration: MAP OF NDONGO (ANGOLA)]




FOOTNOTES:


[1] Battell tells us (p. 7) that he and Thomas Turner were transported
to Angola in the same vessel (1590). Purchas conferred with Turner after
he had returned to England, and obtained from him an account of his
travels, he having “lived the best part of two years in Brazil” (_lib._
vi, c. 8). Elsewhere we learn that he “had also been in Angola” (see p.
71).

This apparently straightforward information is quite irreconcilable with
what we are told by Knivet; for Knivet says he met Turner at Pernambuco
(about 1598); that he advised him to go to Angola; that Turner acted on
this advice, and “made great profit of his merchandise, for which he
thanked me when we met in England.” Concerning Knivet, see _post_, p.
89.

[2] This description does not, of course, apply to his “Voyage to the
East Indies,” but it does to his “Description of the whole Coast of
Guinea, Manicongo, Angola, etc.”

[3] His _Schifffarten_ was first published at Basel in 1624. On this
traveller, see an _Abhandlung_ by D. G. Henning (Basel, 1900), who
rather absurdly calls him the “first German scientific traveller in
Africa.”

[4] _Vijf verscheyde Journalen ... Amsterdam [1620]._

[5] Subsequent editions appeared in 1614, 1617, and 1626.

[6] Battell’s narrative was reprinted in Astley’s _New General
Collection of Voyages_, vol. iii (1746), and Pinkerton’s _Collection_,
vol. xvi (1813). Translations or abstracts were published in the
_Collections_ of Pieter van der Aa (Leiden, 1706-07); of Gottfried
(Leiden, 1706-26); of Prévôt (Paris, 1726-74); in the _Allgemeine
Historie der Reisen_ (Leipzig, 1747-77), in the _Historische
Beschrijving der Reisen_ (The Hague, 1747-67), and by Walckenaer (Paris,
1826-31).

[7] See “The Lake Region of Central Africa: a Contribution to the
History of African Cartography,” by E. G. Ravenstein (_Scottish Geogr.
Mag._, 1891).

[8] Among documents, the publication of which seems desirable are Don G.
Abreu de Brito’s _Summario e Descripção do Reino de Angola_, 1592; and
Cadornega’s _Historia_ (at least, in abstract).

[9] Abraham Cocke had been in the Brazils before this voyage, for
we learn from Purchas (bk. vi, Pt. IV, London, 1625, p. 1141) that
George, Earl of Cumberland, who had left Gravesend on June 26, 1586,
with three ships and a pinnace, fell in, on January 10, 1587, with a
Portuguese vessel, a little short of the River Plate, and in her found
“Abraham Cock, of Leigh, near London,” whom he brought home with him.

[10] Pinnace: formerly applied to any small vessel, usually
schooner-rigged; at present limited to a large rowing-boat carried by
great ships.

[11] Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Canary Islands.

[12] Light-horseman: a pinnace, a rowing-boat.

[13] Vessels bound for Brazil usually cross the Equator about long. 22°
W. If Captain Cock really intended to go direct to Brazil, he had no
business at Cabo das Palmas. Can his voyage to S. Thomé really have
been, as he says, an involuntary deviation from his direct course?

[14] The island of S. Thomé was discovered by the Portuguese about 1472,
and received its first settlers in 1486. In the course of the sixteenth
century it suffered much from the depredations of French, English, and
Dutch pirates, as also (1574) from a revolt headed by the Angolares:
that is, the descendants of Angolan slaves who had swum ashore when the
vessel which carried them was wrecked, in 1544, on the Sette Pedras, and
had fled to the woods near. The Fortaleza de S. Sebastião was intended
to defend the capital against piratical attacks. It was completed in
1575; but the Dutch, under Admiral Van der Dam, nevertheless sacked the
city in 1600. Only four years before the author’s arrival, in 1485, the
city had been destroyed by fire.

[15] The Ilhéo das Rôlas (Turtle-dove Island) lies about a mile off the
southern extremity of S. Thomé. It is of volcanic origin, rises to a
considerable height, and is densely wooded. The inhabitants (about 100)
are dependent upon the rain for their drinking water, for there are no
springs. The chief articles of export are cacao and coffee.

[16] That is, the Povoação of early days, on the Bahia de Anna de
Chaves, incorporated in 1535 as the Cidade de S. Thomé.

[17] Cabo de Lopo Gonçalves, thus named after its discoverer, Cape Lopez
of our charts, in lat 0° 36´ S.

[18] The “dolphin” of British sailors is the _doirada_, or gilthead, of
the Portuguese (_Coryphaena hippurus_), and delights to swim in the
shadow of the vessel.

[19] The Ilha Grande lies in lat. 23° 10´ S., sixty miles to the west of
Rio de Janeiro. It is about seventeen miles in length, lofty, and
shelters a safe bay, surrounded with magnificent scenery.

[20] S. Salvador, on the Bahia de todos os Santos, lat. 13° S.

[21] That is, one of the “degradados” or convicts, whom it is even now
customary to banish to the Colonies.

[22] The Isla de Lobos Marinos (Seal Island) lies off Maldonado Point,
and forms a conspicuous landmark for vessels approaching the Rio de la
Plata.

[23] The Seal (_phoca vitulina_, Linn.) and Otary (_Otaria jubata_,
Desm.) have become very rare. The morse or walrus is found only in the
Northern hemisphere.

[24] These south-westerly winds are known as _Pamperos_. They are more
frequent in winter. In summer they blow with greater force, but
generally cease sooner.

[25] Isla Verde can be no other than Flores, a small island further west
than the Isla de Lobos.

[26] The Ilha de São Sebastião, in lat. 23° 50´ S.

[27] Espirito Santo, a town on the coast of Brazil, in lat. 20° 20´ S.

[28] This capture must have happened at the end of 1589, or, at latest,
early in 1590, yet Thomas Knivet, who only left England with Cavendish
in August 1591, gives an account of the capture of five Englishmen
(Purchas iv, 1625, p. 1220) which at the first glance seems to be a
different version of this very incident. Knivet professes to have been
at Rio de Janeiro at the time, two months after his return from Angola
in 1598. He says: “There came a small man-of-war to Great Island [Ilha
Grande, 70 miles west of Rio]; the captain’s name was _Abram Cocke_; he
lay in wait for the ships on the River of Plate, and had taken them if
it had not been for five of his men that ran away with his boat that
discovered his being there; for within a sevennight after he was gone
three caravels came within the same road where he was. These five men
were taken by a Friar who came from S. Vincent, and were brought to the
river of Janeiro. I being at this time in some account with the Governor
favoured them as well as I could.” In the further course of his
narrative Knivet names two of these five men, namely, _Richard Heixt_
and _Thomas Cooper_. _Thomas Turner_ is referred to elsewhere, but not
under circumstances which would lead one to assume that he was one of
the five. Battell is not mentioned at all.

Are we to suppose, then, that Captain Cocke _was_ heard of once more,
and that in 1599 he lost five men on the Ilha Grande, just as nine years
before he had lost five on the island of San Sebastian? Such a
coincidence is possible, but most improbable.

[29] This Thomas Turner, or Torner, subsequently returned to England,
and Purchas had speech with him.

[30] São Paulo de Loanda, the capital of Angola, 8° 48´ S.

[31] The Kwanza, the most important river of Angola, navigable from the
sea as far as the rapids of Cambambe. The “town of garrison” was
Masanganu, founded in 1582.

[32] João Furtado de Mendonça only arrived at Loanda on August 1, 1594.
He remained Governor until early in 1602, when he was succeeded by João
Rodriguez Coutinho.

[33] That is, the two incisors of the upper jaw, commonly known as
“tusks.”

[34] Battell’s “wheat” is _masa-mamputo_, or zea mayz. Elsewhere he
speaks of “Guinea wheat,” and this might be sorghum or millet; but as he
says that the natives call the grain “mas impoto,” there can be no doubt
about its identity with _masa-mamputo_, the grão de Portugal, or maize,
which, according to Ficalho, was imported from America.

[35] The River of Congo is known to the natives as “Nzadi,” or “Nzari,”
which merely signifies “great river “(Bentley’s _Dictionary of the Congo
Language_). For Isle de Calabes we ought perhaps to read Ilha das
Calabaças (Calabash Island). The position of this island I am unable to
determine. Perhaps it is the same as an Ilheo dos Cavallos Marinhos
(Hippopotamus Island), described by Pimentel as lying within the Cabo do
Padrão, Congo mouth. Duarte Lopez (_A Report of the Kingdom of Congo,
drawn out of the Writings of Duarte Lopez_, by F. Pigafetta, 1591.
Translated by Margareta Hutchinson. London, 1881) says it was the first
island met with on entering the Zaire, and that, although small, the
Portuguese had a town upon it.

[36] Palm cloth is made from the fronds of the _ntera_, or fan palm
(_Hyphæne Guineensis_).

[37] Dapper (_Africa_, Amsterdam, 1670, p. 520) tells us that the hairs
from an elephant’s tail were highly valued by the natives, who wove them
into necklaces and girdles; fifty of these hairs or bristles were worth
1000 reis! Duarte Lopez (_Kingdom of Congo_, London, 1881, p. 46) says
that one such tail was equal in value to two or three slaves, and that
native hunters followed the elephants up narrow and steep defiles, and
there cut off the desired spoils. Battell himself (see p. 58) bought
20,000 (hairs) which he sold to the Portugals for thirty slaves.

[38] The Egyptians were, of course, Ciganos, or gypsies. They appeared
in Portugal in the beginning of the sixteenth century. A Royal order of
1526 ordered them to leave the kingdom, but appears to have had no more
effect than a law of 1538, which, on account of the thefts of which they
were accused, and their sorceries, threatened them with a flogging and
the confiscation of their goods, if caught within the kingdom. This law
was re-enacted in 1557, when the galleys were substituted for a
flogging; and in 1592 a still more severe law was enacted, which
threatened with death all those who should not quit the kingdom within
four months. Battel’s associates were, no doubt, gipsies who had been
sent as convicts to Angola (see F. A. Coelho, _Os Ciganos de Portugal_,
Lisbon, 1892).

The Moriscoes are the Moors of Morocco. Early Portuguese writers refer
to the men who had fought in Africa (Morocco) as Africanos, and
Battell’s Moriscoes were in all probability Moorish prisoners of war, or
Moors expelled from Portugal.

[39] Mani or Muene, lord and even king, as Muene Putu, King of Portugal,
but also applied to a mere village chief. The _Cabech_ of Battell must
have resided somewhere about Muchima, but on the right bank of the
Coanza.

[40] Battell’s Guinea wheat is _masa-mamputo_, or _grão de Portugal_,
the zea mayz of botanists, which, according to Candolle and Ficalho, was
introduced from America.

[41] Kasanza’s lake can confidently be identified with the Lalama Lake
of modern maps, south of the Rio Bengo, thirty-six miles due east of S.
Paulo de Loanda. _Ka_ is a diminitive; _nsanza_ means village.

[42] The river of Bengo or Nzenza, which enters the sea ten miles
north-east of Loanda.

[43] Mani Bangono’s district is not mentioned elsewhere. It cannot have
been far from the sea.

[44] Mushi or Mwishikongo, a Congo-man: plural, Eshi-Kongo.

[45] Bamba, or rather Mbamba, the south-west province of Congo,
extending to the lower Coanza.

[46] Lamba, or Hamba, is bounded by the Bengo in the north, and by the
Coanza and its tributary the Lucalla on the south. The “Governor” here
referred to is João Furtado de Mendonça. Battell seems to have been
among the reinforcements despatched after the disastrous campaign in the
spring of 1596. The “General” of Battell was João de Velloria, a
Spaniard, who was Capitâo mór do Campo.

[47] The route followed by Battell is approximately indicated upon the
map. Sowonso may be the same as Dapper’s Chonso or Douville’s Quionso,
beyond Icolo. As to the other places along the route, I can suggest no
identifications. Namba Calamba certainly has nothing to do with the
Portuguese Fort Calumbu on the Coanza, built in 1571.

[48] Kumba ria Kaiangu?

[49] _Outeiro_ (Portuguese), a hill.

[50] Battell’s Ingasia is undoubtedly the Angazi or Engase of Duarte
Lopez, a Bunda district subject to Bamba, which in Pigafetta’s map lies
to the south of the river Bengo. Mendez de Castellobranco, p. 11,
mentions Engombe (Ngombe). The name survives perhaps in the Ndembu
Ngombe a Muquiama on the northern bank of the Bengo, who, according to
J. V. Carneiro (_An. do conselho ultramar._, vol. ii, pp. 172 to 179,
1861), was in olden times dependent upon Congo. The name Ngombe (“ox”)
is, however, a very common one.

[51] The Pete, more correctly called _Puita_, or _Kipuita_, is a musical
instrument described by Monteiro (_Angola_, vol. ii, p. 140), and in
Cordeiro da Matta’s _Diccionario_, p. 29. It consists of a hollow wooden
cylinder, one end of which is covered with sheepskin. A wooden stick is
passed through the centre of this sheepskin, and a most hideous noise is
produced by moving this stick to and fro.

[52] The Pongo (_mpunga_) is an ivory trumpet.

[53] Engeriay seems to be a misprint, perhaps for the _Ogheghe_ of
Duarte Lopez, which Ficalho identifies with Mung’eng’e (_Spondias
lutea_) of Angola, called _Gego_ by Lopez de Lima (_Ensaios_, vol. iii,
p. 15). Dr. Welwitsch found the tree growing wild in the mountains of
Benguella, whence it was transplanted to Loanda. It is valued for its
wood, the shade it affords, and its fruit, which resembles a yellow
plum, is of delicious flavour and esteemed as a remedy against bile
(Ficalho, _Plantas uteis_, p. 126; Monteiro, _Angola_, vol. ii, p. 298).
Purchas, in a marginal note, Bk. VII, c. 4, says that the _Ogheghe_
“bears a fruit which is like a yellow plumme and is very good to eat,
and hath a very sweet smell withall.” This information was given by
Battell.

[54] Pome-water, a kind of apple, called _malus carbonaria_ by Coles
(Nares’s _Glossary_).

[55] _Margarita_ is the Portuguese (and Latin) for pearl. Purchas may
have suggested the word, whilst Battell simply referred to the _cowrie_
currency of the country, or to a more valuable shell such as Cavazzi (p.
12) says was found near Cambambe, a collar of which had the value of a
slave; or to a crystal found in Shela, and called “thunder-stone” by
the natives. Mr. R. C. Phillips writes: “I have found that some kind of
stone used to pass as money in the old slave times, say in 1850 or 1860,
but I never saw one. These stones were of great value, and I have a
vague idea they were called ‘agang.’”

[56] The author’s “wheat” is maize (see p. 7).

[57] This is undoubtedly the bay upon which Manuel Cerveira Pereira, in
1617, founded the city of S. Filippe de Benguella. The bay at that time
was known as Bahia da Torre, or de S. Antonio. By its discoverers it
seems to have been named Golfo de S. Maria. The “torre” is, of course,
the Ponta do Sombreiro or S. Philip’s bonnet. Pimentel (_Arte de
Navegar_, 1762, p. 276) locates a Bahia da Torre fifty miles to the
south of Benguella Bay, which therefore corresponds to the Elephant Bay
of modern maps, with its “mesa,” or table-mountain rising to a height of
a thousand feet.

[58] Cacongo (_recte_ Kikongo), according to Welwitsch, is the wood of
_Tarchonanthes camphoratus_. It is hard, of a greyish olive colour, and
has the perfume of camphor. Its powder is esteemed as a tonic (Ficalho,
_Plantas uteis_, p. 206).

[59] Carraca, a vessel, generally of considerable burthen, and such as
could be profitably employed in the Brazilian and Indian trade.

[60] Ndalabondo seems to be the name of a person. The people in the
interior of Benguella are known as Bi’nbundo.

[61] Neither Mr. Dennett nor Mr. Phillips knows a bead of that name.
_Mpinda_ (plur. _Zimpinda_) means ground nut.

[62] For an account of Dombe, which lies to the south of St. Filip de
Benguella, see Capello and Ivens, _From Benguella to the Territory of
Yacca_, London, 1882, vol. i, p. 308; and Serpa Pinto, _How I Crossed
Africa_, London, 1881, vol. i, p. 46. Copper ore abounds in the
district, and a mine, four miles inland, was recently worked by the
Portuguese (Monteiro, _Angola_, London, 1875, vol. ii, p. 198).

[63] That is, bark-cloth made of the inner bark of the _nsanda_, Banyan
or wild fig-tree, or _Ficus Lutata_ (see Pechuel Loesche, _Loango
Exped._, vol. iii, p. 172).

[64] Purchas spells indifferently Gaga, Iagge, Giagas, etc. The correct
spelling is Jaga or Jaka. For a sketch of the history of these military
leaders, see Appendix.

[65] The Morro, or bluff, of Old Benguella, in lat. 10° 48´ S., is a
conspicuous headland, presenting a perpendicular cliff towards the sea,
its summit being covered with cactus trees. Here Antonio Lopez Peixoto,
a nephew of Paulo Dias, in 1587, had built a presidio, which was soon
afterwards abandoned.

[66] The river Cuvo (Kuvu) enters the sea in 10° 52´ S.

[67] In a note to Bk. VII, c. iv, § 8 (Hartwell’s translation of
Pigafetta), Battell is made to say that “the Iagges came from Sierre
Liona. But they dispersed themselves as a general pestilence and common
scourge through most parts of Ethiopia.” But see p. 83, where Battell
denies the statements made by Lopez.

Walkenaer (_Histoire des Voyages_, vol. xiii), says that Dapper’s Sierra
Leone cannot be the place usually known by that name. The only locality
in that part of Africa named in honour of a lion, as far as I know, are
the Pedras de Encoge, or more correctly _del nkoshi_ (which means Lion).

[68] Ndongo is the name of the kingdom of Ngola (Angola). Its old
capital was at Pungu-a-Ndongo, a remarkable group of rocks, popularly
known as Pedras Negras.

[69] Ngongo (plural Jingongo), in Kimbundu, means twin, and hence
_Ngong’e_, a double bell, such as is described by Monteiro (_Angola_,
vol. i, p. 203); in Lunda it is called _rubembe_ (Carvalho, _Exp.
Port._, _Ethnographia_, p. 369). See also note, p. 80.

[70] “Gingado,” elsewhere spelt “Iergado,” is evidently a misprint for
_Jangada_, a Portuguese word meaning “raft.” Such a raft is called
_Mbimba_, and is made of the wood of the _bimba_ (_Herminiera
Elaphroxylon_, Guill. et. Perr.), which is identical with the _Ambaj_ of
the Nile, and grows abundantly on the swampy banks of the rivers.
Battell himself, at a critical point of his career, built himself such a
_jangada_ (Ficalho, _Plantas uteis da Africa_, 1884, p. 33).

[71] _Tavale._ Mr. Dennet suggests that _tavale_ corresponds to the
_libala_ of Loango, a word derived from the Portuguese _taboa_ (table),
for the instrument of this name consists of a board supported by two
sticks of wood, and kept in its place by wooden pegs driven into the
ground. The player beats this board with his two index fingers. A. R.
Neves, _Mem. da Epedição a Cassange_, p. 110, calls _tabalha_ a drum,
which is beaten to make known the death of a Jaga Cassange.

[72] Mbala or Embala merely means town or village. Lad. Magyar (_Reisen
in Süd-Afrika_, p. 383) has a district Kibala, abounding in iron, the
chief town of which is Kambuita on the river Longa. Walckenaer’s
suggestion (_Histoire des Voyages_, vol. xiii, p. 30) that Bambala and
Bembe are identical is quite unacceptable.

[73] The baobab is indifferently called by Battell _alicunde_,
_licondo_, _elicondi_, _olicandi_, or _alicunde_, all of which are
corruptions of _nkondo_, by which name the tree is known in Congo. The
Portuguese know this characteristic tree of the coast-land and the
interior as _imbondeiro_ (from _mbondo_ in Kimbundu). Its inner bark
yields a fibre known as _licomte_, is made into coarse cloth, and is
also exported to Europe to be converted into paper. The wood is very
light. The pulp of the fruit is refreshing, and was formerly esteemed as
a remedy against fever and dysentery. The seeds are eaten. The shell
(_macua_) is used to hold water (hence the popular name of Calabash
tree). Ficalho distinguishes three species, viz., _Adansonia digitata_,
Linn., the fruit of which is longish; _A. subglobosa_, bearing a
bell-shaped fruit; _A. lageniformis_, yielding a fruit shaped like a
cucumber (see Monteiro, _Angola_, vol. i, p. 78; Ficalho, _Plantas
uteis_, p. 100).

[74] The cedar of the Portuguese is _Tamarix articulata_, Vahl., and
resembles a cypress (Ficalho, _Plantas uteis da Africa_, 1884, p. 94).

[75] Kizangu, in Kimbundu, means fetish. Burton (_Two Trips to Gorilla
Land_, vol. ii, p. 120), saw a like image, also called Quesango, in a
village above Boma.

[76] The so-called fetishes (from _feitiço_, a Portuguese word meaning
sorcery) are not idols, but charms and amulets, generally known as
_nkissi_, _nkishi_, or _mukishi_. There are _nkissi_ peculiar to a
district, village, or family; charms and amulets to shield the wearer or
possessor against all the evils flesh is heir to, and others enabling
the priest or _nganga_ to discover crime or the cause of disease. The
idea underlying the belief in the efficacy of these charms was very
prevalent among our own ancestors, and the images, rosaries, crosses,
relics, and other articles introduced by the Roman missionaries are
looked upon by the natives as equivalent to their own _nkissi_. Even at
the present day, images of S. Francis and of other saints may be seen in
the collection of Royal Fetishes at S. Salvador, and a cross called
_santu_ (Santa Cruz) “is the common fetish which confers skill in
hunting” (Bentley, _Pioneering on the Congo_, vol. i, pp. 35, 36, 39).
The images, according to Bentley, seen among the natives are not idols
but receptacles of “charms” or medicine. As to a belief in witchcraft
(_ndoki_, witch; _Kindoki_, witchcraft), it is not even now quite
extinct among Christian people, boasting of their civilisation, for a
reputed wizard was drowned at Hedingham in Essex in 1863, and a witch
burnt in Mexico as recently as 1873. Matthew Hopkins, the famous
witch-finder, cannot claim a higher rank than an African _nganga_,
although his procedure was not quite the same. Nor can I see any
difference between a fetish and the miraculous “bambino” manufactured in
the sixteenth century, and kept in the church of S. Maria Aracœli,
which a priest takes to the bedside of sick or dying persons, who are
asked to kiss it to be cured, and whose guardians are at all times ready
to receive the offerings of the faithful (see Dickens, _Pictures from
Italy_).

[77] Marginal note by Purchas:—“Of these Giagas read also Pigafetta’s
_Book of Congo_, translated into English by M. Hartwell, and my
_Pilgrimage_, l. 7. But none could so well know them as this author, who
lived so long with them.”

[78] The river Longa [Lungu] enters the sea in lat. 10° 20´ S.

[79] A soba Calungo is shown on the most recent maps as residing north
of the river Longa.

[80] Perhaps we ought to read _Tunda_, the bush, the East. Lad. Magyar
(_Reisen_, p. 378) has a chief Tunda in the country of the Sellas, and
Falkenstein (_Loango Expedition_, p. 73) heard of a district Tunda,
inland from Novo Redondo.

[81] The Gonsa or Gunza (Ngunza) of Battell is undoubtedly the Coanza. A
river Ngunza enters the sea at Novo Redondo.

[82] _Shila_, nasty; _mbanza_, towns.

[83] According to Duarte Lopez (_Pigafetta_, p. 55), the feathers of
peacocks and of ostriches are used as a standard in battle. Hence,
peacocks are reared within a fence and reserved for the king.

[84] _Njilo_ (in Kimbundu), bird; _mukishi_, a charm.

[85] See note, p. 51.

[86] Cambambe (_Ka_, diminutive; _mbambi_, gazelle), a village on the
north bank of the Coanza, below the falls formed by the river in forcing
its way through the Serra de Prata. Silver, however, has never been
found there (at least not in appreciable quantities), nor anywhere else
in Angola or Congo. Still we are told (Paiva Manso, p. 50) that the King
of Congo, in 1530, sent the wife of King Manuel two silver bracelets
which he had received from one of his chiefs in Matamba, and that among
the presents forwarded by Ngola Nbande, the King of Ndongo, to Paulo
Dias in 1576, there were several silver bracelets, which the Regent of
Portugal, Cardinal Henrique, had converted into a chalice, which he
presented to the church at Belem (_Catalogo dos Governadores de
Angola_). According to Capello and Ivens (_Benguella_, vol. ii, pp. 58,
233), silver ore is plentiful in Matamba, although they never saw any
_in loco_.

[87] Battell’s Casama is the wide province of Kisama (Quiçama), to the
south of the Coanza.

[88] This Casoch (a misprint for Cafoch) is the Cafuxe (Cafuche) of the
Portuguese, who defeated Balthasar de Almeida on April 22, 1594. On
August 10, 1603, the Portuguese, led by Manuel Cerveira Pereira,
retrieved this disaster.

[89] The name Calandola is by no means rare. A Calandula Muanji resided
in 1884, eight miles to the north-east of Malanje (Carvalho, _Viagens_,
vol. i, p. 443); another resided, formerly, near Ambaca (_ib._, p. 230);
and a third on the Lucala, south of Duque de Bragança, was visited by
Capello and Ivens (_Benguella_, vol. ii, p. 45). A Jaga Calandula
accompanied João Soares de Almeida on his disastrous expedition to Sonyo
(_Cat. dos Gov._, p. 390). Either of these may have been a descendant of
Battell’s Calandula.

[90] Human victims are still sacrificed by the diviner when consulting
departed spirits (see A. R. Neves, _Memoria_, p. 119).

[91] Cavazzi (_Historica Descrizione de tre Regni Congo, etc._, Bologna,
1687, p. 207) gives a plan of a Jaga camp, or Kilombo. It is formed of a
square stockade, having in its centre the quarters of the
Commander-in-chief, within a triple hedge of thorns. Between the
stockade, which has only a single gate, and the inner enclosure are the
quarters of the six principal officers, including the Golambolo
(_ngolo_, strength, _mbula_, a blow), or Lieutenant-General, the
Tendala, or Commander of the Rear-guard, and the Mani Lumbo (_lumbu_, a
stockade), or Engineer-in-chief.

[92] _Tavales_ (see note, p. 21).

[93] Bahia das Vaccas, old name for Benguella Bay. There seems to be no
native name for gold; yet Dr. Francisco José Maria de Lacerda, when with
the abortive expedition of 1797, which was charged with the exploration
of the Kunene, met a negress whose head-dress was composed of golden
laminæ, said to have been washed in that river (Burton, _Lacerda’s
Journey to Cazembe_, London, 1873, p. 23). Ladislaus Magyar (_Reisen_,
p. 176), says that about 1833 a Brazilian miner washed gold in the
mountains of Hambo. Quite recently, in 1900, the Mossamedes Company
granted a lease of the Kasinga goldfields to an English company.

[94] The Imbondos are clearly the Nbundu of Angola, who draw the palm
wine from the top, whilst the Jagas cut down the tree.

[95] Purchas adds, in a marginal note: “Fruges consumere nati.”

[96] “Flesh” in the sense of encourage.

[97] Calando should be Calandola (see note on p. 28).

[98] Mbamba, a whelk or trumpet-shell (Cordeiro da Matta, _Dicc.
Kimbundu_).

[99] Mr. Dennet suggests _msose_, a turritella, popularly known as
screw-shell.

[100] No ostriches are met with in Angola, and as to beads made of
ostrich eggs, I can give no explanation.

[101] Monteiro was told that the Sobas and their wives among the Musele
only use human fat to anoint their bodies (vol. ii, p. 157).

[102] The practice of wearing such nose ornaments exists to the present
day in Lunda, among the Bangala and other tribes (Capello and Ivens,
_Benguela_, vol. i, p. 265; Carvalho, _Expedição Portugueza ao
Muatianvua_, Lingua de Lunda, p. 367; _Ethnographia_, p. 349).

[103] Marginal note by Purchas: “They use this ceremony in Florida.”

[104] Civet-cats are numerous in this part of Africa.

[105] I am inclined to believe, from what we learn from Cavazzi and
other missionaries, that only those children were killed which were born
within the _Kilombo_. On the other hand, at the Court of the ferocious
queen Jinga, we are told by Captain Füller, a Dutchman, that, on two
days in 1648, 113 new-born infants born _outside_ the camp were killed
(Dapper, _Africa_, p. 545).

[106] _Ngunza_, according to Cordeira da Matta, means all-powerful;
according to Bentley a herald, who speaks on behalf of a chief.

[107] See note, p. 19.

[108] Human sacrifices among the Jaga are even now of frequent
occurrence. They are made at the installation of a Jaga, one year after
his election (when the sacrifice and its accompanying banquet are
intended to conciliate the spirit of Kinguri, the founder of the
Dynasty), at his death, on the outbreak of war, etc. The ceremony
witnessed by Battell was an act of divination. The soothsayer summons
the spirit of Kinguri, who is supposed to foretell the results of any
enterprise about to be undertaken. In 1567, the Jaga Ngonga Kahanga, of
Shela, having been advised by his soothsayers that he would suffer
defeat in a war he was about to enter upon against the Portuguese,
declined the arbitration of the sword, and submitted voluntarily. The
body of the victim is cooked with the flesh of a cow, a goat, a yellow
dog, a cock and a pigeon, and this mess is devoured (ceremoniously) by
the Jaga and his _makotas_ (councillors).

[109] The handle of this switch contains a potent medicine, which
protects the owner against death.

[110] Casengula, called Kissengula, p. 86, was perhaps a trombash, for
_sangula_ means to kill at a long range (Bentley).

[111] The Jagas are still buried sitting, and wives are sacrificed
(Capello and Ivens, _From Benguella to the Territory of the Iacca_, vol.
i, p. 330). In Ngois, likewise, the dead are occasionally buried in a
sitting posture (Bastian, vol. i, p. 82). For a full account of a
funeral, see Dennett’s _Folklore_, p. 11.

[112] These feasts are intended to secure the goodwill of the deceased,
so that he may not injure the living. Human beings are occasionally
sacrificed, in addition to goats and fowls.

[113] João Rodrigues Coutinho received his appointment as Governor at
Madrid, on January 30, 1601 (see Appendix).

[114] Ndemba, in Quissama, a territory famous for its salt mines, the
chief of which was the Caculo Caquimone Casonga (Cadornega, 1702). In
1783, when P. M. Pinheiro de Lacerda invaded Quissama, a Caculo
Caquimone still held the mines of Ndemba. _Kakulu_, the elder of twins,
a title.

[115] Outaba seems to be a misprint for _libata_ (village). Tombo is on
the north bank of the Coanza, almost due south of Loanda.

[116] Songa, on the Coanza, below Muchima, a village in the territory of
the Caculo Caquimone Casonga.

[117] Machimba I believe to be Muchima or Muxima, whilst (according to
Cadornega) a chief Cavao occupied a district above Lake Quizua and below
Massangano.

[118] According to the _Catalogo dos Governadores_, p. 356, the Governor
died in Quissama. He was succeeded by his captain-major, Manuel Cerveira
Pereira, and it was he who, on August 10, 1603, defeated Cafuxe, in the
bloody battle to which reference is made in the text. Battell’s
Angoykayongo is undoubtedly identical with the _Agoacaiongo_ of an
anonymous account of the _Establimentos e Resgates Portuguezes_ (1607),
published by L. Cordeira. He was a Christian chief; and a captain-major,
with a detachment of cavalry, was stationed at his village to keep
Quissama in order.

[119] See note, p. 27.

[120] Queen Elizabeth died April 3, 1603; but peace with Spain was only
concluded on August 19, 1604.

[121] João de Araujo e Azevedo was the officer left in command at
Cambambe.

[122] That is S. Salvador.

[123] Ngongo, according to Cavazzi (p. 521), is a place on the road from
Sundi to Batta, where Girolamo da Montesarchio destroyed the heathen
images. This place possibly corresponds to the modern Gongo, a station
on the Stanley Pool Railway. Cadornega has a Gongo de Bata, which
figures on Dapper’s map as Congo de Bata, and lies to the west of the
Mbanza of Bata. It is impossible to tell which of these places was
visited by Battell; possibly he passed through both.

[124] The Mbanza or chief town of Mbata, or Batta, still exists in 8°
S., long. 15° E. Bentley (_Pioneering_, vol. ii, p. 404) passed through
it, and discovered a huge wooden cross, a relic of the ancient
missionaries.

[125] D. Manuel Cerveira Pereira had assumed government at the beginning
of 1603, and three years would conveniently carry us to 1606. The “new”
Governor, D. Manuel Pereira Forjaz, was, however, only nominated on
August 2, 1607.

[126] See note, p. 11.

[127] Nkoko, a large grey antelope.

[128] Impalanca, _Palanga_, or _Mpalanga_, an antelope (_Hippotragus
equinus_).

[129] This is an electric silurus called _nsõmbo_, plur. _sinsombo_, by
the natives. Fishermen dread its electrical discharges, but value its
flesh (Pechuel-Loesche, _Die Loango Expedition_, vol. iii, p. 282). This
fish, Mr. Dennett tells me, is the “xina” (taboo) of women, generally
speaking, which may account for the word becoming a generic name for
fish, as in Unyamwezi, Ugogo, and other countries, if vocabularies can
be trusted.

[130] See note, p. 21.

[131] This is Red Point, or Ponta Vermelha, where there is a grove of
palms.

[132] Kabinda, 5° 31´ S., on a fine bay.

[133] The river Kakongo, or Chiloango, enters the sea in lat. 5° 9´ S.
to the north of Landana. It is a very considerable river, and its waters
discolour the sea for seven miles.

[134] Mbale, according to Bentley, is the coast region between the Congo
and Ambrisette; but on Pigafetta’s map (1591) a town, Monbales, is shown
to the south-east of the chief place of Sonho (Sonyo).

[135] Pinda, or Mpinda, in Sonyo, is below the Mbanza of Sonyo, which on
modern maps figures as St. Antonio.

[136] The Luiza Loango, or Massábi, river enters the sea in lat. 5° 1´
S. Its depth across the bar is only 2 ft., but once within, it presents
a fair waterway for over a hundred miles. Kaia is about ten miles up it.

[137] The Golfo das Almadias, or Canoe Bay, as described by Battell,
corresponds to Black Point Bay, 4° 48´ S., the inner bay of which, less
than half a mile across, had become all but silted up by 1884.

[138] No logwood is found in Loango, and Purchas points out in a note
(_post_, p. 82), that Battell’s dyewood must be Red Sanders
(_Pterocarpus tinctorius_), the _tacula_ of Angola, and identical with
the _tavila_ of D. Lopez (Ficalho, _Plantas uteis_, p. 207).
Pechuel-Loesche (_Loango Exp._, vol. iii, p. 190), on the other hand,
states that the dye known as _tacula_ is camwood (_Baphia nitida,
Afz._), and Bentley (_Dict. of the Kongo Language_), who calls the dye
_nkula_, is of the same opinion. Another red dye is obtained from the
_Njilla sonde_ (_Pterocarpus erinaceus, Poir._).

[139] _Nlunga_ (Bentley) or _malungu_ (Cordeira da Matta) is the native
word for bracelet.

[140] The Maloango (_ma_, a contraction of _mani_ or _mwanu_, son;
_mfumu_, chief) or king is selected by the Mamboma (see p. 59) and the
princes, and must be a nephew (sister’s son) of his predecessor. On his
election he takes the title of _Nganga nvumbu_ (_Nganga_, priest;
_nvumbu_, benevolent spirit, breath), but only proceeds to that of
Maloango when rich enough to summon the whole country to a great feast,
when declaration is made for the first time officially of the death of
the former Maloango, and he is buried. As these festivities are very
expensive, they are often deferred for years, and many a _Nganga nvumbu_
has died without even troubling about the higher title. The successors
of the Maloango Njimbi of Loango, of Battell’s time, according to Mr.
Dennett, have been: 1. Maloango Tati of Kondi; 2. Mani Puati of
Chibanga; 3. Mani Yambi; 4. Man’anombo; 5. Mani Makosso Matukila of
Kondi; 6. Mani Makosso Manombo; 7. Mani Makosso Masonga; 8. Mani Puati.
Nos. 3 to 8 never assumed the title of Maloango. Mani Puati very much
disgusted the people with his cruelty (he had killed his own daughter
because she refused to cohabit with him); and when the French, in 1898,
called upon the Mamboma and the princes to produce a Maloango, they
ignored the existence of Puati, and elected his nephew, Mani Luemba.
This list, however, is evidently imperfect.

[141] Mr. Dennett, whose long residence at Loango and thorough knowledge
of the languages entitle him to speak with authority, finds this passage
unintelligible, but ventures to suggest the following:—

_Baliani_ (my companion) _ampembe_ (white) _mpolo_ (face), _muenyeye_
(Boio, the underground _nkishni_), _ke zinga_ (not live
long)!

Freely translated, it would mean “My companion, the white face, has
risen from underground, and will not live long.” This is a curious
greeting, but it fairly represents native ideas: for the white man, as
long as he keeps to his ship (supposed to rise from the bottom of the
ocean), is believed to live long; whilst, once he comes to stay ashore,
he is condemned to an early death.

[142] In a marginal note, Purchas says that the King’s wives are called
_Macomes_. Such a title is known neither to Mr. Dennett nor to Mr.
Phillips. Macome is probably a misprint for Maconda, the title borne,
according to Dapper, p. 522, by the king’s “mother.” _Nkondi_, according
to Bentley, is a title of nobility.

[143] Mr. Dennett informs me that, still at the present day, when the
King (Maloango) or rather _Nganga nvumbu_, drinks in state, he covers
his head with a cloth, so that the public may not see him drink. On
ordinary occasions, however, this custom is no longer observed.

[144] The heads of all families eat alone; that is, they eat first, and
their wives and children afterwards. Maloango still observes the same
custom, with his _ma sa vi_, or house-steward, as the sole attendant
(Dennett).

[145] Bensa may be a corruption of the Portuguese _banca_, a table. Mr.
Dennett does not know the word.

[146] Not Sambe and Pongo, but Nzambi-ampungu! _Nzambi_ is the name by
which God is known; _Nzambi-ampungu_ means the Most High (Supreme) God
(Bentley, _Life on the Congo_, 1887, p. 62).

[147] The rains begin in October and last till April, being heaviest
from November to March. They are very irregular. Thus, in February 1874,
2.2 ins. fell at Chinchosho; in the same month, 1875,12.0 ins.; but in
1876 only 0.2 ins.

[148] _Ensaka_, according to D. Lopez (Pigafetta), a stuff resembling
velvet.

[149] The _Ndamba_ is no drum, as understood by Purchas, but a musical
instrument made out of a piece of palm stem, about 4 or 5 ft. long. This
is split down one side, the soft centre is then scooped out, and the
edges of the split cut into notches. By rubbing these notches
energetically with a stick, a loud rasping noise is produced (Monteiro,
_Angola_, vol. ii, p. 139: Cordeiro da Matta, _Diccionario_, p. 118).

[150] An ivory trumpet (see note, p. 15).

[151] Battell seems to be mistaken. Mr. Dennett informs me that Maloango
as _Ngangu nvumbu_ (see note 44) collects the offerings of his people,
and sends them with a petition for rain to the great rain-doctor,
_Nganga m Bunzi_, in Ngoyo. He has never heard that Maloango had usurped
the functions of the great rain-doctor by shooting an arrow to the sky.
Abbé Proyart (_Hist. de Loango_, c. 13), says that the Maloango being
desirous of not committing himself, orders one of his ministers to make
rain.

[152] Mr. Dennett tells me that _Ndundu_ when born are thrown into the
bush. During his long residence in Africa he has only seen one, and that
was at Kinsembo, eighteen years ago. Proyart (_Histoire de Loango_,
Paris, 1819, p. 150) says that these albinos are held higher than the
Gangas, are looked upon almost as “divine,” and that their hair is
valued as giving protection against accidents. See also p. 81.

[153] _Mukishi à Loango_, the fetish or “charm” of Loango. _Checocke_ is
identical with Dapper’s _Kikoko_ (_Africa_, Amsterdam, 1671, p. 535).
Dapper’s account is not derived from Battell.

[154] According to Mr. Bentley, hysteria is very common in this country.
For the account of the ravings of a witch-doctor, see _Pioneering_, vol.
i, p. 271.

[155] Mr. Dennett informs me that the underground speaking fetish in
Loango is at the present time called _Boio_, and is found at Chilunga.
He suggests that _Ngumbiri_ may be a river spirit, or _Nkishi_ from the
country north of Mayumba. Dr. Bastian paid a visit to the holy place of
the underground oracle of _Ngoio_ near Moanda, known as _Mbunzi_, which
only speaks on the accession of a king, whom he instructs as to his
royal duties (_Die Deutsche Expedition_, vol. i, p. 85, 223).

[156] The mami (_mwana_, or princes) mentioned by Battell are those of
Chibanga, Selanganga (of the family of the Petra Praia of Kenga), Mbuku,
and Kaya, in Chikamba. (R. E. Dennett, on the law of succession, see
note on p. 44.)

[157] Mani Lombe is a man’s name: at least, at the present time, and is
never given to a woman. It means “One who is peaceful and quiet.” No
special name or title is borne by the mother of the successors of
Maloango (R. E. Dennett); but as Lumbu means stockade, palace, or chiefs
house, Battell may have mistaken a word applied to this woman’s
residence for that of her title. Lombo means a person supposed to be an
incarnation of a shimbi, or water-fairy.

[158] Palm-cloth (see note, p. 9).

[159] Dr. Bastian visited the Royal graves at Loangiri, or Loangele, and
found each grave marked by a tusk. The visitors pulled out grass around
the tomb and poured libations of rum upon the bare ground (_Die Deutsche
Expedition an der Loango-Küste_, Berlin, 1874, vol. i, p. 69).

[160] This may be quite true of earlier times, when Europeans were
looked upon as great wizards, who rose out of the sea and were returned
to that element when they died. At present, however, a burial-place is
set apart for them, and is looked after by the Petra Praia (Salanganga),
an office created since the arrival of the Portuguese for the purpose of
looking after the affairs of the white men (R. E. Dennett).

[161] There is some confusion here. Angeca is evidently the Anziki or
Anzique of D. Lopez and others, now represented by the Banteke, on
Stanley Pool. The word may be derived from _anseke_, far or distant. The
proper name of the tribe is Atio (A. Sims, _Kiteke Vocabulary_, 1886).
_Mococke_ (_Makoko_) is a title. Bongo is evidently the country of the
Obongo of Du Chaillu, the Babongo of Lenz, Bastian, and Falkenstein: a
race of dwarfs between the coast and the Banteke, varying in stature
between 51 and 56 ins. Compare note, p. 59.

[162] Identical with Chinkanga, on the river Juma, where the French have
a post, Wemba.

[163] The river Kuilu, 4° 28´ S.

[164] _As duas moutas_ (the two corpses) of Juan de la Cosa’s map
(1500), near the mouth of the Kuilu.

[165] Fifteen miles carry us to the Longebonda of the Admiralty Chart,
4° 20´ S.. which has very little water in it at the most favourable time
of the year (_Africa Pilot_, vol. ii, 1893, p. 136), but the river meant
is evidently the Numbi, which enters Chilunga (Kilonga) Bay in 4° 13´
S., a mere stream (_Deutsche Loango Expedition_).

[166] Yumba is the name of the country. _Mayumba_ (_Mani Yumba_) means
chief of Yumba. The Bay of Mayumba, 3° 19´ S., lies about 10 miles to
the south of Cape Mayumba, which is undoubtedly the Cabo Negro of
Battell.

[167] Dyewoods are still an article of export, but not logwood (see
note, p. 43.)

[168] The Banya, a lagoon extending to the south-east, parallel with the
coast.

[169] The _Mpungu_ is the gorilla. For _Engeco_ (printed _Encego_ in the
earlier editions) we ought to read _Nsiku_, the native name for the
chimpanzi, a larger variety of which is known as _Chimpenso_
(Pechuel-Loesche, _Loango Expedition_, vol. iii, p. 248). P. Du Chaillu,
the first European to kill a gorilla in his native haunts (_Adventures
in Equatorial Africa_), declares Battell’s stories to be mere
traveller’s tales, “untrue of any of the great apes of Africa.” Sir R.
F. Burton (_Two Trips to Gorilla Land_, vol. i, p. 240) suggests that as
Battell had not seen a gorilla, he may have confounded gorillas with
bushmen.

[170] Misprint for Mayumbas?

[171] Dr. Pechuel-Loesche (_D. Loango Exp._, vol. iii, p. 302) says that
native dogs do _not_ bark, but that they often acquire the habit when
living among European dogs. Most of them are mongrels, but there are
some superior breeds trained for hunting. These dogs carry a wooden bell
(_ndibu_) round the neck, the clatter of which scares the game. When the
scent grows warm, the dogs begin to whine, and when the game is in sight
they give tongue. After each beat the dogs sit down apart from the
hunters, raise their heads, and howl for several minutes. Mr. Dennett,
in a letter to me, confirms the barking (_kukula_, to bark) of the
native dogs.

[172] See p. 82 for further information on this fetish.

[173] Neither Mr. Dennett, nor one of the officials in the French
Colonial Office, thoroughly acquainted with the language, has been able
to make sense out of this sentence. The latter suggests _Ku Kwiza bukie
lika_, “I come for the truth!” For another version of this appeal, see
p. 83. The sentence is evidently very corrupt.

[174] Circumcision is common in some districts, but no magical or mystic
influence is ascribed to it (Bentley).

[175] For an account of the initiation into the guild called _Ndembo_,
see Bentley’s _Dictionary_, p. 506.

[176] The custom of prohibiting certain food to be eaten, etc., is very
common. _Mpangu_ is the name for this taboo in the case of new-born
infants; _Konko_, a taboo imposed in connection with an illness. The
thing tabooed is called _nlongo_ (Bentley).

[177] This refers no doubt to Sette, the river of which enters the sea
in 2° 23´ S. The capital of the same name being fifty miles up it.
Barwood is still exported, but no logwood.

[178] His modern representative seems to be the Mani Kasoche on the
Upper Ngonga, who was visited by Güssfeldt.

[179] Not to be taken literally, for Cão certainly touched at this bay.

[180] The usual designation for “Dwarf” is _mbaka_ or _kimbakabaka_ (the
diminutive of _mbaka_), but _Batumba_ (with which Battell’s _matimba_
seems to be identical) is likewise applied to a dwarf person or thing
(Bentley). In Angola, _Matumbu_ means a far-off, unknown country
(Cordeiro da Matta). Compare note, p. 52.

[181] “Marombos” seems to be a misprint for Mayumbas (see note, p. 55).

[182] The Mamboma is a sort of home secretary. He buries the Maloango,
and summons the princes for the election of a successor. _Mboma_ is the
black python; _boma_ means fear. Hence the title has been translated
“Lord of Terror.”

[183] _Mbundu_, the powdered root of a species of strychnos, is
administered to confessed witches accused of having caused the death of
a person. If the accused be guilty, this poison causes him to lose all
control over the _sphincter urethræ_; he discharges red urine profusely,
runs a few paces, falls down and dies. An innocent person only
discharges a few drops on a banana leaf (Pechuel-Loesche, _Loango Exp._,
vol. iii, p. 188). _Nkasa_, prepared from the bark of _Erythrophlaeum
guineense_, paralyses the action of the heart, but if thrown up at once,
it will not kill (Dr. M. Boehr, _Correspon. der Deutschen Afrik. Ges._,
vol. i, p. 332). It is administered to persons who deny being witches.
(For a full account of such a trial, see Dennett, _Seven Years Among the
Fjort_, p. 165.) In the case of minor offences, the ordeal of the hot
matchet—_bikalo_, _bisengo_, or _bau_—is resorted to. The knife is
passed thrice over the skin of the leg, and if it burns the accused is
declared guilty (see also Dennett, _Notes on the Folk-Lore of the
Fjort_, p. 162). The Nganga is, of course, open to a bribe, and in the
case of a chief the poison may be administered to a substitute—a dog or
a slave—and the penalty commuted to a fine. See also Bentley’s
_Pioneering on the Congo_, London, 1900.

[184] The poison administered in this case was _nkasa_, and not _mbundu_
(see p. 80).

[185] _Ndoki_, a witch; _undoki_, that which pertains to witchcraft
(Bentley).

[186] That is, _Purchas his Pilgrimage, or Relations of the World_, bk.
vii, ch. 10, dealing with Loango.

[187] Worthy Purchas grows quite incoherent in his indignation, but the
reader will nevertheless be able to gather his meaning, and will
appreciate his distinction between a Jewish priest and a heathen
_Nganga_, both administering the same rite. He thus shares the opinion
of the Roman Catholic missionaries who recognised the efficacy of native
charms, but ascribed it to the Devil, whilst claiming greater potency
for their crosses, relics, etc., deriving their potency from Heaven.

[188] The poison ordeal, which required a woman suspected of infidelity
to her husband to drink “bitter water” administered by the Jewish
priest, is here referred to. This ordinance, of course, was not
applicable in case of a similar offence charged against a husband
(Numbers v, 12-31).

[189] Valdez (_Six Years in Angola_, vol. ii, p. 130) calls this ordeal
_quirigué tubia_ (_Kiriké tubia_), and says that the hot hatchet may be
applied to any part of the person. The meaning of _kiri_ is truth; of
_tubia_, fire. Purchas is evidently mistaken when he calls this
procedure _Motamba_, for _tambi_ or _mutambi_ is a kind of funeral feast
or wake. The body having been buried, and potsherds, pipes, and other
articles placed on the grave, the mourners devour a roast pig, the skull
of which is afterwards thrown into a neighbouring river.

[190] Illness and death are frequently ascribed to witchcraft. If a
disease does not yield to medical treatment by a _Nganga a moko_, the
_nganga a ngombo_, or witch-doctor, is called in with his fetish. He may
ascribe the death to natural causes, or to a charm worked by a person
recently deceased and beyond his reach; or he may denounce one or more
persons as witches. The persons thus denounced are compelled to submit
to the poison ordeal (see, among others, Dennett’s _Seven Years among
the Fjort_, and his _Folk-Lore_).

[191] Garcia Mendes de Castellobranco, p. 33, says, in 1621, that hens
abounded and also goats and sheep, but that cows were rare.

[192] Zebras are still found in Benguella, but not any longer in Angola
or Congo. Duarte Lopez, p. 49, speaks of a “pet zebra” (in Bamba?) which
was killed by a “tiger.” Further on he says that zebras were common, but
had not been broken in for riding. M. Garcia Mendez likewise mentions
the “zebra.” The native name is _ngolo_ (Kangolo). “Zebra” is a
corruption of its Abyssinian appellation.

[193] Tandale, in Kimbundu, means councillor or minister of a _soba_ or
kinglet; _tumba’ndala_ was an old title of the Kings of Angola, and may
be translated Emperor (Cordeiro da Matta, _Diccionario_).

[194] All this is borne out by Portuguese documents. From the very
beginning, Dias de Novaes handed over the Sovas to the mercy of his
fellow-adventurers and the Jesuits. The system was still in force in
1620 when Garcia Mendez de Castellobranco proposed to King Philip a
“regimen de aforamento” of the native chiefs, which would have yielded a
revenue of fifteen million Reis, and would, at the same time, afforded
some slight protection to the natives. Those who would have profited
most largely by these “reforms” would have been the Jesuits.

[195] According to Dr. Pechuel-Loesche (_Die Loango Expedition_, vol.
iii, p. 279), this seems to be the cowfish of the whalers, or _Tursions
gillii_, Dale. The natives call it _ngulu-mputu_ (_ngulu_,
hog-fish;-_mputu_, Portugal). He says that the natives will not suffer
this fish to be injured, as it drives other fish ashore and into their
nets; and that if one of these fish were to be wounded or killed they
would stop away for ever so long. The Rev. W. M. Holman Bentley, in his
_Dictionary of the Kongo Language_, says that the _ngola_ of the natives
is a bagre, or catfish. A gigantic bagre, 8 ft. in length, is found in
the Upper Coanza (Monteiro, _Angola_, vol. ii, p. 134). Mr. Dennett
suggests the _Chialambu_, a kind of bream, which is said to chase other
fish; _Mboa_, _Mbwa_, or _Imboa_ certainly means dog, and is not the
name of a fish.

[196] _Massa-ngo_, the _Penisetum typhoideum_, introduced from abroad.
It is the _milho_, or millet, of the Portuguese (see Capello and Ivens,
_Benguella_, vol. i, p. 103; vol. ii, p. 257).

[197] _Massa-mballa_ is _sorghum_ (Ficalho). A white variety is known as
_Congo-mazzo_.

[198] This is _luku_, or _Eleusine coracana_, introduced from Asia. It
is extensively grown in Abyssinia and among the Niamniam (Schweinfurth,
_The Heart of Africa_, vol. i, p. 248; Ficalho, _Plantas uteis_, p. 41).

[199] _Massa-mamputo_, or Grão de Portugal, is _Zea mayz_, introduced
from America (Ficalho). See note, p. 7.

[200] This is the ground-nut (_Arachis hypogaea_), or underground kidney
bean. Its native name is _nguba_ or _mpinda_. According to Ficalho, p.
142, it was introduced from America, while _Voandzeia subterranea_,
called _vielo_ in Angola, is certainly indigenous. The seeds of the
latter are smaller and less oleaginous than those of _Arachis_, and
hence its commercial value is less.

[201] _Wandu_ (of Congo) is the _mbarazi_ of the Swahili, the _Cajanus
indicus_ of botanists. It is grown all over Africa, and Welwitsch
considers it indigenous. In Angola a variety is known as _nsonje_
(Ficalho, p. 143; Burton, _Two Trips to Gorilla Island_, vol. ii, p.
119).

[202] In a marginal note to his reprint of Pigafetta’s book (p. 1005),
Purchas quotes Battell as confirming Lopez when he states, with regard
to the _Cola_ (_c. acuminata, R. Br._), that “the liver of a hen, or of
any other like bird, which putrified and stinketh, being sprinkled over
with the juice of this fruit (the _Cola_), returneth into its former
estate, and becometh fresh and sound again.”

[203] See note, p. 24. Monteiro (vol. ii, 165) confirms that hives are
securely placed in the branches of a tree, the _Baobab_ being chosen in
preference.

[204] A misprint from _Inganda_, i.e., _Nsanda_, banyan.

[205] The three kinds of palm are, the wine-palm (_Raphia_); the
oil-palm (_Elaeis_); and the date-palm (_Phœnix_).

[206] _Lubámbu_ (in Kimbundu); _luvambu_ (in Congoese) means a chain.
Dr. Lacerda says that a _Libambo_ was made of sufficient length to hold
twelve slaves (_The Lands of Cazembe_, ed. by Burton, London; 1873, p.
18).

[207] For his _Relations_, see Purchas, lib. VI. ch. viii.

[208] Domingos d’Abreu de Brito, in a memoir addressed in 1592 to King
Philip, states that 52,000 slaves were exported from Angola to Brazil
and the Spanish Indies between 1575 and 1591, and 20,131 during the last
four years of this period (Paiva Manso, _Hist. do Congo_, p. 140).
Cadornega, quoted by the same author, estimates the number of slaves
annually exported between 1580 and 1680 at eight or ten thousand (_ib._,
p. 287).

[209] _Recte_, _Engenho_, a mill, and in Brazil more especially a sugar
mill.

[210] Turner says, in his _Relations_, p. 1243, that John de Paiis
(_sic_) owned ten thousand slaves and eighteen sugar mills.

[211] Manuel Cerveira Pereira was Governor 1603-7 (see p. 37).

[212] Carvalho (_Ethnographia_, pp. 248, 258) describes trophies of
these as also trophies of war, built up of the skulls of enemies killed
in battle. Bastian (_Loango Expedition_, vol. i, p. 54) saw a fossil
tusk, which was looked upon as a fetish, around which were piled up the
horns of oxen, and the teeth and skulls of hippopotami.

[213] Libations are a common practice. Dr. Bastian (_Loango Expedition_,
vol. i. p. 70) observed libations of rum being poured on the royal
graves at Loangiri; Capello and Ivens (_Benguella_, vol. i, p. 26) say
that the Bandombe, before they drink spirits, pour a portion on the
ground, as a libation to _Nzambi_; whilst in Congo (according to
Bentley), the blood of a beast killed in the chase is poured on the
grave of a good hunter, to ensure success in the future. Instances of
this practice could easily be multiplied. Compare note, p. 51.

[214] _Wá_, an interjection, O! _Kizangu_ is a fetish image (see note,
p. 24). _Kuleketa_, to prove, to try (Cordeiro da Matta’s
_Diccionario_).

[215] On this ordeal, as practised in Angola, see note, p. 61.

[216] _Nganga a mukishi._

[217] See note, p. 34.

[218] See note, p. 55.

[219] Battell is named in the margin as authority for this paragraph,
but it is not likely that he would have mentioned a lake Aquelunda,
which we now know does not exist. It rather seems that Purchas got this
bit of information out of Pigafetta. The Quizama here referred must not
be confounded with the country of the same name, to the south of the
Coanza. It was the district of the Quiluangi quia Sama (or quia Samba,
according to Lopez de Lima, p. 60), the ancestor of a chief of the same
name now living near the Portuguese fort of Duque de Bragança. The
“commonwealth” is an evident reference to the country of the Dembos
(_ndembu_, plural _jindembu_, ruler, chief), who recognise no superior
chief or king.

[220] It need scarcely be stated that the horse was first introduced
into Angola by the Portuguese. The tails seen by the early Portuguese,
and sometimes described as horse-tails, were in truth the tails of the
Zebra.

[221] See another version of the same story, p. 69.

[222] The _nsanda_ is the banyan, or wild fig-tree (_ficus umbelata_,
Vahl).

[223] Battell has been misunderstood by Purchas, for the _manga_ tree is
the Mangrove (_Rhyzophora mangle_) called _Mangue_ in Kimbundu, which
rejoices in adventitious roots, as also does the _nsanda_.

[224] See p. 24, for note on the _Nkondo_ or _Baobab_.

[225] For an account of this mode of climbing a tree, see
Pechuel-Lösche, _Loango Expedition_, vol. iii, p. 179.

[226] On honey, see note, p. 68.

[227] _Nsanda_, the banyan-tree.

[228] Schuit, a boat, in Dutch.

[229] This sentence is introduced on the authority of Duarte Lopez
(Pigafetta, p. 22). The other tree referred to by Battell is the
_mfuma_, or cotton-tree (see Tuckey, _Narrative_, p. 225). Dr.
Falkenstein, however, affirms that the soft wood of the _baobab_ is that
usually employed for making canoes (“dug-outs”).

[230] Battell, I have no doubt, never employed the word “Bramas”
(Bramanes in Portuguese, Brahmans). D. Lopez (Pigafetta) must be held
responsible for the statement that the inhabitants of Loango were
originally known as Bramas. Surely this cannot be (as supposed by
Degrandpré) because of the red and yellow stripes with which the women
in Loango paint their foreheads in honour of a certain fetish, and the
similarity of these with the marks of the votaries of Siva in India.

[231] Dr. Bastian (_Loango Expedition_, vol. i, pp. 158, 202, 232)
mentions offerings of this kind. Thus the skull of an animal killed in
the chase is placed before the fetish.

[232] _Mbongo_, cloth (Bentley’s _Dictionary_).

[233] See note, p. 35.

[234] Restrictions upon the use of certain articles of food are imposed
by the doctor (_nganga_), even before the child is born (_mpangu_), and
upon the sick (_konko_). The things forbidden to be eaten are called
_nlongo_, and it is believed that a disregard of this taboo entails most
disastrous consequences (Bentley, _Dictionary_, pp. 353, 389). In Loango
things forbidden are called _Shin_, or _thina_ (Dennett, _Folk-Lore_, p.
138).

[235] Any place guarded by a “charm,” such as a shell, a bit of cloth,
or the like, is respected by the natives as being protected by the
_nkishi_ (Dennett, _Folk-Lore_, pp. 6, 18).

[236] See note, p. 48.

[237] This bell is called _Shi-Ngongo_, and the Maloango alone is
allowed to order it to be struck. Thus, when a messenger is sent round
the town, striking this _Shi-Ngongo_, the people know that it is the
voice of Maloango which speaketh. It is thus quite likely that a thief,
under these circumstances, should be frightened into restoring stolen
property. (From a letter by Mr. Dennett.) See also note, p. 20.

[238] See p. 59.

[239] _Ndoke_, or _ndoki_, witchcraft, sorcerer.

[240] A misprint for _Libata_, village.

[241] See p. 48.

[242] _Munsa_, should be _inzo_ or _nzo_, a house (see also note, p.
49).

[243] _Nkishi ngolo_, a strong _nkishi_.

[244] Marginal note by Purchas: “This seemeth to be Red Sanders. A.
Battell saith it is logwood.” Purchas is right! _Tacula_ is Red Sanders
(_Pterocarpus tinctorius_).

[245] _Nkwa_, the possessor of a thing or quality; _akwa_, possessed of.

[246] Compare p. 56, where we are told that a fetish called _Maramba_
(_Morumba_), stood in the town of the Mani Yumba.

[247] Evidently a misprint for Mayumba.

[248] Another version of this address will be found on p. 56.

[249] Marginal note with reference to the existence of amazons
(Pigafetta, p. 124): “Andr. Battell, which travelled near to these parts
[where Amazons are supposed to exist] denieth this report of Lopez as
untrue.” The Amazons of Lopez lived in Monomotapa, on the Zambezi.

[250] We may presume that Purchas told his friend what was reported by
Lopez (Pigafetta, vol. ii, chs. 5, 9) and others about the origin of the
Jagas. Battell, upon this, not only rejects the conjecture of Lopez, but
also disclaims having any knowledge of their origin himself. Elsewhere,
however, Purchas makes his author responsible for the assertion that
they came from Sierra Leone (see note, p. 19).

[251] The Bangála (_akibangála_, in Kimbundu _Jimbangála_, sing.
_kibangála_) are the people of the Jaga of Kasanj. The term merely means
“people,” and they have absolutely nothing to do with the Bangala on the
middle Kongo, still less with the Galla (see Carvalho, _Exp. Port. do
Muatianvua, Ethnographia_, p. 85).

[252] The words within asterisks are obviously a parenthesis of worthy
Purchas. He speaks (p. 854) of the Gallæ [our Galla] as a “nationless
nation,” either the same as or like in condition to the Giacchi or
Iaggés [Jaga], and (p. 857) of the Imbij as “a barbarous nation” near
Mombaza. There exists not the slightest justification for identifying
the Jagas of Angola with the Sumbas of Sierra Leone, the Mazimbas of the
Zambezi, or the Galla. The whole of this question is dealt with in the
Appendix.

[253] On infanticide, see note, p. 32.

[254] In a marginal note Purchas adds: “_Azimogli_ are the children of
Christians taken from the parents by the Turke, the spawne of their
_Ianizaries_”. It should be _Ajem oglan_ (“inexperienced boys”), the
children of Christians who were handed over to Turks to be brought up as
Moslims, and trained as recruits for the _Yanizaries_ (_Yeni-cheri_, new
troops) organised by Sultan Urkhan in 1328. This unruly force ceased to
exist in 1826.

[255] _Elembe_ means pelican.

[256] See notes, pp. 19, 28.

[257] See note, p. 26.

[258] _Njilo mukisho_, see p. 27.

[259] _Mpungi_, an ivory trumpet.

[260] See note, p. 34.

[261] See note, p. 33.

[262] _Kuzambula_, a soothsayer, diviner. Neves, p. 19, mentions a
_Mocoa-co-Zambulla_ as officiating among the Jagas of Cassanje.

[263] See pp. 1 and 6.

[264] Masanganu is the famous fort on the Kwanza built by Paulo Dias de
Novaes in 1583. Anyeca, elsewhere called Ancica, Angica, Angila and
Anguca, is clearly meant for Anzica, that is the country of the Nteke
above Stanley Pool.

[265] That is, St. Paul de Loanda, the chief town of Angola.

[266] João Furtado de Mendonça was Governor of Angola (not Kongo),
1594-1601.

[267] I know of no town (or even church) in the whole of Angola
dedicated to St. Francis.

[268] There is no such city in Angola. It seems to me that Knivet found
the name in Linschoten, a translation of whose work appeared in 1698.
Linschoten says here of the island of Luandu, which lies in front of the
Portuguese town of S. Paul de Loanda, that “there were seven or eight
villages upon it, at one of which called ‘Holy Ghost’, resides the
Governor of Kongo, who takes care of the right of fishing up shells.”
This “Governor” was an officer of the King of Kongo. The island, with
its valuable cowrie fishery, was ceded to Portugal in 1649.

[269] _Ngulu_, a hog.

[270] _Sanji_, a hen.

[271] _I’mboa_, or _mbwa_, dog.

[272] Earlier in his narrative he mentions having seen, at the Straits
of Magellan, “a kind of beast bigger than horses; they have great eyes
about a span long, and their tails are like the tail of a cow; these are
very good: the Indians of Brazil call them _tapetywason_: of these
beasts I saw in Ethiopia, in the Kingdom of Manicongo. The Portugals
call them _gombe_” (marginal note by Purchas). The gombe (_ngombe_) of
the Portugals is undoubtedly a cow, whilst the _tapetywason_, called
“taparussu” in a _Noticia de Brazil_ of 1589, and _tapyra_, in the
language of the Tupi Indians, is applied to any large beast, and even to
the oxen imported by the Portuguese, which they call _tapyra sobay go
ara_, that is, “foreign beasts,” to distinguish them from their own
_tapyra caapora_ or “forest beast.”

[273] This account of a “trial by battle” does much credit to the
author’s ingenuity. No such custom is referred to by any other visitor
to the Kongo. The meaning of “Mahobeque” we cannot discover, but
_mbenge-mbenge_ means “principally.”

[274] _Nkadi_, one who is, and _mpungu_, the highest. The usual word to
express the idea of God is _nzambi_, or _nzambi ampungu_, God the most
high! _Nkadi ampemba_, according to Bentley, means Satan. The word used
in Angola is, _Karia-pemba_.

[275] _Ri-konjo_, banana.

[276] _Mutombo_ is the flour from which cassava-bread is made.

[277] The name for bread, both in Kimbundu and Kishikongo, is _mbolo_
(derived from the Portuguese word for cake or _bolo_). _Anou_ or _auen_
may stand for _mwan_, a cassava-pudding; _tala_ means look! _kuna_,
here! The Rev. Thomas Lewis would say, in the Kongo language of
Salvador: _Umpana mbolo tambula nzimbu_; literally, “Give me bread, take
or receive money.”

[278] The cowrie-shells fished up at Luanda Island (the old “treasury”
of the Kings of Kongo) are called _njimbu_ in Angola, but _nsungu_ in
Kongo. _Njimbu_ in Kongo means beads, or money generally, and hence the
author’s “gullgimbo” evidently stands for _ngulu anjimbu_, red beads.

[279] _Npuku_, a field mouse.

[280] Crimbo (_kirimbo_) seems to be a corruption of the Portuguese
_carimbo_, a stamp.

[281] The Rev. Thomas Lewis suggests: _Mundele ke sumbanga ko, kadi wan
bele-bele_; that is, “The white men do not buy, but they have gone away
in a hurry.”

[282] _Nlele_, the general name for European cloth. They do make cloth
from the inner bark of the banyan tree (see p. 18, _note_).

[283] _Mukaji_; wife, woman, concubine.

[284] The “fishes” are no doubt molluscs.

[285] The King at the time of Knivet’s alleged visit was Alvaro II.

[286] The Vangala, spelt Bengala lower down, seems to represent the
Imbangolas of Battell, more generally known as Jagas (see p. 84, _note_)

[287] D. Alvaro sent several embassies to Europe, but never a brother of
his. The most famous of these ambassadors was Duarte Lopez, who was at
Rome in 1590.

[288] This certainly seems to be a misprint for Angola, for a party of
Portuguese going to Masanganu would never stray so far north as Anzica.
On the other hand, if Knivet was really on his way from the capital of
Congo to Prester John’s country, that is, Abyssinia, he must have gone
in the direction of Anzica.

[289] Masanganu actually stands at the confluence of the Rivers Kwanza
and Lukala!

[290] That is, they suffered from elephantiasis.

[291] Gold is often referred to in ancient documents, but its actual
discovery (so far in unremunerative quantities) is quite a recent
affair. Silver was supposed to exist in the hills of Kambambe above
Masanganu, but has not as yet been actually found.

[292] These Angicas are certainly identical with the Anziques or
Anzicanas of Duarte Lopez, according to whom they eat human flesh and
circumcise. The Angolans have at no time been charged with cannibalism.

[293] Cavazzi, p. 262, calls Corimba a province of the kingdom of Coango
(not Loango, as in Labat’s version) on the Zaire. Cadornega (quoted by
Paiva Manso, p. 285) tells us that our river Kwangu (Coango) is called
after a lordship of that name, and was known to the people as the
“great” Zaire (_nzari anene_). On the other hand, D. Pedro Affonso II,
in a letter of 1624, speaks of Bangu, which had recently been raided by
the Jaga, aided by the King of Loango (_sic_), as the “trunk and origin
of Congo” (Paiva Manso, p. 177). But then this Pedro Affonso was not of
the original dynasty of Nimi a Lukeni.

[294] Collectively known as Ambundu, a term applied in Angola to black
men generally, but in Kongo restricted to slaves, _i.e._, the conquered.
Bunda, in Kongo, has the meaning of “combine;” in Lunkumbi (Nogueira,
_Bol._ 1885, p. 246) it means “family.” Cannecatim, in the introduction
to his Grammar, says that Kimbundu originated in Kasanj, and that the
meaning of Abundo or Bundo is “conqueror.” According to Carvalho (_Exp.
Port. ao Muatianvua, Ethnographia_, p. 123) Kimbundu should be
translated “invaders.” The derivations of the word Kongo are quite as
fanciful. Bentley seems to favour _nkongo_, a “hunter.” Cordeiro da
Matta translates Kongo by “tribute;” whilst Nogueira says that Kongo
(_pl._ Makongo) denotes a “prisoner of war.”

[295] “Palaver place” or “court,” corrupted by European travellers into
“Ambasse.” Subsequently this town became known as S. Salvador.

[296] Both the Rev. W. H. Bentley and the Rev. Tho. Lewis believe Sonyo
to be a corruption, at the mouths of natives, of San Antonio. This is
quite possible, for when the old chief was baptised, in 1491, he
received the name of Manuel (after the King), whilst his son was
thenceforth known as Don Antonio. Images of Sa. Manuela and S. Antonio
are still in existence, and are venerated by the natives as powerful
fetishes (Bastian, _Loangoküste_, vol. i, p. 286). Soyo, according to
the same author, is the name of a district near the Cabo do Padrão. Yet
Garcia de Resende and Ruy de Pina, in their Chronicles of King João II,
only know a Mani Sonho, whom João de Barros calls Mani Sono. No hint of
the suggested corruption is given by any author.

[297] On these northern kingdoms, whose connexion with Kongo proper
seems never to have been very close, see Proyart, _Histoire de Loango,
Cacongo, et autres royaumes d’Afrique_, Paris, 1776; Degrandpré, _Voyage
à la côte occidentale d’Afrique_, 1786-7, Paris, 1801; and of recent
books, R. D. Dennett, _Seven Years among the Fjort_, London, 1887,
Güssfeldt, Falkenstein, and Pechuel-Loesche, _Die Loango Expedition_,
Berlin, 1879-83; and that treasury of ill-digested information, Bastian,
_Die Deutsche Expedition an der Loangoküste_, Jena, 1874-5.

[298] On the voyages of Cão and Dias, see my paper in the _Geographical
Journal_, 1900, pp. 625-655.

[299] Now Cape St. Mary, 13° 28´ S.

[300] The “Cabo do Padrão” of early maps.

[301] A legend on the chart of Henricus Martellus Germanus (1489), and
the “Parecer” of the Spanish pilots of 1525, are our only authorities on
this fact. Cão is not again mentioned in Portuguese documents (see my
Essay, _Geographical Journal_, p. 637).

[302] Nsaku was henceforth known as Don João da Silva. See Ruy de Pina,
p. 149; Garcia de Resende, c. 69; and De Barros, _Asia_, t. I, Pt. 1,
pp. 177, 224.

[303] On this embassy, see De Barros, _Asia, Dec. I_, Liv. 3; Ruy de
Pina’s _Chronica_, pp. 174-179; Garcia de Resende’s _Chronice_, cc.
155-61; D. Lopez, Bk. II, c. 2; Fr. Luis de Sousa, _Historia de S.
Domingos_, Parte II, Livro vi, c. 8; and Parte IV, Livro iv, c. 16.

[304] Not Dominicans, as is usually stated. Garcia de Resende says
Franciscans; and P. Fernando da Soledade, _Historia Serafica_, has
proved the documents published by Paiva Manso in favour of the Dominican
claim to be forgeries. Compare Eucher, _Le Congo_, Huy, 1894, p. 64.

[305] Mbaji a ekongo, the palaver-place of Kongo. See Index sub _San
Salvador_.

[306] The insignia of royalty of the Kings of Kongo are the chair, a
bâton, a bow and arrow, and the cap.

[307] De Barros calls them Mundequetes, but D. Lopez says they should be
called Anziquetes. They are the Anzicanas of later writers, about whose
identity with the Bateke there can be no doubt. Their king bore the
title of Makoko (Nkaka).

[308] Hence this, the oldest church of S. Salvador, became known as
_Egreja da Vera Cruz_. In it the Christian kings of Kongo were formerly
buried; but when the Devil took up its roof and carried the body of the
unbelieving D. Francisco to hell, their coffins were removed to other
churches (see post, p. 121). Other churches, subsequently built, are S.
Salvador, N. S. do Socorro, S. Jago, S. Miguel, dos Santos, de
Misericordia, S. Sebastian.

[309] Frei João had died soon after reaching the capital.

[310] Paiva Manso, pp. 2-4.

[311] Paiva Manso, pp. 6-76, publishes quite a series of letters and
documents bearing upon the reign of Affonso, and dated between 1512, and
December 15th, 1540. Cavazzi makes him die in 1525, but in letters
written between February 15th, 1539, and December 4th, 1540, the King
refers to D. Manuel, who was about to go to Rome, as his “brother.” If
the letters had been written by his successor Don Pedro II Affonso, Don
Manuel would have been an uncle, and not a brother.

[312] Cavazzi calls him Mpanzu a kitima; D. Lopez invariably _Mpangu_.

[313] King Affonso, whose account of this battle may be read in Paiva
Manso, p. 8, does not mention the flaming swords, but there can be no
doubt that they were seen, for they were introduced in the coat-of-arms
subsequently granted to the King. D. Lopez (p. 82) substitutes the
Virgin for the white cross seen during the battle. Cavazzi (p. 273), and
others, down to Father Eucher (_Le Congo_, Huy, 1894, p. 36),
unhesitatingly accept this miracle. The Rev. W. H. Bentley most
irreverently suggests a solar halo; but such a phenomenon might account
for flaming swords, but not for the Virgin and St. James.

[314] On this embassy, see the documents printed by Paiva Manso, and
also Damian de Goes, _Chron. do Rei D. Emanuel_, vol. iii, c. 37.

[315] _Alguns Documentos_, p. 419.

[316] On this mission, see _Alguns documentos_, pp. 277-289, for the
instructions given to Simão da Silva; Paiva Manso, pp. 5-12, or King
Manuel’s letter, and D. Affonso’s manifesto; and also Damian de Goes,
_Chronica_, vol. iii, cc. 38-39.

[317] This coat-of-arms is fully described by King Affonso himself
(Paiva Manso, p. 11), as follows:—The field _gules_, and the chief of
the coat _azure_, quartered by a cross-fleury _argent_. Each quarter of
the chief charged with two shells, _or_, on a foot _argent_, bearing a
shield _azure_, charged with the five plates of Portugal. The field
_gules_ is charged with five arms holding swords, _or_. An open helmet,
_or_, with a royal crown surmounts the coat. Crest: the five swords.
Supporters: two idols, decapitated, with their heads at their feet. The
coats figured on Pigafetta’s map and by Cavazzi, p. 274, are much less
elaborate, but are both charged with five swords. The arrow in the
latter is one of the royal insignia.

[318] In the formal documents addressed to his “brother” of Portugal, he
claims to be “By the Grace of God, King of Kongo, Ibumgu, Kakongo, Ngoyo
this side and beyond Zari, lord of the Ambundus, of Ngola, Aquisyma
(Ptolemy’s Agisymba) Muswalu, Matamba, Muyilu and Musuku, and of the
Anzicas (Bateke), and the Conquest of Mpanzu-alumbu,” &c.

[319] D. de Goes, _Chronica_, vol. iv, c. 3.

[320] Paiva Manso, pp. 15, 17.

[321] Paiva Manso, p. 71. Concerning Mpanzu-alumbu, see below.

[322] On this mission, see Paiva Manso, pp. 69-74.

[323] On the bishops of Kongo, see _Add. MS. 15183_ (British Museum),
and R. J. da Costa Mattos, _Corographia Historica das Ilhas S. Thomé,
etc._ Oporto, 1842.

[324] Paiva Manso, p. 31.

[325] For King Affonso’s account of this event, as also for an account
of a second conspiracy, apparently planned by Fernão Rodrigues Bulhão,
see Paiva Manso, pp. 76-80.

[326] For Mpangu-lungu, see Index and Glossary.

[327] The minutes of this inquiry are printed by Paiva Manso, p. 84.

[328] D. de Goes, _Chron. de Rei D. Em._, iv, c. 54.

[329] See Index, _sub_ Mpanzu-alumbu _and_ Mpangu-lungu.

[330] See Paiva Manso, pp. 60, 69. Later sovereigns claimed also to be
kings of the Matumbulas, _i.e._, the spirits of their dead ancestors
buried at S. Salvador, whom they pretended to be able to consult, and
who were dreaded as fetishes.

[331] According to a Jesuit canon, who wrote in 1624 (Paiva Manso, p.
174), these daughters were: (1) Nzinga a mbembe, the mother of D. Diego,
Affonso II, and Bernardo; (2) D. Isabel Lukeni lua mbemba, the mother of
Alvaro I, Alvaro II, Alvaro III, and Bernardo II; (3) D. Anna Tumba a
mbemba, the mother of D. Affonso Mbikia ntumba, Duke of Nsundi, whose
son was Pedro II. This genealogy does not seem to be quite trustworthy.

[332] Several authors say that he came to the throne in 1525 or 1532,
but the letters written by D. Affonso, and published by Paiva Manso,
conclusively show that this is impossible (see _supra_).

[333] His native name proves him to have been a _son_ of D. Francisco.
He is, however, generally described as a cousin or grandson of D. Pedro.

[334] The earliest published letter of D. Diogo is dated April 25th,
1547. His death is mentioned in a letter dated November 4th, 1561 (Paiva
Manso, pp. 81, 113). He may, however, have died a considerable time
before that date. Lopez de Lima (_An. Mar._ 1845, p. 101) makes him die
in 1552, after a reign of nine years.

[335] This bishop was a Dominican. He entered upon his charge in 1549.
The four Jesuits going in his company were Christovão Ribeira, Jacome
Dias, Jorge Vaz, and Diogo de Soveral.

[336] See letters in Paiva Manso, pp. 91-93.

[337] He was appointed bishop in 1554, and died at S. Thomé in 1574.

[338] For the minutes of an inquiry into a conspiracy planned by one D.
Pedro ka nguanu of Mbemba, in 1550, see Paiva Manso, pp. 101, 110.

[339] Compare D. Lopez, p. 93; Cavazzi, p. 276; a list of kings given by
the Duke of Mbamba to the bishop D. Manuel Baptista in 1617 (Paiva
Manso, p. 166), the statement of a Jesuit canon of S. Salvador made in
1624 (_ibid._, p. 174), and Christovão Dorte de Sousa’s letter to Queen
Catherine of Portugal, dated (Luandu) November 4th, 1561 (_ibid._, p.
113); also a letter by P. Rodrigues de Pias, 1565 (Eucher, _Le Congo_,
p. 70).

[340] Printed by Paiva Manso, p. 114.

[341] His letter is printed by Paiva Manso, p. 116. It was during the
reign of this king, in 1563, that a “missionary” is stated to have
crossed Africa (Garcia d’Orta, _Coloquios dos simples e drogos_. Goa,
1567).

[342] Lopez de Lima, _An. Mar._, 1845, p. 101.

[343] Duarte Lopez, p. 93.

[344] Alvaro, according to Cavazzi, came to the throne in 1542 and died
in 1587, whilst Lopez de Lima, quite arbitrarily, puts off his accession
to 1552. These figures are absolutely incorrect, as may be seen from the
date of the letter of Queen Catherine to D. Bernardo. D. Alvaro cannot
possibly have ascended the throne anterior to 1568.

[345] The Ayaka still inhabit a large stretch of country along the
Kwangu, and are generally considered to be identical with the Jagas
(Cavazzi speaks of them as Jaga, or Aiaka), an opinion which I do not
share. See _post_, p. 149.

[346] I imagine the account given by Duarte Lopez, p. 96, is much
exaggerated.

[347] Garcia Mendes, p. 9.

[348] As a proof of vassalage we may mention that the King was denied
the title of _Alteza_ (Highness), which would have implied sovereign
rights, and was only allowed that of _Senhoria_ (lordship).

[349] Duarte Lopez, p. 9. Originally, the Christian kings of Kongo were
buried in this church, but upon this desecration their bodies were
removed to other churches.

[350] Our information concerning the reign of this king is exceedingly
scanty. We think we have shown satisfactorily that he cannot have
reigned from 1542 to 1587, but are unable to vouch either, for the date
of the invasion of his country by the Ayaka, or for that of his death.

[351] In a letter of September 15th, 1617 (Paiva Manso, p. 166).

[352] Samuel Braun, who visited the Kongo in 1612, says that the fort
built near the Padrão, and another on an uninhabited island, had been
razed.

[353] Sebastian da Costa had been sent to Kongo to announce the
accession of Philip I, in 1580. He was given a letter by D. Alvaro, but
died on the voyage, and Duarte Lopez, upon whose writings and discourses
Pigafetta based his work on the Kongo (see p. 19), was appointed in his
stead. For an account of this embassy, see Duarte Lopez, pp. 101-108.

[354] Printed by Paiva Manso, p. 158.

[355] This order was, as a matter of course, issued at the instance of
the Council of Regency at Lisbon.

[356] Paiva Manso, pp. 174-177.

[357] We confess that this is unintelligible to us. Perhaps
we ought to read Coango (Kwangu), instead of Loango. There is, of
course, the “kingdom” of Kwangu beyond the Kwangu river, within which
lies the district of Kurimba, the birthplace of the first King of Kongo
(see p. 102). Bangu is evidently the district on the river Mbengu. It
may have been the home of the King’s ancestors; and the Kwangu here
referred to may be a neighbouring district of that name (see Index).

[358] It was during the reign of this King that five Portuguese
merchants crossed the Kwangu and fell into the hands of the Makoko, who
made slaves of them. But upon this, his kingdom was visited by plague
and famine, and his armies were beaten; and these “miracles” only ceased
when, acting on the advice of his diviners, he had sent back his
prisoners to S. Salvador, richly compensated for their sufferings
(Cavazzi, p. 281).

[359] For documents referring to the reign of this king, see Paiva
Manso, pp. 187-237.

[360] Whether the Dutch ambassadors prostrated themselves when presented
to the king, as shown on one of Dapper’s plates, may be doubted.

[361] The auxiliary force of thirty Dutchmen was commanded by Captain
Tihman (Dapper, p. 541).

[362] They sent, indeed, a vessel to remonstrate, but the Duke defied
them to land, and they retired humbly.

[363] Dapper, p. 572. Perhaps the itinerary on one of Dapper’s maps from
Mpinda, by way of Mbamba, S. Salvador, Mbata and Nsundi, is supplied by
Herder. The names _conso_, _canda_, _quing_ and _ensor_ of the map are
corruptions of the names of the four week-days (_konso_, _nkanda_,
_nkenga_ and _nsona_), and designate places where markets are held on
those days.

[364] He died at S. Salvador in 1651, when about to start for Abyssinia,
and was succeded by P. Giovanni Francisco of Valenza, as Prefect. For a
full account of the missions of 1645 and 1648, see Pellicer de Tovar,
_Mission Evangelica al Reyno de Congo_, Madrid, 1649; and P. Francisco
Fragio, _Breve Relazione_, Rome, 1648.

[365] Giovanni Antonio de Cavazzi, of Montecuccolo, was a member of this
mission.

[366] This district was invaded by Queen Nzinga, in 1649, and the
missionaries, P. Bonaventura of Correglia, and P. Francesco of Veas,
retired.

[367] See Cavazzi, pp. 512-15.

[368] Those of our readers who have no time or inclination to wade
through the bulky tomes of Cavazzi and other missionaries of those days,
may be recommended to read an excellent summary by the Franciscan Friar
Eucher (_Le Congo, Essai sur l’Histoire Religieuse de ce Pays_, Huy,
1860).

[369] Paiva Manso, pp. 200-229.

[370] Fr. Bonaventura had left Luandu in December, 1649; in June, 1650,
he was in Rome; in July, 1651, at Lisbon. He then returned to Kongo in
the company of P. Giacinto Brusciotto of Vetralla (1652), but ultimately
joined the mission in Georgia. To Brusciotto we are indebted for a
grammar and vocabulary of the Sonyo dialect, published at Rome in 1659.

[371] Paiva Manso, p. 244.

[372] I have no doubt that these “Pedras” are identical with the “Pedras
de Nkoshi,” or “lion rocks,” now occupied by the Presidio of Encoge.

[373] Cavazzi, p. 287.

[374] Published by Paiva Manso, pp. 350-355.

[375] Pedro Mendes, however, only gives the names of ten Kings. If we
add to these Alvaro VII, D. Rafael, and Alvaro IX, mentioned by others,
we make up the number to thirteen. See Appendix III for a list and
classification of these Kings.

[376] Cadornega says Affonso III.

[377] He had some correspondence with the Pope in 1673 and 1677.

[378] Paiva Manso, p. 254.

[379] See Eucher, _Le Congo_, p. 176. Subsequently the Capuchins
returned to Sonyo (Merollo in 1683, Zucchelli in 1703).

[380] Dionigi Carli paid a visit to these: see his _Viaggio_, Reggio,
1672.

[381] See Merolla’s _Relatione del Regno di Congo_, Naples, 1692; and
Zucchelli’s _Viaggi_, Venice, 1712.

[382] His captain-general, D. Pedro Constantino, managed to get himself
elected king, but was taken prisoner and beheaded at S. Salvador in
1709.

[383] It was not unusual to make a charge for the administration of the
sacraments. In 1653, the parochial priests complained that the Capuchin
friars administered the sacraments without claiming an “acknowledgment;”
and the authorities at Rome (1653) prohibited their doing so within five
leagues of the capital (Paiva Manso, p. 233). At Mbamba, the priest had
a regular scale of prices. A baptism cost 7,000 cowries, for a marriage
a slave was expected, and so forth; and thus, adds the Bishop of Angola
(1722): “little children go to limbo, and grown-up people to hell!”

[384] _Western Africa_, London, 1856, p. 329.

[385] _Boletim_, Lisbon Geogr. Society, March 1889.

[386] In 1709, the Holy Office declared the slave-trade in Africa
illicit. Only those persons were to be looked upon as slaves who were
born such; who had been captured in a just war; who had sold themselves
for money (a usual practice in Africa); or who had been adjudged slaves
by a just sentence.

[387] _Alguns Documentos_, p. 107.

[388] For the instructions given to Pacheco, see _Alguns Documentos_, p.
436.

[389] Paiva Manso, p. 55.

[390] Kiluanji, nzundu, and ndambi, which are given as names of kings,
are in reality only titles assumed by them.—Capello and Ivens,
_Benguella to the Iacca_, vol. ii, p. 53. Tumba-ndala (according to Héli
Chatelain) was another of these ancient royal titles.

[391] Capello and Ivens, _ib._, vol. ii, p. 59. His proper name is
Kalunga (_i.e._, Excellency) ndombo akambo.

[392] _Kabâsa_, according to Cordeiro da Matta’s _Diccionario_, simply
means “capital;” but J. V. Carneiro (_An. do cons. ultram._, vol. ii, p.
172, 1861) would have us distinguish between a Mbanza ia Kabasa and a
Mbanza ia Kakulu; the former meaning “second,” the latter “first,”
capital. This “first” or original capital of the kings of Ndongo was
undoubtedly in the locality of Queen Nzinga’s kabasa; the second capital
was at Pungu a ndongo.

[393] Cavazzi, pp. 9, 621. The Queen was branded as a slave (a practice
learnt from the Portuguese; see Marcador in the Index), and died of
grief; but her daughter was received into favour, and was baptized in
1667.

[394] Lopes de Lima (_Ensaio_, vol. iii, _parte segundo_), is very
severe upon Cavazzi, whom he charges with having “falsified” history,
but does nothing himself to throw light upon the vexed question of the
names of the kings of Matamba and Ndongo. The following is a summary of
Cavazzi’s very copious information (where Antonio of Gaeta gives
different names, these are added within brackets). _Ngola_, the smith,
or _musuri_ (_Ngola Bumbumbula_), was the founder of the kingdom of
Ndongo. Having no sons, he was succeeded by his daughter, _Nzunda ria
ngola_, and then by another daughter, _Tumba ria ngola_, who married a
_Ngola kiluanji kia Samba_, a great warrior. Their son, _Ngola
kiluanji_, was succeeded by _Ndambi ngola_. Then followed _Ngola
kiluanji kia ndambi_, another great warrior, who advanced to within ten
leagues of the sea, and planted a _nzanda_ tree (_Insandeira_), on the
northern bank of the Kwanza, a short distance above Tombo, to mark the
furthest point reached by his conquering hosts. _Nzinga ngola kilombo
kia kasende_ (_Ngola kiluanji_) followed next; then came _Mbandi ngola
kiluanji_, the father, and _Ngola mbandi_, the brother, of the famous
Queen _Nzinga (Jinga) mbandi ngola_ (born 1582, acceded 1627, died
1663), since whose day the upper part of Ndongo, including Matamba; has
been known as Nzinga or Ginga. The great queen was succeeded by her
sister, _D. Barbara da Silva_, who married _D. Antonio Carrasco nzinga a
mina_ (she died 1666). Then followed in succession _D. João Guterres
Ngola kanini_, _D. Francisco Guterres Ngola kanini_ (1680-81), and _D.
Victoria_, whom Cadornega calls _Veronica_.

According to Lopez de Lima, it was a Jaga of Matamba, _Ngola a nzinga_,
who conquered Ndongo, and gave it as an appanage to his son, _Ngola
mbandi_. It was this _Ngola mbandi_ who invited the Portuguese in 1556,
and a son of his, bearing the same name or title, who received Dias in
1560.

Cadornega (Paiva Manso, p. 281) gives the following names as the “Kings
of Angola” since the arrival of the Portuguese: Ngola a kiluanji, Ngola
mbandi, Ngola a kiluanji II, Queen Nzinga D. Anna de Sousa, D. Antonio
Carrasco Nzinga a mina, D. Barbara da Silva, his wife; D. João Guterres
Ngola kanini, D. Luis, D. Francisco Guterres Ngola kanini, D. Veronica,
the wife of D. Francisco.

[395] Called Ngola mbandi by Lopes de Lima.

[396] Paiva Manso, p. 112.

[397] The Jesuit fathers (Francisco de Gouvea and Garcia Simões) date
their letters from _Angoleme_, and call the King’s capital Glo-amba
Coamba, evidently a misprint. Sixty leagues would carry us far beyond
the later capital, Pungu a ndongo, perhaps as far as the Anguolome
aquitambo (Ngwalema a kitambu) of Garcia Mendes, in the district known
as Ari. Another Angolome (Ngolome) lived less than twenty leagues from
the coast, on the northern side of the Kwanza, and near him a soba,
Ngola ngoleme a kundu. Neves (_Exped. de Cassange_) says the old name of
Pungu a ndongo is Gongo a mboa. For the Jesuit letters of that time, see
(_Boletim_, 1883, pp. 300-344).

[398] He is referred to as Ngola Mbandi or Ngola ndambi.

[399] Lopes de Lima, _Ensaios_, p. ix, calls him Kiluanji kia samba, an
ancestor of the chief residing near the presidio of Duque de Bragança.
V. J. Duarte (_Annaes do cons. ultramar._, vol. ii, p. 123), the
commandant of that presidio in 1847, confirms that it occupies the site
of a former chief of that name, who was, however, quite an insignificant
personage.

[400] Domingos d’Abreu de Brito, in a MS. of 1592, quoted by Lima,
_Ensaios_, p. x. Garcia Mendes mentions seven hundred men, but these
probably included the crews of the vessels.

[401] F. Garcia Simões, S.J., informs us that a few days before the
arrival of Dias four men had been killed at a village only six leagues
from Luandu, and eaten.—_Boletim_, 1883.

[402] Domingos d’Abreu de Brito, quoted by Paiva Manso, p. 139, informs
us that in 1592 it was governed by a Muene Mpofo, M. Luandu and M.
Mbumbi.

[403] The King, after his defeat, is stated to have ordered the Makotas
who had given him this evil counsel to be killed (Lopes de Lima, p.
xiii).

[404] Lima, _Ensaios_, vol. xi, suggests that this S. Cruz became
subsequently known as Kalumbu, and that its church was dedicated to S.
José. To me it seems more likely that it occupied the site of Tombo, and
was subsequently abandoned.

[405] This “Penedo” seems subsequently to have been named after Antonio
Bruto, a captain-major.

[406] Garcia Mendes, p. 19, describes Kanzele as lying half-way between
the rivers Kwanza and Mbengu.

[407] According to Antonio of Gaeta two leagues below Masanganu. Garcia
Mendes calls this place Makumbe.

[408] See his account of this battle in _Boletim_, 1883, p. 378. The
story in the _Catalogo_, that Dias sent loads of cut-off noses to S.
Paulo, is hardly credible.

[409] So says Garcia Mendes, p. 25; whilst Duarte Lopez, p. 34, says
they were sent, but being defeated on the river Mbengu, retired again to
the north.

[410] Diogo Rodrigues dos Colos brought three hundred men in 1584;
Jacome da Cunha, nine hundred in 1586. Two hundred Flemings, who arrived
in 1587, nearly all died soon after they had been landed.

[411] Garcia Mendes, p. 24.

[412] In 1809 his remains were transferred to the Jesuit Church at
Luandu.

[413] This place is said to be eighty leagues from Masanganu, a gross
exaggeration. Vicente José, who was the commander of Duque de Bragança
in 1848, mentions a Ngolema Aquitamboa among the chiefs of Haire da cima
(_An. do Conselho ultram._, vol. ii, p. 123).

[414] Garcia Mendes mentions the Kindas as if they were a tribe. To me
they seem to be the people of the Jaga Kinda (Chinda of the Italian
Capuchins), one of the chiefs killed by the famous Queen Nzinga. See
Cavazzi, p. 636, and Antonio de Gaeta’s narrative in _La maravigliosa
conversione delle Regina Singa escritta dal. P. F. Francesco Maria Gioia
da Napoli_. Naples, 1669, p. 233. Emilio, a son of Count Laudati, was
born in 1615; he lived a few years as a knight of Malta, and then
entered a monastery of Capuchins, assuming the name of Antonio of Gaeta.
He landed at Luandu in November, 1650, and died there, after an active
life as a missionary, in July, 1662.

[415] Called Kakalele in the _Catalogo_.

[416] Douville, _Voyage au Congo_, Paris, 1832, vol. ii, p. 375;
Bowdich, _On the Bunda Language_, p. 138, note 2.

[417] See note, p. 84.

[418] _Breve Relação da embaixada_, etc., Lisbon, 1565. Reprint of 1875,
p. 98.

[419] It will be remembered that Battell, p. 25, writes Gaga as an
alternative form for Jaga. May Agau stand for Agaga, the Jagas
collectively?

[420] _Relacão anuel_, 1602-3. Lisbon, 1605.

[421] Ginde (pronounced Jinde) may be derived from _njinda_, the meaning
of which is fury, hostility.

[422] See p. 83.

[423] _Expedição Portuguesa: Ethnographia_, p. 56.

[424] _Expedição a Cassange_, Lisbon, 1854.

[425] Perhaps Manuel Cerveira Pereira, who founded the Presidio of
Kambambe in 1604. The first DON Manuel, however, is D. Manuel Pereira
Forjaz (1607-11). But as the Jaga offered to fight Queen Nzinga, who
only acceded in 1627, this Don Manuel may have been D. Manuel Pereira
Coutinho (1630-34).

[426] A “feira” was established at Lukamba, near Mbaka, in 1623. The
Kamueji is perhaps the Fumeji of Capello and Ivens.

[427] The list of Neves, p. 108, begins with Kinguri kia bangala, who
was succeeded by Kasanje kaimba, Kasanje kakulachinga, Kakilombo,
Ngonga-nbande, etc.

[428] Capello and Ivens, _Benguella to Iacca_, vol. i, p. 239, include
Mahungo and Kambolo among the family of Ngongo, and Mbumba among that of
Kulachinga.

[429] _Reisen in Süd-Afrika_, Pest, 1869, p. 264.

[430] From _Mpakasa_, a buffalo, and the meaning of the word is
therefore originally “buffalo-hunter,” but it was subsequently applied
to natives employed by government, as soldiers, etc. Capello and Ivens,
_From Benguella to the Yacca_, vol. ii, p. 215, deny that they ever
formed a secret society for the suppression of cannibalism.

[431] _Kichile_, transgression.

[432] See Cavazzi, pp. 182-205.

[433] It is to him we owe several memoirs, referred to p. xviii. He did
excellent service; but whilst João Velloria and others were made Knights
of the Order of Christ, and received other more substantial rewards, his
merits seem not to have been recognised.

[434] This important MS., dated 1592, still awaits publication.

[435] Lopes de Lima, _Ensaios_, p. 147.

[436] However, there are two sides to this dispute, and it may well be
doubted whether the natives would not have been better off under a
Jesuit theocracy than they were under an utterly corrupt body of civil
officials. See P. Guerreiro, _Relação anual de_ 1605, p. 625, and Lopes
de Lima, p. xviii.

[437] Erroneously called Adenda by most authors. Battell is the first to
give the correct name.

[438] Garcia Mendes, p. 24.

[439] They were “converts” from the Casa Pia founded by D. Maria, the
queen of D. Manuel—not reformed criminals, but converted Jewesses.

[440] Battell gives some account of this campaign. See also Garcia
Mendes, p. 11. Ngombe a Mukiama, one of the Ndembu to the north of the
Mbengu, may be a descendant of this Ngombe (see Luis Simplico Fonseca’s
account of “Dembos” in _An. do conselho ultram._, ii, p. 86).

[441] Upon this Spaniard was conferred the habit of the Order of Christ,
he was granted a pension of 20,000 reis, and appointed “marcador dos
esclavos,” an office supposed to yield I,000 cruzados a year (Rebello de
Aragão, p. 23).

[442] Luciano Cordeiro (_Terras e Minas_, p. 7), says that, according to
local tradition, the first presidio of that name was at Kasenga, a
village which we are unable to discover on any map.

[443] See Battell’s account of this campaign, p. 37.

[444] See note, p. 37.

[445] See Glossary, _Museke_.

[446] Others call him Paio d’Araujo.

[447] Estabelecimentos, 1607.

[448] A. Beserra Fajardo, in _Producçoes commercio e governo do Congo e
de Angola_, 1629, one of the documents published by Luciano Cordeiro in
1881.

[449] Near where the railway now crosses that river.

[450] Rebello de Aragão, p. 15.

[451] It seems that the explorer considers Kambambe to lie eighty
leagues inland (P. Guerreiro—_Rel. an._, 1515, f. 126—estimated the
distance from S. Paulo to Kafuchi’s at sixty leagues). Accepting this
gross over-estimate in calculating his further progress, and assuming
him to have gone to the south-east, which was not only the shortest
route to Chikovo and Mwanamtapa, but also avoided the country of the
hostile Ngola, he cannot even have got as far as Bié. As to a “big
lake,” he heard no more than other travellers have heard since, only to
be disappointed. The natives certainly never told him that one of the
rivers flowing out of that lake was the Nile. This bit of information he
got out of a map. His expedition _may_ have taken place in 1607—he
himself gives no date. Perhaps Forjaz had given the instructions, which
were only carried out in 1612, when Kambambe was in reality threatened
by the natives.

[452] Rebello de Aragão, p. 14, calls him Manuel da Silveira.

[453] A Kakulu Kabasa still lives to the north-east of Masanganu, in 9°
4´ S., 14° 9´ E.

[454] The territory of a chief of that name is on the upper Mbengu, to
the north of Mbaka. The _Catalogo_ calls him Kakulu Kahango.

[455] See _Benguella e seu sertão_, 1617-22, by an anonymous writer,
published by Luciano Cordeiro in 1881.

[456] This bay is known by many aliases, such as S. Maria, S. Antonio,
do Sombreiro, and da Torre.

[457] The anonymous MS. already cited by us is, however, silent on this
subject.

[458] Antonio Diniz, who wrote in 1622 (_Producções do Congo e de
Angola_, Lisbon, 1881, p. 14), charges Pereira with having sent, without
the King’s knowledge, three shiploads of salt to Luandu, which he
exchanged for “Farinha de guerra” (Commissariat flour), with which to
feed his men.

[459] That is a _district_ called Kakonda, for the old fort of that name
(Caconda velha), sixty miles from the coast, was only built in 1682.
Letters from Pereira, dated September 9th, 1620, and January 23rd, 1621,
in _Egerton MS. 1133_ (British Museum), ff. 357-361.

[460] I do not know whether oxen were employed as beasts of burthen
(_bois cavallos_) in these early days.

[461] Reckoning the cruzado at 2_s._ 8_d._

[462] Published by Luciano Cordeiro.

[463] Dapper, p. 592, regrets that these exactions ceased on the
occupation of the country by the Dutch (not from love of the native, we
may be sure), and that, as a consequence, his countrymen were little
respected.

[464] Antonio Diniz, _Producçoes, commercio e governo do Congo e de
Angola_, 1516-19, published by Luciano Cordeiro in 1881.

[465] Luiz de Figuerido Falcão, _Livro em que se contem toda a Fazenda_,
etc. Lisbon, 1855, p. 26. I reckon 400 reis to a cruzado worth 2_s._
8_d._

[466] The Capitão-mor do Campo, who was the chief officer next to the
Governor, was paid £67; the ouvidor (or judge), £34; the sergeant-major,
£34; the principal financial officer (provedor da Fazenda), £27: a
captain of infantry, £40; a private, £18. There was a “marcador dos
esclavos,” who branded the slaves. He received no pay but levied fees
which brought him in £140 a year (see _Estabelecimentos_, p. 21).

In 1721 the Governor’s salary was raised to 15,000 cruzados (£2,000),
but he was forbidden to engage any longer in trade.

[467] Called Nzinga mbandi ngola, or Mbandi Ngola kiluanji, by Cavazzi,
pp. 28, 601; Ngola akiluanji by Cadornega; and Nzinga mbandi, King of
Ndongo and Matamba, in the _Catalogo_.

[468] Called Ngola mbandi by Cavazzi, Cadornega, and in the _Catalogo_;
Ngola-nzinga mbandi by Lopes de Lima, _Ensaios_, p. 95.

[469] This removal seems to have taken place immediately after the
Governor’s arrival. The site chosen was that of the Praça velha of
modern maps, to the south of the present Ambaca.

[470] D. João de Souza Ngola ari was the first King of Angola (Ndongo)
recognised by the Portuguese. He only survived a few days, and was
succeeded by D. Felippe de Souza, who died in 1660; and by D. João II,
the last of the line, who was executed as a traitor in 1671.

[471] Livingstone, _Missionary Travels_, 1857, p. 371, calls this a law
dictated by motives of humanity.

[472] He was appointed April 7th, 1621, took possession in September
1621, and left in 1623 (see _Add. MS._ 15, 183, I. 5).

[473] Literally “mother priest.” It is thus the natives of Angola call
the Roman Catholic priests, because of their long habits, to distinguish
them from their own _Nganga_.

[474] Ndangi (Dangi), with the royal sepultures (_Mbila_), was two
leagues from Pungu a ndongo (according to Cavazzi, p. 20).

[475] Bento de Benha Cardozo was originally given the command, but died
before operations were begun.

[476] The Queen was in the habit of consulting the spirits of the Jagas
Kasa, Kasanji, Kinda, Kalandu and Ngola mbandi, each of whose _Mbila_
(pl. _Jimbila_), or sepulture, was in charge of a soothsayer or
_Shingiri_ (Cavazzi, p. 656).

[477] The _Catalogo_ is provokingly obscure with respect to the pursuit
of the Queen. Malemba (Lemba) is known to be above Hako, to the west of
the Kwanza, whilst Ngangela (Ganguella) is a nickname applied by the
Binbundo to the tribes to the east of them. “Little Ngangela,” according
to Cavazzi, is identical with the country of the Bangala, or Kasanji, of
modern maps. Kina (quina) simply means “sepulture” or “cavern,” and A.
R. Neves (p. 103) tells us that Kasanji, on first arriving in the
country where subsequently he settled permanently, took up his quarters
at Kina kia kilamba (“Sepulture of the exorcist”). The mountain
mentioned by Cavazzi (p. 770), as abounding in caverns full of the
skulls of Kasanji’s victims, may be identical with this Kina.

[478] Cavazzi, pp. 9, 622. In one place he calls her the dowager-queen,
in the other the daughter of Matamba Kalombo, the last King of Matamba.
J. V. Carneiro (_An. do cons. ultram._ 1861), asserts that Matamba was
the honorary title of the great huntsman of Ngola.

[479] D. Simão de Mascarenhas had been appointed bishop of Kongo on
November 15th, 1621, and provisionally assumed the office of Governor at
the urgent request of the captain-major Pedro de Souza Coelho. He was a
native of Lisbon and a Franciscan. On the arrival of his successor,
Fernão de Souza, in 1624, he proceeded to his See at S. Salvador, and
died there in the following year under mysterious circumstances. Under
his successor, D. Francisco Soveral (1628, d. 1642) the See was
transferred to S. Paulo de Luandu. (_Add. MS._ 15,183). The dates given
by Lopes de Lima (_Ensaio_, iii, p. 166a) are evidently corrupt.

[480] This Kafuche appears to have been a descendant of the warlike soba
of that name. Another Kafuche, likewise in Kisama, asked to be baptised
in 1694 (see Paiva Manso, p. 332).

[481] Dapper, p. 579. This first attempt to cultivate the soil was
undertaken very reluctantly, but the profits derived therefrom soon
converted both banks of the Mbengu into flourishing gardens.

[482] The _Catalogo_, p. 366, calls him Alvares, but Paiva Manso, p.
182, Gaspar Gonçalves (see also Eucher, p. 83).

[483] This seminary was never founded, notwithstanding repeated Royal
reminders of 1684, 1686, 1688, and 1691 (Lopez de Lima, _Ensaio_, iii,
p. 149).

[484] S. Braun, _Schifffarten_, Basel, 1624; and P. van der Broeck,
_Journalen_, Amst., 1624.

[485] Jacome Ferreira, in command of these patrol ships, was killed in
action in 1639, when the command devolved upon Bartholomeu de
Vasconcellos.

[486] N. G. van Kampen, _Geschiedenes der Nederlanders buiten Europa_,
Haarlem, 1831, vol. i, p. 436, asks his readers to decide upon the
morality of this proceeding, when negotiations were actually in
progress, and in the case of Portugal, which had only recently thrown
off the yoke of Spain, the common enemy.

[487] _Catalogo_, p. 375.

[488] _Cavazzi_, p. 626.

[489] He was a son of the valiant Martim de Sá, the Governor of Rio de
Janeiro. Previously to sailing up to Luandu, he erected a factory on
Kikombo Bay.

[490] This envoy likewise visited the Jagas Kasanji, Kalungu and Kalumbu
for the purpose of persuading them to abolish infanticide; and they
promised to shut an eye if the old practice was not followed.

[491] In 1652 two years’ grace for the payment of all debts incurred
anterior to the invasion of the Dutch was granted to all inhabitants of
Angola.

[492] Cavazzi vouches for this (p. 637).

[493] She was conducted back by José Carrasco.

[494] This may have been Kasanji ka kinjuri, born in 1608, and baptised
by Antonio of Serraveza in 1655, and named D. Pasquale (Cavazzi, p.
784).

[495] Lopes de Lima, _Ensaio_, iii, p. xxxii, says he was assassinated
by a Portuguese soldier.

[496] All the successors of the famous Queen, as also her people and
country, are called Nzinga (Ginga) by Portuguese authors.

[497] Lopes de Lima, _Ensaio_, iii, p. 117, and parte segunda, p. 18,
calls them Quinalonga, and there can be no doubt of their identity with
the Quihindonga (Kindonga) islands of Cavazzi. The _Catalogo_ does not
mention this cession.

[498] He had arrived on August 26th, 1669, and spite of his prudence
must be held responsible for this disastrous Sonyo campaign.

[499] See Paivo Manso, p. 255, who quotes an anonymous _Relação_,
published at Lisbon in 1671; also Cadornega.

[500] Cavazzi, who accompanied this expedition as chaplain, gives a full
account of it, without naming the Portuguese commander. His geographical
data, as usual, are exceedingly vague: a circumstance all the more to be
regretted, as even now we know very little about this part of Angola.

[501] This soba had been baptised. In 1684, a brother of his expelled
him, but he was reinstated by João de Figueireda e Souza.

[502] From a letter published by Paiva Manso (p. 316), we learn that
Mbuilu had begged the King of Kongo to receive him as a vassal.

[503] For King Pedro’s letter of thanks for this victory, see
_Catalogo_, p. 401. In 1693, massacres of prisoners were strictly
prohibited.

[504] He died in prison at Luandu.

[505] The author of a Report referred to below admits that they had many
detractors who were envious of their success.

[506] Seventeen Capuchins, eight Jesuits, seven Franciscans, and four
Carmelites.

[507] In 1709 there were seven million reis in its treasury.

[508] _Ensaio_, iii, p. 149.

[509] The testoon was a coin of 100 reis, worth about 8_d._

[510] The assumed value of the _makuta_ was 50 reis; its actual value,
in silver, only 30 reis. There were pieces of half _makutas_ and of
quarter _makutas_, popularly called _paka_.

[511] Zucchelli (p. xvii, § 11), tells us that when Luiz Cerar de
Menezes returned to Rio, in 1701, he carried away with him 1,500,000
crusados (£200,000), realised in the slave trade.

[512] _Ensaio_, iii, p. xxxiv.

[513] Provincial Governors not appointed by the King, but elected by the
local authorities or the troops.




INDEX AND GLOSSARY.


For information additional to that given in the body of this volume,
consult Bramas, Margarita, Ostrich Eggs.

Included in this Index are all the geographical names mentioned by
Duarte Lopes (Pigafetta’s _Report of the Kingdom of Congo_), as also
many names referred to by Cavazzi, Paiva Manso, and others.

The approximate geographical position is given in degrees and tenths of
degrees.

For names beginning with _C_, _Ch_, or _Qu_, see also _K_.


   +Abundu+, pl. of _mbundu_, a slave. In Angola the natives generally
      are called _Ambundu_.

   +Aca mochana.+ _See_ Aki musanu.

   +Acca+, a corruption of _Aki_, followers.

   +Achelunda.+ _See_ Aquilunda.

   +Adenda.+ _See_ Ndemba.

   +Administration+ of natives, 161

   +Affonso VI+, King of Portugal, 183

   +Affonso I+, King of Kongo, 110, 136

   +Affonso II+, King of Kongo, 119, 136

   +Affonso III+, King of Kongo, 131, 137

   +Agag+, are not Jaga, 150

   +Aghirimba,+ according to D. Lopez, the ancient name for _Mbata_,
      but called _Agisymba_ on his map, and evidently Ptolemy’s region
      of that name, 112

   +Agoa Kaiongo+ (Augoy cayango), 9.8 S., 14.2 E., 37;
     battle of 1603, 156

   +Agoa rozada+, King of Kongo (Pedro IV), 133, 137

   +Aguiar+, Alvaro, 175

   +Aguiar+, Francisco de, 175

   +Aguiar+, Ruy d’, 113

   +Aiacca+, _See_ Ayaka.

   +Aki+, followers.

   +Akimbolo+ (Aquibolo), about 9.3 S., 14.9 E., 149

   +Aki musanu+ (Acamochana), a soba, 8.9 S., 13.8 E., 172

   +Albinos+, 48, 81

   +Alemquer+, Pero d’, pilot, 108

   +Alguns documentos+, quoted, 112, 139, 140

   +Almadias+, Golfo das, undoubtedly Kabinda Bay (5.5 S.), but Battel’s
     _B. da Almadias_, 43, is identical with Black Point Bay, 4.8 S., 43

   +Almeida+, D. Francisco, 153, 188

   +Almeida+, D. Jeronymo, 153, 154, 188

   +Almeida+, João Soares de, 132

   +Alvares+, Gaspar (or Gonçales), 169

   +Alvaro I+, King of Kongo, 119, 136

   +Alvaro II+, King of Kongo, 121, 136

   +Alvaro III+, King of Kongo, 122,137

   +Alvaro IV+, King of Kongo, 124, 137

   +Alvaro V+, King of Kongo, 124, 137

   +Alvaro VI+, King of Kongo, 125, 137

   +Alvaro VII+, King of Kongo, 130, 137

   +Alvaro VIII+, King of Kongo, 131, 137

   +Alvaro IX+, King of Kongo, 130, 133, 137

   +Alvaro+, Frei, the assassin, 115

   +Alvaro Gonçales Bay+, called _Alvaro Martins’ Bay_ on map (D. Lopez);
     identical with Yumba Bay, 3.3 S., 10.5 E.

   +Ambaca.+ _See_ Mbaka.

   +Ambasse+, or Ambresa, a corruption of _mbazi_ or _mbaji_.
     _See_ S. Salvador.

   +Ambriz+ (Mbidiji or Mbiriji) river, 7.3 S., 12.9 E., 131, 132

   +Amboella.+ _See_ Mbwela.

   +Ambrosio I+, King of Kongo, 124, 137

   +Ambuilla.+ _See_ Mbuila.

   +Ambuila dua.+ _See_ Mbuila anduwa.

   +Ambandu+, _i.e._, negroes (in Kongo abundu = slaves), 103, 112

   +Ambus+ (D. Lopez), tribe between coast and Anzica; perhaps the
     _Balumbu_. Mbu = ocean.

   +Ampango.+ _See_ Mpangu.

   +Amulaza+, Congo de, 6.0 S., 16.3 E.

   +Andala mbandos+ (Ndala mbandu), or Endalla nbondos, 17

   +Andrada+, João-Juzarte, 174, 189

   +André mulaza+, King of Kongo, 132, 137

   +Angazi+, or Engazi (D. Lopez), Ingasia (Battell). _See_ Ngazi.

   +Angeka+, or Engeco (nsiku, Chimpanzee), 54

   +Angelo+ of Valenza, capuchin, 126

   +Angica+ of Knivet, are the Anzica.

   +Angoi.+ _See_ Ngoya.

   +Angola+, history, 139;
     Knivet’s account, 93

   +Angola.+ _See_ Ngola.

   +Angoleme+ (Ngolome) of Jesuits was Ngola’s capital in 1565, 143

   +Anguolome aquitambo+ (Ngwalema a kitambu), 9. S., 15.8 E.;
     battle 143, 148

   +Angoy kayonga+, a chief. _See_ Agoa Kaiongo.

   +Antelopes+, 40

   +Antonio I+, King of Kongo, 129, 137

   +Antonio+, Friar, a Franciscan, 110

   +Antonio+, de Dénis, or Diogo de Vilhégas, 114

   +Antonio+ of Serravezza, Capuchin, 177

   +Antonio Laudati+, of Gaeta, 148 _n._, 140, 146, 176, 184

   +Anville+, B. d’, his maps, xv

   +Anzele+ (D. Lopez) (Kanzele), fort, in Lower Ngulungu, 9. S.,
      13.8 E., 147

   +Anzicana+, Anzichi, Anziques, Mundiqueti, etc., the people of
     the Makoko (_Anseke_, “distant,” “remote”), are undoubtedly
     the Bateke about Stanley Pool.
       Knivet’s account, 10, 91;
       war with them, 112

   +Aquilunda+, or Achelunda (D. Lopez), a supposed lake, 74;
     Douville (_Voyage au Congo_, ii, 173), suggests that the name
     meant “here (Aqui) is Lunda.”

   +Aquibolo.+ _See_ Akimbolo.

   +Aquisyma+ (D. Lopez), misprint for Agisymba.

   +Aragão+, Balth. Rebello de, xviii, 27, 153, 157, 158;
       attempt to cross Africa, 161;
       on Ouando, 206

   +Araujo+, João, 175

   +Araujo e Azevedo+, Antonio de, 190

   +Araujo e Azevedo+, João, 157, 166

   +Argento+, Monti dell (D. Lopez), supposed “Silver Mountains” (Serra
     da Prata) near Kambambe.

   +Ari+, or Hary, a district, 9.0 S., 15.5 E. _See_ Ngola Ari.

   +Armada+, its destruction in 1588, xiv, 169

   +Armistice+ of 1609-21, 170;
     or 1641, 171

   +Augoykayango.+ _See_ Agoa Kaiongo.

   +Austin Friars+ in Kongo, 114

   +Axila mbanza.+ _See_ Shilambanza.

   +Ayaka+ (Aiacca), 7.5 S., 18.0 E., their invasion of Kongo, 120;
      are not identical with Jaga, 149


   +Bagamidri.+ D. Lopez calls it a river, separating Mataman and
      Monomotapa, but it is clearly _Bege meder_ of Abyssinia gone
      astray.

   +Bahia das Vaccas+, 12.9 S., 13.4E., 16, 29, 160

   +Bailundo+ (Mbalundu), 12.2 S., 19.7 E., 172

   +Bakkebakke+ (Mbakambaka), diminutive of Mbaka, dwarf, and according
      to Dennett, also the name of a fetish _Shibingo_ which prevents
      growth. _See_ Matimba.

   +Bamba.+ _See_ Mbamba.

   +Bamba ampungo.+ _See_ Mbamba a mpungu.

   +Bambala+ (Mbala, Mbambela), a district, 10.6 S., 14.5 E., 22

   +Bamba-tunga+ (Mbamba-tungu), soba, 9.6 S., 14.4 E., 147, 158

   +Bananas+, 68

   +Bancare+ (D. Lopez), a tributary of the Kongo, east of Nsundi.

   +Bangala+, the people of the Jaga, 9.5 S., 13.0 E., 84, 149

   +Bango aquitambo+ (Bangu a Kitambu), missionary station, 9.1 S.,
      14.9 E.

   +Bango-bango.+ _See_ Bangu-bangu.

   +Bangono+, mani, in hills north of Dande River, 8.5 S., 13.6 E., 12

   +Bangu+, kingdom, “trunk” of Kongo, 24;
     perhaps _Bangu_ on the river Mbengu. Bangu signifies an acclivity,
     and the name occurs frequently.

   +Bangu+, a soba in Angola, 164

   +Bangu-bangu+, soba near Nzenza a ngombe, 168

   +Banna+ (Banya), river, 3.5 S., 11.0 E., 53

   +Banyan-tree+, 18, 76, 77

   +Baobab+, 24, 68, 71

   +Baptista+, João, bishop, 118

   +Baptista+, Manuel, bishop, 118, 121, 122

   +Barama.+ _See_ Bramas.

   +Barbara+, Kambe, sister of Queen Nzinga, 166, 173, 176

   +Barbela+ (Berbela), river, a tributary of the Kongo, which flows
     through Mpangu. According to L. Magyar (_Peterm. Mitt._ 1857,
     p. 187); the south arm of the Kongo opposite Mboma, is known
     as Barbela.

   +Barkcloth+, 18, 28, 77

   +Barros+, Gonzalo Borges de, 181

   +Barros+, João de, quoted, 108

   +Barreira+, F. Balthasar, Jesuit, 144, 147

   +Barreiras+, “cliffs.”
     _Barreiras vermelhas_, north of Zaire, 5.3 S.;
     _Ponta das barreiras_, 3.2 S.

   +Bastian+, Dr. A., quoted, 51, 52, 72, 73, 78, 104, 204

   +Bateke+, tribe are identical with the Mundequetes, Anziquetes,
      Anzicanas, etc., 109

   +Batta+ (Mbata), province, Mbanza, 5.8 S., 15.4 E., 39, 104, 120

   +Battell+, Andrew, character of his narrative, x;
     chronology of his voyages, xiii;
     account of “adventures,” 1-70;
     notes on the religion and customs, 71-87

   +Batumba+, in Kongoese, a dwarf. _See_ Matimba.

   +Bavagul.+ _See_ Bravagul (D. Lopez).

   +Beads+, as ornaments, 9, 17, 32

   +Beehives+, 68, 77

   +Beja+, Feira de, 9.8 S., 15.3 E., 168

   +Bembe+ (Mbembe), according to Cavazzi, p. 13, etc., a vast district
      extending from the Kwanza to the Kunene (which separates it from
      Benguella), traversed by the river Kutato, and inhabited by the
      Binbundo. It included all Lubolo, and Kuengo (Kemgo), the
      residence of Ngola Kakanje (according to Cadornega, a chief of
      Hako) was its capital. I believe it to be the same as Chimbebe
     (_q.v._), 166

   +Bembem+ (Mbembe), a village between Luandu and R. Mbengu, 8.8 S.,
      13.4 E.

   +Benevides.+ _See_ Sá de Benevides.

   +Bengledi+ (D. Lopez), a river, almost certainly a misprint for
      Benguella.

   +Bengo+, district of Angola, at mouth of R. Mbengu, or Nzenza,
      8.7 S., 13.3 E.

   +Bengo+, river (Mbengu), 39, 155, 168

   +Benguella+ (Mbangela), Battell’s visit, 16;
     conquest, 159;
     events since 1617, 182

   +Benguella a velha+, 10.8 S., 13.8 E., 147

   +Benomotapa.+ _See_ Mwana mtapa.

   +Bentley+, Rev. W. H., quoted, xx, 7, 25, 33, 34, 42, 43, 45, 57, 59,
      60, 66, 73, 95, 104, 111

   +Berbela+, or Verbela (D. Lopez), is evidently identical with the
      Barbela river, _q.v._

   +Bermudez+, João, Abysinian missionary, 150

   +Bernardo I+, King of Kongo, 119, 136

   +Bernardo II+, King of Kongo, 122, 137

   +Bié+ (Bihe), 12.3 S., 16.8 E., 151, 152

   +Binbundo+, or Va-nano, the hill tribes of Benguella, 13.0 S.,
      15.5 E., 151

   +Binger+, Captain, xvii

   +Binguelle+ (Cavazzi, ii), a misprint for Benguella.

   +Bock+ (Mbuku), mani, 4.9 S., 12.3 E. There are many other Mbukus.

   +Boehr+, Dr. M., quoted, 34, 73

   +Boenza+, or Benza (Mbensa), about 4.6 S., 15.0 E.

   +Boma+ (Mboma) 5-8 S., 13.1 E.

   +Bonaventura+, of Alessano, Capuchin, 126

   +Bonaventura+, of Correglia, Capuchin, 126 _n._

   +Bonaventura+ Sardo (the Sardinian), Capuchin, 127

   +Bonaventura+, of Sorrento, a Capuchin, 128

   +Bondo+, province, or rather a tribe, 10.0 S., 17.0 E.

   +Bongo+, 32, the country of the Babongo dwarfs

   +Bongo+ soba, on site of Kakonda a velha, 182

   +Boreras rosas+ (D. Lopez), should be Barreiras vermelhas, 5.4 S.,
      12.2 E.

   +Borgia+, D. Gaspar, 167

   +Bosso+, a rock, perhaps Mpozo hills, opposite Vivi.

   +Bowdich+, T. E., quoted, 149

   +Bozanga+, kingdom in Kongo (Garcia Mendes, 8), identical either
      with Nsanga or Nsongo? (_q.v._).

   +Bramas+, 677 _n._ According to D. Lopez, the original inhabitants
      of all Luangu. According to A. Forét (_Compte rendu_ of Paris
      Geog. Soc., 1894, p. 431), a trading tribe called Barama, or
      Ivarrama, still lives to N. E. of Nyange, 2.7 S., 10.5 E.
      See _note_, p. 77

   +Braun+, Samuel, quoted, x, 122, 170

   +Bravaghul+, or Bavagul (D. Lopez), a river; rises in Mountains of
      Moon, and flows to Magnice, _i.e._, to Delagoa Bay.

   +Brito+, Domingos d’Abreu de, quoted, 121, 144, 145, 147, 153

   +Brito+, João Antonio de, 179

   +Brito+, Manuel Rebello de, 129

   +Broeck+, Pieter van der, his journals, x

   +Brusciotto+, P. Giacinto, of Vetralla, a Capuchin, 128

   +Bruto+, Antonio, 168;
     his death, 172

   +Bruto+, a “penedo” named after him, 9.1 S., 13.7 E., 146

   +Bula.+ _See_ Mbula.

   +Bulhão+, Fernão Rodrigues, 115

   +Bumbe+ (Mbumbi), mani S. of River Loje, 7.8 S., 13.6 E., 123

   +Bumbelungu+ (Mbumbu a lungu), a village near mouth of Kwanza, where
      Dias’ vessels awaited his return, 9.3 S., 13.2 E.

   +Bumba andalla+, (Mbumbu a ndala), a soba in Lamba, 159

   +Bunda+ means family, kin: hence Binbundo (_sing._ Kibundo),
        kinsfolk (Nogueira, _A raça negra_, 255).
     _See_ also Abundu.

   +Burial+, 34, 73

   +Burton+, Sir R. F., 24, 29, 54, 68


   +Cabech+, (Kabeka), soba on the Kwanza, 9.5 S., 14.1 E., 10, 11

   +Cabango+ (Kabangu, or Chibanga), mani, in Luangu, 50

   +Cabazo+, should be Kabasa, capital.

   +Cabenda+ (Kabinda), port, 5.5 S., 12.2 E., 42

   +Cabreira+, Antonio Araujo, 129

   +Cachoeira+ (D. Lopez), is the Portuguese for cataract, and refers
      to the Falls of the lower Zaire.

   +Cacinga+ (Kasinga), river, a tributary of the Barbela, in Mbata
      (D. Lopez).

   +Cacongo+ river, or Chiluangu, 5.1 S., 12.1 E., 42

   +Cacongo+, (Chikongo), aromatic wood, 16

   +Caçuto+ (Nsaku), Cão’s hostage, 106, 107, 108

   +Cadornega+, quoted, 38, 72, 131, 140, 142, 163

   +Cafuche.+ _See_ Kafuche.

   +Calabes Island+ (Ilha des Calabaças), 8.
     _See_ Cavalli.

   +Calando+ (Kalandu), a Jaga, 31, should be _Calandula_. Cavazzi,
      however, (p. 656) mentions a Jaga _Calenda_.

   +Calicansamba+ (Katikasamba, or Kachisamba), a chief, 10.7 S.,
      14.5 E., 22, 24, 25

   +Calango+ (Kalungu), town in Lubolu, 10.30 S., 14.5 E., 26

   +Calongo+ (Chilunga), district north of river Kuilu, 4.1 S.,
      11.4 E., 52

   +Camara+, Portuguese, a municipal council.

   +Camissa+, flows out of Lake Gale (_q.v._), and enters the sea as
     _Rio doce_ at the Cape of Good Hope (D. Lopez).

   +Cango+ (Nkanga, Chinkanga), a district of Luengu, 3.9 S,
      12.3 E., 52

   +Cannibalism+, 31, 144, 162

   +Cão+, Diogo, discovery of Kongo, 105;
     second voyage, 107

   +Cão+, Gaspar, Bishop of S. Thomé, 118, 121, 145

   +Caoalla+ (Kawala), between Luandu and Masanganu;
     fight 1648, 174

   +Capello+ and Ivens, quoted, 17, 27, 28, 32, 34, 67, 73, 140, 141,
      151

   +Capuchins+ in Kongo, 123, 126, 127, 128, 183;
     in Angola, 183

   +Cardoso+, Bento de Banha, 158, 166, 188

   +Cardoso+, João, 175

   +Cardoso+, Domingos, Jesuit, 127

   +Carli+, Dionigi, Capuchin, 132

   +Carmelites+ in Angola, 189

   +Carneiro+, J. V., quoted, 14, 141, 167, 206

   +Carrasco+, José, 176

   +Carvalho+, H. B. de, quoted, 20, 32, 72, 84, 103, 150, 151, 202

   +Casama+ of Battell, 27, is _Kisama_.

   +Casanza+ (Kasanza), a chief, 8.9 S., 13.7 E., 11, 40, 41

   +Cashil+ (Kati, Kachi, or Kasila), chief, 10.8 S., 14.3 E., 23-25

   +Cashindcabar+ (Kashinda kabare), mountains, 10.6 S., 14.6 E., 26

   +Castellobranco.+ _See_ Mendes.

   +Castello d’Alter pedroso+, cliff, 13.3 S., 12.7 E., 106

   +Castro+, Balthasar de, 116, 139, 152

   _Catalogo_, quoted, xx, 145, 147, 159, 163, 166, 169, 172, 178, 181

   +Catharina+, Cabo de S., 1.8 S., 9.3 E.

   +Catherine+, Queen of England, 185

   +Catherine+, Queen of Portugal, 119

   +Cauo+, Cavao of Cadornega, 9. S., 14.2 E., 37

   +Cavalli+, isola (D. Lopez). _See_ Hippopotamus Island.

   +Cavangongo+, Motemo, 8.4 S., 13.4 E.;
     a second _Cavangongo_, 8.2 S., 15.3 E.

   +Cavazzi+, quoted, xix, 15, 29, 32, 38, 110, 111, 119, 123, 124, 126,
      130, 140, 141, 148, 152, 153, 163, 165, 166, 167, 176, 179, 184,
      193

   +Cavendish+, Thomas, his voyage, 89

   +Cay+, or Caye (Kaia), river and town, 4.8 S., 12.0 E., 42, 50

   +Cedars+, 24

   +Chabonda+ (D. Lopez). _See_ Kabanda.

   +Chatelein+, Héli, quoted, 140

   +Chekoke+, a fetish, 82

   +Chichorro.+ _See_ Souza Chichorro.

   +Chiluangu+, 5.2 S., 12.1 E., 42

   +Chilunga+ (Calongo), 4.1 S., 11.4 E., 52

   +Chimbebe.+ _See_ Kimbebe.

   +Chimpanzee+, 54

   +Chinchengo+ (Ki-nkenge) in Mbamba, on border of Angola (D. Lopez),
      8.0 E., 15.0 E.

   +Church+, Col. G. Earl, on Knivet’s adventures, 90

   +Circumcision+, 57

   +Civet Cats+, 32, 111

   +Climbebe+ (D. Lopez), a misprint for Qui mbebe.

   +Coandres+, perhaps the _Mukwanda_, a tribe to S. of Benguella,
      13.5 S., 13.0 E.

   +Coanga+ (Cavazzi, 440), a territory near Masanganu.

   +Coango.+ _See_ Kwangu.

   +Coanza.+ _See_ Kwanza.

   +Coari+ river (D. Lopez), perhaps Kùari, a river flowing towards
      Ari.

   +Coat-of-arms+ of Kongo, 112

   +Cocke+, Abraham, his voyages, 1, 5;
     his identity, 6, 8, 9

   +Coelho+, F. A., quoted, 10

   +Coelho+, Pedro de Souza, 163, 168, 189

   +Coelho+, F. Antonio, 167

   +Colos+, Diogo Rodrigo das, 147

   +Combrecaianga+ (Kumba ria kaianga), village, about 8.9 S., 14.1 E.,
      14

   +Concobella+ (Konko a bele), on N. bank of the Zaire, below Stanley
      Pool.

   +Congere amulaza+ (Kongo dia mulaza), 6.0 S., 16.3 E.

   +Congre a molal+ (Kongo dia mulai?) name by which the Anzichi
     (Anzica), are known in Luangu (D. Lopez).

   +Consa+, a misprint for Coanza (Kwanza).

   +Copper mines+, 17, 18, 31, 43, 111, 115, 119, 123, 160

   +Copper coins+, introduction of, 185

   +Cordeiro+, Luciano, quoted, xvi, 37, 155

   +Corimba.+ _See_ Kurimba.

   +Corn+, native, 67

   +Cortes+, Manuel, 178

   +Costa+, André da, 172

   +Coste+, Sebastien da, 122

   +Costa de Alcaçova Carneiro de Menezes+, Gonçalo da, 190

   +Coua+ (Kuvu) river, 10.9 S., 13.9 E., 19, 20, 161

   +Coutinho+, D. Francisco Innocencia de Souza, 187

   +Coutinho+, João Rodrigues, 36, 156, 188

   +Coutinho+, D. Manuel Pereira, 189

   +Cowrie fishery+ at Luandu, 96

   +Crocodiles+, 11, 69, 75

   +Cross+, Cape, 21.8 S., 107

   +Crystal+ mountain (D. Lopez) in Nsundi.

   +Cuigij+ (Cavazzi), perhaps = Muija or Muguije, “river,” 9.7 S.,
      16.0 E.

   +Cunha+, Jacome da, companion of Dias, 147

   +Cunha+, Tristão da, 189

   +Cunha+, Vasconcellos da. _See_ Vasconcellos.


   +Dambe+ (Ndambe), a territory near Mbuila, 7.8 S., 19.6 E., 181

   +Dande+ (Dandi), river, 8.5 S., 13.3 E., 11, 39, 117, 120, 123, 128,
      144

   +Dangi+ (Ndangi), island in Kwanza, 9.8 S., 15.9 E. (?), 165, 166,
      167

   +Daniel de Guzman+, King of Kongo, 131, 137

   +Dapper+, quoted, xix, 9, 19, 32, 45, 48, 105, 125, 168

   +Degrandpré+, quoted, 72, 104

   +Demba+ (Ndemba), salt-mine, 9.9 S., 13.8 E., 36, 37, 154, 162

   +Dembo.+ _See_ Ndembu.

   +Dennett+, R. E., quoted, xvii, 17, 21, 31, 40, 44-51, 56, 60, 61,
      66, 79, 80, 104, 192

   +Dias de Novaes+, Bartholomeu, 107, 108

   +Dias de Novaes+, Paulo, 120, 121, 142, 144, 148, 180

   +Dias+, Jacome, priest, 118

   +Dickens+, Charles, quoted, 25

   +Diniz+, Antonio, quoted, 162

   +Diogo+, King of Kongo, 117, 136

   +Diogo de Vilhégas+, or Antonio de Dénis, Franciscan friar, 114

   +Divination+, 33, 86, 129, 176

   +Dogs+, 33, 86

   +Dolphins+, 4

   +Dombe+ (Ndombe), in Benguella, 13.8 S., 13.3 E., 17, 160

   +Dominicans+, 108, 114, 144

   +Dondo+ (Ndundu) of Battell, are Albinos, 48, 81

   +Dondo+ (Ndondo), feira, 9.7 S., 14.5 E., 168

   +Dongo+, 20, 26, is _Pungu a ndongo_.

   +Dongy+ (Ndongazi?), a Jaga (Cavazzi, 86, 200), 152

   +Douville+, quoted, 149, 192

   +Drinking+ customs, 32, 45

   +Drums+, 33, 34

   +Duarte+, V. J., quoted, 143, 205

   +Du Chaillu+, quoted, 52, 54

   +Dumbe a Pepo+, 8.63 S., 15.1 E.

   +Dumbe a Zocche+ (D. Lopez), a lake fed by streams rising in the
      Monti nevosi; most likely the Dembea lake of Abyssinia.

   +Dunda+, or Dondo (Ndundu) are Albinos, 48, 81

   +Duque+, João, 175

   +Dutch+, embassy to Kongo, 125;
     traders in Kongo, 121, 123, 131, 161, 170;
     occupation of Angola, 169-174;
     piracies, 170


   +Ecclesiastical+ state of Angola, 183

   +Egyptians+, or gypsies, 10 _n._

   +Elambe.+ _See_ Lamba.

   +Electric Fish+, 40

   +Elembe+, a Jaga, 185

   +Elephants+, how trapped, 97;
     value of tails, 9, 58

   +Eleusine+, 67

   +Elizabeth+, Queen, 38

   +Embacca.+ _See_ Mbaka.

   +Embo+, or Huembo, a marquisate of Kongo (Paiva Manso, 175).
     _See_ Wembo.

   +Emcus+ of Zucchelli = _Nkusu._

   +Empacaceiros+, from _Pakasa_, buffalo, originally buffalo-hunters,
      then native militia-men. Supposed secret society, 152, 185.

   +Encoge+, should be Nkoshi, lion.

   +Endalla nbondo+, or Andala mbundos, 17

   +Engase+, or Angaze (D. Lopez), is Battell’s Ingasia _See_ Ngazi.

   +Engeriay+, a tree, 15

   +English+ pirates, 175

   +Engombe+, or Ingombe. _See_ Ngombe.

   +Engombia.+ _See_ Ngombe.

   +Engoy+ (Ngoyo), 42, 104

   +Engracia Funji+, sister of Queen Nzinga, a prisoner, 166;
     strangled, 173

   +Enriques+, Duarte Dias, 162

   +Ensala.+ _See_ Nsala.

   +Esiquilo+ (Esikilu), birthplace of D. Alvaro I., on the road from
      S. Salvador to Nsundi (Cavazzi, 105), 5.5 S., 14.5 E.(?)

   +Escovar+, Pero d’, pilot, 108

   +Espiritu Santo+, Serra do, 2.8 S., 10.2 E.

   +Eucher+, F., quoted, 108, 111, 119, 127

   +Ezikongos+, the people of Kongo, 130


   +Fajardo, A.+ Beserra, quoted, 158

   +Falcão+, Luiz de Figueirido, quoted, 162

   +Falkenstein+, quoted, 26, 52, 77, 104

   +Famine+ in Luandu, 168

   +Faria+, Antonio de, 182

   +Feira+ (Portuguese), fair, market.

   +Ferreira+, F. de Salles, quoted, 203

   +Ferreira+, Jacome, 170 _n._

   +Ferro+, serra do (iron mountains) to S. of Kwanza, 10.6 S., 15.2 E.

   +Fetishes+, 24, 41;
     underground, 49, 81;
     Maramba fetish, 56, 82;
     possessed of a fetish, 182;
     destruction by missionaries, 114

   +Ficalho+, quoted, 7, 15, 16, 21, 24, 43, 67

   +Figueirido e Souza+, João de, 180, 181

   +Finda.+ _See_ Mfinda.

   +Fishing+, 166

   +Flemish+ immigrants in Angola, 147

   +Flores+, Fr. Antonio, quoted, 198

   +Fonseca+, Luis Simplicio, quoted, 155

   +Fonseca+, Pedro da, 144, 145

   +Forét, A.+, quoted, 193

   +Forjaz+, D. Manuel Pereira, 157, 161, 188

   +Foster+, Mr. W., xvii

   +Fragio+, Francisco, capuchin, 126

   +Franciscans+ in Angola, 108, 114, 183

   +Francisco+, King of Kongo, 117, 136

   +Francisco+ of Pavia, capuchin, 133

   +Francisco+ of Veas, 126 _n._

   +Freddi+, monti. _See_ Fria.

   +French+ pirates, 175

   +Fria+, serra (“Cold Mountains”), on Pigafetta’s map, in 17.5
      S.; the _Monti Freddi_ (“cold mountains”) of the text, stated
      to be known to the Portuguese as _Monti nivosi_ (“snowy
      mountains”). Modern maps show a _Serra da neve_ in 14.0 S.; but
      as I am not aware that snow ever fell in these mountains,
      _neve_ may be an ancient misprint for _nevoas_ (mists). The
      _Serra Fria_ may possibly be connected with the _Cabo Frio_,
      thus named because of the cold current which washes it.

   +Froes+, Manuel de Tovar, 182

   +Fumacongo+, (mfumu ekongo), a village (Cavazzi, 416).

   +Funerals+, 78

   +Funji.+ _See_ Engracia.

   +Furtado+, Tristão de Mendonça, 170


   +Gaga+, 13, are the Jaga.

   +Gale+, according to Pigafetta a lake giving rise to the river
     _Camissa_, rashly supposed to represent Lake Ngami, but copied
      from more ancient maps, upon which are to be read the names
     _Gale_ (Galla), _Adia_, _Vaby_ (Webi), etc. Hence a lake in the
      Galla country, south of Abyssinia.

   +Galla+, are not Jaga, 150

   +Gangella.+ _See_ Ngangela.

   +Gango+, river, 9.8 S., 75.5 E., 180

   +Gangue+ (Gange), village near Masanganu, with church S. Antonio.

   +Garcia I.+, King of Kongo, 124, 137

   +Garcia II.+, King of Kongo, 125, 137

   +Garcia III.+, King of Kongo, 131, 137

   +Geographical+ explorers. _See_ Aragão, Brito, Castro, Girolamo,
      of Montesarchio, Herder, Murça, Pacheco, Quadra and Roza:
      also pp. 119, 129

   +Germanus+, Henricus Martellus, his map, 107

   +Giaghi+, an Italian mode of spelling Jagas.

   +Giannuario+ of Nola, capuchin, 127

   +Gimbo Amburi.+ _See_ Njimbu a mbuji.

   +Gimdarlach+, a German miner, 115

   +Gindes+ (Njinda), a name by which the Jaga are known, 19, 150

   +Giovanni Francisco+ of Valença, a capuchin, 126

   +Gipsies+ in Angola, 2, 10

   +Giribuma+, or Giringbomba, inland tribe. Perhaps the Buma, 3.0 S.,
      16.5 E.

   +Girolamo+ of Montesarchio, a capuchin, 125, 126

   +Glo-Amb Coambu+, supposed name of the capital of Angola, 142 _n._
      Rev. Tho. Lewis suggests Kwambu, or Kiambu.

   +Goats+, 63

   +Goes+, Damian de, quoted, 112, 113, 116

   +Goes+, João Braz de, 182

   +Goiva+, D. Antonio de, bishop, 122

   +Gola.+ _See_ Ngola.

   +Gold+, 20, 131, 179

   +Golungo.+ _See_ Ngulungu.

   +Gomba.+ _See_ Ngombe

   +Gomez+, Luiz, 123

   +Gonçalves.+ _See_ Alvares, 169

   +Gonga caanga+ (Ngonga kaanga), chief of Nsela, 180

   +Gongha+ (Ngonga), original name of Kasanje Kakinguri (Cavazzi,
      773).

   +Gongo a mboa+ (Ngongo a mbwa), supposed old name of Pungu-a-Ndongo,
      143 _n._

   +Gongo+ (Ngongo), a double bell, 20

   +Gongon+, 38, on road from S. Salvador to Mbata. Perhaps _Gongo_
    (_Ngongo_), on the Kongo railway, 5.3 S., 14.8 E. Rev. Tho. Lewis
     suggests _Kongo dia Mbata_, 38

   +Gonsa+, or Gunza, river, of Battell, 26, is the Kwanza.

   +Gorilla+, 54, 57.

   +Gouvea+, Francisco de, 120, 143

   +Gouvea+, Antonio Gomez de, 173

   +Ground-nuts+, 67

   +Guerra preta+, “black warriors,” _i.e._, the native militia.

   +Guerreira+, a Jesuit, 150, 154, 159

   +Gulta+, Ngulta, (D. Lopez), town S. W. of Masanganu.

   +Gumbiri+, fetish. _See_ Ngumbiri.

   +Gunga bamba+ (Ngunga mbamba), chief in Lubulo, 180

   +Gunza+, (Ngunza), on Pigafetta’s map a town S. of the river Longa,
      is undoubtedly Kangunze of Nsela.

   +Gunza a gombe+, (Ngunza a ngombe), a soba in Ndongo, 164

   +Güssfeld+, quoted, 58, 104

   +Guzambamba+ (Ngunza a mbamba), soba in Hako, 10.3 S., 15.3 E., 180


   +Hako+ (Oacca), country, 10.4 S., 15.5 E., 166, 180

   +Hamba+ (Va-umba, or Umba) river, 8.0 S., 17.0 E., 141

   +Hambo.+ _See_ Huambo.

   +Hary+, a district. _See_ Ari.

   +Henrique+, the Cardinal-King of Portugal, 111, 114, 145

   +Henrique+, King of Kongo, 119, 136

   +Henriques+, Rodrigo de Miranda, 189

   +Herder+, Johan, 126

   +Hiambo.+ _See_ Huambo.

   +Hindersen+, Jeems, 171

   +Hippopotami+, 64

   +Hippopotamus Island+, 120, the Ilha dos cavalhos marinhos of
      the Portuguese, wrongly translated Isola Cavalli, or “Horse
      Island,” by Pigafetta. Perhaps identical with Battell’s
      Calabes Island. A “Hippopotamus Island” figures in the charts,
      12.9 E.

   +Hobley+, quoted, 202, 206

   +Holy Ghost+, a village, on Luandu Island, 94 (called Espiritu Santo
      by D. Lopez), 8.8 S., 13.2 E.

   +Hombia ngymbe+ (Hombia ngombe, equivalent to Wembo a ngombe in the
      S. Salvador dialect), a “prince” in Benguella, on the river Kuvu,
      21

   +Horse Island+ (D. Lopez). _See_ Hippopotamus Island.

   +Horses’+ (zebras’) tails, 75

   +Huambo+ (Hambo, Hiambo), district or soba in Benguella, 13.1 S.,
      15.6 E.; gold found there, 29

   +Huembo+, a province of Kongo (Paiva Manso, 50), perhaps Wembo.

   +Human+ sacrifices, 28, 33, 85, 86, 105


   +Iakonda+, a tributary of the Kwanza (Cavazzi), probably to be looked
      for in the Kondo cataract, 9.9 S., 16.1 E.

   +Ibari+ (Ybari), a kingdom whither the Portuguese traded (Garcia
      Mendes, 8). Rev. Tho. Lewis suggests that it refers to a place
      where _mbadi_ cloth is made (the letters _r_ and _d_ being
      interchangeable, and _m_ coming naturally before _b_). Sir H.
      Stanley (_Through the Dark Continent_, ii, 283, 320, 323) heard
      Kongo called _Ibari_, and subsequently was told of an Ibari Nkubu,
      or river of Nkutu. A. Sims (_Kiteke Vocabulary_) knows of a tribe
      Bakutu towards the Kasai. We believe the Ybari of G. Mendes to
      refer to the country about the Kwangu, whither Portuguese traders
      actually did go for cloth.

   +Icau+ (Ikau), 8.5 S., 13.9 E., 123

   +Icolo+ (Ikolo), district on lower Mbengu, 8.8 S., 13.6 E.

   +Ilha grande+, Brazil, 4

   +Ilamba+ (Lamba), Battell’s campaign in it, 13

   +Imbangola+, identical with Bangala, 84 _n._

   +Imbondos+ of Battell, 30 are the Mbundu of Angola.

   +Imbuella.+ _See_ Mbuila.

   +Imbuilla+, _recta_, Mbila, sepulture.

   +Incorimba.+ _See_ Kurimba.

   +Incussu.+ _See_ Nkusu.

   +Infanticide+, 32, 84

   +Ingasia+, 14, 155. _See_ Ngazi.

   +Ingombe.+ _See_ Ngombe.

   +Initiation+ of native priests, 56, 57, 82

   +Innocent X+, Pope, 127

   +Insandeira+ (Nzanda), the tree planted by Ngola Kiluanji on Kwanza,
      9.1 S., 13.4 E., 142

   +Insandie+. _See_ Nsande.

   +Iron+, 52

   +Ivory+, 7, 9, 42, 52, 58


   +Jagas+,
     Battell’s account, 19, 83;
     origin, 83;
     infanticide among them, 32, 89;
     allies of the Portuguese, 123;
     history of the Jaga of Kasangi, 149;
     their invasion of Kongo in 1558, 117

   +Jesuits+,
     in Angola, 143;
     in Kongo, 118;
     Jesuit college, 123;
     political intrigues, 153, 183;
     a legacy, 169

   +Jinga+. _See_ Nzinge.

   +João II+, of Portugal, 106, 108

   +João IV+, of Portugal, 127, 170

   +João I+, King of Kongo, 109, 136

   +João II+, King of Kongo, 136

   +João+ of Mbula, King of Kongo, 130, 131, 137

   +João+, Manuel, 146

   +João de S. Maria+, Franciscan, 109

   +João Maria+, capuchin, 133

   +John+. See João.

   +John Moritz+ of Nassau. _See_ Nassau.

   +Jol+, Cornelis Cornelisson, 171

   +José+, Duarte, 147, 150

   +José+, Vicente, 148


   +Kabanda+,
     district in Motolo, on road to Mpemba mines (Garcia Mendes, 11,
       12);
     the Chabonda of D. Lopez, 8.7 S., 146 E., 124, 181

   +Kabangu+, (Cabengo), mani in Luangu, 50

   +Kabasa+, capital, chief town, group of villages, 141 _n._

   +Kabasa+, Kakulu, 9.3 S., 14.9 E., 159;
     another chief Kakulu Kabasa, in 8.3 S., 15.3 E., in Banga mountains
     (map of Fr. Antonio Flores, 1867).

   +Kabeka+ (Cabech), soba on the Kwanza, 9.5 S., 14.1 E., 10, 11

   +Kabeza+ (Cabezzo) district, 10.2 S., 15.0 E., 180

   +Kabinda+, seaport, 5.5 S., 12.2 E., 42

   +Kabuku+ (kia mbula), soba, 9.5 S., 15.0 E.

   +Kafuche+ (Kafuche Kabara), 10.0 S., 14.4 E., 27, 37, 156, 168

   +Kahenda+, Kakulu, 8.9 S., 15 5 E., 159, 177

   +Kakonda a velha+, 13.2 S., 14.0 E., 161, 182

   +Kakonda+, 13.7 S., 15.1 E., 182

   +Kakongo+, kingdom, N. of Zaire, 104, 112

   +Kakongo+, (Kikongo), an aromatic wood, 16 _n._, 145

   +Kakulu+, the first-born of twins, a title in Angola. _See_ Kimone.

   +Kakulu kia Nkangu+ (Caculo quenacango), a soba in whose territory
      Kanzele was built (Garcia Mendes), 9.1 S., 13.8.

   +Kalandu+, ancestor of Queen Nzinga, 166

   +Kalandula+, name or title among the Jaga, 28, 33, 83, 86, 132

   +Kale+, Jesuit farm in Kisama, 9.1 S., 13.4 E.

   +Kalemba.+ _See_ Namba Calemba.

   +Kalumbu+, presidio, on Kwanza, 9.1 S., 13.5 E., 146;
     Jaga in Little Ngangele, 175

   +Kalungu+, soba at mouth of Koporolo, 12.9 S., 13.0 E., 160

   +Kalungu+ (Calongo), Jaga, near Kasanji, 9.8 S., 18.1 E., 151, 152,
      175

   +Kalungu+ (Calango), 10.3 S., 14.6 E., 26

   +Kambambe+, presidio, 9.7 S., 14.6 E., 17, 27, 36, 38, 147, 156, 158

   +Kambe.+ _See_ Barbara.

   +Kambo+, river in Matamba, enters the Kwangu, 7.6 S., 17.3 E.

   +Kambulu+, a royal title in Matamba, 141

   +Kamolemba+, village on road from Masanganu to Mbuila; perhaps Lembo,
     _q.v._

   +Kamuegi+, perhaps the Fumeji river of Capello and Ivens, 9.5 S.,
      15.5 E., 151

   +Kamundai+, village of Bangala (Neves); perhaps named from “mundai,”
      a tree which is supposed to protect against lightning.

   +Kangunze+, capital of Nsela, 11.2 S., 15.0 E., 180

   +Kanguri+, or Kinguri, Jaga, 152

   +Kanguana+, _See_ Kinguana.

   +Kanzele+ (Anzela), stockade, 9.0 S., 13.8 E., 147

   +Kasa+, Jaga, one of Queen Nzinga’s relations, 164, 166

   +Kasandama+, battery at S. Paulo de Loanda, 8.7 S., 13.2 E.

   +Kasanji+, Jagas, 151, 152, 166, 167, 175 _n._ Residence of the
      principal among them, about 9.6 S., 18.0 E.

   +Kasanji ka kínjuri+, Jaga, 177

   +Kasanza+ (Cazzanza), mani, 8.9 S., 13.7 E., 11, 40, 41

   +Kasinga+, river, tributary of the Barbela (D. Lopez).

   +Kasoko+, Kilombo of Kasanji ka Kinjuri, 9.7 S., 18.0 E.

   +Kaswea+, mani, 8.8 S., 13.6 E., 40

   +Katala+, soba in Kisama, 9.6 E., 14.1 S., 180

   +Katole+, three days from Mbanza or Matamba, 177. A village, Katala
      ka nzinga, on the river Kambo, 8.8 S., 16.6 E., was visited by
      Mechow (_Zeitsch. f. Erdk._, 1882).

   +Kawala+ (Caoalla), is Kisama, 74

   +Kayá+, 4.8 S., 12.0 E.; 42, 50

   +Kazanga+, island, 8.9 S., 13.0 E.

   +Kenga+ (Kinga), the port of Luangu, 4.6 S., 118 E., 48, 50

   +Kesock+, mani, 2.8 S., 11.0 E., 58

   +Kibangu+, temporary capital of Kongo, perhaps identical with an old
     “priests’” town (Kinganga), 6.9 S., 14.6 E., 131

   +Kífangondo+, village on lower Mbengu, 8.6 S., 13.3 E.

   +Kíjila+ (Quixille), the laws or customs of the Jaga, 152

   +Kikombo+, bay, 11.3 S., 13.9 E.

   +Kilolo+, a warrior.

   +Kilombo+, “dwelling-place.” Cavazzi, p. 893, applies it to the
      residence of the Jaga.

   +Kilomba kia tubia+, chief in upper Ngulungu, 159

   +Kilonga+, a soba, 158. A Kilonga kia Bango still live close to
      Kambambe, 9.6 S., 14.5 E.

   +Kiluanji kia Kanga+ (Quiloange Acango), soba of upper Ngulungu,
      179

   +Kiluanji kia Kwangu+, according to Garcia Mendes, the chief whom
      Dias defeated, 143. _See_ Kwangu.

   +Kiluanji kia Samb+a, title of kings of Ndongo. A small chief of
      that title still resides near Duque de Bragança, 141 _n._

   +Kimbadi+ (Quimbazi), a small piece of cloth.

   +Kimbaka+, fort, stockade.

   +Kimbebe.+ _See_ Quimbebe.

   +Kimbundu.+ _See_ Binbundo.

   +Kimone kia Sanga+, principal chief of Kisama, 180

   +Kina grande+, the “great sepulture,” 9.5 S., 17.7 E. (?), 166

   +Kinalunga+, or Kindonge (Quihindonga), islands in Kwanza river,
      9.7 S., 15.8 E., 166, 177

   +Kinda+, Jaga, 148 _n._, 166

   +Kindonga.+ _See_ Kinalunga.

   +Kinganga+, “priests’ town,” applied to old stations of the Roman
      Catholic missionaries.

   +Kinga+ (Kenga), port of Luengu, 4.6 S., 11.8 E., 48, 50

   +Kingengo+ (Chingengo or Quinguego). _See_ Mutemu.

   +Kinguri+ (Kanguri), a Jaga, 151, 152

   +Kinzambe+, ndembu at Koporolo mouth (Dapper), 12.9 S., 12.9 E.

   +Kioko+, tribe, 12.0 S., 18.0 E., 151

   +Kiowa+ (Quiôa) duchy in Sonyo, 6.1 S., 13.0 E., 125

   +Kipaka+, a kraal, entrenchment.

   +Kipupa+, soba, 10.2 S., 18.7 E., 166

   +Kisala+, a steep mountain in Lit. Ngangela (Cavazzi, 771), 9.8 S.,
      17.9 E.

   +Kisama+, country S. of Kwanza, 9.3 S., 13.5 E., 27, 74, 146, 180.
      Another Kisama (Chizzema, Quesama on Pigafetta’s map) is said by
      D. Lopez to lie E. of Mpemba and Mbamba.

   +Kisamu+ (Quisomo), village with chapel two leagues above Masanganu.

   +Kisembo+, 7.7 S., 13.1 E.

   +Kisembula+ (Kuzambulo), a soothsayer, 87

   +Kisengula+, a war hatchet, 34, 81

   +Kisengengele+ (Quicequelle), soba in Masanganu district with church
      of S. Anna.

   +Kisutu+ (Quixoto) village with church (N.S. do Desterro), in
      Masanganu district.

   +Kitaka+, island in the Kwanza, 9.8 S., 15.7 E., 166

   +Kitangombe+, “cattle dealer,” soba in Kisama, 146

   +Kitata+, soba near Kakonda, 13.4 S., 15.1 E., 182

   +Kizua+, a soba in Kisama, 9.5 S., 14.1 E., 146

   +Knivet+, Anthony, his credibility, x, travels, 6, 89-101

   +Kole+ (Cola, Icole), tributary of Lukala, 9.1 S., 16.1 E.

   +Kongo+, kingdom, history, 102-135;
     list of kings, 136;
     Battell’s visit to Kongo, 38;
     Kongo, river, 7;
     Knivet’s visits, 89, 94

   +Kongo dia Mulaza+, 6.0 S., 16.0 E.

   +Konko a bele+ (Concobella), town. The confused account given of
      Girolamo of Montesarchio’s visit to that town, merely enables
      us to locate it on the northern bank of the Zaire. The place
      was likewise visited by Luca of Caltanisetta (Zucchelli,
      xviii, 3).

   +Konzo+, one of the four days of the week, and hence applied to
      places where a market is held on that day.

   +Koporolo+, river, 12.9 S., 12.9 E., 160

   +Kuari.+ _See_ Coary.

   +Kuilu+ (Quelle), river, 4.5 S., 11.7 E., 52

   +Kulachimba+, a warrior, 152

   +Kulachinga+, a woman, 151, 152

   +Kulambo+, a Jaga, 152

   +Kumbu ria Kaianga.+ _See_ Combre.

   +Kumba ria Kina+, 9.8 S., 14.7 E.

   +Kundi.+ _See_ Nkundi.

   +Kurimba+, or Kwimba? (Corimba, Incorimba), a district on the Kwangu,
      6.0 S., 17.0 E., 102; another Kwimba, 6.1 S., 14.8 E.

   +Kurimba+, bar of, 8.9 S., 13.1 E., 144

   +Kuvu+ (Covo), river, 10.9 S., 13.9 E., 19, 20, 161

   +Kwangu+, river, formerly looked upon as the principal source stream
      of the Zaire (Zari anene, the “big river”). It joins the Kasai
      3.2 S., 17.3 E.

   +Kwangu+ (Ocango, Coango), kingdom, after which the river is named,
      4.5 S., 17.0 E., 102

   +Kwangu+, a minor district (Coanga) near Masanganu (Cavazzi, 440),
      124. _See_ Kiluanji kia Kwangu.

   +Kwanza+ (Coanza), the “river of Ngola,” 9.3 S., 13.2 E., 7, 10, 92,
      106, 146, 149, 173


   +Lacerda+, Carlos de, 182

   +Lacerda+, Dr. J. M. de, 29, 69

   +Laço+, Lopo Soares, 168, 169, 170

   +Laguos+, Estevaõ de, 119

   +Lake+, reported in Central Africa, 159

   +Lamba+ (Ilamba), district, 9.3 S., 14.3 E., 13, 146, 149

   +Longere+, a chief in Kisama, 9.9 S., 14.4 E., 27

   +Lead+, discovered, 115

   +Ledo+, cabo, 9.8 S., 13.3 E.

   +Lefumi+, river. _See_ Lufune.

   +Leigh+ in Essex, xi

   +Leitão+, Manuel de Magalhães, 180

   +Lelunda+, river (D. Lopez), enters the sea 6.9 S., 12.8 E.

   +Lemba.+ _See_ Malemba.

   +Lemba+, name of several villages or chiefs in Kongo (Kongo di Lemba,
      6.2 S., 14.2 E.; Lemba, on coast, 8.3 S.; Lemba Mbamba, 7.5 S.,
      17.1 E.)

   +Lembo+, village near Masanganu, 9.5 S., 14.4 E., 181

   +Lencastre+, D. João de, 185, 190

   +Lendi+, province of Kongo. A village _Lendi_, S.S.E. of S. Salvador,
      in 6.6 S., 14.5 E.

   +Lewis+, Rev. Tho, quoted, xvii, 104, 197, 198, 210

   +Libations+, 58, 73

   +Libolo.+ _See_ Lubolo.

   +Light-horse+ man, 2, 3, 5

   +Lima+, Lopez de, quoted, xx, 74, 117, 119, 140, 142, 143, 145, 146,
      154, 163, 168, 169, 177, 178, 184, 187

   +Limoeiro+, a prison at Lisbon, 169

   +Linschoten+, quoted, x, 94

   +Livingstone+, quoted, 164

   +Loanda.+ _See_ Luandu.

   +Loango.+ _See_ Luangu.

   +Lobo+, Cabo do, with Cão’s pillar, now C. St. Maria, 13.4 S., 106

   +Logwood+, 43, 53

   +Loje+, river, 7.8 S., 13.2 E., 28

   +Longa+, river, 10.3 S., 13.6 E., 26

   +Longeri+ (Loangele, or Luanjili), the royal tombs of Luangu, 4.6 S.,
      11.9 E., 51, 86

   +Longo Leuys+, river. _See_ Luiza Luangu.

   +Lopez+, Alvaro, 112

   +Lopez+, Duarte, quoted, x, xix, 8, 9, 26, 47, 64, 68, 75, 97, 110,
      111, 117, 119, 121, 122

   +Lopo Gonçalves+, Cape, 0.6 S., 3

   +Loze+, river. _See_ Loje.

   +Luandu+ (Loanda), 8.7 S., 13.2 E., 115, 116, 121, 123, 140, 146;
     Dutch occupation, 171-4;
     fortifications, 185

   +Luangu+ (Loango) kingdom, 4.6 S., 11.8 E., 9, 43, 44, 49, 50, 86,
      104;
     Battell in Luangu, 9

   +Luanjili.+ _See_ Longeri.

   +Lubolo+ (Libolo), district, formerly of much wider extent, 10.0 S.,
      15.0 E., 151, 172, 180

   +Luca+ of Caltanisetta, visited Concobella (Zucchelli, xvii, 3)

   +Luchilu+ (Luxilu), river W. of Pungu a ndongo, 9.7 S., 15.5 E., 178

   +Ludolfus+, his proposed map of Africa, xv

   +Lueji+, princess of Lunda, 151

   +Lufune+ (Lefumi), river, entering sea in 8.3 S.

   +Lui+, river, enters Kwangu in 8.3 S., 17.6 E., is the Luinene
     (“big Lui”), called Lunino by Cavazzi.

   +Luiza Luangu+, river (Lovanga Luise, Longo Luys), the Masabi,
      5.0 S., 12.0 E.

   +Lukala+, river, tributary of Kwanza, 9.6 S., 14.2 E., 146, 166

   +Lukamba+, district and feira, 9.4 S., 15.5 E., 151, 168

   +Lukanza+, camp, W. of Ngwalema, 149

   +Lula+, province of Kongo (Paiva Manso, 244); the mbanza, 5.3 S.,
      15.7 E.

   +Lumbo+, or upper Ngulungu.

   +Lumbu.+ _See_ Panzalunbu.

   +Lusum+, river, crossed on road from Mpinda to S. Salvador. Perhaps
      the _Luzu_, a tributary of the Mpozo, 6.2 S., 14.0 E.

   +Lutatu+, river of Bembe (Cavazzi, 13), probably misprint for Cutato.

   +Luxilu.+ _See_ Luchilu.


   +Mabumbula+ (Mbumbula), mwana of Mpangala, 6.1 S., 14.6 E., 103

   +Machimba+, 37, is probably identical with Muchima village.

   +Madureira+, Gaspar Borges de, 173

   +Magalhães+, Henrique Jaques, 190

   +Magyar+, Ladislas, quoted, 22, 26, 29, 152, 192

   +Maia+, Baptista de, 181

   +Maize+, 67

   +Majinga+, Mwixi, a “man of Majinga,” a term of contempt for
     “Bushman” (Bentley, _Dictionary_, 364).

   +Makaria kia matamba+, village, 167

   +Makella colonge+, chief, 9.8 S., 15.4 E., 26

   +Makoko+, title of the King of the Bateke (Anzicana), perhaps more
      correctly given as Nkaka, a title of respect, lit. “grandfather,”
      52, 124 _n._, 127, 132

   +Makota+ (plur. rikota), counsellor of a chief.

   +Makunde+ (Makumbe), 9.6 S., 14.2 E., 146

   +Makuta+, perhaps 6.3 S., 13.0 E.; surrendered to Sonyo, 125. There
      are other localities of the same name.

   +Malemba+ (Lemba), a kingdom, 11.4 S., 17.0 E., 166

   +Malomba+ (D. Lopez), seems to be a misprint for Malumba.

   +Malombe+, a “great lord” in Kisama, 9.8 S., 14.2 E., 37

   +Mamboma+, an official in Luangu, 59 _n._

   +Mambumba+ (D. Lopez), between river Loje and Onzo, the same as Mani
      Mbumbi.

   +Manuel+, King of Portugal, 110, 111, 113, 133, 137, 139

   +Manuel+, King of Kongo, 137, 181

   +Manuel+, brother of Affonso I, of Kongo, 111, 113

   +Mangroves+, 76

   +Manso+, Paiva, quoted, xviii, 27, 72, 102, 108, 110, 111, 119, 121,
      124, 125, 130, 169, 178, 181

   +Maopongo+ (Cavazzi), a corrupt spelling of Mpungu a ndongo.

   +Maps+, illustrating this volume, xv.

   +Maramara+, river, between S. Salvador and Kibangu (P. Manso), 351

   +Maramba+, fetish in Yumba, 56, 82

   +Maravi+, they are Zimbas and not Jagas, 150

   +Marcador dos esclaves+, an officer charged with “branding” the slaves.

   +Margarita+ stone, 15. Garcia Simões, the Jesuit, in 1575, says that
     “provisions are bought for cloth and margaridit.” Rev. Tho. Lewis
      suggests _Ngameta_, a special kind of beads. It is just possible
      that these “stones” may be perforated quartz-pebbles, worn as
      beads, such as were recently discovered by Mr. Hobley in Kavirondo,
      where they are highly valued. They are found after thunder-storms,
      and of unknown antiquity.

   +Masanganu+, presidio, 9.6 S., 14.3 E., 7, 10, 13, 91, 92, 99, 146,
      155, 171, 173, 181

   +Mascarenhas+, bishop Simão de, 124, 167, 189

   +Masicongo+ (Muizi Kongo), a Kongo man, 12

   +Masongo+, a “kingdom,” the country of the Songo, 11.0 S., 13.0 E.

   +Masinga+, a “kingdom;” perhaps Majinga (_q.v._), hardly to be
      identified with the Chinge, beyond the Kwangu.

   +Matama+, King of Quimbebe (D. Lopez). Perhaps identical with Matimu.
     _See_ Quimbebe.

   +Matamba+, kingdom, 7.5 S., 16.5 E., 113, 116, 121, 127, 141, 142, 167

   +Matamba Kalombo+, King of Matamba, 167

   +Matambulas+, the spirits of the King of Kongo’s ancestors, 116 _n._

   +Matapa+ (D. Lopez), stands for Monomatapa, _q. v._

   +Matari+ (Matadi). There are many villages of that name. Cavazzi’s
      Matari, on road to Nsundi, 5.8 S., 14.6 E.

   +Matimu+, soba, in Ngangela, battle, 166

   +Matimbas+ (Batumba), or pygmies, 59

   +Matinga+, a town 60 miles N. E. of Cabo do Palmar (D. Lopez).

   +Matos+, Simão de, 129

   +Matta+, Cordeira da, quoted, xx, 103, 141

   +Mattos+, R. J. da Costa, quoted, 114

   +Maxilongos+, the people of Sonyo (Paiva Manso, 350), should be
      Osolongo, or Musurongo.

   +Mayombe+ (Yumba), country, 3.3 S., 10.7 E., 53, 82

   +Mbaji+, a “palaver place,” corrupted into Ambassi. _See_ S. Salvador.

   +Mbaka+ (Ambaca), first fort, 9.4 S., 14.7 E., 158;
     new fort, 9.3 S., 15.4 E., 163

   +Mbakambaka+. _See_ Bakkebakke.

   +Mbale+ (Mombales), 6.5 S., 12.7 E., 42

   +Mbalundu+ (Bailundo), 12.2 S., 15.7 E., 172

   +Mbamba+, province of Kongo, 12, 123. The chief Mbanza is probably
      identical with Kiballa, 7.5 S., 14.0 E.

   +Mbamba+ (Dapper, 577), district of Lamba, 9.1 S., 14.0 E.

   +Mbamba a mpungu+, village on river Mbengu (Garcia Mendes, ii),
      8.9 S., 14.1 E.

   +Mbamba Tunga+, soba, 147, 158

   +Mbanza+, residence of a chief or king.

   +Mbata+, province of Kongo, capital, 5.8 S., 15.4 E., 39, 104, 120

   +Mbemba+, same as Mpemba, or Mbamba, 42

   +Mbembe.+ _See_ Bembe.

   +Mbengu+ (Bengo), river, 5.7 S., 13.3 E., 39, 155, 168

   +Mbila+, sepulture, 165

   +Mbiriji+ (Ambriz), river, 7.3 S., 12.9 E., 131, 132

   +Mbuila+ (Ambuila), 8.0 S., 15.7 E., 120, 176, 181

   +Mbuila amduwa+ (Ambuila dua, 168)

   +Mbuku+ (Buck), 4.9 S., 12.3 E.; and many others of the same name.

   +Mbula+, one of royal residences of Kongo, perhaps 5.2 S., 15.0 E.,
      134

   +Mbula matadi+, D. Francisco, carried off by the Devil, 121. There
      are several villages named Matadi or Matari (“stones”), and a
      mbula matari lies beyond the Zaire in 5.5 S., 13.4 E.

   +Mbumba a ndala+, soba in Angola, 159

   +Mbumbi+, soba in Mbamba, 7.9 S., 13.6 E., 123

   +Mbundu+, root of a species of strychnos, 59 _n._

   +Mbwela+ (Amboelle), 7.8 S., 15.0 E., (F. de Salles Ferreira, _An.
      do Cons. ultr._, ii, 1859, p. 59), 126

   +Mechow+, Major, quoted, 199, 210

   +Mello da Cunha+, Vasco de, 177

   +Mello+, Fernão de, 115

   +Mendes Castellobranco+, Garcia, quoted xvii, 14, 63, 64, 65, 120,
      143-147, 145, 146, 154, 155, 162

   +Mendes+, Pedro, quoted, 130

   +Mendes+, Ruy, 115

   +Mendonça+, João Furtado de, 17, 93, 155, 188

   +Mendonça+, Antonio Texeira de, 173, 174, 189

   +Menezes+, Gonçalo de Alcaçova Carneiro Carvalho da Costa de, 181

   +Menezes+, Luis Cesar de, 190

   +Menezes+, Gonçalo da Costa de Alcaçova Carneiro de, 184, 190

   +Menezes+, Pedro Cezar de, 171-173, 186, 189

   +Menezes e Souza+, Ayres de Saldanha de, 190

   +Merolla+, Girolamo, of Sorrento, 132

   +Messa+ (D. Lopez) is a town in Morocco.

   +Mfinda a ngulu+, forest between Sonyo and S. Salvador, 6.2 S.,
      13.2 E., 125

   +Mfinda a nkongo+ (P. Manso, 355), perhaps E. of Lukunga, 5.2 S.,
      14.2 E.

   +Mfuma ngongo+, 6.3 S., 13.5 E.

   +Miguel+, Roque de, 167

   +Military+ organisation, 185

   +Millet+, 17

   +Mimos+, synonym of Bakkebakke (Dapper).

   +Miracles+, 111, 121, 124 _n._, 124, 127, 129, 130

   +Miranda+, Antonio de, 172

   +Missions+ in Kongo, 108, 110, 111, 114;
     destruction of fetishes, 114, 117;
     scandalous conduct, 122;
     small results, 123, 126;
     heretic Dutchmen, 126;
     troubles in Sonyo, 132;
     failure in Kongo, 133;
     mission in Angola, 139, 183, 187

   +Mo-.+ _See_ Mu-.

   +Moanda+, 5.9 S., 12.3 E., 49

   +Mocata.+ _See_ Makuta.

   +Mocicongo+ (D. Lopez), should be mwizi-Kongo, a native of Kongo
     (plur. Ezikongo).

   +Mococke+, 52, a corrupt spelling of Makoko.

   +Modiku+, islands in upper Kwanza, 9.7 S., 15.9 E.

   +Moenemugi+ (Mwene muji), “Lord of villages” in the country of the
      Maravi, 150

   +Mofarigosat+, a “lord” in Benguella, 10.9 S., 14.1 E., 22, 23

   +Moko a nguba+, mani, in Kongo (Paiva Manso), 109

   +Mols+, Fort, 9.3 S., 13.2 E., 173

   +Molua+, frequently used as a synonym for Lunda, means “carrier of
      information” (Carvalho, _Ethnographia_), 66

   +Mombales+ (Mbale), 6.5 S., 12.7 E., 72

   +Monomatapa+ (Mwanamtapa), the famous empire to the E. of the Zambesi.

   +Monsobos+ (D. Lopez), elsewhere called Muzombi. They are the Zombo of
      Mbata.

   +Monsul+, capital of the Makoko, a corruption of Monjol,
     “scratch-faces” (?)

   +Monte di Ferro.+ _See_ Ferro.

   +Monteiro+, quoted, 15, 17, 21, 24, 31, 47, 66, 68

   +Monte negro+, with Cão’s pillar, 15.7 S., 107

   +Montes queimados+, “burnt mountains” (D. Lopez), 6.9 S., 15.1 E.

   +Monti freddi+, and Nevosi (D. Lopez). _See_ Fria.

   +Moon+, Mountains of the; these fabulous mountains, on Pigafetta’s
      map, rise in 25.0 S.

   +Moraes+, Antonia Texeira de, 175

   +Morales+, Diogo Gomez de, 128, 172, 174, 180

   +Morales+, Diogo Mendez de, 175

   +Morim+, Lourenço de Barros, 181

   +Moriscoes+, or Moormen, 10

   +Morombes+, 55, 59, a misprint for Mayumbas (?).

   +Morro de Benguella+, 10.8 S., 13.7 E., 19

   +Morumba+, 82, a town 30 leagues N. of Luangu; should be Mayumba (?).

   +Moseche+. _See_ Museke.

   +Mosombi+. _See_ Zombo.

   +Mosul+. _See_ Musulu.

   +Motemmo+. _See_ Mutemu.

   +Motolo+,
     an inland district in Mbamba, N. of the Mbengu or Dande (D. Lopez);
     Kabanda is in Motolo (Garcia Mendes), 8.7 S., 14.6 E.

   +Mpangala+, district in Kongo, 6.0 S., 14.6 E., 103, 104

   +Mpangu+, or +Ulolo+, on road from Nsundi to Mbata, 5.4 S.,
      14.9 E. (?)

   +Mpangu+ (Panga), a lordship bestowed upon the bishop D. Henrique,
      in 1625 (Paiva Manso, 51), seems to be identical with Mpangu-lungu.

   +Mpangu-lungu+, the Pango or Pangalungo of Cavazzi, S. 454, and
      D. Lopez, variously spelt Pangelungu or Pamzelungua in King
      Affonso’s letters (Paiva Manso, 29, 36, 41), is undoubtedly
      a district on the lower Kongo, bordering upon the country of
      the Musurongo. There are numerous villages called Mpangu,
      several of which are indicated upon our map, but the Mbanza
      of Mpangu, according to Lopez, was near the river Barbela,
      which is another name for the Kongo. _See also_ Mpanzu alumbu,
      115, 116.

   +Mpanzu-alumbu+ (Panzu or Pazoalumbu) a village or district on
      the lower Kongo, either in Mpangu-lungu or that district itself.
      King Affonso (Paiva Manso, 50) calls himself “Lord of the Conquest
      of Pazoallumbo,” and does not mention Pangalungu, which certainly
      was a district incorporated with Kongo in his day. Bastian
     (_Exped. an der Loangoküste_, i, 289), mentions a village Mpanzo,
      and another Mpanzo mfinda (“Mpanzo in the Wood”) as being near
      Sonyo. Mpangu and Mpanzu may possibly be interchangeable, just as
      Lopez gives the name of Mpango to the fourth king of Kongo, whom
      others call Mpanzu, 112, 113

   +Mpanzu anzinga+, King of Kongo, 130, 131, 137

   +Mpemba+, province of Kongo, capital, 7.1 S., 14.8 E.

   +Mpemba-kasi+, district around S. Salvador, 103, 131

   +Mpinda+, 6.1 S., 12.4 E., 42, 110, 115, 121, 161

   +Mpozo+, river, enters Kongo at Matadi, 5.8 S., 13.5 E.

   +Mpunga+, an ivory trumpet. _See_ Ponge.

   +Mubela+, village with chapel, in Bengo (Mbengu.)

   +Muchima+, presidio and soba, 9.4 S., 13.9 E., 146, 155, 174, 186

   +Mucondo.+ _See_ Nkondo.

   +Muene+, in Angole, a title, lord, owner. Ngana (Nga-) is a synonym.

   +Mugi.+ _See_ Muzi.

   +Mukimba+, cattle-breeders in hills of Benguella, 14.0 S.,
      13.0 E., 160

   +Mulato+ children, born white, 49

   +Mulaza+ (Kongo dia Mulaza) 6.0 S., 16.3 E.

   +Mundequetes+, derived from Nteke, _plur._ Manteke or Anazinteke,
      our Bateke.

   +Muongo Matamba+, queen, 167

   +Murça+, Francisco de, 132

   +Muromba+, river N. of Felippe de Benguella, perhaps the Balombo,
      11.0 S., 13.8 E., 160

   +Musasa+, the wife of Dongy, a Jaga, 152

   +Museke+, “farm,” or country-house, and hence used to denote the
      vicinity of a town. There is thus a Museke of Luandu, a Museke
      of Masanganu, etc., 156

   +Muswalu+, province of Kougo, 112

   +Musuku+, province of Kongo, 112. The Maungu, a tribe extending
      eastward across the Kwangu (8.0 S.), are also known as Musuku;
      a village Musuku lies on the lower Zaire.

   +Musulu+ (Mosul), 8.5 S., 13.3 E., 120

   +Musurongo+, or Asolongo, the people of Sonyo, 130

   +Mutemu+, Ndembu, at head of navigation of the Lufune, 8.2 S.,
      14.3 E.

   +Mutemu Kavongonge+, 8.2 S., 15.3 E.

   +Mutemukingengo+, ndembu, about 7.9 S., 15.0 E., 180

   +Mutiny+ at Luandu, 186;
     at Masanganu, 181

   +Muyilu+, province of Kongo, 112

   +Muzombi+ (D. Lopez), are the Zombo in Mbatu, 5.8 S., 15.5 E.

   +Muzi zemba+ (Muge azemba), soba in Lamba, 149

   +Mwana+, in Kongo, a title, son; mwana, a ntinu, prince; _synonyms_
      are Muene, Muata, Ngana. Mani is a corruption.

   +Mwana mtapa+, famous empire on lower Zambezi, described as
      Benemotapa, 61


   +Nabo angungo+. _See_ Nambu a ngongo.

   +Nambu Calamba+ (Nambua kalambu), village, 14. Dapper, 397, mentions
      Namboa and Kalumba as two separate but contiguous districts east
      of Ikolo, about 8.9 S., 13.7 E.

   +Nambu a ngongo+ (Uambo ngongo?) 8.1 S., 14.3 E.;
     invaded by Portuguese, 123;
     rebellion, 172, 180.
     Another soba of that name lives in Kisama, 158

   +Nassau+, John Moritz of, 171

   +Ndala+. _See_ Andala.

   +Native+ policy of the Portuguese, 65

   +Ndamba+ (Damba), district in Kongo, 6.7 S., 15.2 E.

   +Ndamba+ (Dambe) a ndembu, 7.8 S., 14.7 E., 181

   +Ndamba+, a musical instrument, 47

   +Ndangi+ (Danji), island in Kwanza, 9.8 S., 15.5 E. ? 165, 166, 167

   +Ndemba+ (Demba of Battell, erroneously called Adenda), salt mines
      in Kisama, 9.9 S., 13.8 E., 36, 37, 154, 162

   +Ndembu+ (plur. jindembu), potentate. The commonwealth of these
      home-rulers lies to the N. of the Dande, 8.2 S., 15.0 E.

   +Ndombe+ (Dombe), country around S. Felippe de Benguella, 13.0 S.,
      13.3 E., 17, 160

   +Ndondo+, feira, 9.7 S., 14.5 E., 168

   +Ndonga+, a soba in Ndongo, 164

   +Ndongo+ (the native name of Angola),
     early history, 140
     list of kings, 142

   +Ndundu+, or Albinos, 48, 81

   +Negreiros+, André Vidal de, 189

   +Negro+, Cabo, 15.7 S., 171

   +Negro+, Cabo, 3.2. S., 10.5 E., 53

   +Neves+, Capt. A. R., quoted, 28, 150, 151, 199

   +Nevosi+, monti. _See_ Fria, monti.

   +Nganga+, a wise man, medicine-man, priest.

   +Ngangela+ (Ganguella), a nickname for the inland tribes. Little
      Ngangela is identical with the Bangala country, 9.5 S., 17.7 E.,
      166, 167

   +Ngazi+ (Ingasia of Battell), 8.8 S. 14.2 E., 14, 153

   +Nginga+. _See_ Nzinga.

   +Ngola+, title or name of kings of Ndongo.

   +Ngola ari+, king, 164, 165, 178

   +Ngola Bumbumbula+, founder of kingdom of Ndongo, 142 _n._

   +Ngola a nzinga+, jaga of Matamba, 142 _n._

   +Ngola ineve+, 142

   +Ngola kabuku+, soba in Kisama, 180.
     Another Kabuku now lives on the Lukala, 9.4 S., 15.0 E.

   +Ngola kalungu+, a soba near Kambambe, 9.8 S., 14.6 E., 147

   +Ngola kanini+, 177

   +Ngola kiluanji+, 142 _n._ 145

   +Ngola kiluanji kia Samba+, full title of kings. A chief of that title
      occupied site of Duque de Bragança, 8.9 S., 16.0 E., 41, 141 _n._

   +Ngola kitumba+, soba in Lubolo, 180

   +Ngola mbandi+, 117, 142, 165, 169

   +Ngola ndambi+, 140

   +Ngola njimbu+ (Golla gimbo), near Kakonda, in Benguella, 182

   +Ngola njinga mbandi+, king, 163, 164

   +Ngola’s+ river (the Kwanza), 139

   +Ngola Ngolome a kundu+, a soba on the Kwanza, 9.5 S., 14.2 E., 143

   +Ngolome+, a soba on the Kwanza, 9.4 S., 14.2 E., 143

   +Ngolome aquitamboa.+ _See_ Ngwalema.

   +Ngolome a kayiti.+ _See_ Ngwalema.

   +Ngombe+ (Ingombe), chief town of Ngazi, 8.8 S., 14.3 E., 14, 15,
      124, 155

   +Ngombe a muchana+, 8.4 S., 13.5 E.

   +Ngombe kabonde+, 8.7 S., 13.7 E.

   +Ngongo.+ _See_ Gongon, 38

   +Ngongo+, a chief in Lubolo, 151, 152

   +Ngongo ka anga+ (Kanga) of Nsela (Shella), 180

   +Ngoya+ (Angoy), kingdom, 5.6 S., 12.3 E., 42, 104

   +Ngulungu+ (Golungo), a region between the Lukala and Mbengu, 9.0 S.,
      14.5 E., 149, 179

   +Ngumbiri+, fetish, 49, 81

   +Ngunga mbamba+, soba in Lubolo, 180

   +Ngunza a ngombe+, chief in Ndongo, 164

   +Ngunza a mbamba+, in Hako, 10.3 S., 15.3 E., 180

   +Ngwalema+ (Ngolome) +a Kayitu+, soba in Ngulungu, 179

   +Ngwalema a kitambu+, the Ngolome akitambwa of V. J. Duarte (_An. do
      cons ultram._, ii, p. 123), and the Anguolome aquitambo of Garcia
      Mendes, 9.1 S., 15.8 E., 143, 148

   +Njimbu+, native name for cowries.

   +Njimbu a mbuji+ (Gimbo Amburi) a fetish place, about 5.9 S., 14.5 E.

   +Nkanda Kongo+, of Girolamo of Montesarchio, is perhaps identical with
      a modern village, Nkandu, 4.8 S., 14.9 E.

   +Nkandu+, one of the four days of the Kongo week, and hence applied to
      a place where a market is held on that day.

   +Nkishi.+ _See_ Fetish.

   +Nkondo+ (Mucondo), district between Sonyo and Kibango, 16.7 S.,
      14.1 E., 131

   +Nkanga.+ _See_ Cango.

   +Nkundi+ (Kundi), female chief in Kwangu, 4.7 S., 16.8 E., 126

   +Nkusu+ (Incussu), 26, district in Kongo, 6.7 S., 15.0 E., 126

   +Nogueira+, A. F., quoted, 103, 194, 207

   +Nombo+ (Numbu), river, enters Xilungu Bay, 4.3 S., 11.4 E., 53

   +Nsaku+ (Caçuto) Cão’s hostage, 106, 108

   +Nsata+, a district in Kongo, 7.8 S., 16.0 E., 125

   +Nsanda.+ _See_ Banyan tree.

   +Nsanga+, of Girolamo Montesarchio, is perhaps identical with a
      modern village, Nsanga, 4.7 S., 15.2 E.

   +Nsela+ (Sheila), district, 11.3 S., 15.0 E., 180

   +Nsongo+, a province of Mbata (Cavazzi, 6), 4.4 S., 16.5 E.?

   +Nsonso+ (Zucchelli, xvii, 3), a district above Nsundi, the capital
      of which is Incombella (Konko a bela).

   +Nsoso+ (Nsusu), a province of Mbata, 6.7 S., 15.5 E.

   +Nsundi+ (Sundi), province of Kongo, capital perhaps, 5.2 S.,
      14.3 E., 109

   +Ntinu+, King of Kongo, 102

   +Ntotela+, title of King of Kongo, 102, 136

   +Nua Nukole+ (Nuvla nukole), river, (_nua_, mouth), 10.2 S.,
      15.4 E.

   +Numbi.+ _See_ Nombo.

   +Nzari+, or Nzadi, “great river,” applied to the river Kongo (Zaire)
      and its tributaries.

   +Nzenza+, said to be the proper name of the river Mbengu, and is also
      the name of several districts, as Nzenza of Ngulungu, the chief
      place of which is Kalungembo, 9.2 S., 14.2 E. _Nzenza_ means
      river-margin; _Nzanza,_ table-land.

   +Nzenza a ngombe+, a Jaga in Ndongo, 168

   +Nzinga a mona+ (D. Antonio Carrasco), king, 176, 177

   +Nzinga mbandi ngola+ (D. Anna de Souza), the famous queen, 141, 142,
      163, 164, 165, 173, 176, 181

   +Nzinga mbandi ngolo+, kiluanji, 163


   +Oacco.+ _See_ Hako.

   +Oarij.+ _See_ Ari.

   +Ocango.+ _See_ Kwangu.

   +Offerings+, 77

   +Oliveira+, Manuel Jorge d’, 149

   +Oliveira+, bishop João Franco de, 177

   +Oloe+, a river, which on the map of D. Lopez, flows past S. Salvador,
      and enters the Lilunda (Lunda)—an impossibility. The river flowing
      past S. Salvador is the Luezi.

   +Onzo+, or Ozoni (D. Lopez), 8.2 S., 13.3 E.

   +Orta+, Garcia d’, quoted, 119

   +Ostrich eggs+, beads, 31. Mr. Hobley suggests to me that these may
      merely be discs cut out of the shell of ostrich eggs and then
      perforated, such as he saw used as ornaments in Kavirondo.

   +Ouuando+, seems to be a region to the N. of Encoge and the river
      Loje. Rebello de Aragão, p. 20, calls it _Oombo_ (Wumbo) and says
      the copper mines of Mpemba are situated within it. J. C. Carneiro
      (_An. do cons. ultr_, ii, 1861, p. 172) says that the proper name
      is _Uhamba_ (pronounced Wamba) _or_ Ubamba. Dapper calls it
     _Oando_ (pronounced Wando). Rev. Thos. Lewis tells me that the
      natives pronounce d, b, and v quite indistinctly, and suggests
     _Wembo_. He rejects _Ubamba_ as a synonym. From all this we may
      accept Wembo, Wandu, or Wanbo as synonymous. _See_ Wembo.

   +Oulanga.+ _See_ Wanga.

   +Outeiro+, the “Hill,” a vulgar designation of S. Salvador.

   +Ozoni.+ _See_ Onzo.


   +Pacheco+, Manuel, 116, 139

   +Padrão+, Cabo do, at Kongo mouth, 6.1 S., 12.4 E., 105, 107, 125

   +Palm cloth+, 9, 31, 43, 50, 52

   +Palm oil+, 7

   +Palm wine+, 30, 32

   +Palm trees+, 69

   +Palmar+, Cabo or Punta do, 5.6 S., 12.1 E.

   +Palmas+, Cabo das, on Guinea coast, 2

   +Palongola+, a village one mile outside S. Salvador (Cavazzi.)
      No such village exists now.

   +Palongola+, kilombo of Kasanji ka Kinjuri in Little Ngangela
     (Cavazzi, 42, 781, 793).

   +Pampus Bay+, Dutch name given to S. Antonio Bay at Kongo mouth, 126

   +Pangu.+ _See_ Mpangu.

   +Panzu.+ _See_ Mpanzu.

   +Parrots+, 54

   +Partridges+, 63

   +Paul III+, Pope, 113

   +Peacocks+, sacred birds, 26

   +Peas+, 67

   +Pechuel-Loesche+, quoted, 18, 40, 43, 54, 55, 60, 66, 76, 104

   +Pedras da Ambuila+, are the Pedras de Nkoski, or the “Roca” S. of
      the Presidio de Encoge, 7.7 S., 15.4 E., 129

   +Pedro+, King of Portugal, 181

   +Pedro I+, King of Kongo, 117, 136

   +Pedro II+, King of Kongo, 123, 137

   +Pedro III+, King of Kongo, 131, 137

   +Pedro IV+, King of Kongo, 130, 133, 137

   +Pedro Constantino+, King of Kongo, 133, 138

   +Pedro+, Dom, negro ambassador to Portugal, 110

   +Pegado+, Captain Ruy, 175

   +Peixoto+, Antonio Lopez, 19, 147

   +Peixoto+, Manuel Freis, 176

   +Pelicans+, 63

   +Pemba.+ _See_ Mpemba.

   +Penedo de Bruto+, 9.1 S., 13.7 E., 146

   +Pereira+, Andre Fereira, 144, 148

   +Pereira+, Luiz Ferreira, 149

   +Pereira+, Manuel Cerveira, 37, 38, 39, 72, 156, 159, 161, 182, 188

   +Pete+ (puita), a musical instrument, 15, 21, 33

   +Pheasants+, 63

   +Philip+ of Spain, King of Portugal, 121, 153, 169

   +Philip II+, King of Portugal, 122

   +Phillips+, R. C., quoted, xvii, 15, 17, 45

   +Pigafetta+, quoted, x, 14, 42, 74, 122. _See_ also Lopez.

   +Pimental+, quoted, 16

   +Pina+, Ruy de, quoted, 104, 108

   +Pinda.+ _See_ Mpinda.

   +Pinto+, Serpo, quoted, 17

   +Pirates+, 170, 175

   +Piri+, the lowland of Luangu, inhabited by the Bavili.

   +Pitta+, Antonio Gonçalves, 121, 159

   +Plata+, Rio de la, 4

   +Plymouth+, departure, 2

   +Poison+ ordeals, 59, 61, 73, 80

   +Pongo+ (Mpunga), an ivory trumpet, 15, 21, 33, 47, 86

   +Pontes+, Vicente Pegado de, 175

   +Portuguese+ knowledge of inner Africa, xv;
     massacre of Portuguese in Angola, 145;
     in Kongo, 105

   +Poultry+, 63

   +Prata+, Serra da, the supposed “silver mountain” near Kambambe, 27

   +Prazo+, Porto do, the bay of the Kongo.

   +Prohibitions.+ _See_ Tabu.

   +Proyart+, quoted, 64

   +Pumbeiros+ (from _Pumbelu_, hawker), in Kongo, the country of the
      Avumbu, the trading district about Stanley Pool is known as
      Mpumbu (Bentley). _See_ p. 164 for “Shoeless Pumbeiros.”

   +Punga+, an ivory trumpet. _See_ Pongo.

   +Purchas+, as editor, xi

   +Pungu a ndongo+, 9.7 S., 15.5. E., 143, 178

   +Pygmies+, 59


   +Quadra+, Gregòrio de, 116

   +Quelle+ (Kuilu), river, 4.5 S., 11.7 E., 52

   +Quesama.+ _See_ Kisama.

   +Queimados+, serras, “burnt mountains” (D. Lopez), about 6.9 S.,
      15.3 E.

   +Quesanga+, a fetish, 24

   +Qui-.+ _See_ Ki.

   +Quigoango.+ _See_ Kinkwango.

   +Quina+ (Kina), sepulture, 166

   +Quiôa.+ _See_ Kiowa.

   +Quisama.+ _See_ Kisama.

   +Quimbebe+ of D. Lopez, I believe ought to have been spelt Quimbēbe
     (pron. Kimbembe), and to be identical with Cavazzi’s wide district
      of Bembe (Mbembe). Its king, Matama, may have been the Matima
     (Mathemo) near whose Kilombo Queen Nzinga was defeated, p. 166.
      The Beshimba, or Basimba (Nogueira, _A raça negra_, 1881, p. 98)
      have nothing to do with this Kimbembe, but may have given origin
      to the Cimbebasia of the missionaries. _See_ Bembe.

   +Quingi.+ _See_ Kinti.

   +Quinguego+ (D. Lopez). _See_ Kingengo.


   +Rafael+, king of Kongo, 130, 131, 137

   +Raft+, built by Battell, 41

   +Rain-making+ in Luangu, 46

   +Rangel+, D. Miguel Baptista, bishop, 122

   +Rapozo+, Luiz Mendes, 147

   +Rebello+, Pedro Alvares, 154

   +Resende+, Garcia de, quoted, 104, 108

   +Revenue+, administrative reforms, 169

   +Ribeiro+, Christovão, Jesuit, 118

   +Ribeiro+, Gonçalo Rodrigues, 111

   +Rimba+, district, 11.5 S., 14.5 E., 180

   +Rio de Janiero+, 6.

   “+Roebuck+,” voyage of, 89

   +Rolas+, Ilheo das, islet off S. Thomé, 3

   +Roza+, José de, 186


   +Sá+, Diogo Rodrigo de, 129

   +Sá+, Salvador Corrêa de, governor of Rio, 90, 93

   +Sá de Benevides+, Salvador Corrêa de, 174, 189

   +Sabalo+, inland town S.-E., of Sela (D. Lopez).

   +Sakeda+, mbanza in Lubolo, 180

   +Salag+, mani, 50. Dennett suggests _Salanganga_, Rev. Tho. Lewis
     _Salenga_.

   +Salaries+ of officials in 1607, 163

   +Saldanha de Menezes e Sousa+, Ayres de, 190

   +Saltpeter+ mountains (Serras de Salnitre), of D. Lopez, are far
      inland, to the east of the Barbela.

   +Salt mines+, 36, 37, 160

   +Samanibanza+, village in Mbamba, 14

   +Santa Cruz+ of Tenerife, 2

   +S. Cruz+, abandoned fort on the Kwanza, perhaps at Isandeira,
      9.1. S., 13.4 E., 146 _n._

   +S. Felippe de Benguella+, 12.6 S., 15.4 E., 160, 170, 173, 183

   +S. Miguel+, Roque de, 157

   +S. Miguel+, fort and morro, 8.8 S., 13.2 E., 145, 170, 174

   +S. Paulo de Loande+, 8.8 S., 13.2 E., 7, 13, 144, 157, 171-174.
     _See also_ Luandu.

   +S. Pedro+, Penedo de, (perhaps identical with the Penedo de A. Bruto,
      9.1 S., 13.7 E.), 145

   +San Salvador+, 6.2 S., 14.3 E., the Portuguese name of the capital
      of Kougo, also referred to simply as “Outeiro,” the Hill, on the
      ground of its situation. The native names are Mbaji a ekongo
     (the palaver place of Kongo), Mbaji a nkanu (the place of judgment),
      Nganda a ekongo or Ngandekongo (the “town”) or ekongo dia ngungo
     (town of church-bells, because of its numerous churches), 103, 109,
      117, 123, 131, 134

   +S. Sebastian+, in Brazil, 6

   +S. Thomé+, island, 139

   +Schweinfurth+, quoted, 67

   +Seals+ in the Rio de la Plata, 5

   +Seat.+ _See_ Sette.

   +Sebaste+, name given by Dias to Angola, 145

   +Sebastian+, King of Portugal, 145

   +Sela.+ _See_ Nsela.

   +Sequeira+, Bartholomeu Duarte de, 177

   +Sequeira+, Francisco de, 148

   +Sequeira+, Luiz Lopez de, 129, 153, 177, 178, 180

   +Serra comprida+, the “long range,” supposed to extend from
      C. Catharina to the Barreira vermelha, 1.8 to 5.3 S.

   +Serrão+, João, 146

   +Serrão+, Luiz de, 144, 147, 148, 150, 188

   +Sette+, 2.6 S., 10.3 E., 58

   +Shelambanza.+ _See_ Shilambanze.

   +Shells+, as ornaments, 31, 32

   +Shilambanza+, 26, 86 (a village of the uncle of King Ngola), and
     _Axilambansa_ (a village said to belong to the king’s
      father-in-law), are evidently the same place, situated about
      9.8 S., 15.1 E.

   +Shingiri+, a diviner, soothsayer.

   +Sierra Leone+, supposed home of the Jaga, 19

   +Silva+, Antonio da, 180

   +Silva+, Gaspar de Almeida da, 182

   +Silva+, Luiz Lobo da, 190

   +Silva+, Pedro da, 182

   +Silva e Sousa+, João da, 190

   +Silver+ and silver mines, 27, 113, 115, 122, 128, 140, 145

   +Silver+ mountain (Serra da Prata), supposed to be near Kambambe.

   +Simão da Silva+, 112

   +Simões+, Garcia, Jesuit, 143, 144, 202

   +Sims+, Rev. A., quoted, 198

   +Singhilamento+ (Cavazzi, 189, 198), a divination, from Shing’iri,
      a diviner.

   +Sinsu+, a district on Mbengu river, N. of Luandu (Dapper), 8.7 S.,
      13.3 E.

   +Slave+ trade, 71, 96, 135, 157

   +Soares+, João, Dominican, 110

   +Soares+, Manuel da Rocha, 182

   +Soares+, Silvestre, 124

   +Soba+, kinglet, chief, only used S. of the river Dande.

   +Sogno+, pronounced Sonyo, _q.v._

   +Soledade+, P. Fernando de, 108

   +Sollacango+ (Solankangu), a small lord in Angola, 14. Perhaps
      identified with Kikanga, 8.9 S., 13.8 E.

   +Songa+, village on the Kwanza, 9.3 S., 13.9 E., 37, 156

   +Songo+, a tribe, 11.0 S., 18.0 E., 152, 166

   +Sonso+, a province of Kongo (P. Manso, 244), to N.E. of S. Salvador,
      15.7 S., 14.5 E.?

   +Sonyo+ (Sonho), district on lower Kongo, 6.2 S., 12.5 E., 42, 104
     (origin of name).

   +Sorghum+, 67

   +Sotto-maior+, Francisco de, 173, 189

   +Sousa+, Balthasar d’Almeida de, 154

   +Sousa+, Christovão Dorte de, 118

   +Sousa+, Luiz de, quoted, 108

   +Sousa+, Ruy de, 108

   +Souza+, Fernão de, 168, 189

   +Souza+, Gonçalo de, 108

   +Souza+, João Corrêa de, 123, 164, 169, 187

   +Souza+, João de, 108

   +Souza+, José Antonio de, 134

   +Souza Chichorro+, Luiz Martim de, 189

   +Soveral+, Diogo, Jesuit, 118

   +Soveral+, Francisco, bishop, 168

   +Sowonso+ (Sonso), village 14

   +Spelling+, rules followed, xvii

   +Stanley+, Sir H. M., quoted, 198

   +Sulphur+ discovered, 160

   +Sumba mbela’+, district at the Kuvu mouth, 10.8 S., 14.0 E., 160.
      On modern maps it is called Amboella.

   +Sumbe+ of Sierra Leone, are not Jaga, 150

   +Sun+ mountains (Serras do Sol) of D. Lopez, E. of Mbata and Barbela.

   +Sundi.+ _See_ Nsundi.

   +Susa+, district of Matamba, 7.8 S., 16.6 E.

   +Sutu+ Bay, 9.7 S., 13.3 E., 173


   +Tabu+ (prohibitions), 57, 78

   +Tacula+ (red sanders), 82

   +Talama mtumbo+ (S. João Bautista), in Nzenza do Ngulungu, 9.2 S.,
      14.2 E.

   +Tala mugongo+, mountain, 9.8. S., 17.5 E.

   +Tamba+, district, 10.1 S., 15.5 E., 180

   +Tari (Tadi) ria nzundu+, district in Kongo. A _Tadi_, 4.9 S.,
      15.2 E.; a _Nzundu_, 5.6 S., 14.9 E.

   +Tavale+, a musical instrument, 21

   +Tavares+, Bernardo de Tavora Sousa, 190

   +Tavora+, Francisco de, 178, 190

   +Teeth+, filed or pulled out, 37

   +Teka ndungu+, near Kambambe, 9.7 S., 14.6 E., 147

   +Temba ndumba+, a daughter of Dongy, 152

   +Tenda+ (Tinda), town between Ambrize and Loze (D. Lopez).

   +Theft+, its discovery, 56, 80, 83

   +Tihman+, Captain, 125

   +Tin+ mines, 119

   +Tombo+, village, 9.1 S., 13.3 E., 36, 145

   +Tondo+ (Tunda), a district, 10.0 S., 15.0 E., 26

   +Tovar+, Joseph Pellicer de, quoted, 126

   +Treaties+ with Holland, 128, 175

   +Trials+ before a fetish, 56, 80, 83

   +Trombash+, or war-hatchet, 34, 86

   +Tuckey+, Capt., quoted, 77

   +Turner+, Thomas, ix, 7, 71


   +Ukole+, island in Kwanza, 9.7. S., 15.7 E.

   +Ulanga+, battle of 1666, 7.7 S., 17.4 E., 127, 179

   +Ulhoa+, D. Manuel de, bishop, 122

   +Ulolo.+ _See_ Mpangu.

   +Umba+, district of, 8.1 S., 16.7 E., 167


   +Vaccas+, Bahia das, 12.6 S., 13.4 E., 16, 29, 160

   +Vamba+, river. _See_ Vumba.

   +Vamma+, district at mouth of Dande (Dapper), 8.5 S., 13.3 E.

   +Vambu a ngongo+, a vassal of Kongo, in the south, who sided with
      the Portuguese. He seems to be identical with Nambu a ngongo,
     _q. v._

   +Vasconcellos+, Ernesto, quoted, 210

   +Vasconcellos+, Luiz Mendes de, 163, 188

   +Vasconcellos da Cunha+, Bartholomeu 127, 189

   +Vasconcellos da Cunha+, Francisco de, 167-170, 174, 179, 189

   +Veanga+ (Paiva Manso, 244), a prince of Kongo. Rev. Tho. Lewis
      suggests _Nkanga_, E. of S. Salvador, 6.3 S., 14.6 E.

   +Vellez+, João Castanhosa, 147

   +Velloria+, João de, 149, 153, 155

   +Verbela+, a river, perhaps the same as Barbela (Duarte Lopez).

   +Viéra+, Antonio, 113

   +Vieira+, Antonio, a negro, 119

   +Vieira+, João Fernandez de, 173, 179, 183-185, 189

   +Vilhegas+, Diogo de. _See_ Antonio de Dénis.

   +Voss+, Isaac, his work on the Nile, xv

   +Vumba+ (Va-umba, “at or near Umba,”) a river that runs to the Zaire
     (Lopez), called _Vamba_ (Cavazzi) = the _Hamba_ (C. and I). Mechow
     (_Abh. G. F. E._, 1882, p. 486) mentions a large river _Humba_ to
      the E. of the Kwangu; a river _Wamba_ joins the lower Kwangu;
      another _Vamba_ joins the lower Zaire, and leads up to Porto Rico.
     (Vasconcellos, _Bol._, 1882, 734); and there is a river _Umba_ or
     _Vumba_ in E. Africa. (_Vumba_ = to make pots, in Kongo). _Vamba_
      is perhaps another name for the Kwangu.

   +Vunda+, district of Kongo (Paiva Manso, 104); but _Vunda_ means “to
      rest,” and there are many of these mid day halting-places of the
      old slave gangs, the villages where they passed the night being
      called Vemadia, _i.e._, Ave Maria (Tho. Lewis). A village _Vunda_,
      on the Kongo, 5.2 S., 13.7 E.


   +Walkenaer+, quoted, 19, 22

   +Wamba+, river. _See_ Vumba.

   +Wembo+, or Wandu, district 7.5 S., 15.0 E., 123, 126. _See_ Ouuanda.

   +Welwitsch+, quoted, 16, 17

   +West India Company+, Dutch, 170

   +Wheat+ (maize), 7, 11

   +Wilson+, Rev. Leighton, quoted, 134

   +Witchcraft+, 61

   +Women+, first European, at Luandu, 155

   +Wouters+, a Belgian capuchin, 132


   +Ybare.+ _See_ Ibare.

   +Yumba+, country, 3.3 S., 10.7 E. 53, 82


   +Zaire+, (Nzari, or Nzadi). _See_ Kongo.

   +Zariambala+, Nzari Ambala of Zucchelli, probably the Mamballa R. of
      Turkey, which is the main channel of the Kongo in 12.9 E.

   +Zebra+, and zebra tails, 33, 63

   +Zenze+ (Nzenza), river bank, _Nzanza_, table land, said to be the
      proper name of the river M’bengu, and also the name of several
      districts.

   +Zenze angumbe.+ _See_ Nzenza.

   +Zerri+ (Chera), N. of Mboma, 5.8 S., 13.1 E.

   +Zimba+, the first Jaga, 152;
     the Zimba are identical with the Maravi in East Africa, 150

   +Zimbo+, soldiers of a Jaga (Cavazzi, 183).

   +Zoca+, an inland town, S. of Mbata (D. Lopez).

   +Zolo+ (Nzolo), a village on road from S. Salvador to Mbata, 6.0 S.,
      15.1 E.

   +Zombo+, (Mosombi), the tribe inhabiting Mbata, 5.8 S., 15.5 E.

   +Zongo+, of Cavazzi, Mosongo of Rebello de Aragõa; our Songo, 11.0 S.,
      17.5 E.

   +Zucchelli+, Antonio, 132, 184, 186






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Strange Adventures of Andrew
Battell, by Andrew Battell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANDREW BATTELL ***

***** This file should be named 41282-0.txt or 41282-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/2/8/41282/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Turgut Dincer, Joseph Cooper and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

