The Project Gutenberg EBook of William Lilly's History of His Life and
Times, by William Lilly

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: William Lilly's History of His Life and Times
       From the Year 1602 to 1681

Author: William Lilly

Editor: Elias Ashmole

Release Date: May 16, 2005 [EBook #15835]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILLIAM LILLY'S HISTORY ***




Produced by Steven Gibbs, David King, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team





WILLIAM LILLY'S

HISTORY

OF HIS

LIFE AND TIMES,

FROM THE YEAR 1602 TO 1681.

       *       *       *       *       *

Written by Himself,

IN THE SIXTY-SIXTH YEAR OF HIS AGE, TO HIS WORTHY FRIEND,

ELIAS ASHMOLE, ESQ.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUBLISHED FROM THE ORIGINAL MS.

_LONDON_, 1715.

       *       *       *       *       *

LONDON:

RE-PRINTED FOR CHARLES BALDWYN,

NEWGATE STREET.

       *       *       *       *       *

M.DCCC.XXII.

MAURICE, PRINTER, PENCHURCH-STREET.




LIST OF PLATES.

William Lilly, (from Marshall's Print)

Ditto (from the Picture)

Dr. Simon Forman      34

John Booker      68

Charles the Second      95

Charles the First      107

Hugh Peters      134

Speaker Lenthall      159

Oliver Cromwell      175

Dr. John Dee      223

Edward Kelly      226

Napier of Merchiston      236




ADVERTISEMENT.

PREFIXED TO THE LIVES OF ELIAS ASHMOLE & WILLIAM LILLY.

In 1 vol. 8vo. 1772.


_Although we cannot, with justice, compare Elias Ashmole to that
excellent Antiquary John Leland, or William Lilly to the learned and
indefatigable Thomas Hearne; yet I think we may fairly rank them with
such writers as honest Anthony Wood, whose_ Diary _greatly resembles
that of his cotemporary, and intimate friend, Elias Ashmole._

_Some anecdotes, connected with affairs of state; many particulars
relating to illustrious persons, and antient and noble families; several
occurrences in which the Public is interested, and other matters of a
more private nature, can only be found in works of this kind. History
cannot stoop to the meanness of examining the materials of which_
Memoirs _are generally composed._

_And yet the pleasure and benefit resulting from such books are manifest
to every reader._

_I hope the admirers of the very laborious Thomas Hearne will pardon me,
if I should venture to give it as my opinion, and with much deference to
their judgment, that William Lilly's_ Life and Death of Charles the
first _contains more useful matter of instruction, as well as more
splendid and striking occurrences, than are to be found in several of
those monkish volumes published by that learned Oxonian._

_Lilly affords us many curious particulars relating to the life of that
unfortunate Prince, which are no where else to be found. In delineating
the character of Charles, he seems dispassionate and impartial, and
indeed it agrees perfectly with the general portraiture of him, as it is
drawn by our most authentic historians._

The History of Lilly's Life and Times _is certainly one of the most
entertaining narratives in our language. With respect to the science he
professed of calculating nativities, casting figures, the prediction of
events, and other appendages of astrology, he would fain make us think
that he was a very solemn and serious believer. Indeed, such is the
manner of telling his story, that sometimes the reader may possibly be
induced to suppose Lilly rather an enthusiast than an impostor. He
relates many anecdotes of the pretenders to foretell events, raise
spirits, and other impostures, with such seeming candor, and with such
an artless simplicity of style, that we are almost persuaded to take his
word when he protests such an inviolable respect to truth and
sincerity._

_The powerful genius of Shakespeare could carry him triumphantly through
subjects the most unpromising, and fables the most improbable: we
therefore cannot wonder at the success of such of his plays, where the
magic of witches and the incantation of spirits are described, or where
the power of fairies is introduced; when such was the credulity of the
times respecting these imaginary beings, and when that belief was made a
science of, and kept alive by artful and superstitious, knavish, and
enthusiastic teachers; what Lilly relates of these people, considered
only as matter of fact, is surely very curious._

_To conclude; I know no record but this where we can find so just and so
entertaining a History of Doctor Dee, Doctor Forman, Booker, Winder,
Kelly, Evans, (Lilly's Master,) the famous William Poole, and Captain
Bubb Fiske, Sarah Shelborne, and many others._

_To these we may add, the uncommon effects of the Crystal, the
appearance of Queen Mabb, and other strange and miraculous operations,
which owe their origin to folly, curiosity, superstition, bigotry, and
imposture._




THE

LIFE

OF

WILLIAM LILLY,

STUDENT IN ASTROLOGY.

    Wrote by himself in the 66th Year of his Age, at Hersham, in the
    Parish of Walton-upon-Thames, in the County of Surry. _Propria
    Manu._


I[1] was born in the county of Leicester, in an obscure town, in the
north-west borders thereof, called Diseworth, seven miles south of the
town of Derby, one mile from Castle-Donnington, a town of great
rudeness, wherein it is not remembered that any of the farmers thereof
did ever educate any of their sons to learning, only my grandfather sent
his younger son to Cambridge, whose name was Robert Lilly, and died
Vicar of Cambden in Gloucestershire, about 1640.

    [Footnote 1: "William Lilly was a prominent, and, in the opinion
    of many of his cotemporaries, a very important personage in the
    most eventful period of English history. He was a principal
    actor in the farcical scenes which diversified the bloody
    tragedy of civil war; and while the King and the Parliament were
    striving for mastery in the field, he was deciding their
    destinies in the closet. The weak and the credulous of both
    parties, who sought to be instructed in 'destiny's dark
    counsels,' flocked to consult the 'wily Archimage,' who, with
    exemplary impartiality, meted out victory and good fortune to
    his clients, according to the extent of their faith, and the
    weight of their purses. A few profane Cavaliers might make his
    name the burthen of their _malignant_ rhymes--a few of the more
    scrupulous among the _Saints_ might keep aloof in sanctified
    abhorrence of the 'Stygian sophister'--but the great majority of
    the people lent a willing and reverential ear to his prophecies
    and prognostications. Nothing was too high or too low--too
    mighty or too insignificant, for the grasp of his genius. The
    stars, his informants, were as communicative on the most trivial
    as on the most important subjects. If a scheme was set on foot
    to rescue the king, or to retrieve a stray trinket--to restore
    the royal authority, or to make a frail damsel an honest
    woman--to cure the nation of anarchy, or a lap-dog of a surfeit,
    William Lilly was the oracle to be consulted. His _almanacks_
    were spelled over in the tavern and quoted in the senate; they
    nerved the arm of the soldier, and rounded the periods of the
    orator. The fashionable beauty, dashing along in her calash from
    St. James's or the Mall, and the prim, starched dame, from
    Watling-street or Bucklersbury, with a staid foot-boy, in a
    plush jerkin, plodding behind her--the reigning toast among 'the
    men of wit about town,' and the leading groaner in a tabernacle
    concert--glided alternately into the study of the trusty wizard,
    and poured into his attentive ear strange tales of love, or
    trade, or treason. The Roundhead stalked in at one door, whilst
    the Cavalier was hurried out at the other.

    "The _Confessions_ of a man so variously consulted and trusted,
    if written with the candour of a Cardan or a Rousseau, would
    indeed be invaluable. The _Memoirs of William Lilly_, though
    deficient in this essential ingredient, yet contain a variety of
    curious and interesting anecdotes of himself and his
    cotemporaries, which, where the vanity of the writer, or the
    truth of his art, is not concerned, may be received with
    implicit credence.

    "The simplicity and apparent candour of his narrative might
    induce a hasty reader of this book to believe him a well-meaning
    but somewhat silly personage, the dupe of his own
    speculations--the deceiver of himself as well as of others. But
    an attentive examination of the events of his life, even as
    recorded by himself, will not warrant so favourable an
    interpretation. His systematic and successful attention to his
    own interest--his dexterity in keeping on 'the windy side of the
    law'--his perfect political pliability--and his presence of mind
    and fertility of resources when entangled in
    difficulties--indicate an accomplished impostor, not a crazy
    enthusiast. It is very possible and probable, that, at the
    outset of his career, he was a real believer in the truth and
    lawfulness of his art, and that he afterwards felt no
    inclination to part with so pleasant and so profitable a
    delusion: like his patron, Cromwell, whose early fanaticism
    subsided into hypocrisy, he carefully retained his folly as a
    cloak for his knavery. Of his success in deception, the present
    narrative exhibits abundant proofs. The number of his dupes was
    not confined to the vulgar and illiterate, but included
    individuals of real worth and learning, of hostile parties and
    sects, who courted his acquaintance and respected his
    predictions. His proceedings were deemed of sufficient
    importance to be twice made the subject of a parliamentary
    inquiry; and even after the Restoration--when a little more
    scepticism, if not more wisdom, might have been expected--we
    find him examined by a Committee of the House of Commons,
    respecting his fore-knowledge of the great fire of London. We
    know not whether it 'should more move our anger or our mirth,'
    to see an assemblage of British Senators--the cotemporaries of
    Hampden and Falkland--of Milton and Clarendon--in an age which
    roused into action so many and such mighty energies--gravely
    engaged in ascertaining the causes of a great national calamity,
    from the prescience of a knavish fortuneteller, and puzzling
    their wisdoms to interpret the symbolical flames, which blazed
    in the mis-shapen wood-cuts of his oracular publications.

    "As a set-off against these honours may be mentioned, the
    virulent and unceasing attacks of almost all the party
    scribblers of the day; but their abuse he shared in common with
    men, whose talents and virtues have outlived the malice of their
    cotemporaries, and

      'Whose honours with increase of ages grow,
       As streams roll down, enlarging as they flow.'"

    _Retrospective Review_, Vol. ii. p. 51.]

The town of Diseworth did formerly belong long unto the Lord Seagrave,
for there is one record in the hands of my cousin Melborn Williamson,
which mentions one acre of land abutting north upon the gates of the
Lord Seagrave; and there is one close, called Hall-close, wherein the
ruins of some ancient buildings appear, and particularly where the
dove-house stood; and there is also the ruins of decayed fish-ponds and
other outhouses. This town came at length to be the inheritance of
Margaret, Countess of Richmond, mother of Henry VII. which Margaret gave
this town and lordship of Diseworth unto Christ's College in Cambridge,
the Master and Fellows whereof have ever since, and at present, enjoy
and possess it.

In the church of this town there is but one monument, and that is a
white marble stone, now almost broken to pieces, which was placed there
by Robert Lilly, my grandfather, in memory of Jane his wife, the
daughter of Mr. Poole of Dalby, in the same county, a family now quite
extinguished. My grandmother's brother was Mr. Henry Poole, one of the
Knights of Rhodes, or Templars, who being a soldier at Rhodes at the
taking thereof by Solyman the Magnificent, and escaping with his life,
came afterwards to England, and married the Lady Parron or Perham, of
Oxfordshire, and was called, during his life, Sir Henry Poole. William
Poole the Astrologer knew him very well, and remembers him to have been
a very tall person, and reputed of great strength in his younger years.

The impropriation of this town of Diseworth was formerly the inheritance
of three sisters, whereof two became votaries; one in the nunnery of
Langly in the parish of Diseworth, valued at the suppression, I mean the
whole nunnery, at thirty-two pounds per annum, and this sister's part is
yet enjoyed by the family of the Grayes, who now, and for some years
past, have the enjoyment and possession of all the lands formerly
belonging to the nunnery in the parish of Diseworth, and are at present
of the yearly value of three hundred and fifty pounds per annum. One of
the sisters gave her part of the great tithes unto a religious house in
Bredon upon the Hill; and, as the inhabitants report, became a religious
person afterwards.

The third sister married, and her part of the tithes in succeeding ages
became the Earl of Huntingdon's, who not many years since sold it to one
of his servants.

The donation of the vicarage is in the gift of the Grayes of Langley,
unto whom they pay yearly, (I mean unto the Vicar) as I am informed, six
pounds per annum. Very lately some charitable citizens have purchased
one-third portion of the tithes, and given it for a maintenance of a
preaching minister, and it is now of the value of about fifty pounds per
annum.

There have been two hermitages in this parish; the last hermit was well
remembered by one Thomas Cooke, a very ancient inhabitant, who in my
younger years acquainted me therewith.

This town of Diseworth is divided into three parishes; one part belongs
under Locington, in which part standeth my father's house, over-against
the west end of the steeple, in which I was born: some other farms are
in the parish of Bredon, the rest in the parish of Diseworth.

In this town, but in the parish of Lockington, was I born, the first day
of May 1602.

My father's name was William Lilly, son of Robert, the son of Robert,
the son of Rowland, &c. My mother was Alice, the daughter of Edward
Barham, of Fiskerton Mills, in Nottinghamshire, two miles from Newark
upon Trent: this Edward Barham was born in Norwich, and well remembered
the rebellion of Kett the Tanner, in the days of Edward VI.

Our family have continued many ages in this town as yeomen; besides the
farm my father and his ancestors lived in, both my father and
grandfather had much free land, and many houses in the town, not
belonging to the college, as the farm wherein they were all born doth,
and is now at this present of the value of forty pounds per annum, and
in possession of my brother's son; but the freehold land and houses,
formerly purchased by my ancestors, were all sold by my grandfather and
father; so that now our family depend wholly upon a college lease. Of my
infancy I can speak little, only I do remember that in the fourth year
of my age I had the measles.

I was, during my minority, put to learn at such schools, and of such
masters, as the rudeness of the place and country afforded; my mother
intending I should be a scholar from my infancy, seeing my father's
back-slidings in the world, and no hopes by plain husbandry to recruit a
decayed estate; therefore upon Trinity Tuesday, 1613, my father had me
to Ashby de la Zouch, to be instructed by one Mr. John Brinsley; one, in
those times, of great abilities for instruction of youth in the Latin
and Greek tongues; he was very severe in his life and conversation, and
did breed up many scholars for the universities: in religion he was a
strict Puritan, not conformable wholly to the ceremonies of the Church
of England. In this town of Ashby de la Zouch, for many years together,
Mr. Arthur Hildersham exercised his ministry at my being there; and all
the while I continued at Ashby, he was silenced. This is that famous
Hildersham, who left behind him a commentary on the fifty-first psalm;
as also many sermons upon the fourth of John, both which are printed; he
was an excellent textuary, of exemplary life, pleasant in discourse, a
strong enemy to the Brownists, and dissented not from the Church of
England in any article of faith, but only about wearing the surplice,
baptizing with the cross, and kneeling at the sacrament; most of the
people in town were directed by his judgement, and so continued, and yet
do continue presbyterianly affected; for when the Lord of Loughborough
in 1642, 1643, 1644, and 1645, had his garrison in that town, if by
chance at any time any troops of horse had lodged within the town,
though they came late at night to their quarters; yet would one or other
of the town presently give Sir John Gell of Derby notice, so that ere
next morning most of his Majesty's troops were seized in their lodgings,
which moved the Lord of Loughborough merrily to say, there was not a
fart let in Ashby, but it was presently carried to Derby.

The several authors I there learned were these, viz. _Sententiæ
Pueriles_, _Cato_, _Corderius_, _Æsop's Fables_, _Tully's Offices_,
_Ovid de Tristibus_; lastly, _Virgil_, then _Horace_; as also _Camden's
Greek Grammar_, _Theognis_ and _Homer's Iliads_: I was only entered into
_Udall's Hebrew Grammar_; he never taught logick, but often would say it
was fit to be learned in the universities.

In the fourteenth year of my age, by a fellow scholar of swarth, black
complexion, I had like to have my right eye beaten out as we were at
play; the same year, about Michaelmas, I got a surfeit, and thereupon a
fever, by eating beech-nuts.

In the sixteenth year of my age I was exceedingly troubled in my dreams
concerning my salvation and damnation, and also concerning the safety
and destruction of the souls of my father and mother; in the nights I
frequently wept, prayed and mourned, for fear my sins might offend God.

In the seventeenth year of my age my mother died.

In the eighteenth year of my age my master Brinsley was enforced from
keeping school, being persecuted by the Bishop's officers; he came to
London, and then lectured in London, where he afterwards died. In this
year, by reason of my father's poverty, I was also enforced to leave
school, and so came to my father's house, where I lived in much penury
for one year, and taught school one quarter of a year, until God's
providence provided better for me.

For the two last years of my being at school, I was of the highest form
in the school, and chiefest of that form; I could then speak Latin as
well as English; could make extempore verses upon any theme; all kinds
of verses, hexameter, pentameter, phaleuciacks, iambicks, sapphicks, &c.
so that if any scholars from remote schools came to dispute, I was
ringleader to dispute with them; I could cap verses, &c. If any minister
came to examine us, I was brought forth against him, nor would I argue
with him unless in the Latin tongue, which I found few of them could
well speak without breaking Priscian's head; which, if once they did, I
would complain to my master, _Non bene intelligit linguam Latinam, nec
prorsus loquitur_. In the derivation of words, I found most of them
defective, nor indeed were any of them good grammarians: all and every
of those scholars who were of my form and standing, went to Cambridge
and proved excellent divines, only poor I, William Lilly, was not so
happy; fortune then frowning upon father's present condition, he not in
any capacity to maintain me at the university.


OF THE MANNER HOW I CAME UNTO LONDON.


Worthy sir, I take much delight to recount unto you, even all and every
circumstance of my life, whether good, moderate, or evil; _Deo gloria_.

My father had one Samuel Smatty for his Attorney, unto whom I went
sundry times with letters, who perceiving I was a scholar, and that I
lived miserably in the country, losing my time, nor any ways likely to
do better, if I continued there; pitying my condition, he sent word for
me to come and speak with him, and told me that he had lately been at
London, where there was a gentleman wanted a youth, to attend him and
his wife, who could write, &c.

I acquainted my father with it, who was very willing to be rid of me,
for I could not work, drive the plough, or endure any country labour; my
father oft would say, I was good for nothing.

I had only twenty shillings, and no more, to buy me a new suit, hose,
doublet, &c. my doublet was fustian: I repaired to Mr. Smatty, when I
was accoutred, for a letter to my master, which he gave me.

Upon Monday, April 3, 1620, I departed from Diseworth, and came to
Leicester: but I must acquaint you, that before I came away I visited my
friends, amongst whom I had given me about ten shillings, which was a
great comfort unto me. On Tuesday, April the 4th, I took leave of my
father, then in Leicester gaol for debt, and came along with Bradshaw
the carrier, the same person with whom many of the Duke of Buckingham's
kindred had come up with. Hark how the waggons crack with their rich
lading! It was a very stormy week, cold and uncomfortable: I footed it
all along; we could not reach London until Palm-Sunday, the 9th of
April, about half an hour after three in the afternoon, at which time we
entered Smithfield. When I had gratified the carrier and his servants, I
had seven shillings and sixpence left, and no more; one suit of cloaths
upon my back, two shirts, three bands, one pair of shoes, and as many
stockings. Upon the delivery of my letter my master entertained me, and
next day bought me a new cloak, of which you may imagine (good Esquire)
whether I was not proud of; besides, I saw and eat good white bread,
contrary to our diet in Leicestershire. My master's name was Gilbert
Wright, born at Market Bosworth in Leicestershire; my mistress was born
at Ashby de la Zouch, in the same county, and in the town where I had
gone to school. This Gilbert Wright could neither write nor read: he
lived upon his annual rents, was of no calling or profession; he had for
many years been servant to the Lady Pawlet in Hertfordshire; and when
Serjeant Puckering was made Lord keeper, he made him keeper of his
lodgings at Whitehall. When Sir Thomas Egerton was made Lord Chancellor,
he entertained him in the same place; and when he married a widow in
Newgate Market, the Lord Chancellor recommended him to the company of
Salters, London, to admit him into their company, and so they did, and
my master in 1624, was master of that company; he was a man of excellent
natural parts, and would speak publickly upon any occasion very
rationally and to the purpose. I write this, that the world may know he
was no taylor, or myself of that or any other calling or profession: my
work was to go before my master to church; to attend my master when he
went abroad; to make clean his shoes; sweep the street; help to drive
bucks when he washed; fetch water in a tub from the Thames: I have
helped to carry eighteen tubs of water in one morning; weed the garden;
all manner of drudgeries I willingly performed; scrape trenchers, &c. If
I had any profession, it was of this nature: I should never have denied
being a taylor, had I been one; for there is no calling so base, which
by God's mercy may not afford a livelihood; and had not my master
entertained me, I would have been of a very mean profession ere I would
have returned into the country again; so here ends the actions of
eighteen years of my life.

My master married his second wife for her estate; she was competently
rich; she married him for considerations he performed not, (nocturnal
society) so that they lived very uncomfortably; she was about seventy
years of age, he sixty-six or more; yet never was any woman more jealous
of a husband than she; insomuch, that whensoever he went into London,
she was confident of his going to women; by those means my life was the
more uncomfortable, it being very difficult to please two such opposite
natures: however, as to the things of this world I had enough, and
endured their discontents with much sereneness. My mistress was very
curious to know of such as were then called cunning or wise men, whether
she should bury her husband? She frequently visited such persons, and
this occasion begot in me a little desire to learn something that way,
but wanting money to buy books, I laid aside these motions, and
endeavoured to please both master and mistress.


OF MY MISTRESS'S DEATH, AND OCCASION THEREOF BY MEANS OF A CANCER IN HER
BREAST.


In 1622 she complained of a pain in her left breast, whereon there
appeared at first a hard knob no bigger than a small pea; it increased
in a little time very much, was very hard, and sometimes would look very
red; she took advice of surgeons, had oils, sear-cloths, plates of lead,
and what not: in 1623 it grew very big, and spread all over her breast;
then for many weeks poultices were applied to it, which in continuance
of time broke the skin, and then abundance of watery thin stuff came
from it, but nothing else; at length the matter came to suppuration, but
never any great store issued forth; it was exceeding noisome and
painful; from the beginning of it until she died, she would permit no
surgeon to dress it but only myself; I applied every thing unto it, and
her pains were so great the winter before she died, that I have been
called out of my bed two or three times in one night to dress it and
change plaisters. In 1624 by degrees, with scissars, I cut all the whole
breast away, I mean the sinews, nerves, &c. In one fortnight, or little
more, it appeared, as it were, mere flesh, all raw, so that she could
scarce endure any unguent to be applied.

I remember there was a great cleft through the middle of the breast,
which when that fully appeared she died, which was in September 1624; my
master being then in the country, his kindred in London would willingly
have had mourning for her; but by advice of an especial friend of his I
contradicted them; nor would I permit them to look into any chest or
trunk in the house. She was decently buried, and so fond of me in the
time of her sickness, she would never permit me out of her chamber, gave
me five pounds in old gold, and sent me unto a private trunk of her's at
a friend's house, where she had one hundred pounds in gold; she bid me
bring it away and take it, but when I opened the trunk I found nothing
therein; for a kinsman of hers had been there a few days before, and
carried all away: she was in a great passion at my relating thereof,
because she could not gratify my pains in all her sickness, advised me
to help myself, when she was gone, out of my master's goods, which I
never did.

Courteous Esquire, be not weary of reading hereof, or what followeth.

When my mistress died, she had under her arm-hole a small scarlet bag
full of many things, which, one that was there delivered unto me. There
was in this bag several sigils, some of Jupiter in Trine, others of the
nature of Venus, some of iron, and one of gold, of pure angel-gold, of
the bigness of a thirty-three shilling piece of King James's coin. In
the circumference on one side was engraven, _Vicit Leo de tribu Judæ
Tetragrammaton_ [symbol: cross], within the middle there was engraven a
holy lamb. In the other circumference there was Amraphel and three
[symbol: cross]. In the middle, _Sanctus Petrus_, _Alpha_ and _Omega_.

The occasion of framing this sigil was thus; her former husband
travelling into Sussex, happened to lodge in an inn, and to lie in a
chamber thereof; wherein, not many months before, a country grazier had
lain, and in the night cut his own throat; after this night's lodging,
he was perpetually, and for many years, followed by a spirit, which
vocally and articulately provoked him to cut his throat: he was used
frequently to say, 'I defy thee, I defy thee,' and to spit at the
spirit; this spirit followed him many years, he not making any body
acquainted with it; at last he grew melancholy and discontented; which
being carefully observed by his wife, she many times hearing him
pronounce, 'I defy thee,' &c. she desired him to acquaint her with the
cause of his distemper, which he then did. Away she went to Dr. Simon
Forman, who lived then in Lambeth, and acquaints him with it; who having
framed this sigil, and hanged it about his neck, he wearing it
continually until he died, was never more molested by the spirit: I sold
the sigil for thirty-two shillings, but transcribed the words _verbatim_
as I have related. Sir, you shall now have a story of this Simon Forman,
as his widow, whom I well knew, related it unto me. But before I relate
his death, I shall acquaint you something of the man, as I have gathered
them from some manuscripts of his own writing.


OF DR. SIMON FORMAN


He was a chandler's son in the city of Westminster. He travelled into
Holland for a month, in 1580, purposely to be instructed in astrology,
and other more occult sciences; as also in physick, taking his degree of
Doctor beyond seas: being sufficiently furnished and instructed with
what he desired, he returned into England, towards the latter end of the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, and flourished until that year of King James,
wherein the Countess of Essex, the Earl of Somerset, and Sir Thomas
Overbury's matters were questioned. He lived in Lambeth, with a very
good report of the neighbourhood, especially of the poor, unto whom he
was very charitable. He was a person that in horary questions
(especially thefts) was very judicious and fortunate; so also in
sicknesses, which indeed was his master-piece. In resolving questions
about marriage he had good success: in other questions very moderate. He
was a person of indefatigable pains. I have seen sometimes half one
sheet of paper wrote of his judgment upon one question; in writing
whereof he used much tautology, as you may see yourself, (most excellent
Esquire) if you read a great book of Dr. Flood's, which you have, who
had all that book from the manuscripts of Forman; for I have seen the
same word for word in an English manuscript formerly belonging to Doctor
Willoughby of Gloucestershire. Had Forman lived to have methodized his
own papers, I doubt not but he would have advanced the
Jatro-mathematical part thereof very completely; for he was very
observant, and kept notes of the success of his judgments, as in many of
his figures I have observed. I very well remember to have read, in one
of his manuscripts, what followeth.

'Being in bed one morning,' (says he) 'I was desirous to know whether I
should ever be a Lord, Earl, or Knight, &c. whereupon I set a figure;
and thereupon my judgment:' by which he concluded, that within two years
time he should be a Lord or great man: 'But,' says he, 'before the two
years were expired, the Doctors put me in Newgate, and nothing came.'
Not long after, he was desirous to know the same things concerning his
honour or greatship. Another figure was set, and that promised him to be
a great Lord within one year. But he sets down, that in that year he had
no preferment at all; only 'I became acquainted with a merchant's wife,
by whom I got well.' There is another figure concerning one Sir ----
Ayre his going into Turkey, whether it would be a good voyage or not:
the Doctor repeats all his astrological reasons and musters them
together, and then gave his judgment it would be a fortunate voyage. But
under this figure he concludes, 'this proved not so, for he was taken
prisoner by pirates ere he arrived in Turkey, and lost all.' He set
several questions to know if he should attain the philosophers' stone,
and the figures, according to his straining, did seem to signify as
much; and then he tuggs upon the aspects and configurations, and elected
a fit time to begin his operation; but, by and by, in conclusion, he
adds, 'so the work went very forward; but upon the [symbol: aspect
"squares"] of [symbol: aspect "conjunctions"] the setting-glass broke,
and I lost all my pains:' he sets down five or six such judgments, but
still complains all came to nothing, upon the malignant aspects of
[symbol: Saturn] and [symbol: Mars]. Although some of his astrological
judgments did fail, more particularly those concerning himself, he being
no way capable of such preferment as he ambitiously desired; yet I shall
repeat some other of his judgments, which did not fail, being performed
by conference with spirits. My mistress went once unto him, to know when
her husband, then in Cumberland, would return, he having promised to be
at home near the time of the question; after some consideration, he told
her to this effect: 'Margery,' for so her name was, 'thy husband will
not be at home these eighteen days; his kindred have vexed him, and he
is come away from them in much anger: he is now in Carlisle, and hath
but three-pence in his purse.' And when he came home he confessed all to
be true, and that upon leaving his kindred he had but three-pence in his
purse. I shall relate one story more, and then his death.

One Coleman, clerk to Sir Thomas Beaumont of Leicestershire, having had
some liberal favours both from his lady and her daughters, bragged of
it, &c. The Knight brought him into the star-chamber, had his servant
sentenced to be pilloried, whipped, and afterwards, during life, to be
imprisoned. The sentence was executed in London, and was to be in
Leicestershire: two keepers were to convey Coleman from the Fleet to
Leicester. My mistress taking consideration of Coleman, and the miseries
he was to suffer, went presently to Forman, acquainted him therewith;
who, after consideration, swore Coleman had lain both with mother and
daughters; and besides said, that the old Lady being afflicted with fits
of the mother, called him into her chamber to hold down the fits with
his hands; and that he holding his hands about the breast, she cried
'Lower, lower,' and put his hands below her belly; and then--He also
told my mistress in what posture he lay with the young ladies, &c. and
said, 'they intend in Leicester to whip him to death; but I assure thee,
Margery, he shall never come there; yet they set forward to-morrow,'
says he; and so his two keepers did, Coleman's legs being locked with an
iron chain under the horse's belly. In this nature they travelled the
first and second day; on the third day the two keepers, seeing their
prisoner's civility the two preceding days, did not lock his chain under
the horse's belly as formerly, but locked it only to one side. In this
posture they rode some miles beyond Northampton, when on a sudden, one
of the keepers had a necessity to untruss, and so the other and Coleman
stood still; by and by the other keeper desired Coleman to hold his
horse, for he had occasion also: Coleman immediately took one of their
swords, and ran through two of the horses, killing them stark dead; gets
upon the other, with one of their swords; 'Farewell, gentlemen,' quoth
he, 'tell my master I have no mind to be whipped in Leicestershire,' and
so went his way. The two keepers in all haste went to a gentleman's
house near at hand, complaining of their misfortune, and desired of him
to pursue their prisoner, which he with much civility granted; but ere
the horses could be got ready, the mistress of the house came down, and
enquiring what the matter was, went to the stable, and commanded the
horses to be unsaddled, with this sharp speech--'Let the Lady Beaumont
and her daughters live honestly, none of my horses shall go forth upon
this occasion.'

I could relate many such stories of his performances; as also what he
wrote in a book left behind him, _viz._ 'This I made the devil write
with his own hand in Lambeth Fields 1596, in June or July, as I now
remember.' He professed to his wife there would be much trouble about
Carr and the Countess of Essex, who frequently resorted unto him, and
from whose company he would sometimes lock himself in his study a whole
day. Now we come to his death, which happened as follows: the Sunday
night before he died, his wife and he being at supper in their
garden-house, she being pleasant, told him, that she had been informed
he could resolve, whether man or wife should die first; 'Whether shall
I' (quoth she) 'bury you or no?' 'Oh Trunco,' for so he called her,
'thou wilt bury me, but thou wilt much repent it.' 'Yea, but how long
first?' 'I shall die,' said he, 'ere Thursday night.' Monday came, all
was well. Tuesday came, he not sick. Wednesday came, and still he was
well; with which his impertinent wife did much twit him in his teeth.
Thursday came, and dinner was ended, he very well: he went down to the
water-side, and took a pair of oars to go to some buildings he was in
hand with in Puddle-dock. Being in the middle of the Thames, he
presently fell down, only saying, 'An impost, an impost,' and so died. A
most sad storm of wind immediately following. He died worth one thousand
two hundred pounds, and left only one son called Clement. All his
rarities, secret manuscripts, of what quality soever, Dr. Napper of
Lindford in Buckinghamshire had, who had been a long time his scholar;
and of whom Forman was used to say he would be a dunce: yet in
continuance of time he proved a singular astrologer and physician. Sir
Richard now living, I believe, has all those rarities in possession,
which were Forman's, being kinsman and heir unto Dr. Napper. (His son
Thomas Napper, Esq.; most generously gave most of these manuscripts to
Elias Ashmole, Esq.;) I hope you will pardon this digression.

After my mistress was dead, I lived most comfortably, my master having a
great affection for me.

The year 1625 now comes on, and the plague exceeding violent, I will
relate what I observed the spring before it broke forth. Against our
corner house every night there would come down, about five or six of the
clock, sometime one hundred or more boys, some playing, others as if in
serious discourse, and just as it grew dark would all be gone home; many
succeeding years there was no such, or any concourse, usually no more
than four or five in a company: In the spring of 1625, the boys and
youths of several parishes in like number appeared again, which I
beholding, called Thomas Sanders, my landlord, and told him, that the
youth and young boys of several parishes did in that nature assemble and
play, in the beginning of the year 1625. 'God bless us,' quoth I, 'from
a plague this year;' but then there succeeded one, and the greatest that
ever was in London. In 1625, the visitation encreasing, and my master
having a great charge of money and plate, some of his own, some other
men's, left me and a fellow-servant to keep the house, and himself in
June went into Leicestershire. He was in that year feoffee collector for
twelve poor alms-people living in Clement-Dane's Church-Yard; whose
pensions I in his absence paid weekly, to his and the parish's great
satisfaction. My master was no sooner gone down, but I bought a
bass-viol, and got a master to instruct me; the intervals of time I
spent in bowling in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, with Wat the cobler, Dick the
blacksmith, and such like companions: We have sometimes been at our work
at six in the morning, and so continued till three or four in the
afternoon, many times without bread or drink all that while. Sometimes I
went to church and heard funeral sermons, of which there was then great
plenty. At other times I went early to St. Antholine's in London, where
there was every morning a sermon. The most able people of the whole city
and suburbs were out of town; if any remained, it were such as were
engaged by parish-officers to remain; no habit of a gentleman or woman
continued; the woeful calamity of that year was grievous, people dying
in the open fields and in open streets. At last, in August, the bills of
mortality so encreased, that very few people had thoughts of surviving
the contagion: the Sunday before the great bill came forth, which was of
five thousand and odd hundreds, there was appointed a sacrament at
Clement Dane's; during the destributing whereof I do very well remember
we sang thirteen parts of the one hundred and nineteenth Psalm. One
Jacob, our minister (for we had three that day, the communion was so
great) fell sick as he was giving the sacrament, went home, and was
buried of the plague the Thursday following, Mr. James, another of the
ministers, fell sick ere he had quite finished, had the plague, and was
thirteen weeks ere he recovered. Mr. Whitacre, the last of the three,
escaped not only then, but all the contagion following, without any
sickness at all; though he officiated at every funeral, and buried all
manner of people, whether they died of the plague or not. He was given
to drink, seldom could preach more than one quarter of an hour at a
time, &c. In November my master came home. My fellow-servant's and my
diet came weekly to six shillings and sixpence, sometimes to seven
shillings, so cheap was diet at that time.

In February of that year, my master married again (one who after his
death became my wife.) In the same year he settled upon me, during my
life, twenty pounds per annum, which I have enjoyed ever since, even to
the writing hereof.

May 22, 1627, my master died at the corner house in the Strand, where I
also lived so long. He died intestate; my mistress relinquishing the
administration, it came to his elder brother, who assigned the estate
over to me for payment of my master's debts; which being paid, I
faithfully returned the remaining part unto his administrator; nor had
one penny of the estate more than twenty pounds per annum, which was
allowed me by contract, to undertake the payment of my master's debts.


OF MY MARRIAGE THE FIRST TIME.


My mistress, who had been twice married to old men, was now resolved to
be couzened no more; she was of a brown ruddy complexion, corpulent, of
but mean stature, plain, no education, yet a very provident person, and
of good condition: she had many suitors, old men, whom she declined;
some gentlemen of decayed fortunes, whom she liked not, for she was
covetous and sparing: by my fellow-servant she was observed frequently
to say, she cared not if she married a man that would love her, so that
he had never a penny; and would ordinarily talk of me when she was in
bed: this servant gave me encouragement to give the onset: I was much
perplexed hereat, for should I attempt her, and be slighted, she would
never care for me afterwards; but again, I considered that if I should
attempt and fail, she would never speak of it; or would any believe I
durst be so audacious as to propound such a question, the disproportion
of years and fortune being so great betwixt us: however, all her talk
was of husbands, and in my presence saying one day after dinner, she
respected not wealth, but desired an honest man; I made answer, I
thought I could fit her with such a husband; she asked me, where? I made
no more ado, but presently saluted her, and told her myself was the man:
she replied, I was too young; I said nay; what I had not in wealth, I
would supply in love; and saluted her frequently, which she accepted
lovingly; and next day at dinner made me sit down at dinner with my hat
on my head, and said, she intended to make me her husband; for which I
gave her many salutes, &c.

I was very careful to keep all things secret, for I well knew, if she
should take counsel of any friend, my hopes would be frustrated,
therefore I suddenly procured her consent to marry, unto which she
assented; so that upon the eighth day of September, 1627, at St.
George's church in Southwark, I was married unto her, and for two whole
years we kept it secret. When it was divulged, and some people blamed
her for it, she constantly replied, that she had no kindred; if I proved
kind, and a good husband, she would make me a man; if I proved
otherwise, she only undid herself. In the third and fourth years after
our marriage, we had strong suits of law with her first husband's
kindred, but overthrew them in the end. During all the time of her life,
which was until October, 1633, we lived very lovingly, I frequenting no
company at all; my exercises were sometimes angling, in which I ever
delighted: my companions, two aged men. I then frequented lectures, two
or three in a week; I heard Mr. Sute in Lombard-Street, Mr. Gouge of
Black-Fryars, Dr. Micklethwait of the Temple, Dr. Oldsworth, with
others, the most learned men of these times, and leaned in judgment to
Puritanism. In October, 1627, I was made free of the Salters' company in
London.


HOW I CAME TO STUDY ASTROLOGY.


It happened on one Sunday, 1632, as myself and a Justice of Peace's
clerk were, before service, discoursing of many things, he chanced to
say, that such a person was a great scholar, nay, so learned, that his
could make an Almanack, which to me then was strange: one speech begot
another, till, at last, he said, he could bring me acquainted with one
Evans in Gunpowder-Alley, who had formerly lived in Staffordshire, that
was an excellent wise man, and studied the Black Art. The same week
after we went to see Mr. Evans. When we came to his house, he, having
been drunk the night before, was upon his bed, if it be lawful to call
that a bed whereon he then lay; he roused up himself, and, after some
compliments, he was content to instruct me in astrology; I attended his
best opportunities for seven or eight weeks, in which time I could set a
figure perfectly: books he had not any, except _Haly de judiciis
Astrorum_, and _Orriganus's Ephemerides_; so that as often as I entered
his house, I thought I was in the wilderness. Now something of the man:
he was by birth a Welshman, a Master of Arts, and in sacred orders; he
had formerly had a cure of souls in Staffordshire, but now was come to
try his fortunes at London, being in a manner enforced to fly for some
offences very scandalous, committed by him in these parts, where he had
lately lived; for he gave judgment upon things lost, the only shame of
astrology: he was the most saturnine person my eyes ever beheld, either
before I practised or since; of a middle stature; broad forehead,
beetle-browed, thick shoulders, flat nosed, full lips, down-looked,
black curling stiff hair, splay-footed; to give him his right, he had
the most piercing judgment naturally upon a figure of theft, and many
other questions, that I ever met withal; yet for money he would
willingly give contrary judgments, was much addicted to debauchery, and
then very abusive and quarrelsome, seldom without a black eye, or one
mischief of other: this is the same Evans who made so many antimornal
cups, upon the sale whereof he principally subsisted; he understood
Latin very well, the Greek tongue not at all: he had some arts above,
and beyond astrology, for he was well versed in the nature of spirits,
and had many times used the circular way of invocating, as in the time
of our familiarity he told me. Two of his actions I will relate, as to
me delivered. There was in Staffordshire a young gentlewoman that had,
for her preferment, married an aged rich person, who was desirous to
purchase some lands for his wife's maintenance; but this young
gentlewoman, his wife, was desired to buy the land in the name of a
gentleman, her very dear friend, but for her use: after the aged man was
dead, the widow could by no means procure the deed of purchase from her
friend; whereupon she applies herself to Evans, who, for a sum of money,
promises to have her deed safely delivered into her own hands; the sum
was forty pounds. Evans applies himself to the invocation of the angel
Salmon, of the nature of Mars, reads his Litany in the
_Common-Prayer-Book_ every day, at select hours, wears his surplice,
lives orderly all that time; at the fortnight's end Salmon appeared, and
having received his commands what to do, in a small time returns with
the very deed desired, lays it down gently upon a table where a white
cloth was spread, and then, being dismissed, vanished. The deed was, by
the gentleman who formerly kept it, placed among many other of his
evidences in a large wooden chest, and in a chamber at one end of the
house; but upon Salmon's; removing and bringing away the deed, all that
bay of building was quite blown down, and all his own proper evidences
torn all to pieces. The second story followeth.

Some time before I became acquainted with him, he then living in the
Minories, was desired by the Lord Bothwell and Sir Kenelm Digby to show
them a spirit. He promised so to do: the time came, and they were all in
the body of the circle, when lo, upon a sudden, after some time of
invocation, Evans was taken from out the room, and carried into the
field near Battersea Causeway, close to the Thames. Next morning a
countryman going by to his labour, and espying a man in black cloaths,
came unto him and awaked him, and asked him how he came there? Evans by
this understood his condition, enquired where he was, how far from
London, and in what parish he was; which when he understood, he told the
labourer he had been late at Battersea the night before, and by chance
was left there by his friends. Sir Kenelm Digby and the Lord Bothwell
went home without any harm, and came next day to hear what was become of
him; just as they, in the afternoon, came into the house, a messenger
came from Evans to his wife, to come to him at Battersea. I enquired
upon what account the spirit carried him away: who said, he had not, at
the time of invocation, made any suffumigation, at which the spirits
were vexed. It happened, that after I discerned what astrology was, I
went weekly into Little Britain, and bought many books of astrology, not
acquainting Evans therewith. Mr. A. Bedwell, Minister of
Tottenham-High-Cross near London, who had been many years chaplain to
Sir Henry Wotton, whilst he was Ambassador at Venice, and assisted
Pietro Soave Polano, in composing and writing the Council of Trent, was
lately dead; and his library being sold into Little Britain, I bought
amongst them my choicest books of astrology. The occasion of our falling
out was thus: a woman demanded the resolution of a question, which when
he had done, she went her way; I standing by all the while, and
observing the figure, asked him why he gave the judgment he did, since
the signification shewed quite the contrary, and gave him my reasons;
which when he had pondered, he called me boy, and must he be
contradicted by such a novice! But when his heat was over, he said, had
he not so judged to please the woman, she would have given him nothing,
and he had a wife and family to provide for; upon this we never came
together after. Being now very meanly introduced, I applied myself to
study those books I had obtained, many times twelve, or fifteen, or
eighteen hours day and night; I was curious to discover, whether there
was any verity in the art or not. Astrology in this time, viz. in 1633,
was very rare in London, few professing it that understood any thing
thereof. Let it not repent you (O noble Esquire) if now I make a short
digression of such persons as then professed astrology, that posterity
may understand in what condition I found it, and in whose hands that
little that remained was lodged.

There lived then in Houndsditch one Alexander Hart, who had been a
soldier formerly, a comely old man, of good aspect; he professed
questionary astrology, and a little of physick; his greatest skill was
to elect young gentlemen fit times to play at dice, that they might win
or get money. I went unto him for resolutions for three questions at
several times, and he erred in every one. To speak soberly of him, he
was but a cheat, as appeared suddenly after; for a rustical fellow of
the city, desirous of knowledge, contracted with Hart to assist for a
conference with a spirit, and paid him twenty pounds of thirty pounds
the contract. At last, after many delays, and no spirit appearing, or
money returned, the young man indicts him for a cheat at the Old Bailey
in London; the Jury found the bill, and at the hearing of the cause this
jest happened: some of the bench enquired what Hart did? 'He sat like an
Alderman in his gown,' quoth the fellow; at which the court fell into a
great laughter, most of the court being Aldermen. He was to have been
set upon the pillory for this cheat; but John Taylour, the Water Poet,
being his great friend, got the Lord Chief Justice Richardson to bail
him, ere he stood upon the pillory, and so Hart fled presently into
Holland, where he ended his days. It was my fortune, upon the sale of
his books in 1634, to buy _Argoll's Primum Mobile_ for fourteen
shillings, which I only wanted.

In Lambeth Marsh at the same time lived one Captain Bubb, who resolved
horary questions astrologically; a proper handsome man, well spoken, but
withal covetous, and of no honesty, as will appear by this story, for
which he stood upon the pillory. A certain butcher was robbed, going to
a fair, of forty pounds; he goes to Bubb, who for ten pounds in hand
paid, would help him to the thief; appoints the butcher such a night
precisely, to watch at such a place, and the thief should come thither;
commanded him by any means to stop him; the butcher attends according to
direction. About twelve in the night there comes one riding very
fiercely upon a full gallop, whom the butcher knocks down, and seized
both upon man and horse: the butcher brings the man and horse to the
next town, but then the person whom the butcher attacked was John the
servant of Dr. Bubb; for which the Captain was indicted and suffered
upon the pillory, and afterwards ended his days in great disgrace.

There was also one Jeffry Neve, at this time a student in physic and
astrology; he had formerly been a merchant in Yarmouth, and Mayor of the
town, but failing in estate, went into the Low-Countries, and at
Franecker took the degree, of doctor in Physick; he had some little
smattering in astrology; could resolve a question of theft, or
love-question, something of sickness; a very grave person, laborious and
honest, of tall stature and comely feature; he died of late years,
almost in the very street near Tower-Hill: he had a design of printing
two hundred verified questions, and desired my approbation ere they went
to press; that I first would see them, and then give testimony. When I
had perused the first forty, I corrected thirty of them, would read over
no more: I showed him how erroneous they were, desired his emendation of
the rest, which he performed not. These were afterwards, in R.
Saunders's custody, bought by him either of his son or of a
stationer.[2]

    [Footnote 2: But first offered to be sold to me for twenty
    shillings. When Mr. Saunders died I bought them of his son for
    less. E. A----.]

There was then William Poole, a nibbler at astrology, sometimes a
gardener, an apparitor, a drawer of linen; as quoifs, handkerchiefs; a
plaisterer and a bricklayer; he would brag many times he had been of
seventeen professions; was very good company for drolling, as you
yourself very well remember (most honoured Sir);[3] he pretended to
poetry; and that posterity may have a taste of it, you shall have here
inserted two verses of his own making; the occasion of making them was
thus. One Sir Thomas Jay, a Justice of the Peace in Rosemary-Lane,
issued out his warrant for the apprehension of Poole, upon a pretended
suggestion, that he was in company with some lewd people in a tavern,
where a silver cup was lost, _Anglice_ stolen. Poole, hearing of the
warrant, packs up his little trunk of books, being all his library, and
runs to Westminster; but hearing some months after that the Justice was
dead and buried, he came and enquired where the grave was; and after the
discharge of his belly upon the grave, left these two verses upon it,
which he swore he made himself.

  Here lieth buried Sir Thomas Jay, Knight,
  Who being dead, I upon his grave did shite.

    [Footnote 3: December 17, this William Poole was married to
    Alice How, at St. George's Church in Southwark. Mr. Lilly gave
    her to him.]

He died about 1651, or 1652, at St. Mary Overy's in Southwark; and this
was part of his last will.

'Item; I give to Dr. Ardee all my books, and one manuscript of my own,
worth one hundred of Lilly's Introduction.'

'Item; If Dr. Ardee give my wife any thing that is mine, I wish the
devil may fetch him body and soul.' The Doctor, terrified with this
curse, gave me all the books and his goods which I presently gave to his
widow.---_Interdum seria jocis_.

Now also lived this Dr. Ardee, but his true name was Richard Delahay,
formerly an Attorney; he studied astrology and physick, being in
necessity, and forced from Derbyshire, where he had lived, by the old
Countess of Shrewsbury; he was of moderate judgment, both in astrology
and physick. He had formerly been well acquainted with Charles Sledd,[4]
an apothecary, who used the crystal, and had a very perfect sight. This
Dr. Ardee hath many times affirmed unto me, (_esto fides_) that an
angel, one time, appeared unto him, and offered him a lease of his life
for one thousand years; he died about the age of fourscore years; left
his widow, who married into Kent,[5] worth two or three thousand pounds,
and William Poole's estate came to four or five pounds.

    [Footnote 4: Of this Charles Sledd, there is mention made in Dr.
    Dee's book of his discourse with spirits, set forth by Dr.
    Casaubon.]

    [Footnote 5: To one Moreland.]

In the years 1632 and 1633, John Booker became famous for a prediction
of his upon a solar eclipse in the 19th degree of Aries 1663, taken out
of _Leovitius de magnis conjunctionibus_, viz. _Oh Reges et Principes
&c._ Both the King of Bohemia, and Gustavus King of Sweden, dying during
the effects of that eclipse.

John Booker was born in Manchester, of good parentage, in the year 1601;
was in his youth well instructed in the Latin tongue, which he
understood very well. He seemed from his infancy to be designed for
astrology; for from the time he had any understanding, he would be
always poring on, and studying almanacks. He came to London at fitting
years, and served an apprenticeship to an haberdasher in Laurence-Lane,
London; but either wanting stock to setup, or disliking the calling, he
left his trade, and taught to write at Hadley in Middlesex several
scholars in that school: he wrote singularly well both Secretary and
Roman. In process of time he served Sir Christopher Clethero, Knight,
Alderman of London, as his clerk, being a city Justice of Peace: he also
was clerk to Sir Hugh Hammersley, Alderman of London, both which he
served with great credit and estimation; and by that means became not
only well known, but as well respected of the most eminent citizens of
London, even to his dying day.

He was an excellent proficient in astrology, whose excellent verses upon
the twelve months, framed according to the configurations of each month,
being blessed with success according to his predictions, procured him
much reputation all over England: he was a very honest man, abhorred any
deceit in the art he studied; had a curious fancy in judging of thefts,
and as successful in resolving love-questions: he was no mean proficient
in astronomy; he understood much of physick; was a great admirer of the
antimonial cup; not unlearned in chymistry, which he loved well, but did
not practise. He was inclined to a diabetes; and in the last three years
of his life was afflicted with a dysentery, which at last consumed him
to nothing: he died of good fame in 1667. Since his decease I have seen
one nativity of his performance exactly directed, and judged with as
much learning as from astrology can be expected.

His library of books came short of the world's approbation, and were by
his widow sold to Elias Ashmole, Esq. who most generously gave her[6]
far more money than they were worth; but out of his respects unto the
deceased and his memory, he most willingly paid her the money. He left
behind him two sons and two daughters. He left in writing very little
but his annual prognostications. He began first to write about the year
1630; he wrote _Bellum Hibernicale_, in the time of the long parliament,
a very sober and judicious book: the epistle thereunto I gave him. He
wrote lately a small treatise of Easter-Day, a very learned thing,
wherein he shewed much learning and reading. To say no more of him, he
lived an honest man, his fame not questioned at his death.

    [Footnote 6: They cost me one hundred and forty pounds.]

In this year 1633, I became acquainted with Nicholas Fiske, licentiate
in physick, who was born in Suffolk, near Framingham[7] Castle, of very
good parentage, who educated him at country schools, until he was fit
for the university; but he went not to the academy, studying at home
both astrology and physick, which he afterwards practised in Colchester;
and there was well acquainted with Dr. Gilbert, who wrote _De Magnete_.
He came afterwards unto London, and exercised his faculty in several
places thereof. (For in his youth he would never stay long in one
house.) In 1633 he was sent for out of Suffolk by Dr. Winston of Gresham
College, to instruct the Lord Treasurer Weston's son in arithmetick,
astronomy upon the globes, and their uses. He was a person very
studious, laborious, of good apprehension, and had by his own industry
obtained both in astrology, physick, arithmetick, astronomy, geometry
and algebra, singular judgment: he would in astrology resolve horary
questions very soundly; but was ever diffident of his own abilities: he
was exquisitely skilful in the art of directions upon nativities, and
had a good genius in performing judgment thereupon, but very unhappy he
was, that he had no genius in teaching his scholars, for he never
perfected any: his own son Matthew hath often told me, that where his
father did teach any scholars in his time, they would principally learn
of him; he had Scorpio ascending, and was secretly envious to those he
thought had more parts than himself; however, I must be ingenuous, and
do affirm, that by frequent conversation with him, I came to know which
were the best authors, and much to enlarge my judgment, especially in
the art of directions: he visited me most days once after I became
acquainted with him, and would communicate his most doubtful questions
unto me, and accept of my judgment therein rather than his own: he
singularly well judged and directed Sir Robert Holborn's nativity, but
desired me to adjudge the first house, seventh and tenth thereof, which
I did, and which nativity (since Sir Robert gave it me) came to your
hands, and remains in your library; [oh learned Esquire!] he died about
the seventy-eighth year of his age, poor.

    [Footnote 7: There is no such place in Suffolk, it being
    mistaken for Framlingham in that county.]

In this year also William Bredon, parson or vicar of Thornton in
Buckinghamshire, was living, a profound divine, but absolutely the most
polite person for nativities in that age, strictly adhering to Ptolemy,
which he well understood; he had a hand in composing Sir Christopher
Heydon's _Defence of Judicial Astrology_, being that time his chaplain;
he was so given over to tobacco and drink, that when he had no tobacco,
he would cut the bell-ropes and smoke them.

I come now to continue the story of my own life, but thought it not
inconvenient to commit unto memory something concerning those persons
who practised when first I became a student in astrology; I have wrote
nothing concerning any of them, which I myself do not either know, or
believe to be true.

In October 1633 my first wife died, and left me whatever was hers: it
was considerable, very near to the value of one thousand pounds.

One whole year and more I continued a widower, and followed my studies
very hard; during which time a scholar pawned unto me, for forty
shillings, _Ars Notoria_,[8] a large volume wrote in parchment, with the
names of those angels, and their pictures, which are thought and
believed by wise men, to teach and instruct in all the several liberal
sciences, and is attained by observing elected times, and those prayers
appropriated unto the several angels.

    [Footnote 8: Among Dr. Napier's MSS. I had an _Ars Notoria_,
    written by S. Forman in large vellum.]

I do ingenuously acknowledge, I used those prayers according to the form
and direction prescribed for some weeks, using the word _astrologia_ for
_astronomia_; but of this no more: that _Ars Notoria_, inserted in the
latter end of Cornelius Agrippa signifieth nothing; many of the prayers
being not the same, nor is the direction to these prayers any thing
considerable.

In the year 1634, I taught Sir George Peckham, Knight, astrology, that
part which concerns sickness, wherein he so profited, that in two or
three months he would give a very true discovery of any disease, only by
his figures. He practised in Nottingham, but unfortunately died in 1635,
at St. Winifred's Well in Wales; in which well he continued so long
mumbling his _Pater Nosters_ and _Sancta Winifrida ora pro me_, that the
cold struck into his body; and, after his coming forth of that well,
never spoke more.

In this year 1634, I purchased the moiety of thirteen houses in the
Strand for five hundred and thirty pounds.

In November, the 18th day, I was again the second time married, and had
five hundred pounds portion with that wife; she was of the nature of
Mars.

Two accidents happened to me in that year something memorable.

Davy Ramsey, his Majesty's clock-maker, had been informed, that there
was a great quantity of treasure buried in the cloyster of
Westminster-Abbey; he acquaints Dean Williams therewith, who was also
then Bishop of Lincoln; the Dean gave him liberty to search after it,
with this proviso, that if any was discovered, his church should have a
share of it. Davy Ramsey finds out one John Scott,[9] who pretended the
use of the Mosaical rods, to assist him herein: I was desired to join
with him, unto which I consented. One winter's night, Davy Ramsey, with
several gentlemen, myself, and Scott, entered the cloysters; we played
the hazel-rod round about the cloyster; upon the west-side of the
cloysters the rods turned one over another, an argument that the
treasure was there. The labourers digged at least six foot deep, and
then we met with a coffin; but in regard it was not heavy, we did not
open, which we afterwards much repented. From the cloysters we went into
the Abbey church, where, upon a sudden, (there being no wind when we
began) so fierce, so high, so blustering and loud a wind did rise, that
we verily believed the west-end of the church would have fallen upon us;
our rods would not move at all; the candles and torches, all but one,
were extinguished, or burned very dimly.[10] John Scott, my partner, was
amazed, looked pale, knew not what to think or do, until I gave
directions and command to dismiss the dæmons; which when done, all was
quiet again, and each man returned unto his lodging late, about twelve
o'clock at night; I could never since be induced to join with any in
such-like actions.

    [Footnote 9: This Scott lived in Pudding-Lane, and had some time
    been a page (or such like) to the Lord Norris.]

    [Footnote 10: Davy Ramsey brought an half quartern sack to put
    the treasure in.]

The true miscarriage of the business, was by reason of so many people
being present at the operation; for there was about thirty, some
laughing, others deriding us; so that if we had not dismissed the
dæmons, I believe most part of the Abbey church had been blown down;
secrecy and intelligent operators, with a strong confidence and
knowledge of what they are doing, are best for this work.

In 1634, or 1635, a Lady living in Greenwich, who had tried all the
known artists in London, but to no purpose, came weeping and lamenting
her condition, which was this: she had permitted a young Lord to have
the use of her body, till she was with child by him; after which time he
could not or would not endure her sight, but commanded his lacquies and
servants to keep his doors fast shut, lest she should get into his
chamber; or if they chanced to see her near his lodging, to drive her
away, which they several times had done. Her desire unto me was to
assist her to see him, and then she should be content; whereupon I
ordered, such a day, such an hour of that day, to try her fortune once
more. She obeyed; and when she came to the King's Bench, where the Lord
there was imprisoned, the outward door stood wide open: none speaking a
word unto her, she went up stairs, no body molesting her; she found the
Lord's chamber door wide open: he in bed, not a servant to be heard or
seen, so she was pleased. Three days after she came to acquaint me with
her success, and then drew out of her pocket a paper full of ratsbane,
which, had she not had admission unto him that day I appointed, she
would in a pint of white wine have drank at the stair's foot where the
Lord lodged. The like misfortune befell her after that; when the Lord
was out of prison: then I ordered her such a day to go and see a play at
Salisbury-Court; which she did, and within one quarter of an hour the
Lord came into the same box wherein she was. But I grew weary of such
employments, and since have burned my books which instructed these
curiosities: for after that I became melancholy, very much afflicted
with the hypochondriack, growing lean and spare, and every day worse; so
that in the year 1635 my infirmity continuing, and my acquaintance
increasing, I resolved to live in the country, and in March and April
1636 removed my goods unto Hersham, where I now live; and in May my
person, where I continued until 1641, no notice being taken who, or what
I was.

In the years 1637 and 1638, I had great lawsuits both in the Exchequer
and Chancery, about a lease I had of the annual value of eighty pounds:
I got the victory.

In the year 1640 I instructed John Humphreys, master of that art, in the
study of astrology: upon this occasion, being at London, by accident in
Fleet-Street, I met Dr. Percival Willoughby of Derby; we were of old
acquaintance, and he but by great chance lately come to town, we went to
the Mitre-Tavern in Fleet-Street, where I sent for old Will Poole the
astrologer, living then in Ram-Alley: being come to us, the Doctor
produced a bill, set forth by a master of arts in Cambridge, intimating
his abilities for resolving of all manner of questions astrologically.
The bill was shewed, and I wondering at it Poole made answer, he knew
the man, and that he was a silly fool; 'I,' quoth he, 'can do more than
he; he sees me every day, he will be here by and by;' and indeed he came
into our room presently: Poole had, just as we came to him, set a
figure, and then shewed it me, desiring my judgement; which I refused,
but desired the master of arts to judge first; he denied, so I gave
mine, to the very great liking of Humphreys, who presently enquired, if
I would teach him, and for what? I told him I was willing to teach, but
would have one hundred pounds. I heard Poole, whilst I was judging the
figure, whisper in-Humphrey's ear, and swear I was the best in England.
Staying three or four days in town, at last we contracted for forty
pounds, for I could never be quiet from his solicitations; he invited me
to supper, and before I had shewed him any thing, paid me thirty-five
pounds. As we were at supper a client came to speak with him, and so up
into his closet he went with his client; I called him in before he set
his figure, or resolved the question, and instantly acquainted him how
he should discover the moles or marks of his client: he set his figure,
and presently discovers four moles the querent had; and was so overjoyed
therewith, that he came tumbling down the stairs, crying, 'Four by
G----, four by G----, I will not take one hundred pounds for this one
rule.' In six weeks time, and tarrying with him three days in a week, he
became a most judicious person.

This Humphreys was a laborious person, vain-glorious, loquacious,
fool-hardy, desirous of all secrets which he knew not, insomuch that he
would have given me two hundred pounds to have instructed him in some
curiosities he was persuaded I had knowledge of, but, _Artis est celare
artem_, especially to those who live not in the fear of God, or can be
masters of their own counsels: he was in person and condition such
another as that monster of ingratitude my _quondam_ taylor, John
Gadbury. After my refusal of teaching him, what he was not capable of,
we grew strange, though I afforded him many civilities whenever he
required it; for after the siege of Colchester he wrote a book against
me, called _Anti Merlinus-Anglicus_, married a second wife, his first
living in Cambridgeshire, then practised physick by a contrary name,
having intentions to practise in Ireland; he went to Bristol, but there
understanding the parliament's forces had reduced that kingdom, he came
back to London, but durst not abide therein; but turning from his second
wife, who also had another husband, he went to sea, with intention for
Barbadoes, but died by the way in his voyage. I had never seen John
Booker at that time; and telling him one day I had a desire to see him,
but first, ere I would speak with him, I would fit myself with my old
rules, and rub up my astrology; for at that time (and this was 1640) I
thought John Booker the greatest and most complete astrologer in the
world. My scholar Humphreys presently made answer, 'Tutor, you need not
pump for any of your former knowledge, John Booker is no such pumper; we
met,' saith he, 'the other day, and I was too hard for him myself, upon
judgment of three or four questions.' If all the transactions happening
unto that my scholar were in one volume, they would transcend either
_Guzman_, _Don Quixote_, _Lazarillo de Tormes_, or any other of the like
nature I ever did see.

Having now in part recovered my health, being weary of the country, and
perceiving there was money to be got in London, and thinking myself to
be as sufficiently enabled in astrology as any I could meet with, I made
it my business to repair thither; and so in September 1641 I did; where,
in the years 1642 and 1643, I had great leisure to better my former
knowledge: I then read over all my books of astrology, over and over;
had very little or no practice at all: and whereas formerly I could
never endure to read _Valentine Naibod's Commentary upon Alcabitius_,
now having seriously studied him, I found him to be the profoundest
author I ever met with; him I traversed over day and night, from whom I
must acknowledge to have advanced my judgment and knowledge unto that
height I soon after arrived at, or unto: a most rational author, and the
sharpest expositor of _Ptolemy_ that hath yet appeared. To exercise my
genius, I began to collect notes, and thought of writing some little
thing upon the [symbol: aspect "conjunction"] of [symbol: Saturn] and
[symbol: Jupiter] then approaching: I had not wrote above one sheet, and
that very meanly, but James Lord Galloway came to see me; and, by
chance, casting his eyes upon that rude collection, he read it over, and
so approved of it, yea, so encouraged me to proceed farther, that then,
and after that time, I spent most of my time in composing thereof, and
bringing it, in the end, into that method wherein it was printed 1644. I
do seriously now profess, I had not the assistance of any person living,
in the writing or composing thereof. Mr. Fiske sent me a small
manuscript, which had been Sir Christopher Heydon's, who had wrote
something of the conjunction of [symbol: Saturn] and [symbol: Jupiter],
1603; out of which, to bring my method in order, I transcribed, in the
beginning, five or six lines, and not any more, though that graceless
fellow Gadbury wrote the contrary: but, _Semel et semper nebulo et
mendax_. I did formerly write one treatise, in the year 1639, upon the
eclipse of the sun, in the eleventh degree of Gemini, May 22, 1639; it
consisted of six sheets of paper. But that manuscript I gave unto my
most munificent patron and ever bountiful friend, William Pennington, of
Muncaster in Cumberland, Esq., a wise and excellently learned person;
who, from the year 1634, even till he died, continued unto me the most
grateful person I ever was acquainted with. I became acquainted with him
by means of Davy Ramsey.

Oh! most noble Esquire, let me now beg your pardon, if I digress for
some small time, in commemorating his bounty unto me, and my requital of
his friendship, by performing many things successfully for his
advantage.

In 1639 he was made captain, and served his Majesty in his then wars
against the Scots; during which time a farmer's daughter being delivered
of a bastard, and hearing, by report, that he was slain, fathered the
child upon him. Shortly after he returned, most woefully vexed to be
thus abused, when absent. The woman was countenanced by some gentlemen
of Cumberland, in this her villany against him; so that, notwithstanding
he had warrants to attach her body, he could never discover her: but
yet, hunting her from one place to another, her friends thought it most
convenient to send her to London, where she might be in most safety. She
came up to the city, and immediately I had notice thereof, and the care
of that matter was left unto me. I procured the Lord Chief Justice
Bramston's warrant, and had it lying dormant by me. She had not been in
the city above one fortnight, but that I, going casually to the clerk of
the assizes' office for Cumberland, saw there an handsome woman; and
hearing of her speak the northern tone, I concluded she was the party I
did so want. I rounded the clerk in his ear, and told him I would give
him five shillings to hold the woman in chat till I came again, for I
had a writing concerned her. I hasted for my warrant, and a constable,
and returned into the office, seized her person before the clerk of the
assizes, who was very angry with me: it was then sessions at Old-Bayley,
and neither Judge nor Justice to be found. At night we carried her
before the Recorder, Gardner. It being Saturday at night, she, having no
bail, was sent to Bridewell, where she remained till Monday. On Monday
morning, at the Old-Bayley, she produced bail; but I desiring of the
Recorder some time to enquire after the bail, whether they were
sufficient, returned presently, and told him one of the bail was a
prisoner in Ludgate, the other a very poor man. At which he was so
vexed, that he sent her to Newgate, where she lay all that week, until
she could please me with good sureties; which then she did, and so was
bound over to appear at the next assizes in Cumberland; which she did,
and was there sentenced to be whipped, and imprisoned one whole year.

This action infinitely pleased Mr. Pennington, who thought I could do
wonders; and I was most thankfully requited for it. All the while of
this scandalous business, do what he could, he could not discover what
persons they were that supported her; but the woman's father coming to
town, I became acquainted with him, by the name of Mr. Sute, merchant;
invited him to a dinner; got George Farmer with me; when we so plied him
with wine, he could neither see or feel. I paid the reckoning,
twenty-two shillings. But next morning the poor man had never a writing
or letter in his pocket. I sent them down to my friend, who thereby
discovered the plots of several gentlemen in the business; after which,
Mr. Sute returned to his old name again.

Mr. Pennington was a true royalist, whom Charles the Second made one of
his Commissioners of Array for Cumberland. Having directions from me
continually how matters did and would go betwixt the King and
Parliament, he acted warily, and did but sign one only warrant of that
nature, and then gave over. When the times of sequestrations came, one
John Musgrave, the most bold and impudent fellow, and most active of all
the north of England, and most malicious against my friend, had got this
warrant under Mr. Pennington's hand into his custody; which affrighted
my friend, and so it might, for it was cause enough of sequestration,
and would have done it. Musgrave intending himself great matters out of
his estate, I was made acquainted herewith. Musgrave being in London, by
much ado, I got acquainted with him, pretending myself a bitter enemy
against Pennington, whereat he very heartily rejoiced; and so we
appointed one night to meet at the Five Bells, to compare notes; for I
pretended much. We did meet, and he very suddenly produced upon the
table all his papers, and withal, the warrant of array unto which my
friend had set his hand; which when I saw, 'I marry,' said I, 'this is
his hand I will swear; now have at all come, the other cup, this warrant
shall pay for all.' I observed where the warrant lay upon the table,
and, after some time took occasion ignorantly to let the candle fall
out, which whilst he went to light again at the fire, I made sure of the
warrant, and put it into my boot; he never missing it of eight or ten
days; about which time, I believe, it was above half way towards
Cumberland, for I instantly sent it by the post, with this friendly
caveat, '_Sin no more_.' Musgrave durst not challenge me in those times,
and so the business was ended very satisfactory to his friend, and no
less to myself.

He was, besides, extremely abused by one Isaac Antrobus, parson of
Egremond, a most evil liver, bold, and very rich; at last he procured a
minister of that country, in hope of the parsonage, to article against
him in London, before the committee of plundered ministers. I was once
more invited to solicit against Antrobus, which I did upon three or more
articles.

I. That Antrobus baptized a cock, and called him Peter.

II. He had knowledge of such a woman and of her daughter, _viz._ of both
their bodies, in as large a manner as ever of his own wife.

III. Being drunk, a woman took a cord and tied it about his privy
members unto a manger in a stable.

IV. Being a continual drunkard.

V. He never preached, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

Antrobus was now become a great champion for the Parliament; but, at the
day of hearing, I had procured abundance of my friends to be there; for
the godly, as they termed themselves, sided with him; the present Master
of the Rolls was Chairman that day, Sir Harbottle Grimston.

Who, hearing the foulness of the cause, was very much ashamed thereof. I
remember Antrobus, being there, pleaded he was in his natural condition
when he acted so ungraciously.

'What condition were you in,' said the Chairman, 'when you lay with
mother and daughter?'

'There is no proof of that,' saith he.

'None but your own confession,' said the Chairman, 'nor could any tell
so well.'

'I am not given to drunkenness,' quoth he. 'He was so drunk within this
fortnight,' quoth I, 'he reeled from one side of the street to the
other; here is the witness to prove it:' who, presently, before the
committee, being sworn, made it good, and named the place and street
where he was drunk. So he was adjudged scandalous, and outed of his
benefice, and our minister had the parsonage.

You cannot imagine how much the routing of this drunken parson pleased
Mr. Pennington, who paid all charges munificently and thankfully.

But now follows the last and greatest kindness I ever did him.
Notwithstanding the committee for sequestrations in Cumberland were his
very good friends, yet the sub-sequestrators, of their own heads, and
without order, and by strength of arms, secured his irons, his wood, and
so much of his personal estate as was valued at seven thousand pounds.
Now had I complaint upon complaint: would I suffer my old friend to be
thus abused? it was in my power to free him from these villains.

I hereupon advised what was best to do, and was counselled to get Mr.
Speaker Lenthall's letter to the sub-sequestrators, and command them to
be obedient to the committee of the county.

Whereupon, I framed a letter myself, unto the sub-sequestrators
directed, and with it, myself and Mr. Laurence Maydwell (whom yourself
well knew) went to Mr. Speaker, unto whom we sufficiently related the
stubbornness of the officers of Cumberland; their disobedience to the
committee; and then shewed him the letter, which when he had read over,
he most courteously signed, adding withal, that if they proceeded
further in sequestring Mr. Pennington, he would command a Serjeant at
Arms to bring them up to answer their contempts: I immediately posted
that letter to my friend, which when the absurd fellows received, they
delivered him possession of his goods again; and, for my pains, when he
came to London, gave me one hundred pounds; he died in 1652, of a
violent fever. I did carefully, in 1642 and 1643, take notice of every
grand action which happened betwixt King and Parliament, and did first
then incline to believe, that as all sublunary affairs did depend upon
superior causes, so there was a possibility of discovering them by the
configurations of the superior bodies; in which way making some essays
in those two years, I found encouragement to proceed further, which I
did; I perused the writings of the ancients, but therein they were
silent, or gave no satisfaction; at last, I framed unto myself that
method, which then and since I follow, which, I hope, in time may be
more perfected by a more penetrating person than myself.

In 1643, I became familiarly known to Sir Bulstrode Whitlocke, a member
of the House of Commons; he being sick, his urine was brought unto me by
Mrs. Lisle,[11] wife to John Lisle, afterwards one of the keepers of the
Great Seal; having set my figure, I returned answer, the sick for that
time would recover, but by means of a surfeit would dangerously relapse
within one month; which he did, by eating of trouts at Mr. Sand's house,
near Leatherhead in Surrey. Then I went daily to visit him, Dr. Prideau
despairing of his life; but I said there was no danger thereof, and that
he would be sufficiently well in five or six weeks; and so he was.

    [Footnote 11: She was afterwards beheaded at Winchester, for
    harbouring one Nelthrop, a rebel in the Duke of Monmouth's army
    1685. She had made herself remarkable, by saying at the
    martyrdom of King Charles I, 1648, 'that her blood leaped within
    her to see the tyrant fall;' for this, when she fell into the
    state trap, she neither did nor could expect favour from any of
    that martyr's family.]

In 1644, I published _Merlinus Anglicus Junior_ about April. I had given
one day the copy thereof unto the then Mr. Whitlocke, who by accident
was reading thereof in the House of Commons: ere the Speaker took the
chair, one looked upon it, and so did many, and got copies thereof;
which when I heard, I applied myself to John Booker to license it, for
then he was licenser of all mathematical books; I had, to my knowledge,
never seen him before; he wondered at the book, made many impertinent
obliterations, framed many objections, swore it was not possible to
distinguish betwixt King and Parliament; at last licensed it according
to his own fancy; I delivered it unto the printer, who being an arch
Presbyterian, had five of the ministry to inspect it, who could make
nothing of it, but said it might be printed, for in that I meddled not
with their Dagon. The first impression was sold in less than one week;
when I presented some to the members of Parliament, I complained of John
Booker the licenser, who had defaced my book; they gave me order
forthwith to reprint it as I would, and let them know if any durst
resist me in the reprinting, or adding what I thought fit; so the second
time it came forth as I would have it.

I must confess, I now found my scholar Humphreys's words to be true
concerning John Booker, whom at that time I found but moderately versed
in astrology; nor could he take the circles of position of the planets,
until in that year I instructed him. After my _Introduction_ in 1647
became publick, he amended beyond measure, by study partly, and partly
upon emulation to keep up his fame and reputation; so that since 1647, I
have seen some nativities by him very judiciously performed. When the
printer presented him with an _Introduction_ of mine, as soon as they
were forth of the press; 'I wish,' saith he, 'there was never another
but this in England, conditionally I gave one hundred pounds for this.'
After that time we were very great friends to his dying day.

In June, 1644, I published _Supernatural Sight_; and, indeed, if I could
have procured the dull stationer to have been at charges to have cut the
_icon_ or form of that prodigious apparition, as I had drawn it forth,
it would have given great satisfaction; however, the astrological
judgment thereupon had its full event in every particular.

That year also I published the _White King's Prophecy_, of which there
were sold in three days eighteen hundred, so that it was oft reprinted:
I then made no commentary upon it.

In that year I printed the _Prophetical Merlin_, and had eight pounds
for the copy.

I had then no farther intention to trouble the press any more, but Sir
Richard Napper having received one of Captain Wharton's _Almanacks_ for
1645, under the name Naworth, he came unto me: 'Now, Lilly, you are met
withal, see here what Naworth writes.' The words were, he called me 'an
impudent senseless fellow, and by name William Lilly.'

Before that time, I was more Cavalier than Roundhead, and so taken
notice of; but after that I engaged body and soul in the cause of
Parliament, but still with much affection to his Majesty's person and
unto monarchy, which I ever loved and approved beyond any government
whatsoever; and you will find in this story many passages of civility
which I did, and endeavoured to do, with the hazard of my life, for his
Majesty: but God had ordered all his affairs and counsels to have no
successes; as in the sequel will appear.

To vindicate my reputation, and to cry quittance with Naworth, against
whom I was highly incensed, to work I went again for _Anglicus_, 1645;
which as soon as finished I got to the press, thinking every day one
month till it was publick: I therein made use of the King's nativity,
and finding that his ascendant was approaching to the quadrature of
Mars, about June, 1645, I gave this unlucky judgment; 'If now we fight,
a victory stealeth upon us;' and so it did in June, 1645, at Naseby, the
most fatal overthrow he ever had.

In this year, 1645, I published a treatise called the _Starry
Messenger_, with an interpretation of three suns seen in London, 29th
May, 1644, being Charles the Second's birthday: in that book I also put
forth an astrological judgment concerning the effects of a solar
eclipse, visible the 11th of August, 1645. Two days before its
publishing, my antagonist, Captain Wharton, having given his
astronomical judgment upon his Majesty's present march from Oxford;
therein again fell foul against me and John Booker: Sir Samuel Luke,
Governor of Newportpagnel, had the thing came to his garrison from
Oxford, which presently was presented unto my view. I had but twelve
hours, or thereabout, to answer it, which I did with such success as is
incredible; and the printer printed both the _March_ and my answer unto
it, and produced it to sight, with my _Starry Messenger_, which came
forth and was made publick the very day of the Parliament's great
victory obtained against his Majesty in person at Naseby, under the
conduct of the Lord Thomas Fairfax.

That book no sooner appeared, but within fourteen days complaint was
made to the committee of examinations, Miles Corbet then being Chairman,
my mortal enemy, he who after was hanged, drawn, and quartered, for
being one of the King's Judges; he grants his warrant, and a messenger
to the Serjeant at Arms seizeth my person. As I was going to Westminster
with the messenger, I met Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir Christopher Wray,
Mr. Denzil Hollis, Mr. Robert Reynolds, who, by great fortune, had the
_Starry Messenger_ sheet by sheet from me as it came from the press.
They presently fell a smiling at me; 'Miles Corbet, Lilly, will punish
thee soundly; but fear nothing, we will dine, and make haste to be at
the committee time enough to do the business;' and so they most
honourably performed; for they, as soon as they came, sat down, and put
Mr. Reynolds purposely into the chair, and I was called in; but Corbet
being not there, they bid me withdraw until he came; which when he did,
I was commanded to appear, and Corbet desired to give the cause of my
being in restraint, and of the committee's order. Mr. Reynolds was
purposely put into the chair, and continued till my business was over.

Corbet produced my _Anglicus_ of 1645, and said there were many
scandalous passages therein against the Commissioners of Excise in
London. He produced one passage, which being openly read by himself, the
whole committee adjudged it to signify the errors of sub-officers, but
had no relation to the Commissioners themselves, which I affirmatively
maintained to be the true meaning as the committee declared.

Then Corbet found out another dangerous place, as he thought, and the
words were thus in the printed book--'In the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, will not the Excise pay the soldiers?'

Corbet very ignorantly read, 'will not the Eclipse pay soldiers?' at
which the Committee fell heartily to laugh at him, and so he became
silent.

There was a great many Parliament men there; the chamber was full. 'Have
you any more against Mr. Lilly?' cried the chairman.

'Yes,' saith the Sollicitor for the Excise, 'since his _Starry
Messenger_ came forth we had our house burnt, and the Commissioners
pulled by their cloaks in the Exchange.' 'Pray, sir, when was this,'
asked old Sir Robert Pye, 'that the house was burnt, and the Aldermen
abused?' 'It was in such a week,' saith he. 'Mr. Lilly, when came the
book forth?' 'The very day of Naseby fight,' answered Mr. Reynolds, 'nor
needs he be ashamed of writing it: I had it daily as it came forth of
the press: it was then found the house to be burnt, and the Aldermen
abused, twelve days before the _Starry Messenger_ came forth.' 'What a
lying fellow art thou,' saith Sir Robert Pye, 'to abuse us so!' This he
spoke to the Sollicitor. Then stood up one Bassell, a merchant: he
inveighed bitterly against me, being a Presbyterian, and would have had
my books burnt. 'You smell more of a citizen than a scholar,' replied
Mr. Francis Drake. I was ordered to withdraw, and by and by was called
in, and acquainted the committee did discharge me. But I cried with a
loud voice, 'I was under a messenger;' whereupon the committee ordered
him or the Serjeant at Arms not to take any fees; Mr. Reynolds saying,
'Literate men never pay any fees.'

But within one week after, I was likely to have had worse success, but
that the before-named gentlemen stoutly befriended me. In my Epistle of
the _Starry Messenger_, I had been a little too plain with the committee
of Leicestershire; who thereof made complaint unto Sir Arthur Hazelrigg,
Knight for that county; he was a furious person, and made a motion in
the House of Commons against me, and the business was committed to that
committee, whereof Baron Rigby was chairman. A day was assigned to hear
the matter; in the morning whereof, as I passed by Mr. Pullen's shop in
St. Paul's Church-yard, Pullen bad 'God be with you,' and named me by
name. Mr. Selden being there, and hearing my name, gave direction to
call me unto him, where he acquaints me with Hazelrigg's humour and
malice towards me, called for the _Starry Messenger_, and having read
over the words mentioning that committee, he asked me how I would answer
them? I related what I would have said, but he contradicted me, and
acquainted me what to say, and how to answer. In the afternoon I went to
appear, but there was no committee set, or would sit; for both Mr.
Reynolds and Sir Philip Stapleton, and my other friends, had fully
acquainted Baron Rigby with the business, and desired him not to call
upon me until they appeared; for the matter and charge intended against
me was very frivolous, and only presented by a cholerick person to
please a company of clowns, meaning the committee of Leicester. Baron
Rigby said, if it were so he would not meddle with the matter, but
exceedingly desired to see me. Not long after he met Sir Arthur, and
acquainting him what friends appeared for me, said, 'I will then
prosecute him no further.'

All the ancient astrologers of England were much startled and confounded
at my manner of writing, especially old Mr. William Hodges, who lived
near Wolverhampton in Staffordshire, and many others who understood
astrology competently well, as they thought. Hodges swore I did more by
astrology than he could by the crystal, and use thereof, which indeed he
understood as perfectly as any one in England. He was a great royalist,
but could never hit any thing right for that party, though he much
desired it: he resolved questions astrologically; nativities he meddled
not with; in things of other nature, which required more curiosity, he
repaired to the crystal: his angels were Raphael, Gabriel, and Uriel:
his life answered not in holiness and sanctity to what it should, having
to deal with those holy angels. Being contemporary with me, I shall
relate what my partner John Scott, the same Scott as is
before-mentioned, affirmed of him. John Scott was a little skilful in
surgery and physick, so was Will Hodges, and had formerly been a
school-master. Scott having some occasions into Staffordshire, addressed
himself for a month or six weeks to Hodges, assisted him to dress his
patients, let blood, &c. Being to return to London, he desired Hodges to
shew him the person and feature of the woman he should marry. Hodges
carries him into a field not far from his house, pulls out his crystal,
bids Scott set his foot to his, and, after a while, wishes him to
inspect the crystal, and observe what he saw there. 'I see,' saith
Scott, 'a ruddy complexioned wench in a red waistcoat, drawing a can of
beer.' 'She must be your wife,' said Hodges. 'You are mistaken, Sir,'
said Scott. 'I am, so soon as I come to London, to marry a tall
gentlewoman in the Old Bailey.' 'You must marry the red waistcoat,' said
Hodges. Scott leaves the country, comes up to London, finds his
gentlewoman married: two years after going into Dover, in his return, he
refreshed himself at an inn in Canterbury, and as he came into the hall,
or first room thereof, he mistook the room, and went into the buttery,
where he espied a maid, described by Hodges, as before said, drawing a
can of beer, &c. He then more narrowly viewing her person and habit,
found her, in all parts, to be the same Hodges had described; after
which he became a suitor unto her, and was married unto her; which woman
I have often seen. This Scott related unto me several times, being a
very honest person, and made great conscience of what he spoke. Another
story of him is as followeth, which I had related from a person which
well knew the truth of it.

A neighbour gentleman of Hodges lost his horse; who having Hodges's
advice for recovery of him, did again obtain him. Some years after, in a
frolick, he thought to abuse him, acquainting a neighbour therewith,
viz., that he had formerly lost a horse, went to Hodges, recovered him
again, but saith it was by chance; I might have had him without going
unto him: 'Come, let's go, I will now put a trick upon him; I will leave
some boy or other at the town's-end with my horse, and then go to Hodges
and enquire for him.' He did so, gave his horse to a youth, with orders
to walk him till he returned. Away he goes with his friend, salutes Mr.
Hodges, thanks him for his former courtesy, and now desires the like,
having lost a horse very lately. Hodges, after some time of pausing,
said; 'Sir, your horse is lost, and never to be recovered.' 'I thought
what skill you had,' replies the gallant, 'my horse is walking in a lane
at the town's-end.' With that Hodges swore (as he was too much given
unto that vice) 'your horse is gone, and you will never have him again.'
The gentleman departed in great derision of Hodges, and went where he
left his horse: when he came there, he found the boy fast asleep upon
the ground, the horse gone, the boy's arm in the bridle.

He returns again to Hodges, desiring his aid, being sorry for his former
abuse. Old Will swore like a devil, 'be gone, be gone; go look for your
horse.' This business ended not so; for the malicious man brought Hodges
into the star-chamber, bound him over to the assizes, put Hodges to
great expences: but, by means of the Lord Dudley, if I remember aright,
or some other person thereabouts, he overcame the gentleman, and was
acquitted.

Besides this, a gentlewoman of my acquaintance, and of credit, in
Leicestershire, having lost a pillion-cloth, a very new one, went to
desire his judgment. He ordered her such a day to attend at Mountsorrel
in Leicestershire, and about twelve o'clock she should see her
pillion-cloth upon a horse, and a woman upon it. My friend attended the
hour and place; it being told, she must needs warm herself well, and
then enquired if any passengers had lately gone by the inn? Unto whom
answer was made, there passed by whilst she was at the fire, about half
an hour before, a man, and a woman behind him, on horse-back. Inquiring
of what colour the pillion-cloth was of; it was answered, directly of
the colour my friend's was: they pursued, but too late.

In those times, there lived one William Marsh in Dunstable, a man of
godly life and upright conversation, a Recusant. By astrology he
resolved thievish questions with great success; that was his utmost sole
practice. He was many times in trouble; but by Dr. Napper's interest
with the Earl of Bolingbroke, Lord Wentworth, after Earl of Cleveland,
he still continued his practice, the said Earl not permitting any
Justice of Peace to vex him.

This man had only two books, _Guido_ and _Haly_ bound together; he had
so mumbled and tumbled the leaves of both, that half one side of every
leaf was torn even to the middle. I was familiar with him for many
years: he died about 1647.

A word or two of Dr. Napper, who lived at Great Lindford in
Buckinghamshire, was parson, and had the advowson thereof. He descended
of worshipful parents, and this you must believe; for when Dr. Napper's
brother, Sir Robert Napper, a Turkey merchant, was to be made a Baronet
in King James's reign, there was some dispute whether he could prove
himself a gentleman for three or more descents. 'By my saul,' saith King
James, 'I will certify for Napper, that he is of above three hundred
years standing in his family, all of them, by my saul, gentlemen,' &c.
However, their family came into England in King Henry the Eighth's time.
The parson was Master of Arts; but whether doctorated by degree or
courtesy, because of his profession, I know not. Miscarrying one day in
the pulpit, he never after used it, but all his life-time kept in his
house some excellent scholar or other to officiate for him, with
allowance of a good salary: he out-went Forman in physick and holiness
of life; cured the falling-sickness perfectly by constellated rings,
some diseases by amulets, &c.

A maid was much afflicted with the falling sickness, whose parents
applied themselves unto him for cure: he framed her a constellated ring,
upon wearing whereof, she recovered perfectly. Her parents acquainted
some scrupulous divines with the cure of their daughter: 'The cure is
done by inchantment,' say they. 'Cast away the ring, it's diabolical;
God cannot bless you, if you do not cast the ring away.' The ring was
cast into the well, whereupon the maid became epileptical as formerly,
and endured much misery for a long time. At last her parents cleansed
the well, and recovered the ring again; the maid wore it, and her fits
took her no more. In this condition she was one year or two; which the
Puritan ministers there adjoining hearing, never left off, till they
procured her parents to cast the ring quite away; which done, the fits
returned in such violence, that they were enforced to apply to the
Doctor again, relating at large the whole story, humbly imploring his
once more assistance; but he could not be procured to do any thing, only
said, those who despised God's mercies, were not capable or worthy of
enjoying them.

I was with him in 1632, or 1633, upon occasion. He had me up into his
library, being excellently furnished with very choice books: there he
prayed almost one hour; he invocated several angels in his prayer,
viz.[12] Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, Uriel, &c. We parted.

    [Footnote 12: The collect read on Michaelmas-day, seems to allow
    of praying to angels. At some times, upon great occasions, he
    had conference with Michael, but very rarely.]

He instructed many ministers in astrology, would lend them whole
cloak-bags of books; protected them from harm and violence, by means of
his power with the Earl of Bolingbroke.[13] He would confess my master
Evans knew more than himself in some things: and some time before he
died, he got his cousin Sir Richard to set a figure to see when he
should die. Being brought him; 'Well,' he said, 'the old man will live
this winter, but in the spring he will die; welcome Lord Jesus, thy will
be done.' He had many enemies: Cotta, Doctor of physick in Northampton,
wrote a sharp book of witchcraft, wherein, obliquely, he bitterly
inveighed against the Doctor.

    [Footnote 13: Lord Wentworth, after Earl of Cleveland.]

In 1646, I printed a collection of Prophecies, with the explanation and
verification of Aquila, or the _White King's Prophecy_; as also the
nativities of Bishop Laud and Thomas Earl of Strafford, and a most
learned speech by him intended to have been spoke upon the scaffold. In
this year 1646, after a great consideration, and many importunities, I
began to fix upon thoughts of an _Introduction unto Astrology_, which
was very much wanting, and as earnestly longed for by many persons of
quality. Something also much occasioned and hastened the impression,
viz. the malevolent barking of Presbyterian ministers in their weekly
sermons, reviling the professors thereof, and myself particularly by
name.

Secondly, I thought it a duty incumbent upon me, to satisfy the whole
kingdom of the lawfulness thereof, by framing a plain and easy method
for any person but of indifferent capacity to learn the art, and
instruct himself therein, without any other master than my
_Introduction_; by which means, when many understood it, I should have
more partners and assistants to contradict all and every antagonist.

Thirdly, I found it best as unto point of time, because many of the
soldiers were wholly for it, and many of the Independant party; and I
had abundance of worthy men in the House of Commons, my assured friends,
no lovers of Presbytery, which then were in great esteem, and able to
protect the art; for should the Presbyterian party have prevailed, as
they thought of nothing less than to be Lords of all, I knew well they
would have silenced my pen annually, and committed the _Introduction_
unto everlasting silence.

Fourthly, I had something of conscience touched my spirit, and much
elevated my conceptions, believing God had not bestowed those abilities
upon me, to bury them under a bushel; for though my education was very
mean, yet, by my continual industry, and God's great mercy, I found
myself capable to go forward with the work, and to commit the issue
thereof unto Divine Providence.

I had a hard task in hand to begin the first part hereof, and much
labour I underwent to methodize it as it is.

I ingenuously confess unto you (Arts' great Mecænas, noble Esquire
Ashmole,) no mortal man had any share in the composition or ordering of
the first part thereof, but my only self. You are a person of great
reading, yet I well know you never found the least trace thereof in any
author yet extant.

In composing, contriving, ordering, and framing thereof (viz. the first
part) a great part of that year was spent. I again perused all, or most,
authors I had, sometimes adding, at other times diminishing, until at
last I thought it worthy of the press. When I came to frame the second
part thereof, having formerly collected out of many manuscripts, and
exchanged rules with the most able professors I had acquaintance with,
in transcribing those papers for impression, I found, upon a strict
inquisition, those rules were, for the most part, defective; so that
once more I had now a difficult labour to correct their deficiency, to
new rectify them according to art; and lastly, considering the
multiplicity of daily questions propounded unto me, it was as hard a
labour as might be to transcribe the papers themselves with my own hand.
The desire I had to benefit posterity and my country, at last overcame
all difficulties; so that what I could not do in one year, I perfected
early the next year, 1647; and then in that year, viz. 1647, I finished
the third book of[14] nativities,[15] during the composing whereof, for
seven whole weeks, I was shut up of the plague, burying in that time two
maid-servants thereof; yet towards November that year, the Introduction,
called by the name of _Christian Astrology_, was made publick. There
being, in those times, some smart difference between the army and the
Parliament, the head-quarters of the army were at Windsor, whither I was
carried with a coach and four horses, and John Booker with me. We were
welcome thither, and feasted in a garden where General Fairfax lodged.
We were brought to the General, who bid us kindly welcome to Windsor;
and, in effect, said thus much:

    [Footnote 14: The name of the person whose nativity is directed
    and judged, is Mr. Thompson, whose father had been some time an
    inn-keeper at the White-Hart in Newark.]

    [Footnote 15: I devised the forms and fashions of the several
    schemes. E.A.]

'That God had blessed the army with many signal victories, and yet their
work was not finished. He hoped God would go along with them until his
work was done. They sought not themselves, but the welfare and
tranquillity of the good people, and whole nation; and, for that end,
were resolved to sacrifice both their lives and their own fortunes. As
for the art we studied, he hoped it was lawful and agreeable to God's
word: he understood it not; but doubted not but we both feared God; and
therefore had a good opinion of us both.' Unto his speech I presently
made this reply:

'My Lord, I am glad to see you here at this time.

'Certainly, both the people of God, and all others of this nation, are
very sensible of God's mercy, love, and favour unto them, in directing
the Parliament to nominate and elect you General of their armies, a
person so religious, so valiant.

'The several unexpected victories obtained under your Excellency's
conduct, will eternize the same unto all posterity.

'We are confident of God's going along with you and your army, until the
great work for which he ordained you both, is fully perfected; which we
hope will be the conquering and subversion of your's and the
Parliament's enemies, and then a quiet settlement and firm peace over
all the nation, unto God's glory, and full satisfaction of tender
consciences.

'Sir, as for ourselves, we trust in God; and, as Christians, believe in
him. We do not study any art but what is lawful, and consonant to the
scriptures, fathers, and antiquity; which we humbly desire you to
believe,' &c.

This ended, we departed, and went to visit Mr. Peters the minister, who
lodged in the castle, whom we found reading an idle pamphlet come from
London that morning. 'Lilly, thou art herein,' says he. 'Are not you
there also?' I replied. 'Yes, that I am,' quoth he.--The words
concerning me were these:

  From th' oracles of the Sibyls so silly,
  The curst predictions of William Lilly,
  And Dr. Sybbald's Shoe-lane Philly,
                  Good Lord, deliver me.

After much conference with Hugh Peters, and some private discourse
betwixt us two, not to be divulged, we parted, and so came back to
London.

King Charles the First, in the year 1646, April 27, went unto the Scots,
then in this nation. Many desired my judgment, in time of his absence,
to discover the way he might be taken: which I would never be drawn
unto, or give any direction concerning his person.

There were many lewd Mercuries printed both in London and Oxford,
wherein I was sufficiently abused, in this year, 1646. I had then my
ascendant _ad_ [symbol: Gemini] [symbol: aspect "conjunction"], and
[symbol: Moon] _ad propriun_. The Presbyterians were, in their pulpits,
as merciless as the Cavaliers in their pamphlets.

About this time, the most famous mathematician of all Europe,[16] Mr.
William Oughtred, parson of Aldbury in Surry, was in danger of
sequestration by the Committee of or for plundered ministers;
(_Ambo-dexters_ they were;) several inconsiderable articles were deposed
and sworn against him, material enough to have sequestered him, but
that, upon his day of hearing, I applied myself to Sir Bolstrode
Whitlock, and all my own old friends, who in such numbers appeared in
his behalf, that though the chairman and many other Presbyterian members
were stiff against him, yet he was cleared by the major number. The
truth is, he had a considerable parsonage, and that only was enough to
sequester any moderate judgment: he was also well known to affect his
Majesty. In these times many worthy ministers lost their livings or
benefices, for not complying with the _Three-penny Directory_. Had you
seen (O noble Esquire) what pitiful ideots were prefered into
sequestrated church-benefices, you would have been grieved in your soul;
but when they came before the classis of divines, could those simpletons
but only say, they were converted by hearing such a sermon, such a
lecture, of that godly man Hugh Peters, Stephen Marshall, or any of that
gang, he was presently admitted.

    [Footnote 16: This gentleman I was very well acquainted with,
    having lived at the house over-against his, at Aldbury in
    Surrey, three or four years. E.A.]

In 1647, I published the _World's Catastrophe_, the _Prophecies of
Ambrose Merlin_, with the _Key_ wherewith to unlock those obstruse
Prophecies; also _Trithemius of the Government of the World by the
presiding Angels_; these came forth all in one book.

The two first were exquisitely translated by yourself, (most learned
Sir) as I do ingenuously acknowledge in my _Epistle unto the Reader_,
with a true character of the worth and admirable parts, unto which I
refer any that do desire to read you perfectly delineated. I was once
resolved to have continued _Trithemius_ for some succeeding years, but
multiplicity of employment impeded me. The study required, in that kind
of learning, must be sedentary, of great reading, sound judgment, which
no man can accomplish except he wholly retire, use prayer, and accompany
himself with angelical consorts.

His Majesty Charles the First, having entrusted the Scots with his
person, was, for money, delivered into the hands of the English
Parliament, and, by several removals, was had to Hampton-Court, about
July or August 1647; for he was there, and at that time when my house
was visited with the plague. He was desirous to escape from the
soldiery, and to obscure himself for some time near London, the citizens
whereof began now to be unruly, and alienated in affection from the
Parliament, inclining wholly to his Majesty, and very averse to the
army. His Majesty was well informed of all this, and thought to make
good use hereof; besides, the army and Parliament were at some odds, who
should be masters. Upon the King's intention to escape, and with his
consent, Madam Whorewood (whom you knew very well, worthy Esquire) came
to receive my judgment, viz. In what quarter of this nation he might be
most safe, and not to be discovered until himself pleased.

When she came to my door, I told her I would not let her come into my
house for I buried a maid-servant of the plague very lately. 'I fear not
the plague, but the pox,' quoth she; so up we went. After erection of my
figure, I told her about twenty miles (or thereabouts) from London, and
in Essex, I was certain he might continue undiscovered. She liked my
judgment very well; and, being herself of a sharp judgment, remembered a
place in Essex about that distance, where was an excellent house, and
all conveniences for his reception. Away she went, early next morning,
unto Hampton-Court, to acquaint his Majesty; but see the misfortune: He,
either guided by his own approaching hard fate, or misguided by
Ashburnham,[17] went away in the night-time westward, and surrendered
himself to Hammond, in the Isle of Wight.

    [Footnote 17: This Ashburnham was turned out of the House of
    Commons the 3d of November, 1667, for taking a bribe of five
    hundred pounds of the merchants. I was informed hereof 26th
    November, 1667.]

Whilst his Majesty was at Hampton-Court Alderman Adams sent his Majesty
one thousand pounds in gold, five hundred whereof he gave Madam
Whorewood. I believe I had twenty pieces of that very gold for my share.

I have something more to write of Charles the First's misfortunes,
wherein I was concerned; the matter happened in 1648, but I thought good
to insert it here, having after this no more occasion to mention him.

His Majesty being in Carisbrook-Castle in the Isle of Wight, the Kentish
men, in great numbers, rose in arms, and joined with the Lord Goring; a
considerable number of the best ships revolted from the Parliament; the
citizens of London were forward to rise against the Parliament; his
Majesty laid his design to escape out of prison, by sawing the iron bars
of his chamber window; a small ship was provided, and anchored not far
from the castle to bring him into Sussex; horses were provided ready to
carry him through Sussex into Kent, so that he might be at the head of
the army in Kent, and from thence to march immediately to London, where
thousands then would have armed for him. The Lady Whorewood came to me,
acquaints me herewith. I got G. Farmer (who was a most ingenious
lock-smith, and dwelt in Bowlane) to make a saw to cut the iron bars in
sunder, I mean to saw them, and aqua fortis besides. His Majesty in a
small time did his work; the bars gave liberty for him to go out; he was
out with his body till he came to his breast; but then his heart
failing, he proceeded no farther: when this was discovered, as soon
after it was, he was narrowly looked after, and no opportunity after
that could be devised to enlarge him. About September the Parliament
sent their Commissioners with propositions unto him into the Isle of
Wight, the Lord William Sea being one; the Lady Whorewood comes again
unto me from him or by his consent, to be directed: After perusal of my
figure, I told her the Commissioners would be there such a day; I
elected a day and hour when to receive the Commissioners and
propositions; and as soon as the propositions were read, to sign them,
and make haste with all speed to come up with the Commissioners to
London. The army being then far distant from London, and the city
enraged stoutly against them, he promised he would do so. That night the
Commissioners came, and old Sea and his Majesty had private conference
till one in the morning: the King acquaints Sea with his intention, who
clearly dissuaded him from signing the propositions, telling him they
were not fit for him to sign; that he had many friends in the House of
Lords, and some in the House of Commons; that he would procure more, and
then they would frame more easy propositions. This flattery of this
unfortunate Lord occasioned his Majesty to wave the advice I and some
others that wished his prosperity had given, in expectation of that
which afterwards could never be gained. The army having some notice
hereof from one of the Commissioners, who had an eye upon old Sea,
hasted unto London, and made the citizens very quiet; and besides, the
Parliament and army kept a better correspondency afterwards with each
other.

Whilst the King was at Windsor-Castle, once walking upon the leads
there, he looked upon Captain Wharton's _Almanack_: 'My book,' saith he,
'speaks well as to the weather:' One William Allen standing by; 'what,'
saith he, 'saith his antagonist, Mr. Lilly?' 'I do not care for Lilly,'
said his Majesty, 'he hath been always against me,' and became a little
bitter in his expressions. 'Sir,' saith Allen, 'the man is an honest
man, and writes but what his art informs him.' 'I believe it,' said his
Majesty, 'and that Lilly understands astrology as well as any man in
Europe.' _Exit Rex Carolus._

In 1648 I published a _Treatise of the Three Suns_, seen the winter
preceding; as also an Astrological Judgment upon a Conjunction of Saturn
and Mars 28 June, in 11 degrees 8 minutes of Gemini.

I commend unto your perusal that book and the _Prophetical Merlin_,
which, seriously considered, (Oh worthy Esquire) will more instruct your
judgement (_De generalibus contingentibus Mundi_) than all the authors
you yet ever met with.

In this year, for very great considerations, the Council of State gave
me in money fifty pounds, and a pension of one hundred pounds _per
Annum_, which for two years I received, but no more: upon some
discontents I after would not or did require it. The cause moving them
was this; they could get no intelligence out of France, although they
had several agents there for that purpose. I had formerly acquaintance
with a secular priest, at this time confessor to one of the Secretaries;
unto him I wrote, and by that means had perfect knowledge of the
chiefest concernments of France, at which they admired; but I never yet,
until this day, revealed the name of the person.

One occasion why I deserted that employment was, because Scott, who had
eight hundred pounds _per Annum_ for intelligence, would not contribute
any occasion to gratify my friend: And another thing was, I received
some affront from Gualter Frost their Secretary, one that was a
principal minister belonging to the Council of State. Scott was ever my
enemy, the other knave died of a gangrene in his arm suddenly after.

In 1648 and 1649, that I might encourage young students in astrology, I
publickly read over the first part of my _Introduction_, wherein there
are many things contained, not easily to be understood.

And now we are entered into the year 1649: his Majesty being at St.
James's House, in January of that year, I begun its observations thus:

'I am serious, I beg and expect justice; either fear or shame begins to
question offenders.

'The lofty cedars begin to divine a thundering hurricane is at hand; God
elevates men contemptible.

'Our demigods are sensible we begin to dislike their actions very much
in London, more in the country.

'Blessed be God, who encourages his servants, makes them valiant, and of
undaunted spirits, to go on with his decrees: upon a sudden, great
expectations arise, and men generally believe a quiet and calm time
draws nigh.'

In Christmas holidays, the Lord Gray of Grooby and Hugh Peters sent for
me to Somerset-House, with directions to bring them two of my
Almanacks.--I did so; Peters and he read January's Observations.

'If we are not fools and knaves,' saith he, 'we shall do justice:' then
they whispered. I understood not their meaning till his Majesty was
beheaded. They applied what I wrote of justice, to be understood of his
Majesty, which was contrary to my intention; for Jupiter, the first day
of January, became direct; and Libra is a sign signifying Justice; I
implored for justice generally upon such as had cheated in their places,
being treasurers, and such like officers. I had not then heard the least
intimation of bringing the King unto trial, and yet the first day
thereof I was casually there, it being upon a Saturday; for going to
Westminster every Saturday in the afternoon, in these times, at
White-hall I casually met Peters; 'Come, Lilly, wilt thou go hear the
King tried?' 'When?' said I. 'Now, just now; go with me.' I did so, and
was permitted by the guard of soldiers to pass up to the King's-Bench.
Within one quarter of an hour came the Judges, presently his Majesty,
who spoke excellently well, and majestically, without impediment in the
least when he spoke. I saw the silver top of his staff unexpectedly fall
to the ground, which was took up by Mr. Rushworth: and then I heard
Bradshaw the Judge say to his Majesty,

'Sir, instead of answering the court, you interrogate their power, which
becomes not one in your condition'--

These words pierced my heart and soul, to hear a subject thus
audaciously to reprehend his Sovereign, who ever and anon replied with
great magnanimity and prudence.

After that his Majesty was beheaded, the Parliament for some years
effected nothing either for the publick peace or tranquillity of the
nation, or settling religion as they had formerly promised. The interval
of time betwixt his Majesty's death and Oliver Cromwel's displacing
them, was wholly consumed in voting for themselves, and bringing their
own relations to be members of Parliament, thinking to make a trade
thereof.

The week, or three or four days before his Majesty's beheading, one
Major Sydenham, who had commands in Scotland, came to take his leave of
me, and told me the King was to be put to death, which I was not willing
to believe, and said, 'I could not be persuaded the Parliament could
find any Englishman so barbarous, that would do that foul action.'
'Rather,' saith he, 'than they should want such a man, these arms of
mine should do it.' He went presently after into Scotland, and upon the
first engagement against them, was slain, and his body miserably cut and
mangled.

In 1651 I published _Monarchy or no Monarchy_, and in the latter end
thereof some hieroglyphics of my own, composed, at spare time, by the
occult learning, many of those types having representations of what
should from thence succeed in England, and have since had verification.

I had not that learning from books, or any manuscript I ever yet met
withal, it is reduced from a cabal lodging in astrology, but so
mysterious and difficult to be attained, that I have not yet been
acquainted with any who had that knowledge. I will say no more thereof,
but that the asterisms and signs and constellations give greatest light
thereunto.

During Bradshaw's being President of the Council of State, it was my
happiness to procure Captain Wharton his liberty, which when Bradshaw
understood, said, 'I will be an enemy to Lilly, if ever he come before
me.' Sir Bolstrode Whitlock broke the ice first of all on behalf of
Captain Wharton: after him the Committee, unto whom his offence had been
committed, spoke for him, and said he might well be bailed or enlarged:
I had spoken to the Committee the morning of his delivery, who thereupon
were so civil unto him, especially Sir William Ermin of Lincolnshire,
who at first wondered I appeared not against him; but upon my humble
request, my long continued antagonist was enlarged and had his liberty.

In 1651 I purchased one hundred and ten pounds _per Annum_ in fee-farm
rents for one thousand and thirty pounds. I paid all in ready money; but
when his Majesty King Charles the Second, 1660, was restored, I lost it
all again, and it returned to the right owner; the loss thereof never
afflicted me, for I have ever reduced my mind according to my fortune. I
was drawn in by several persons to make that simple purchase. The year I
bought it, I had my ascendant directed into a Trine of Jupiter first,
and in the same year into the _Cauda Draconis_--my fortune into a
quadrant of Mercury. When Colchester was besieged, John Booker and
myself were sent for, where we encouraged the soldiers, assuring them
the town would very shortly be surrendered, as indeed it was: I would
willingly have obtained leave to enter the town, to have informed Sir
Charles Lucas, whom I well knew, with the condition of affairs as they
then stood, he being deluded by false intelligence: at that time my
scholar Humphreys was therein, who many times deluded the Governor with
expectation of relief; but failing very many times with his lies, at
last he had the bastinado, was put in prison, and inforced to become a
soldier; and well it was he escaped so.--During my being there, the
steeple of St. Mary's Church was much battered by two cannons purposely
placed: I was there one day about three of the clock in the afternoon,
talking with the cannoneer, when presently he desired us to look to
ourselves, for he perceived by his perspective glass there was a piece
charged in the castle against his work, and ready to be discharged. I
ran for haste under an old ash-tree, and immediately the cannon-bullet
came hissing quite over us. 'No danger now,' saith the gunner, 'but
begone, for there are five more charging,' which was true; for two hours
after those cannons were discharged, and unluckily killed our cannoneer
and matross. I came the next morning and saw the blood of the two poor
men lie upon the planks: we were well entertained at the head-quarters,
and after two whole days abiding there, came for London.

But we prosecute our story again, and say that in the year 1652 I
purchased my house and some lands in Hersham, in the parish of Walton
upon Thames, in the county of Surrey, where I now live; intending by the
blessing of God, when I found it convenient, to retire into the country,
there to end my days in peace and tranquillity; for in London my
practice was such, I had none or very little time afforded me to serve
God, who had been so gracious unto me. The purchase of the house and
lands, and buildings, stood me in nine hundred and fifty pounds
sterling, which I have very much augmented.

The Parliament now grows odious unto all good men, the members whereof
became insufferable in their pride, covetousness, self-ends, laziness,
minding nothing but how to enrich themselves. Much heart-burning now
arose betwixt the Presbyterian and Independant, the latter siding with
the army, betwixt whose two judgments there was no medium. Now came up,
or first appeared, that monstrous people called Ranters: and many other
novel opinions, in themselves heretical and scandalous, were
countenanced by members of Parliament, many whereof were of the same
judgment. Justice was neglected, vice countenanced, and all care of the
common good laid aside. Every judgment almost groaned under the heavy
burthen they then suffered; the army neglected; the city of London
scorned; the ministry, especially those who were orthodox and serious,
honest or virtuous, had no countenance; my soul began to loath the very
name of a Parliament, or Parliament-men. There yet remained in the House
very able, judicious, and worthy patriots; but they, by their silence,
only served themselves: all was carried on by a rabble of dunces, who
being the greater number, voted what seemed best to their
non-intelligent fancies.

In this year I published _Annas Tenebrosus_, which book I did not so
entitle, because of the great obscurity of the solar eclipse, by so many
prattled of to no purpose, but because of those underhand and
clandestine counsels held in England by the soldiery, of which I would
never, but in generals, give any knowledge unto any Parliament man. I
had wrote publickly in 1650, that the Parliament should not continue,
but a new government should arise, &c.

In my next year's _Anglicus_, upon rational grounds in astrology, I was
so bold as to aver therein, that the Parliament stood upon a tottering
foundation, and that the commonalty and soldiery would join together
against them.

My _Anglicus_ was for a whole week every day in the Parliament House,
peeped into by the Presbyterians, one disliking this sentence, another
finds another fault, others misliked the whole; so in the end a motion
was made, that _Anglicus_ should be inspected by the Committee for
plundered ministers; which being done, they were to return them to the
House, viz. report its errors.

A messenger attached me by a warrant from that Committee; I had private
notice ere the messenger came, and hasted unto Mr. Speaker Lenthall,
ever my friend. He was exceeding glad to see me, told me what was done;
called for _Anglicus_, marked the passages which tormented the
Presbyterians so highly. I presently sent for Mr. Warren the printer, an
assured Cavalier, obliterated what was most offensive, put in other more
significant words, and desired only to have six amended against next
morning, which very honestly he brought me. I told him my design was to
deny the book found fault with, to own only the six books. I told him, I
doubted he would be examined. 'Hang them,' said he, 'they are all
rogues. I'll swear myself to the devil ere they shall have an advantage
against you by my oath.'

The day after, I appeared before the Committee, being thirty-six in
number that day; whereas it was observed, at other times, it was very
difficult to get five of them together. At first they shewed me the true
_Anglicus_, and asked if I wrote and printed it. I took the book and
inspected it very heedfully; and when I had done so, said thus:

'This is none of my book, some malicious Presbyterian hath wrote it, who
are my mortal enemies; I disown it.' The Committee looked upon one
another like distracted men, not imagining what I presently did; for I
presently pulled out of my pocket six books, and said, 'These I own, the
others are counterfeits, published purposely to ruin me.' The Committee
were now more vexed than before: not one word was spoke a good while; at
last, many of them, or the greatest number of them, were of opinion to
imprison me. Some were for Newgate, others for the Gate-House; but then
one Brown of Sussex, called the Presbyterian beadle, whom the Company of
Stationers had bribed to be my friend, by giving him a new _Book of
Martyrs_; he, I say, preached unto the Committee this doctrine, that
neither Newgate or the Gate-House were prisons unto which at any time
the Parliament sent their prisoners: it was most convenient for the
Serjeant at Arms to take me in custody.

Mr. Strickland, who had for many years been the Parliament's Ambassador
or Agent in Holland, when he saw how they inclined, spoke thus:

'I came purposely into the Committee this day to see the man who is so
famous in those parts where I have so long continued: I assure you his
name is famous all over Europe: I come to do him justice. A book is
produced by us, and said to be his; he denies it; we have not proved it,
yet will commit him. Truly this is great injustice. It is likely he will
write next year, and acquaint the whole world with our injustice; and so
well he may. It is my opinion, first to prove the book to be his, ere he
be committed.'

Another old friend of mine, Mr. R. spoke thus:

'You do not know the many services this man hath done for the Parliament
these many years, or how many times, in our greatest distresses, we
applying unto him, he hath refreshed our languishing expectations; he
never failed us of comfort in our most unhappy distresses. I assure you
his writings have kept up the spirits both of the soldiery, the honest
people of this nation, and many of us Parliament men; and now at last,
for a slip of his pen (if it were his) to be thus violent against him: I
must tell you, I fear the consequence urged out of the book will prove
effectually true. It is my counsel, to admonish him hereafter to be more
wary, and for the present to dismiss him.'

Notwithstanding any thing that was spoken on my behalf, I was ordered to
stand committed to the Serjeant at Arms. The messenger attached my
person, said I was his prisoner. As he was carrying me away, he was
called to bring me again. Oliver Cromwell, Lieutenant-General of the
army, having never seen me, caused me to be produced again, where he
stedfastly beheld me for a good space, and then I went with the
messenger; but instantly a young clerk of that Committee asks the
messenger what he did with me, where's the warrant? until that is signed
you cannot seize Mr. Lilly, or shall. Will you have an action of false
imprisonment against you? So I escaped that night, but next day obeyed
the warrant. That night Oliver Cromwell went to Mr. R. my friend, and
said, 'What never a man to take Lilly's cause in hand but yourself? None
to take his part but you? He shall not be long there.' Hugh Peters spoke
much in my behalf to the Committee; but they were resolved to lodge me
in the Serjeant's custody. One Millington, a drunken member, was much my
enemy; and so was Cawley and Chichester, a deformed fellow, unto whom I
had done several courtesies.

First thirteen days I was a prisoner; and though every day of the
Committee's sitting I had a petition to deliver, yet so many churlish
Presbyterians still appeared, I could not get it accepted. The last day
of the thirteen, Mr. Joseph Ash was made Chairman, unto whom my cause
being related, he took my petition, and said I should be bailed in
despite of them all, but desired I would procure as many friends as I
could to be there. Sir Arthur Hazelrigg, and Major Salloway, a person of
excellent parts, appeared for me, and many now of my old friends came
in. After two whole hours arguing of my cause by Sir Arthur and Major
Salloway, and other friends, the matter came to this point; I should be
bailed, and a Committee nominated to examine the printer. The order of
the Committee being brought afterwards to him who should be Chairman, he
sent me word, do what I would, he would see all the knaves hanged, ere
he would examine the printer. This is the truth of the story.

The 16th of February 1655, my second wife died; for whose death I shed
no tears. I had five hundred pounds with her as a portion, but she and
her poor relations spent me one thousand pounds. _Gloria Patri, & Filio,
& Spiritui Sancto: sicut erat in principio & nunc, & semper, & in sæcula
sæculorum_: for the 20th of April 1655, these enemies of mine, viz.
Parliament men, were turned out of doors by Oliver Cromwell. A German
doctor of physick being then in London, sent me this paper:

_Strophe Alcaica: Generoso Domino Gulielmo Lillio Astrologo, de
dissoluto nuper Parliamento_.

  Quod calculasti Sydere prævio,
  Miles peregit numine conscio;
  Gentis videmus nunc Senatum
  Marte togaque gravi levatum.

In the time of my imprisonment, Mr. Rushworth came to visit me, and told
me, the army would do as much as I had predicted unto the Parliament.

In October 1654, I married the third wife, who is signified in my
nativity by _Jupiter in Libra_; and she is so totally in her conditions,
to my great comfort.

In 1655, I was indicted at Hicks's-Hall by a half-witted young woman.
Three several sessions she was neglected, and the Jury cast forth her
bill; but the fourth time, they found it against me: I put in bail to
traverse the indictment. The cause of the indictment was, for that I had
given judgment upon stolen goods, and received two shillings and
six-pence.--And this was said to be contrary unto an Act in King James's
time made.

This mad woman was put upon this action against me by two ministers, who
had framed for her a very ingenious speech, which she could speak
without book, as she did the day of hearing the traverse. She produced
one woman, who told the court, a son of her's was run from her; that
being in much affliction of mind for her loss, she repaired unto me to
know what was become of him; that I told her he was gone for the
Barbadoes, and she would hear of him within thirteen days; which, she
said, she did.

A second woman made oath, that her husband being wanting two years, she
repaired to me for advice: that I told her he was in Ireland, and would
be at home such a time; and, said she, he did come home accordingly.

I owned the taking of half a crown for my judgment of the theft; but
said, I gave no other judgment, but that the goods would not be
recovered, being that was all which was required of me: the party,
before that, having been with several astrologers, some affirming she
should have her goods again, others gave contrary judgment, which made
her come unto me for a final resolution.

At last my enemy began her before-made speech, and, without the least
stumbling, pronounced it before the court; which ended, she had some
queries put unto her, and then I spoke for myself, and produced my own
_Introduction_ into court, saying, that I had some years before emitted
that book for the benefit of this and other nations; that it was allowed
by authority, and had found good acceptance in both universities; that
the study of astrology was lawful, and not contradicted by any
scripture; that I neither had, or ever did, use any charms, sorceries,
or inchantments related in the bill of indictment, &c.

She then related, that she had been several times with me, and that
afterwards she could not rest a-nights, but was troubled with bears,
lions, and tygers, &c. My counsel was the Recorder Green, who after he
had answered all objections, concluded astrology was a lawful art.

'Mistress,' said he, 'what colour was those beasts that you were so
terrified with?'

'I never saw any,' said she.

'How do you then know they were lions, tygers, or bears?' replied
he.--'This is an idle person, only fit for Bedlam.' The Jury who went
not from the bar, brought in, No true Bill.

There were many Presbyterian Justices much for her, and especially one
Roberts, a busy fellow for the Parliament, who after his Majesty came
in, had like to have lost life and fortune.

I had procured Justice Hooker to be there, who was the oracle of all the
Justices of Peace in Middlesex.

There was nothing memorable after that happened unto me, until 1650, and
the month of October, at what time Captain Owen Cox brought me over from
his Majesty of Sweden, a gold chain and medal, worth about fifty pounds;
the cause whereof was, that in the year 1657 and 1658, I had made
honourable mention of him: the _Anglicus_ of 1658 being translated into
the language spoke at Hamburgh, printed and cried about the streets, as
it is in London.

The occasion of my writing so honourably of his Majesty of Sweden was
this: Sir Bolstrode Whitlock, Knight, upon the very time of Oliver's
being made Protector, having made very noble articles betwixt Christina
then Queen of Sweden, and the English nation, was in his being at
Stockholm visited frequently by Charles Gustavus, unto whom Christina
resigned during his abode, and used with all manner of civility by him,
insomuch as some other Ambassadors took it ill, that they had not so
much respect or equal: unto which he would reply, he would be kind where
himself did find just cause of merit unto any. He were a great lover of
our nation; but there were some other causes also moving my pen to be so
liberal, viz. The great hopes I had of his prevailing, and of taking
Copenhagen and Elsinore, which, if he had lived, was hoped he might have
accomplished; and had assuredly done, if Oliver the Protector had not so
untimely died ere our fleet of ships returned; for Oliver sent the fleet
on purpose to fight the Dutch; but dying, and the Parliament being
restored, Sir Henry Vane, who afterwards was beheaded, had order from
the Council of State to give order to the fleet what to do now Oliver
was dead, and themselves restored. Vane, out of state-policy, gave the
Earl of Sandwich direction not to fight the Dutch. Captain Symons, who
carried those letters, swore unto me, had he known the letters he
carried had contained any such prohibition, he would have sunk both ship
and letters. Oliver said, when the fleet was to go forth, 'That if God
blessed his Majesty of Sweden with Copenhagen, the English were to have
Elsinore as their share; which if once I have,' saith Oliver, 'the
English shall have the whole trade of the Baltick Sea: I will make the
Dutch find another passage, except they will pay such customs as I shall
impose.' Considering the advantages this would have been to our English,
who can blame my pen for being liberal, thereby to have encouraged our
famous and noble seamen, or for writing so honourably of the Swedish
nation, who had most courteously treated my best of friends, Sir
Bolstrode Whitlock, and by whose means, had the design taken effect, the
English nation had been made happy with the most beneficial concern of
all Christendom. I shall conclude about Oliver the then Protector, with
whom obliquely I had transactions by his son-in-law, Mr. Cleypool; and
to speak truly of him, he sent one that waited upon him in his chamber,
once in two or three days, to hear how it fared with me in my sessions
business; but I never had of him, directly or indirectly, either
pension, or any the least sum of money, or any gratuity during his whole
Protectorship; this I protest to be true, by the name and in the name of
the most holy God.

In 1653, before the dissolution of the Parliament, and that ere they had
chosen any for their Ambassador into Sweden, Mr. Cleypool came unto me,
demanding of me whom I thought fittest to send upon that embassy into
Sweden: I nominated Sir B. Whitlock, who was chosen, and two or three
days after Mr. Cleypool came again: 'I hope, Mr. Lilly, my father hath
now pleased you: Your friend Sir B. Whitlock is to go for Sweden.' But
since I have mentioned Oliver Cromwell, I will relate something of him,
which perhaps no other pen can, or will mention. He was born of generous
parents in Huntingdonshire, educated some time at the university of
Cambridge: in his youth was wholly given to debauchery, quarrelling,
drinking, &c. _quid non_; having by those means wasted his patrimony, he
was enforced to bethink himself of leaving England, and go to
New-England: he had hired a passage in a ship, but ere she launched out
for her voyage, a kinsman dieth, leaving him a considerable fortune;
upon which he returns, pays his debts, became affected to religion; is
elected in 1640 a member of Parliament, in 1642 made a Captain of horse
under Sir Philip Stapleton, fought at Edge-Hill; after he was made a
Colonel, then Lieutenant-General to the Earl of Manchester, who was one
of the three Generals to fight the Earl of Newcastle and Prince Rupert
at York: Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, and Earl Leven the Scot, were the
other two for the Parliament: the last two thinking all had been lost at
Marston-Moor fight, Fairfax went into Cawood Castle, giving all for
lost: at twelve at night there came word of the Parliament's victory;
Fairfax being then laid down upon a bed, there was not a candle in the
castle, nor any fire: up riseth Lord Fairfax, procures after some time,
paper, ink, and candle, writes to Hull, and other garrisons of the
Parliament's, of the success, and then slept.

Leven the Scot asked the way to Tweed: the honour of that day's fight
was given to Manchester, Sir Thomas Fairfax's brigade of horse, and
Oliver Cromwell's iron sides; for Cromwell's horse, in those times,
usually wore head-pieces, back and breast-plates of iron. After this
victory Cromwell became gracious with the House of Commons, especially
the Zealots, or Presbyterians, with whom at that time he especially
joined; the name Independent, at that time, viz. 1644, being not so much
spoken of.

There was some animosity at or before the fight, betwixt the Earl of
Newcastle and Prince Rupert; for Newcastle being General of his
Majesty's forces in the North, a person of valour, and well esteemed in
those parts, took it not well to have a competitor in his concernments;
for if the victory should fall on his Majesty's side, Prince Rupert's
forces would attribute it unto their own General, viz. Rupert, and give
him the glory thereof: but that it happened, Prince Rupert, in that
day's fight, engaged the Parliament's forces too soon, and before the
Earl of Newcastle could well come out of York with his army; by reason
whereof, though Rupert had absolutely routed the Scots and the Lord
Fairfax's forces; yet ere timely assistance could second his army, Sir
Thomas Fairfax and Cromwell had put him to flight, and not long after
all Newcastle's army. A most memorable action happened on that day.
There was one entire regiment of foot belonging to Newcastle, called the
Lambs, because they were all new cloathed in white woollen cloth, two or
three days before the fight. This sole regiment, after the day was lost,
having got into a small parcel of ground ditched in, and not of easy
access of horse, would take no quarter; and by mere valour, for one
whole hour, kept the troops of horse from entering amongst them at near
push of pike: when the horse did enter, they would have no quarter, but
fought it out till there was not thirty of them living; those whose hap
it was to be beaten down upon the ground as the troopers came near them,
though they could not rise for their wounds, yet were so desperate as to
get either a pike or sword, or piece of them, and to gore the troopers'
horses as they came over them, or passed by them. Captain Camby, then a
trooper under Cromwell, and an actor, who was the third or fourth man
that entered amongst them, protested, he never in all the fights he was
in, met with such resolute brave fellows, or whom he pitied so much, and
said, 'he saved two or three against their wills.'

After the fight, Manchester marched slowly southward, &c. but at last
came with his army to Newbury fight; which ended, he came for London,
and there he accuseth Cromwell, being his Lieutenant, to the Parliament,
of disobedience, and not obeying his orders.

The House of Commons acquaint Cromwell herewith, and charge him, as he
would answer it before God, that the day following he should give them a
full account of Manchester's proceedings, and the cause and occasion of
their difference, and of the reasons why Manchester did not timely move
westward for the relief of Essex, then in the west, who was absolutely
routed, inforced to fly, all his foot taken, and all his ordnance and
train of artillery, only the horse escaping. Cromwell the next day gave
this account to Mr. Speaker in the House of Commons--by way of
recrimination.

That after God had given them a successful victory at Marston over the
King's forces, and that they had well refreshed their army, Manchester,
by their order, did move southward, but with such slowness, that
sometimes he would not march for three days together; sometimes he would
lie still one day, then two days; whereupon he said, considering the
Earl of Essex was in the west, with what success he then knew not, he
moved Manchester several times to quicken his march to the west, for
relief of Essex, if he were beaten, or to divert the King's forces from
following of Essex; but he said Manchester still refused to make any
haste; and that one day he said, 'If any man but yourself, Lieutenant,
should so frequently trouble me, I would call him before a Council of
War. We have beaten the King's forces in the north; if we should do so
in the west, his Majesty is then undone: he hath many sons living; if
any of them come to the Crown, as they well may, they will never forget
us.' This Major Hammond, a man of honour, will justify as well as
myself. After which he marched not at all, until he had order from the
Committee to hasten westward, by reason of Essex's being lost in
Cornwall, which then he did; and at Newbury fight, it is true, I refused
to obey his directions and order: for this it was; his Majesty's horse
being betwixt four and five thousand in a large common, in good order,
he commands me, Mr. Speaker, to charge them; we having no way to come at
them but through a narrow lane, where not above three horse could march
abreast; whereby had I followed his order, we had been all cut off ere
we could have got into any order. Mr. Speaker, (and then he wept; which
he could do _toties quoties_) I, considering that all the visible army
you then had, was by this counsel in danger to be lost, refused thus to
endanger the main strength, which now most of all consisted of those
horse under my command, &c.--This his recrimination was well accepted by
the House of Commons, who thereupon, and from that time, thought there
was none of the House of Lords very fit to be entrusted with their
future armies, but had then thoughts of making a commoner their General;
which afterwards they did, and elected Sir Thomas Fairfax their General,
and Cromwell Lieutenant-General; but it was next spring first. Upon
Essex's being lost in Cornwall, I heard Serjeant Maynard say, 'If now
the King haste to London we are undone, having no army to resist him.'

His Majesty had many misfortunes ever attending him, during his abode at
Oxford; some by reason of that great animosity betwixt Prince Rupert and
the Lord Digby, each endeavouring to cross one another; but the worst of
all was by treachery of several officers under his command, and in his
service; for the Parliament had in continual pay one Colonel of the
King's Council of War; one Lieutenant-Colonel; one Captain; one Ensign;
one or two Serjeants; several Corporals, who had constant pay, and duly
paid them every month, according to the capacity of their officers and
places, and yet none of these knew any thing of each other's being so
employed. There were several well-wishers unto the Parliament in Oxford,
where each left his letter, putting it in at the hole of a glass-window,
as he made water in the street. What was put in at the window in any of
those houses, was the same day conveyed two miles off by some in the
habit of town-gardeners, to the side of a ditch, where one or more were
ever ready to give the intelligence to the next Parliament garrison: I
was then familiar with all the spies that constantly went in and out to
Oxford.

But once more to my own actions. I had, in 1652 and 1653 and 1654, much
contention with Mr. Gatacre of Rotherhithe, a man endued with all kind
of learning, and the ablest man of the whole synod of divines in the
Oriental tongues.

The synod had concluded to make an exposition upon the bible; some
undertook one book, some another. Gatacre fell upon _Jeremy_. Upon
making his exposition on the 2d verse of the 10th chapter,

'Learn not the way of the heathen, and be not dismayed at the signs of
heaven, for the heathen are dismayed at them.'

In his _Annotations_ thereupon, he makes a scandalous exposition; and in
express terms, hints at me, repeating _verbatim_, ten or twelve times,
an _Epistle_ of mine in one of my former _Anglicus_.

The substance of my _Epistle_ was, that I did conceive the good angels
of God did first reveal astrology unto mankind, &c. but he in his
_Annotations_ calls me blind buzzard, &c.

Having now liberty of the press, and hearing the old man was very
cholerick, I thought fit to raise it up--and only wrote--I referred my
discourse then in hand to the discussion and judgment of sober persons,
but not unto Thomas Wiseacre, for _Senes bis pueri_: These very words
begot the writing of forty-two sheets against myself and astrology. The
next year I quibbled again in three or four lines against him, then he
printed twenty-two sheets against me. I was persuaded by Dr. Gauden,
late Bishop of Exeter, to let him alone; but in my next year's
_Anglicus_, in August observations, I wrote, _Hâc in tumbâ jacet
Presbyter & Nebulo_, in which very month he died.

Several divines applied themselves unto me, desiring me to forbear any
further vexing of Mr. Gatacre; but all of them did as much condemn him
of indiscretion, that in so sober a piece of work as that was, viz. in
an _Annotation_ upon a sacred text of scripture to particularize me and
in that dirty language: they pitied him, that he had not better
considered with himself ere he published it.

Dean Owen of Christ's-Church in Oxford, also in his sermons had sharp
invectives against me and astrology; I cried quittance with him, by
urging Abbot Panormitan's judgment of astrology contrary to Owen's, and
concluded, 'An Abbot was an ace above a Dean.'

One Mr. Nye of the assembly of divines, a Jesuitical Presbyterian,
bleated forth his judgment publickly against me and astrology: to be
quit with him, I urged Causinus the Jesuit's approbation of astrology,
and concluded, _Sic canibus catulos, &c_.

In some time after the Dutch Ambassador being offended with some things
in _Anglicus_, presented a memorial to the Council of State, that
_Merlinus Anglicus_ might be considered, and the abuses against their
nation examined; but his paper was not accepted of, or I any way
molested.

In Oliver's Protectorship, I wrote freely and satyrical enough: he was
now become Independant, and all the soldiery my friends; for when he was
in Scotland, the day of one of their fights, a soldier stood with
_Anglicus_ in his hand; and as the several troops passed by him, 'Lo,
hear what Lilly saith; you are in this month promised victory, fight it
out, brave boys;' and then read that month's prediction.

I had long before predicted the downfall of Presbytery, as you (most
honoured Sir) in the figure thereof, in my _Introduction_, may observe;
and it was upon this occasion. Sir Thomas Middleton of Chark Castle,
enemy to Presbytery, seeing they much prevailed, being a member of the
House, seriously demanded my judgment, if Presbytery should prevail, or
not, in England? The figure printed in my _Introduction_, will best give
you an account, long before it happened, of the sinking and failing of
Presbytery; so will the second page of my _Hieroglyphicks_. Those men,
to be serious, would preach well; but they were more lordly than
Bishops, and usually, in their parishes, more tyrannical than the Great
Turk.

       *       *       *       *       *


OF THE YEAR 1660; THE ACTIONS WHEREOF, AS THEY WERE REMARKABLE IN
ENGLAND, SO WERE THEY NO LESS MEMORABLE AS TO MY PARTICULAR FORTUNE AND
PERSON.


Upon the Lord General Monk's returning from Scotland with his army into
England, suddenly after his coming to London, Richard Cromwell, the then
Protector's, authority was laid aside, and the old Parliament restored;
the Council of State sat as formerly. The first act they put the General
upon was, to take down the city gates and portcullisses, an act which,
the General said, was fitter for a Janizary to do than for a General;
yet he effected the commands received, and then lodged in the city with
his army. The citizens took this pulling down of their gates so
heinously, that one night the ruder sort of them procured all the rumps
of beef, and other baggage, and publickly burnt them in the streets, in
derision of the then Parliament, calling them that now sat, The Rump.
This hurly-burly was managed as well by the General's soldiers as the
citizens. The King's health was publickly drank all over the city, to
the confusion of the Parliament. The matter continued until midnight, or
longer. The Council of State, sitting at White-Hall, had hereof no
knowledge, until Sir Martin Noell, a discreet citizen, came about nine
at night, and then first informed them thereof. The Council could not
believe it, until they had sent some ministers of their own, who
affirmed the verity thereof. They were at a stand, and could not resolve
what to do; at last Nevil Smith came, being one of them, and publickly
protested there was but one way to regain their authority, and to be
revenged of this affront, and to overthrow the Lord General Monk, whom
they now perceived intended otherways than he had pretended; his council
was, to take away Monk's commission, and to give a present commission to
Major-General Lambert to be their General; which counsel of his, if they
would take and put it speedily in execution, would put an end unto all
the present mischiefs. The Council in general did all very well approve
Nevil Smith's judgment; but presently up starts Sir Arthur Hazellrigg,
and makes a sharp invective against Lambert, and concluded, he would
rather perish under the King of Scot's power, than that Lambert should
ever any more have command under the Parliament.

The Lord General suddenly after brings in the long excluded Members to
sit in Parliament, being persons of great judgment, and formerly
enforced from sitting therein by the soldiery, and connivance of those
who stiled themselves the godly part of the Parliament. These honourable
patriots presently voted his Majesty's coming into England, and so he
did in May 1660. But because Charles the Second, now (1667) King of
England, Son of Charles the First, grandchild to James the First, King
of Great Britany, was so miraculously restored, and so many hundreds of
years since prophesied of by Ambrose Merlin, it will not be impertinent
to mention the prophecies themselves, the rather because we have seen
their verification.


AMBROSE MERLIN'S PROPHECY WROTE ABOUT 990 YEARS SINCE.


He calls King James, The Lion of Righteousness; and saith, when he died,
or was dead, there would reign a noble White King; this was Charles the
First. The prophet discovers all his troubles, his flying up and down,
his imprisonment, his death; and calls him Aquila. What concerns Charles
the Second, is the subject of our discourse: in the Latin copy it is
thus:

_Deinde ab Austro veniet cum Sole super ligneos equos, & super spumantem
inundationem maris, Pullus Aquilæ navigans in Britanniam._

_Et applicans statim tunc altam domum Aquilæ sitiens, & cito aliam
sitiet._

_Deinde Pullus Aquilæ nidificabit in summa rupe totius Britanniæ: nec
juvenis occidet, nec ad senem vivet._

This, in an old copy, is Englished thus:

'After then, shall come through the south with the sun, on horse of
tree, and upon all waves of the sea, the Chicken of the Eagle, sailing
into Britain, and arriving anon to the house of the Eagle, he shall shew
fellowship to them beasts.

'After, the Chicken of the Eagle shall nestle in the highest rock of all
Britain: nay, he shall nought be slain young; nay, he nought come old.'

Another Latin copy renders the last verse thus:

_Deindè pullus Aquilæ nidificabit in summo rupium, nec juvenis
occidetur, nec ad senium perveniet._ There is after this, _percificato
regno omnes occidet_; which is intended of those persons put to death,
that sat as Judges upon his father's death.


THE VERIFICATION.


His Majesty being in the Low-Countries when the Lord General had
restored the secluded Members, the Parliament sent part of the Royal
Navy to bring him for England, which they did in May 1660. Holland is
East from England, so he came with the sun; but he landed at Dover, a
port in the south part of England. Wooden-horses, are the English ships.

_Tunc nidificabit in summo rupium._

The Lord General, and most of the gentry in England, met him in Kent,
and brought him unto London, then to White-hall.

Here, by the highest Rooch, (some write Rock,) is intended London, being
the metropolis of all England.

Since which time, unto this very day I write this story, he hath reigned
in England, and long may he do hereafter. 10th December, 1667.

Had I leisure, I might verify the whole preceding part concerning King
Charles. Much of the verification thereof is mentioned in my _Collection
of Prophecies_, printed 1645. But his Majesty being then alive, I
forbore much of that subject, not willing to give offence. I dedicated
that book unto him; and, in the conclusion thereof, I advised his return
unto Parliament, with these words, _Fac hoc & vives_.

There was also a _Prophecy_ printed 1588, in Greek characters, exactly
decyphering the long troubles the English nation had from 1641 until
1660; and then it ended thus:

'And after that shall come a dreadful dead man, and with him a Royal G.'
[it is Gamma in the Greek, intending C. in the Latin, being the third
letter in the alphabet,] 'of the best blood in the world, and he shall
have the Crown, and shall set England on the right way, and put out all
heresies.'

Monkery being extinguished above eighty or ninety years, and the Lord
General's name being Monk, is the Dead Man. The Royal G. or C. is
Charles the Second, who, for his extraction, may be said to be of the
best blood in the world.

These two prophecies were not given vocally by the angels, but by
inspection of the crystal in types and figures, or by apparition the
circular way, where, at some distance, the angels appear, representing
by forms, shapes, and creatures, what is demanded. It is very rare, yea,
even in our days, for any operator or master to have the angels speak
articulately; when they do speak, it is like the Irish, much in the
throat.

What further concerns his Majesty, will more fully be evident about 1672
or 1674, or, at farthest, in 1676. And now unto my own actions in 1660.

In the first place, my fee-farm rents, being of the yearly value of one
hundred and twenty pounds, were all lost by his Majesty's coming to his
restoration: but I do say truly, the loss thereof did never trouble me,
or did I repine thereat.

In June of that year, a new Parliament was called, whereunto I was
unwillingly invited by two messengers of the Serjeant at Arms. The
matter whereupon I was taken into custody was, to examine me concerning
the person who cut off the King's head, viz. the late King's.

Sir Daniel Harvey, of Surry, got the business moved against me in great
displeasure, because, at the election of new knights for Surrey, I
procured the whole town of Walton to stand, and give their voices for
Sir Richard Onslow. The Committee to examine me, were Mr. Prinn, one
Colonel King, and Mr. Richard Weston of Gray's-Inn.

God's providence appeared very much for me that day, for walking in
Westminster-Hall, Mr. Richard Pennington, son to my old friend Mr.
William Pennington, met me, and enquiring the cause of my being there,
said no more, but walked up and down the hall, and related my kindness
to his father unto very many Parliament men of Cheshire and Lancashire,
Yorkshire, Cumberland, and those northern countries, who numerously came
up into the Speaker's chamber, and bade me be of good comfort: at last
he meets Mr. Weston, one of the three unto whom my matter was referred
for examination, who told Mr. Pennington, that he came purposely to
punish me; and would be bitter against me; but hearing it related, viz.
my singular kindness and preservation of old Mr. Pennington's estate to
the value of six or seven thousand pounds, 'I will do him all the good I
can,' says he. 'I thought he had never done any good; let me see him,
and let him stand behind me where I sit:' I did so. At my first
appearance, many of the young members affronted me highly, and demanded
several scurrilous questions. Mr. Weston held a paper before his mouth;
bade me answer nobody but Mr. Prinn; I obeyed his command, and saved
myself much trouble thereby; and when Mr. Prinn put any difficult or
doubtful query unto me, Mr. Weston prompted me with a fit answer. At
last, after almost one hour's tugging, I desired to be fully heard what
I could say as to the person who cut Charles the First's head off.
Liberty being given me to speak, I related what follows, viz.

That the next Sunday but one after Charles the First was beheaded,
Robert Spavin, Secretary unto Lieutenant-General Cromwell at that time,
invited himself to dine with me, and brought Anthony Peirson, and
several others, along with him to dinner: that their principal discourse
all dinner-time was only, who it was that beheaded the King; one said it
was the common hangman; another, Hugh Peters; others also were
nominated, but none concluded. Robert Spavin, so soon as dinner was
done, took me by the hand, and carried me to the south window: saith he,
'These are all mistaken, they have not named the man that did the fact:
it was Lieutenant-Colonel JOICE; I was in the room when he fitted
himself for the work, stood behind him when he did it; when done, went
in again with him: there is no man knows this but my master, viz.
Cromwell, Commissary Ireton, and myself.' 'Doth not Mr. Rushworth know
it?' said I. 'No, he doth not know it,' saith Spavin. The same thing
Spavin since had often related unto me when we were alone. Mr. Prinn
did, with much civility, make a report hereof in the House; yet Norfolk
the Serjeant, after my discharge, kept me two days longer in arrest,
purposely to get money of me. He had six pounds, and his Messenger forty
shillings; and yet I was attached but upon Sunday, examined on Tuesday,
and then discharged, though the covetous Serjeant detained me until
Thursday. By means of a friend, I cried quittance with Norfolk, which
friend was to pay him his salary at that time, and abated Norfolk three
pounds, which we spent every penny at one dinner, without inviting the
wretched Serjeant: but in the latter end of the year, when the King's
Judges were arraigned at the Old-Bailey, Norfolk warned me to attend,
believing I could give information concerning Hugh Peters. At the
sessions I attended during its continuance, but was never called or
examined. There I heard Harrison, Scott, Clement, Peters, Hacker,
Scroop, and others of the King's Judges, and Cook the Sollicitor, who
excellently defended himself; I say, I did hear what they could say for
themselves, and after heard the sentence of condemnation pronounced
against them by the incomparably modest and learned Judge Bridgman, now
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England.

One would think my troubles for that year had been ended; but in January
1662, one Everard, a Justice of Peace in Westminster, ere I was
stirring, sent a Serjeant and thirty four musqueteers for me to
White-Hall: he had twice that night seized about sixty persons, supposed
fanaticks, very despicable persons, many whereof were aged, some were
water-bearers, and had been Parliament-soldiers; others, of ordinary
callings: all these were guarded unto White-Hall, into a large room,
until day-light, and then committed to the Gate-House; I was had into
the guard-room, which I thought to be hell; some therein were sleeping,
others swearing, others smoaking tobacco. In the chimney of the room I
believe there was two bushels of broken tobacco-pipes, almost half one
load of ashes. Everard, about nine in the morning, comes, writes my
mittimus for the Gate-House, then shews it me: I must be contented. I
desired no other courtesy, but that I might be privately carried unto
the Gate-House by two soldiers; that was denied. Among the miserable
crew of people, with a whole company of soldiers, I marched to prison,
and there for three hours was in the open air upon the ground, where the
common house of office came down. After three hours, I was advanced from
this stinking place up the stairs, where there was on one side a company
of rude swearing persons; on the other side many Quakers, who lovingly
entertained me. As soon as I was fixed, I wrote to my old friend Sir
Edward Walker, Garter King at Arms, who presently went to Mr. Secretary
Nicholas, and acquainted him with my condition. He ordered Sir Edward to
write to Everard to release me, unless he had any particular information
against me, which he had not. He further said, it was not his Majesty's
pleasure that any of his subjects should be thus had to prison without
good cause shewed before. Upon receipt of Sir Edward's letter, Everard
discharged me, I taking the oaths of allegiance and supremacy. This
day's work cost me thirty-seven shillings. Afterwards Everard stood to
be Burgess for Westminster; sent me to procure him voices. I returned
answer, that of all men living he deserved no courtesy from me, nor
should have any.

In this year 1660, I sued out my pardon under the Broad Seal of England,
being so advised by good counsel, because there should be no
obstruction; I passed as William Lilly, Citizen and Salter of London; it
cost me thirteen pounds six shillings and eight pence.

There happened a verification of an astrological judgment of mine in
this year, 1660, which, because it was predicted sixteen years before it
came to pass, and the year expressly nominated, I thought fit to
mention.

In page 111 of my _Prophetical Merlin_, upon three sextile Aspects of
Saturn and Jupiter, made in 1659 and 1660, I wrote thus--

'This their friendly salutation comforts us in England, every man now
possesses his own vineyard; our young youth grow up unto man's estate,
and our old men live their full years; our nobles and gentlemen root
again; our yeomanry, many years disconsolated, now take pleasure in
their husbandry. The merchant sends out ships, and hath prosperous
returns; the mechanick hath quick trading: here is almost a new world;
new laws, new Lords. Now my country of England shall shed no more tears,
but rejoice with, and in the many blessings God gives or affords her
annually.'

And in the same book, page 118, over-against the year 1660, you shall
find, A bonny Scot acts his part.

The long Parliament would give Charles the Second no other title than
King of Scots.

I also wrote to Sir Edward Walker, Kt. Garter King at Arms in 1659, he
then being in Holland--

_Tu, Dominusque vester videbitis Angliam, infra duos annos_.--For in
1662, his moon came by direction to the body of the sun.

But he came in upon the ascendant directed unto the trine of Sol and
antiscion of Jupiter.

And happy it was for the nation he did come in, and long and
prosperously may he reign amongst us.

In 1663 and 1664, I had along and tedious law-suit in Chancery, M.C.
coming to quartile of Saturn; and the occasion of that suit, was
concerning houses; and my enemy, though aged, had no beard, was really
saturnine. We came unto a hearing Feb. 1664, before the Master of the
Rolls, Sir Harbottle Grimston, where I had the victory, but no costs
given me.

My adversary, not satisfied with that judgment, petitioned that most
just and honourable man, the Lord Chancellor Hyde, for a re-hearing his
cause before him.

It was granted, and the 13th June, 1664, my M.C. then directed to
quartile of Venus and Sol. His Lordship most judiciously heard it with
much attention, and when my adversary's counsel had urged those
depositions which they had against me, his Lordship stood up, and said,

'Here is not one word against Mr. Lilly.'--

I replied, 'My Lord, I hope I shall have costs.'

'Very good reason,' saith he; and so I had: and, at my departure out of
court, put off his hat, and bid 'God be with you.'

This is the month of Dec. 1667, wherein, by misfortune, he is much
traduced and highly persecuted by his enemies: is also retired, however
not in the least questioned for any indirect judgment as Chancellor, in
the Chancery; [but in other things he hath been very foul, as in the
articles drawn up by the Parliament against him, it appears. Which
articles I presume you have not seen, otherwise you would have been of
another mind, A W] for there was never any person sat in that place, who
executed justice with more uprightness, or judgment, or quickness for
dispatch, than this very noble Lord. God, I hope, in mercy will preserve
his person from his enemies, and in good time restore him unto all his
honours again: from my soul I wish it, and hope I shall live to see it.
Amen: _Fiat oh tu Deus justitiæ_.

In 1663 and 1664, I was made churchwarden of Walton upon Thames,
settling as well as I could the affairs of that distracted parish, upon
my own charges; and upon my leaving the place, forgave them seven pounds
odd money due unto me.

In 1664, I had another law-suit with Captain Colborn, Lord of the manor
of Esher, concerning the rights of the parish of Walton. He had newly
purchased that manor, and having one hundred and fifty acres of ground,
formerly park and wood ground lying in our parish, conceived, he had
right of common in our parish of Walton: thereupon, he puts three
hundred sheep upon the common; part whereof I impounded: he replevins
them, and gave me a declaration. I answered it. The trial was to be at
the Assizes at Kingston in April 1664. When the day of trial came, he
had not one witness in his cause, I had many; whereupon upon conference,
and by mediation, he gave me eleven pounds for my charges sustained in
that suit, whereof I returned him back again fifty shillings: forty
shillings for himself, and ten shillings for the poor of the parish he
lived in.

This I did at my own cost and charges, not one parishioner joining with
me. I had now M.C. under quartile of Venus and Sol--both in my second,
ergo, I got money by this thing, or suit. Sir Bolstrode Whitlock gave me
counsel.

Now I come unto the year 1665, wherein that horrible and devouring
plague so extreamly raged in the city of London. 27th of June 1665, I
retired into the country to my wife and family, where since I have
wholly continued, and so intend by permission of God. I had, before I
came away, very many people of the poorer sort frequented my lodging,
many whereof were so civil, as when they brought waters, viz. urines,
from infected people, they would stand purposely at a distance. I
ordered those infected, and not like to die, cordials, and caused them
to sweat, whereby many recovered. My landlord of the house was afraid of
those poor people, I nothing at all. He was desirous I should be gone.
He had four children: I took them with me into the country and provided
for them. Six weeks after I departed, he, his wife, and man-servant died
of the plague.

In _Monarchy or no Monarchy_, printed 1651, I had framed an
Hieroglyphick, which you may see in page the 7th, representing a great
sickness and mortality; wherein you may see the representation of people
in their winding-sheets, persons digging graves and sepultures, coffins,
&c. All this was performed by the more secret _Key of Astrology_, or
_Prophetical Astrology_.

In 1666, happened that miraculous conflagration in the city of London,
whereby in four days, the most part thereof was consumed by fire. In my
_Monarchy or no Monarchy_, the next side after the coffins and pickaxes,
there is a representation of a great city all in flames of fire. The
memorial whereof some Parliament men remembering, thought fit to send
for me before that Committee which then did sit, for examination of the
causes of the fire; and whether there was no treachery or design in the
business, his Majesty being then in war both with the French and Dutch.
The summons to appear before that Committee was as followeth.

    '_Monday, 22d October_, 1666.

    'At the Committee appointed to enquire after the causes of the
    late fires:

    'ORDERED,

    'That Mr. Lilly do attend this Committee on Friday next, being
    the 25th of October, 1666, at two of the clock in the afternoon,
    in the Speaker's chamber; to answer such questions as shall be
    then and there asked him.

    'ROBERT BROOKE.'

By accident I was then in London, when the summons came unto me. I was
timorous of Committees, being ever by some of them calumniated,
upbraided, scorned, and derided. However I must and did appear; and let
me never forget that great affection and care yourself (Oh most
excellent and learned Esquire Ashmole) shewed unto me at that time.
First, your affection in going along with me all that day; secondly,
your great pains and care, in speaking unto many worthy Members of that
Committee your acquaintance, that they should befriend me, and not
permit me to be affronted, or have any disgraceful language cast upon
me. I must seriously acknowledge the persuasions so prevailed with those
generous souls, that I conceive there was never more civility used unto
any than unto myself; and you know, there were no small number of
Parliament men appeared, when they heard I was to be there.

Sir Robert Brooke spoke to this purpose:

'Mr. Lilly, This Committee thought fit to summon you to appear before
them this day, to know, if you can say any thing as to the cause of the
late fire, or whether there might be any design therein. You are called
the rather hither, because in a book of your's, long since printed, you
hinted some such thing by one of your hieroglyphics.' Unto which I
replied,

'May it please your Honours,

'After the beheading of the late King, considering that in the three
subsequent years the Parliament acted nothing which concerned the
settlement of the nation in peace; and seeing the generality of people
dissatisfied, the citizens of London discontented, the soldiery prone to
mutiny, I was desirous, according to the best knowledge God had given
me, to make enquiry by the art I studied, what might from that time
happen unto the Parliament and nation in general. At last, having
satisfied myself as well as I could, and perfected my judgment therein,
I thought it most convenient to signify my intentions and conceptions
thereof, in Forms, Shapes, Types, Hieroglyphicks, &c. without any
commentary, that so my judgment might be concealed from the vulgar, and
made manifest only unto the wise. I herein imitating the examples of
many wise philosophers who had done the like.'

'Sir Robert,' saith one, 'Lilly is yet _sub vestibulo_.'

I proceeded further. Said I, 'Having found, Sir, that the city of London
should be sadly afflicted with a great plague, and not long after with
an exorbitant fire, I framed these two hieroglyphics as represented in
the book, which in effect have proved very true.'

'Did you foresee the year?' said one.

'I did not,' said I, 'or was desirous: of that I made no scrutiny.' I
proceeded--

'Now, Sir, whether there was any design of burning the city, or any
employed to that purpose, I must deal ingenuously with you, that since
the fire, I have taken much pains in the search thereof, but cannot or
could not give myself any the least satisfaction therein. I conclude,
that it was the only finger of God; but what instruments he used
thereunto, I am ignorant.'

The Committee seemed well pleased with what I spoke, and dismissed me
with great civility.

Since which time no memorable action hath happened unto me, my
retirement impeding all concourse unto me.

I have many things more to communicate, which I shall do, as they offer
themselves to memory.

In anno 1634, and 1635, I had much familiarity with John Hegenius,
Doctor of Physick, a Dutchman, an excellent scholar and an able
physician, not meanly versed in astrology. Unto him, for his great
civility, I communicated the art of framing Sigils, Lamens, &c. and the
use of the Mosaical Rods:--and we did create several Sigils to very good
purpose. I gave him, the true key thereof, _viz._ instructed him of
their forms, characters, words, and last of all, how to give them
vivification, and what number or numbers were appropriated to every
planet: _Cum multis aliis in libris veterum latentibus; aut perspicuè
non intellectis_.

I was well acquainted with the Speculator of John a Windor, a scrivener,
sometimes living in Newbury. This Windor was club-fisted, wrote with a
pen betwixt both his hands. I have seen many bonds and bills wrote by
him. He was much given to debauchery, so that at some times the Daemons
would not appear to the Speculator; he would then suffumigate:
sometimes, to vex the spirits, he would curse them, fumigate with
contraries. Upon his examination before Sir Henry Wallop, Kt. which I
have seen, he said, he once visited Dr. Dee in Mortlack; and out of a
book that lay in the window, he copied out that call which he used, when
he invocated--

It was that--which near the beginning of it hath these words,

  _Per virtutem illorum qui invocant nomen tuum_,
  Hermeli--_mitte nobis tres Angelos, &c_.

Windor had many good parts, but was a most lewd person: My master Wright
knew him well, and having dealing in those parts, made use of him as a
scrivener.

Oliver Withers, servant to Sir H. Wallop, brought up John a Windor's
examination unto London, purposely for me to peruse. This Withers was
Mr. Fiske's scholar three years more or less, to learn astrology of him;
but being never the wiser, Fiske brought him unto me: by shewing him but
how to judge one figure, his eyes were opened: He made the Epistle
before Dr. Neve's book, now in Mr. Sander's hands, was very learned in
the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew tongues.

Having mentioned Dr. John Dee, I hold it not impertinent to speak
something of him; but more especially of Edward Kelly's Speculator.

Dr. Dee himself was a Cambro Briton, educated in the university of
Oxford, there took his degree of Doctor; afterwards for many years in
search of the profounder studies, travelled into foreign parts: to be
serious, he was Queen Elizabeth's intelligencer, and had a salary for
his maintenance from the Secretaries of State. He was a ready witted
man, quick of apprehension, very learned, and of great judgment in the
Latin and Greek tongues. He was a very great investigator of the more
secret Hermetical learning, a perfect astronomer, a curious astrologer,
a serious geometrician; to speak truth, he was excellent in all kinds of
learning.

With all this, he was the most ambitious person living, and most
desirous of fame and renown, and was never so well pleased as when he
heard himself stiled Most Excellent.

He was studious in chymistry, and attained to good perfection therein;
but his servant, or rather companion, Kelly, out-went him, _viz._ about
the Elixir or Philosopher's Stone; which neither Kelly or Dee attained
by their own labour and industry. It was in this manner Kelly obtained
it, as I had it related from an ancient minister, who knew the certainty
thereof from an old English merchant, resident in Germany, at what time
both Kelly and Dee were there.

Dee and Kelly being in the confines of the Emperor's dominions, in a
city where resided many English merchants, with whom they had much
familiarity, there happened an old Friar to come to Dr. Dee's lodging.
Knocking at the door, Dee peeped down the stairs. 'Kelly,' says he,
'tell the old man I am not at home.' Kelly did so. The Friar said, 'I
will take another time to wait on him.' Some few days after, he came
again. Dee ordered Kelly, if it were the same person, to deny him again.
He did so; at which the Friar was very angry. 'Tell thy master I came to
speak with him and to do him good, because he is a great scholar and
famous; but now tell him, he put forth a book, and dedicated it to the
Emperor: it is called _Monas Hierogliphicas_. He understands it not. I
wrote it myself, I came to instruct him therein, and in some other more
profound things. Do thou, Kelly, come along with me, I will make thee
more famous than thy master Dee.'

Kelly was very apprehensive of what the Friar delivered, and thereupon
suddenly retired from Dee, and wholly applied unto the Friar; and of him
either had the Elixir ready made, or the perfect method of its
preparation and making. The poor Friar lived a very short time after:
whether he died a natural death, or was otherwise poisoned or made away
by Kelly, the merchant, who related this, did not certainly know.

How Kelly died afterwards at Prague, you well know: he was born at
Worcester, had been an apothecary. Not above thirty years since he had a
sister lived in Worcester, who had some gold made by her brother's
projection.

Dr. Dee died at Mortlack in Surrey, very poor, enforced many times to
sell some book or other to buy his dinner with, as Dr. Napier of
Linford, in Buckinghamshire, oft related, who knew him very well.

I have read over his book of _Conference with Spirits_, and thereby
perceive many weaknesses in the manage of that way of Mosaical learning:
but I conceive, the reason why he had not more plain resolutions, and
more to the purpose, was, because Kelly was very vicious, unto whom the
angels were not obedient, or willingly did declare the questions
propounded; but I could give other reasons, but those are not for paper.

I was very familiar with one Sarah Skelhorn, who had been Speculatrix
unto one Arthur Gauntlet about Gray's-Inn-Lane, a very lewd fellow,
professing physick. This Sarah had a perfect sight, and indeed the best
eyes for that purpose I ever yet did see. Gauntlet's books, after he was
dead, were sold, after I had perused them, to my scholar Humphreys:
there were rare notions in them. This Sarah lived a long time, even
until her death, with one Mrs. Stockman in the Isle of Purbeck, and died
about sixteen years since. Her mistress one time being desirous to
accompany her mother, the Lady Beconsfield, unto London, who lived
twelve miles from her habitation, caused Sarah to inspect her crystal,
to see if she, viz. her mother, was gone, yea or not: the angels
appeared, and shewed her mother opening a trunk, and taking out a red
waistcoat, whereby she perceived she was not gone. Next day she went to
her mother's, and there, as she entered the chamber, she was opening a
trunk, and had a red waistcoat in her hand. Sarah told me oft, the
angels would for some years follow her, and appear in every room of the
house, until she was weary of them.

This Sarah Skelhorn, her call unto the crystal began,

'_Oh ye good angels, only and only_,' &c.

Ellen Evans, daughter of my tutor Evans, her call unto the crystal was
this:

'_O Micol, O tu Micol, regina pigmeorum veni, &c_.'

Since I have related of the Queen of Fairies, I shall acquaint you, that
it is not for every one, or every person, that these angelical creatures
will appear unto, though they may say over the call, over and over, or
indeed is it given to very many persons to endure their glorious
aspects; even very many have failed just at that present when they are
ready to manifest themselves; even persons otherwise of undaunted
spirits and firm resolution, are herewith astonished, and tremble; as it
happened not many years since with us. A very sober discreet person, of
virtuous life and conversation, was beyond measure desirous to see
something in this nature. He went with a friend into my Hurst Wood: the
Queen of Fairies was invocated, a gentle murmuring wind came first;
after that, amongst the hedges, a smart whirlwind; by and by a strong
blast of wind blew upon the face of the friend,--and the Queen appearing
in a most illustrious glory, 'No more, I beseech you,' (quoth the
friend:) 'My heart fails; I am not able to endure longer.' Nor was he:
his black curling hair rose up, and I believe a bullrush would have beat
him to the ground: he was soundly laughed at, &c.

Sir Robert Holborn, Knight, brought once unto me Gladwell[18] of
Suffolk, who had formerly had sight and conference with Uriel and
Raphael, but lost them both by carelessness; so that neither of them
both would but rarely appear, and then presently be gone, resolving
nothing. He would have given me two hundred pounds to have assisted him
for their recovery, but I am no such man.--Those glorious creatures, if
well commanded, and well observed, do teach the master any thing he
desires; _Amant secreta, fugiunt aperta_. The Fairies love the southern
side of hills, mountains, groves.--Neatness and cleanliness in apparel,
a strict diet, and upright life, fervent prayers unto God, conduce much
to the assistance of those who are curious these ways.

    [Footnote 18: Mr. Gilbert Wakering gave him his berril when he
    died; it was of the largeness of a good big orange, set in
    silver, with a cross on the top, and another on the handle; and
    round about engraved the names of these angels, Raphael,
    Gabriel, Uriel.]

It hath been my happiness to meet with many rarities in my time
unexpectedly. I had a sister lived in the Minories, in that very house
where formerly had lived one Evans, not my tutor, but another far
exceeding him in astrology, and all other occult learning, questioned
for his life about 1612. I am sure it was when the present Earl of
Manchester's father was Lord Chief Justice of England. He was found
guilty by a peevish Jury: but petitioning King James by a Greek
petition, as indeed he was an excellent Grecian; 'By my saul,' said King
James, 'this man shall not die; I think he is a better Grecian than any
of my Bishops:' so his life was spared, &c. My sister's master when new
modelling the house, broke up a window, under which were Evans's secret
manuscripts,[19] and two moulds in brass; one of a man, the other of a
woman. I bought the moulds and book for five shillings; the secrets were
wrote in an imperfect Greek character; but after I found the vowels, all
the rest were presently clear enough.

    [Footnote 19: From these manuscripts he gained his first
    knowledge.]

You see, most worthy Sir, I write freely; it is out of the sincerity of
my affection, many things wrote by me having been more fit for a
sepulture than a book: But,

_Quo major est virorum præstantium, tui similium inopia; eo mihi charior
est, & esse debet & amicitia tua: quam quidem omnibus officiis, &
studiis, quæ a summa benevolentia possunt, perpetuò colam_: However, who
study the curiosities before-named, if they are not very well versed in
astrology, they shall rarely attain their desired ends. There was, in
the late times of troubles, one Mortlack, who pretended unto
Speculations, had a crystal, a call of Queen Mab, one of the Queen of
Fairies; he deluded many thereby: at last I was brought into his
company; he was desired to make invocation, he did so; nothing appeared,
or would: three or four times in my company he was put upon to do the
work, but could not; at last he said he could do nothing as long as I
was in presence. I at last shewed him his error, but left him as I found
him, a pretending ignoramus.

I may seem to some to write incredibilia; be it so, but knowing unto
whom, and for whose only sake, I do write them, I am much comforted
therewith, well knowing you are the most knowing man in these
curiosities of any now living in England; and therefore it is my hope,
these will be a present well-becoming you to accept.

_Præclara omnia quam difficilia sint, his præsertim temporibus.
(Celeberrimè Armiger,) non te fugit_; and therefore I will acquaint you
with one memorable story related unto me by Mr. John Marr, an excellent
mathematican and geometrician, whom I conceive you remember: he was
servant to King James and Charles the First.

At first, when the Lord Napier, or Marchiston, made publick his
Logarithms, Mr. Briggs, then reader of the astronomy lecture at
Gresham-College in London, was so surprized with admiration of them,
that he could have no quietness in himself, until he had seen that noble
person the Lord Marchiston, whose only invention they were: he acquaints
John Marr herewith, who went into Scotland before Mr. Briggs, purposely
to be there when these two so learned persons should meet. Mr. Briggs
appoints a certain day when to meet at Edinburgh: but failing thereof,
the Lord Napier was doubtful he would not come. It happened one day as
John Marr and the Lord Napier were speaking of Mr. Briggs; 'Ah, John,'
saith Marchiston, 'Mr. Briggs will not now come:' at the very instant
one knocks at the gate; John Marr hasted down, and it proved Mr. Briggs,
to his great contentment. He brings Mr. Briggs up into my Lord's
chamber, where almost one quarter of an hour was spent, each beholding
the other almost with admiration, before one word was spoke: at last Mr.
Briggs began.

'My Lord, I have undertaken this long journey purposely to see your
person, and to know by what engine of wit or ingenuity you came first to
think of this most excellent help unto astronomy, viz. the Logarithms;
but, my Lord, being by you found out, I wonder no body else found it out
before, when, now known, it is so easy.' He was nobly entertained by the
Lord Napier, and every summer after that, during the Lord's being alive,
this venerable man, Mr. Briggs, went purposely into Scotland to visit
him; _Tempora nunc mutantur_.

These two persons were worthy men in their time; and yet the one, viz.
Lord Marchiston, was a great lover of astrology, but Briggs the most
satirical man against it that hath been known: but the reason hereof I
conceive was, that Briggs was a severe Presbyterian, and wholly
conversant with persons of that judgment; whereas the Lord Marchiston
was a general scholar, and deeply read in all divine and human
histories: it is the same Marchiston who made that most serious and
learned exposition upon the _Revelation of St. John_; which is the best
that ever yet appeared in the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus far proceeded Mr. William Lilly in setting down the account of his
life, with some other things of note. Now shall be added something more
which afterwards happened during his retirement at his house at Hersham,
until his death.

He left London in the year 1665, (as he hath before noted) and betook
himself to the study of physick; in which, having arrived at a competent
degree of knowledge, assisted by diligent observation and practice, he
desired his old friend, Mr. Ashmole, to obtain of his Grace Dr. Sheldon,
then Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, a license for the practice of
physick; which upon application to his Grace, and producing a
testimonial (October 8, 1670,) under the hands of two physicians of the
college in London, on Mr. Lilly's behalf, he most readily granted, in
the manner following, viz.

'GILBERTUS providentia divina Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus totius Angliæ
Primas & Metropolitanus, dilecto nobis in Christo GULIELMO LILLY in
Medicinis Professori, salutem, gratiam, & benedictionem. Cum ex fide
digna relatione acceperimus Te in arte sive facultate Medicinæ per non
modicum tempus versatum fuisse, multisque de salute & sanitate corporis
verè desperatis (Deo Omnipotente adjuvante) subvenisse, eosque sanasse,
nec non in arte predicta multorum peritorum laudabili testimonio pro
experientia, fidelitate, diligentia & industria tuis circa curas quas
susceperis peragendas in hujusmodi Arte Medicinæ meritò commendatum
esse, ad practicandum igitur & exercendum dictam Artem Medicinæ in, &
per totam Provinciam nostram Cant' (Civitate Lond' & circuitu septem
milliarum eidem prox' adjacen' tantummodo exceptis) ex causis prædictis
& aliis nos in hac per te justè moventibus, præstito primitus per te
juramento de agnoscendo Regiam suprema potestatem in causis
ecclesiasticis & temporalibus ac de renunciando, refutando, & recusando
omni, & omnimodæ jurisdictioni potestati, authoritati & superioritati
foraneis juxta vim formam & effectum statui Parliamenti hujus inclyti
Regni Angliæ in ea parte editi & provisi quantum nobis per statuta hujus
Regni Angliæ liceat & non aliter neque alio modo te admittimus &
approbamus, tibique Licentiam & Facultatem nostras in hâc parte, tenore
præsentium quamdiu te benè & laudabiliter gesseris benignè concedimus &
elargimur. In cujus rei testimonium sigillum (quo in hâc parte utimur)
praesentibus apponi fecimus. Dat. undecimo die mensis Octobris, Anno
Domini 1670. Nostræque translationis Anno Octavo.

Sigillum

    Radulph. Snowe    }
    ET                }   Registrarii.
    Edm. Sherman      }

    S. Rich. Lloyd, Sur.

'Vicarii in Spiritualibus Generalis per Provinciam Cantuariensem.'


Hereupon he began to practise more openly, and with good success; and
every Saturday rode to Kingston, where the poorer sort flocked to him
from several parts, and received much benefit by his advice and
prescriptions, which he gave them freely, and without money. From those
that were more able, he now and then received a shilling, and sometimes
an half crown, if they offered it to him, otherwise he demanded nothing;
and, in truth, his charity towards poor people was very great, no less
than the care and pains he took in considering and weighing their
particular cases, and applying proper remedies to their infirmities,
which gained him extraordinary credit and estimation.

He was of a strong constitution, and continued generally in good health,
till the 16th of August 1674, when a violent humour discovered itself in
red spots all over his body, with little pushes in his head. This, in
the winter (18 December) following, was seconded by a distemper whereof
he fell sick, and was let blood in the left foot, a little above the
ancle.

The 20th of December following, a humour descended from his head to his
left side, from eight o'clock at night till the next morning; and then
staying a while in the calf of his leg, at length descended towards his
toes, the anguish whereof put him into a fever. This humour fixed in two
places on the top of his left foot (one in that where he was let blood
two days before) which (upon application of pledgets) growing ripe, they
were (28 Dec.) lanced by Mr. Agar of Kingston, his apothecary (and no
less a skilful Surgeon:) after which he began to be at ease, his fever
abated, and within five months the cure was perfected.

The 7th of November 1675, he was taken with a violent fit of vomiting
for some hours, to which a fever succeeded, that continued four months:
this brought his body exceeding low, together with a dimness in his
eyes, which after occasioned him to make use of Mr. Henry Coley, as his
amanuensis, to transcribe (from his dictates) his astrological judgments
for the year 1677; but the monthly observations for that year, were
written with his own hand some time before, though by this time he was
grown very dim-sighted. His judgments and observations for the
succeeding years, till his death, (so also for the year 1682,) were all
composed by his directions, Mr. Coley coming to Hersham the beginning of
every summer, and stayed there, till, by conference with him, he had
dispatched them for the press; to whom, at these opportunities, he
communicated his way of judgment, and other astrological arcanas.

In the beginning of the year 1681, he had a flux, which weakened him
much, yet after some time his strength encreased; but now his sight was
wholly taken from him, not having any glimmering as formerly.

He had dwelt many years at Hersham, where his charity and kindness to
his poor neighbours was always great and hearty; and the 30th of May
1681, towards the evening, a dead palsy began to seize his left side.
The second of June, towards evening, he took his bed, and then his
tongue began to falter. The next day he became very dull and heavy:
sometimes his senses began to fail him. Henceforward he took little or
nothing, for his larinx swelled, and that impeded his swallowing.

The fourth of June, Mr. Ashmole went to visit him, and found he knew
him, but spake little, and some of that scarce intelligible; for the
palsy began now to seize upon his tongue.

The eighth of June he lay in a great agony, insomuch that the sweat
followed drop after drop, which he bore with wonderful courage and
patience (as indeed he did all his sickness) without complaint; and
about three o'clock the next morning, he died, without any shew of
trouble or pangs. Immediately before his breath went from him, he
sneezed three times.

He had often, in his life-time, desired Mr. Ashmole to take care of his
funeral, and now his widow desired the same: whereupon Mr. Ashmole
obtained leave from Sir Mathew Andrews (who had the parsonage of Walton)
to bury him in the chancel of that church.

The 10th of June, his corse was brought thither, and received by the
minister (in his surplice) at the Litch Gates, who, passing before the
body into the church, read the first part of the _Office for the Burial
of the Dead_. In the reading desk he said all the evening service, and
after performed the rest of the office (as established by law) in the
chancel, at the interment, which was about eight o'clock in the evening,
on the left side of the communion table, Mr. Ashmole assisting at the
laying him in his grave; whereupon afterwards (9 July 1681) he placed a
fair black marble stone, (which cost him six pounds four shillings and
six-pence) with this inscription following:

    Ne Oblivione conteretur Urna

    GULIELMI LILLII

    ASTROLOGI PERITISSIMI,

    QUI FATIS CESSIT

    Quinto Idus Junii Anno Christi Juliano

    M DC LXXXI.

    Hoc Illi posuit amoris Monumentum

    ELIAS ASHMOLE,

    ARMIGER.

Shortly after his death, Mr. Ashmole bought his library of books of Mrs.
Ruth Lilly, (his widow and executrix) for fifty pounds: he oft times, in
his life-time, expressed, that if Mr. Ashmole would give that sum, he
should have them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following Epitaphs (Latin and English) were made by George
Smalridge, then a scholar at Westminster, after Student of Christ-Church
in Oxford.

  _In Mortem Viri Doctissimi Domini_ GULIELMI
  LILLY, _Astrologi, nuper defuncti_.

  Occidit atque suis annalibus addidit atram
    Astrologus, quâ non tristior ulla, diem
  Pone triumphales, lugubris Luna, quadrigas;
    Sol mæstum piceâ nube reconde caput.
  Illum, qui Phoebi scripsit, Phoebesq; labores
    Eclipsin docuit Stella maligna pati.
  Invidia Astrorum cecidit, qui Sidera rexit
    Tanta erat in notas scandere cura domos.
  Quod vidit, visum cupiit, potiturq; cupito
    C[oe]lo, & Sidereo fulget in orbe decus.
  Scilicet hoc nobis prædixit ab ane Cometa,
    Et fati emicuit nuncia Stella tui
  Fallentem vidi faciem gemuiq; videndo
    Illa fuit vati mortis imago suo,
  Civilis timuere alii primordia belli
    Jejunam metuit plebs stupefata faniem
  Non tantos tulerat bellumve famesve dolores:
    Auspiciis essent hæc relevanda tuis.
  In cautam subitus plebem nunc opprimat ensis,
    Securos fati mors violenta trahat.
  Nemo est qui videat moneatq; avertere fatum,
    Ars jacet in Domini funera mersa sui
  Solus naturæ reservare arcana solebat,
    Solus & ambigui solvere jura poti.
  Lustrâsti erantes benè finâ mente Planeta
    Conspectum latuit stellata nulla tuum
  Defessos oculos pensârunt lumina mentis
    Firesias oculis, mentibus Argus eras.
  Cernere, Firesia, poteras ventura, sed, Arge,
    In fatum haud poteras sat vigil esse tuum
  Sed vivit nomen semper cum sole vigebit,
    Immemor Astrologi non erit ulla dies
  Sæcla canent laudes, quas si percurrere cones,
    Arte opus est, Stellas quâ numerare soles
  Hæreat hoc carmen cinerum custodibus urnis,
    Hospes quod spargens marmora rore legat.
  "Hic situs est, dignus nunquam cecidisse Propheta;
    Fatorum interpres fata inopina subit.
  Versari æthereo dum vixit in orbe solebat:
    Nunc humilem jactat Terra superba virum.
  Sed Coelum metitur adhuc resupinus in urnæ
    Vertitur in solitos palpebra clausa polos.
  Huic busto invigilant solenni lampade Musaæ
    Perpetuo nubes imbre sepulchra rigant.
  Ille oculis movit distantia Sidera nostris,
    Illam amota oculis traxit ad astra Deus."

_An_ ELEGY _upon the Death of_ WILLIAM LILLY, _the Astrologer_.

  Our Prophet's gone; no longer may our ears
  Be charm'd with musick of th' harmonious spheres.
  Let sun and moon withdraw, leave gloomy night
  To shew their NUNCIO'S fate, who gave more light
  To th' erring world, than all the feeble rays
  Of sun or moon; taught us to know those days
  Bright TITAN makes; follow'd the hasty sun
  Through all his circuits; knew th' unconstant moon,
  And more unconstant ebbings of the flood;
  And what is most uncertain, th' factious brood,
  Flowing in civil broils: by the heavens could date
  The flux and reflux of our dubious state.
  He saw the eclipse of sun, and change of moon
  He saw, but seeing would not shun his own:
  Eclips'd he was, that he might shine more bright,
  And only chang'd to give a fuller light.
  He having view'd the sky, and glorious train
  Of gilded stars, scorn'd longer to remain
  In earthly prisons: could he a village love,
  Whom the twelve houses waited for above?
  The grateful stars a heavenly mansion gave
  T' his heavenly soul, nor could he live a slave
  To mortal passions, whose immortal mind,
  Whilst here on earth, was not to earth confin'd.
  He must be gone, the stars had so decreed;
  As he of them, so they of him, had need.
  This message 'twas the blazing comet brought;
  I saw the pale-fac'd star, and seeing thought
  (For we could guess, but only LILLY knew)
  It did some glorious hero's fall foreshew:
  A hero's fall'n, whose death, more than a war,
  Or fire, deserv'd a comet: th' obsequious star
  Could do no less than his sad fate unfold,
  Who had their risings, and their settings told.
  Some thought a plague, and some a famine near;
  Some wars from France, some fires at home did fear:
  Nor did they fear too much: scarce kinder fate,
  But plague of plagues befell th' unhappy state
  When LILLY died. Now swords may safely come
  From France or Rome, fanaticks plot at home.
  Now an unseen, and unexpected hand,
  By guidance of ill stars, may hurt our land;
  Unsafe, because secure, there's none to show
  How England may avert the fatal blow.
  He's dead, whose death the weeping clouds deplore,
  I wish we did not owe to him that show'r
  Which long expected was, and might have still
  Expected been, had not our nation's ill
  Drawn from the heavens a sympathetic tear:
  England hath cause a second drought to fear.
  We have no second LILLY, who may die,
  And by his death may make the heavens cry.
  Then let your annals, Coley, want this day,
  Think every year leap-year; or if't must stay,
  Cloath it in black; let a sad note stand by,
  And stigmatize it to posterity.

_Here follows the Copy of an Indictment filed against Mr. Lilly, for
which see page 167 of his Life_.

The jurors for the Lord Protector of the commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, &c. upon their oaths do present, that William
Lilly, late of the Parish of St. Clements Danes, in the County of
Middlesex, Gent. not having the fear of God before his eyes, but being
moved and seduced by the instigation of the devil, the 10th day of July,
in the Year of our Lord, 1654, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid, wickedly, unlawfully, and deceitfully, did take upon him, the
said William Lilly, by inchantment, charm, and sorcery, to tell and
declare to one Anne East, the wife of Alexander East, where ten
waistcoats, of the value of five pounds, of the goods and chattels of
the said Alexander East, then lately before lost and stolen from the
said Alexander East, should be found and become; and two shilling and
sixpence in monies numbred, of the monies of the said Alexander, from
the said Anne East, then and and there unlawfully and deceitfully, he,
the said William Lilly, did take, receive, and had, to tell and declare
to her the said Anne, where the said goods, so lost and stolen as
aforesaid, should be found and become: And also that he, the said
William Lilly, on the said tenth day of July, in the Year of our Lord,
1654, and divers other days and times, as well before as afterwards, at
the said Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, unlawfully and
deceitfully did take upon him, the said William Lilly, by inchantment,
charm, and sorcery, to tell and declare to divers other persons, to the
said jurors, yet unknown, where divers goods, chattels, and things of
the said persons yet unknown, there lately before lost and stolen from
the said persons yet unknown, should be found and become; and divers
sums of monies of the said persons yet unknown, then and there
unlawfully and deceitfully, he the said William Lilly did take, receive,
and had, to tell and declare to the said persons yet unknown, where
their goods, chattels, and things, so lost and stolen, as aforesaid,
should be found and become, in contempt of the laws of England, to the
great damage and deceit of the said Alexander and Anne, and of the said
other persons yet unknown, to the evil and pernicious example of all
others in the like case offending, against the form of the statute in
this case made and provided, and against the publick peace, &c.

    _Anne East,
    Emme Spencer,
    Jane Gold,
    Katherme Roberts,
    Susannah Hulinge_.




_Butler's Character of_ WILLIAM LILLY.

       *       *       *       *       *

  "A cunning man[20], hight SIDROPHEL.
  That deals in destiny's dark counsels,
  And sage opinions of the moon sells;
  To whom all people, far and near,
  On deep importances repair;
  When brass and pewter hap to stray,
  And linen slinks out of the way:

    [Footnote 20: _A cunning man, hight_ Sidrophel. 'William Lilly,
    the famous astrologer of those times, who in his yearly
    almanacks foretold victories for the parliament with as much
    certainty as the Preachers did in their sermons; and all or most
    part of what is ascribed to him by the Poet, the reader will
    find verified in his "Letter," (if we may believe it) wrote by
    himself to Elias Ashmole, Esq.' For further curious information
    respecting William Lilly, the reader may consult _Dr. Grey's
    Notes to Hudibras_, vol. ii. page 163, &c. Edition 1819, in 3
    vols, 8vo.]

  When geese and pullen are seduc'd,
  And sows of sucking pigs are chous'd:
  When cattle feel indisposition,
  And need th' opinion of physician;
  When murrain reigns in hogs or sheep,
  And chickens languish of the pip;
  When yeast and outward means do fail,
  And have no power to work on ale;
  When butter does refuse to come,
  And love proves cross and humoursome;
  To him with questions and with urine,
  They for discov'ry flock, or curing.

       *       *       *       *       *

  He had been long t'wards mathematics,
  Opticks, philosophy, and staticks,
  Magick, horoscopy, astrology,
  And was old dog at physiology:
  But, as a dog that turns the spit,
  Bestirs himself, and plies his feet
  To climb the wheel, but all in vain,
  His own weight brings him down again;
  And still he's in the self-same place,
  Where at his setting out he was:
  So, in the circle of the arts,
  Did he advance his nat'ral parts:
  Till falling back still, for retreat,
  He fell to juggle, cant, and cheat:
  For as those fowls that live in water
  Are never wet, he did but smatter:
  Whate'er he labour'd to appear,
  His understanding still was clear,
  Yet none a deeper knowledge boasted,
  Since old Hodge Bacon, and Bob Grosted,

       *       *       *       *       *

  Do not our great _Reformers_ use
  This SIDROPHEL to forebode news?
  To write of victories next year,
  And castles taken yet i'th' air?
  Of battles fought at sea, and ships
  Sunk, two years hence, the last eclipse?
  A total o'er throw giv'n the KING
  In Cornwall, horse and foot, next spring?
  And has not he point-blank foretold
  Whatso'er the _Close Committee_ would?
  Made Mars and Saturn for the _cause_,
  The Moon for _fundamental laws_;
  The Ram, the Bull, the Goat, declare
  Against the _Book of Common Prayer_;
  The Scorpion take the _Protestation_,
  And Bear engage for Reformation;
  Made all the _royal stars_ recant,
  Compound, and take the covenant."


THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *

MAURICE, PRINTER, FENCHURCH STREET.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of William Lilly's History of His Life
and Times, by William Lilly

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILLIAM LILLY'S HISTORY ***

***** This file should be named 15835-8.txt or 15835-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/8/3/15835/

Produced by Steven Gibbs, David King, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
