The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Houseful of Girls, by Sarah Tytler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Houseful of Girls

Author: Sarah Tytler

Release Date: December 10, 2006 [EBook #20081]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HOUSEFUL OF GIRLS ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Jacqueline Jeremy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









A HOUSEFUL OF GIRLS.
BY
SARAH TYTLER,

AUTHOR OF

"CITOYENNE JACQUELINE," "PAPERS FOR THOUGHTFUL GIRLS,"
ETC., ETC.


LONDON:
WALTER SMITH AND INNES,
31 & 32, BEDFORD STREET, STRAND.
1889.

[_All rights reserved._]


RICHARD CLAY & SONS, LIMITED,
LONDON & BUNGAY.




CONTENTS.

 CHAP.                                                       PAGE

    I. A FLUTTER IN THE DOVE-COT                                1

   II. THE "COUP DE GRÂCE"                                     20

  III. THE HEADS OF THE HOUSE LOOK GRAVE                       35

   IV. THE CRASH                                               54

    V. PROMOTION                                               72

   VI. THE CLOUD DEEPENS                                       81

  VII. ROSE GOES WEST AND ANNIE GOES EAST                     106

 VIII. STANDING AND WAITING                                   122

   IX. A WILFUL DOG WILL HAVE HIS WAY                         136

    X. LIFE IN AN HOSPITAL WARD                               157

   XI. MRS. JENNINGS AND HER DAUGHTER HESTER                  182

  XII. A YOUNG ARTIST'S EXPERIENCE                            188

 XIII. MR. ST. FOY'S AND THE MISSES STONE'S                   196

  XIV. THE OLD TOWN, WITH ITS AIR STAGNANT YET TROUBLED.
       IS MAY TO BECOME A SCHOLAR OR A SHOP-GIRL?             214

   XV. TOM ROBINSON TAKEN INTO COUNSEL                        234

  XVI. ROSE'S FOLLY AND ANNIE'S WISDOM                        257

 XVII. MAY HAS TO FIGHT HER OWN BATTLE                        288

XVIII. DORA IS THE NEXT MESSENGER WITH BAD TIDINGS            316

  XIX. THE UNEMPLOYED--A FAMILIAR FACE                        322

   XX. REDCROSS AGAIN                                         342

  XXI. MISS FRANKLIN'S MISTAKE                                363

 XXII. A SHRED OF HOPE                                        382

XXIII. SECOND THOUGHTS AND LAST WORDS                         392




A HOUSEFUL OF GIRLS

CHAPTER I.

A FLUTTER IN THE DOVE-COT.


Is there any sensation equal to that produced by the first lover and
the first proposal coming to a girl in a large family of girls? It is
delightfully sentimental, comical, complimentary, affronting, rousing,
tiresome--all in one. It is a herald of lovers, proposals, and wonderful
changes all round. It is the first thrill of real life in its strong
passions, grave vicissitudes, and big joys and sorrows as they come
in contact with idle fancies, hearts that have been light, simple
experiences which have hitherto been carefully guarded from rude shocks.

It does not signify much whether the family of girls happen to be rich
or poor, unless indeed that early and sharp poverty causes a precocity
which deepens girls' characters betimes, and by making them sooner
women, robs them of a certain amount of the thoughtlessness,
fearlessness, and impracticability of girlhood. But girlhood, like many
another natural condition, dies hard; and its sweet, bright illusions,
its wisdom and its folly, survive tolerably severe pinches of adversity.

The younger members of such a sisterhood are politely supposed to be
kept in safe ignorance of the great event which is befalling one of the
seniors. It is thought at once a delicate and prudent precaution to
prevent the veil which hides the future, with its casualties, from being
lifted prematurely and abruptly, where juvenile minds are concerned,
lest they become unhinged and unfit for the salutary discipline of
schoolroom lessons, and the mild pleasure of schoolroom treats. The
flower in the bud ought to be kept with its petals folded, in its
innocent absence of self-consciousness, to the last moment.

But there is an electric sympathy in the air which defeats precautions.
There is a freemasonry of dawning womanhood which starts into life
everywhere. How do the young people pick up with such surprising
quickness and acuteness the looks and whispers meant to pass over their
heads, the merry glances, nervous shrugs, quick blushes, and indignant
pouts, which have suddenly grown strangely prevalent in the blooming
circle? The bystanders are understood to be engrossed with their
music-lessons, their drawing-classes, their rudimentary Latin and
Greek--if anybody is going in for the higher education of women--their
pets, their games of lawn-tennis, their girl companions with whom these
other girls are for ever making appointments to walk, to practise
part-singing, to work or read together, to get up drawing-room
_tableaux_ or plays.

The general consciousness is not, in certain lights, favourable to a
lover's pretensions. For human nature is perverse, and there is such a
thing as _esprit-de-corps_ running to excess. There may be a due amount
of girlish pride in knowing that one of the sisters has inspired a
grand passion. There may be a tremulous respect for the fact that she
has passed the Rubicon, that, in place of girlish trifling, she has an
affair which has to do with the happiness or misery of a fellow
creature, not to say with her own happiness or misery, on her burdened
mind. Why, if she does not take care, she may be plunged at once, first
into the whirl of choosing her trousseau and the fascinating trial of
being the principal figure at a wedding, and then involved in the
tremendous responsibilities of housekeeping, butchers' bills, grocers'
bills, cooks' delinquencies, with the heavy obligations--not only of
ordering dinners for two, but of occasionally entertaining a room full
of company, single-handed!

And this is only one side of the shield; there is a reverse side, at
least equally prominent and alarming. The second side upholds maidenly
claims, finds nothing good enough to match with them, and is tempted to
scout and flout, laugh and mock at the rival claims of the lover upon
trial. This is true even in the most innocent of dove-cots, where satire
is still as playful and harmless as summer lightning.

"The idea of Tom Robinson's thinking of one of us!" cried Annie Millar.
"What could possess him to imagine that we should ever get over the
shop--granted that it is a Brobdingnagian shop, an imposing mart of
linen-drapery, haberdashery, silk-mercery enough to serve the whole
county?"

"To be sure it is only Dora, not you, Annie," burst in eighteen years'
old Rose, who had just left school, and was fain to drop the pretence of
being too young to notice the most interesting event in the world to a
family of girls.

"Why do you say that, Rose? Dora may not be so pretty as Annie--I don't
know, and I don't care--it is all a matter of taste; but she is as much
one of us, father's daughter, brought up like the rest of us in the Old
Doctor's House."

The speaker was May, between sixteen and seventeen. She was the tallest
of the four sisters--let them call her "Little May" as long as they
liked. She had so far forgotten herself as to follow Rose's lead.

"Hold your tongues, you two monkeys; what should you know about it?"
Annie, who had a tendency to sit upon her younger sisters, tried to
silence them. She had reached the advanced age of twenty-two, and by
virtue of being the eldest, had been considered grown up for the last
four years, when Rose and May were chits of fourteen and a little over
twelve. Of course this gave Annie a vast advantage in womanly dignity
and knowledge of the world. But at the present moment she was herself so
interested in the discussion that she could not make up her mind to drop
it till Rose and May were out of the way.

"I must say"--Annie started the subject again--"that I think it great
presumption in Tom Robinson, though he is not so ugly as that comes to,
and he's really well enough bred in spite of 'Robinson's.'"

"He is a college-bred man." Dora ventured shyly to put in a word for the
dignity of her suitor, and for her own dignity as so far involved in
his. "And so were his father and grandfather before him, father says."

"But the Robinsons had the silk-mill and the woollen-factory then as
well as the big shop," corrected Annie. "And Tom might have gone into
the Church or into some other profession if he had chosen, when things
might have been a little different. Still, if you are pleased, Dora,"
with a peal of derisive laughter, "if you do not object to the--shop."

"Of course I object," cried Dora, tingling with mortification and shame.
"That is, I should object to his having a shop, if I had ever thought of
him for a single moment in that light. I cannot imagine what put me into
his head--in that sense. Indeed I cannot believe it yet. I am sure it is
just some nonsense on the part of the rest of you to tease me."

"No, no," Annie hastened to contradict her. "It is sober reality. He has
said something to father; you know he has, mother owned it."

"He has been meeting us and throwing himself in our way everywhere,"
broke in the irrepressible Rose and May.

"He has been coming and coming here," resumed Annie, "where, as we
don't happen to have a brother, there is not even another young man to
form an excuse for his coming. We cannot so much as pretend, when
people remark on his visits, that he has come ever since we remember,
and is as familiar with us as we are with ourselves. No doubt, in a
little town like this, everybody who has the least claim to be a
gentleman or a lady, knows every other gentleman or lady--after a
fashion. But naturally father and mother were not intimate with the
late Mr. and Mrs. Robinson; and we--that is, Tom and we girls--are not
so near each other in age as to have been brought together by our
respective nurses. We did not pick daisies in company, or else pull
each other's hair, and slap each other's faces, according to our
varying moods. Tom Robinson is four or five years older than I, not to
speak of Dora."

"He stopped us this very morning," Rose again joined in the chorus,
"when May and I were going with the Hewetts to gather primroses in
Parson's Meadow. He asked if our sisters--that was you, Dora, with Annie
thrown into the bargain--thought of going on the river this afternoon."

"He might be an inch or two taller, I don't suppose he is above five
feet six or seven," suggested Annie, maliciously recalling a detail in
the description of Dora's future husband, that be he who or what he
might, he should certainly not be under six feet in height. Dora, who
was herself considerably below the middle size, would never yield her
freedom to a man who had to admit a lower scale of inches.

"And his hair might be a little less--chestnut, shall we say, Dora?"
put in Rose with exasperating sprightliness, referring to a former
well-known prejudice of Dora's against "_Judas-tinted hair_."

"Would you call his nose Roman or Grecian?" asked May naïvely, of a
very nondescript feature.

"And he has so little to say for himself," recommenced Annie, "though
when he does speak there is no great fault to be found with what he
says; still it would be dreadfully dull and tiresome to have to do all
the speaking for a silent partner."

"Oh, hold your tongues, you wretched girls," cried Dora, standing at
bay, stamping one small foot in a slipper with a preposterously large
rosette. "What does it signify? The man, like his words, is well
enough--better than any of us, I dare say," speaking indignantly; "but
what does it matter, when I could never look at him, never dream of him,
as anything more than a mere acquaintance? I don't wish for a lover or a
husband--at least not yet," with a gasp; "I don't wish to leave home,
and go away from all of you, though you are so unkind and teasing--not
for a long, long time, till I am quite a middle-aged woman. I don't see
why I should be plagued about it when Annie here, who is two years older
than I am, and ever so much prettier, as everybody knows, has escaped
such persecution."

"My dear," said Annie demurely, "it is because you have the opportunity
of presenting me with a pair of green garters. If it should occur again,
and you choose to avail yourself of it, I mean to accept the garters
with the best grace in the world. Isn't that good of me when you have
been coolly telling me that I have been overlooked as the eldest, and
the belle of the family--flattering my conceit with one breath and
taking it down with another? But it is not a case of Leah and Rachel.
We are not in the East, and in the West the elder sister does not
necessarily take precedence in marriage. You are quite welcome to marry
first, Dora; you are all welcome to marry before me, girls," with a
sweeping curtsey to her audience all round. "I am perfectly resigned to
your leaving your poor worthy elder sister to end her days as a solitary
spinster, a meek and useful maiden-aunt."

The Millars were the daughters of Dr. Millar of Redcross, an
old-fashioned country town in the Midlands. They were happy in having a
good father and mother still spared to them. The girls were what is
called "a fine family," in a stronger sense than that in which Jane
Austen has used the term. Their ages ranged from twenty-two to midway
between sixteen and seventeen. They were all good-looking girls, with a
family likeness. Annie, the eldest, was very pretty, with delicate,
regular features, a soft warm brunette colour, dark eyes, and a small
brown head and graceful throat, like the head and throat of a greyhound.

Dora, the first wooed, was, at a hasty glance, a mere shadow of Annie.
She was pale, though it was a healthy paleness. Her hair was lighter in
tint, her eyes, too, were considerably lighter--granted that they were
clear as crystal. It was difficult to think of Dora as preferred before
Annie, if one did not take into account that there are people who will
turn away from June roses to gather a cluster of honeysuckle, or pick
a sweet pea--people to whom there is an ineffable charm in simple
maidenliness and sweetness. Dora's modest unhesitating acceptance of the
second part in the family and social circle, and her perfect content to
play it, would be a crowning attraction in such people's eyes. So would
her gentle girlish diffidence, which moved her rather to meet and
reflect the tastes and opinions of others than to exercise her own,
though she was by no means without individual capacity and character.

Rose was the least handsome of the family at this stage of her
existence. The family features in her had taken a slightly bizarre
cast, and she had a bad habit of wrinkling her smooth low forehead and
crumpling up her sharpish nose, in a manner which accentuated the
peculiarity. But Annie, who was an authority on the subject of looks,
maintained, behind Rose's back, that there was something _piquante_ and
_recherchée_ about Rose's face and figure. Not one of the Millars was
tall--not even May, though she came nearest to it; but Rose's slight
pliant figure had a natural grace and elegance which its quick,
careless movements did not dispel. When she held herself up, uncreased
her forehead and nose, showed to advantage her very fine, true chestnut
hair, and was full of animation--as to do Rose justice she generally
was--giving fair play to her dimples and little white teeth, Annie said
Rose had a style of her own which did no discredit to the family
reputation for more than a fair share of beauty. In addition to Annie's
high spirit and ready tongue, Rose had a decided turn for art, which
her father had taken pride in cultivating.

"Little May" was like Annie, and promised to be as pretty; but she was a
rose in the bud still, with the unfilled out outlines and crude
angularities of a girl not done growing. She was very much of a child in
many things, and she had Dora's soft clinging nature, yet under it all
she was the born scholar of the family, with a simple aptitude and taste
for learning which surprised and delighted her father still more than
Rose's achievements in pastilles and water-colours pleased him. It was
seeing May at her books, when she was a very different May from the girl
who ran about with Rose, and was kept in her proper place by Annie,
which revived in Doctor Millar the old regret that Providence had not
blessed him with a son. He could not exactly make a son of May, since
from her early childhood she was a little sensitive woman all over, but
he did what he could. He had her taught Latin, Greek, and mathematics
just to afford her the chance of being a scholar. He never told himself,
and nobody else did, in the meantime, what she was to do with her
scholarship when she was a little older. Whether it was merely to grace
her womanhood, or whether the youngest of the family, her father and
mother's last pet, was to summon up courage, tear herself away from
familiar and dear surroundings, and carry her gifts and acquirements out
into the world, in order to win for them the best distinction of
usefulness.

Dora's lightly held suitor was the head of "Robinson's." "Robinson's"
was a great and time-honoured institution in Redcross, while it and its
masters were somewhat of anomalies. The first Robinson whom the town
troubled to remember was as good as anybody in it, the proprietor of a
silk-mill, and latterly of a wool-factory in the neighbourhood. As a
mere convenient adjunct to the mill and the factory he had started a
shop in the town, and kept it going by means of a manager. Even in that
light it was a handsome old shop. The walls were lined with polished
oak, so was the low ceiling, and there was an oak staircase leading
from one storey to another which a connoisseur in staircases might have
coveted. "Robinson's" was a positive feature in Redcross, and if it had
been anything else than a good shop of its kind would have been greatly
admired. The son of the founder of the shop was also reckoned, to begin
with, as good as his professional neighbours. He was college-bred, like
his father, as Dora in her jealousy for the dignity of her first lover
had stated. This was "all to begin with." Whether because it was
advisable, or from mere grovelling instincts, he dropped in turn both
the mill and the factory, neither of which did more than pay its way,
and retained the shop, which was understood to be a lucrative concern.
He did worse; though Redcross continued to acknowledge him--somewhat
dubiously to be sure--as a gentleman, because of the fine presence which
Tom had not inherited, and the perfect good breeding which had descended
to the son. In spite of the magnanimity which forgave frostily the
second Robinson for so far forgetting himself as to take the management
of his great shop into his own hands, walk up and down and receive
customers, and be seen working at his books in the glass office if he
did not go behind the counter, he went and married for his second wife a
farmer's daughter. She was an honest, sensible, comely young woman, but
she had no pretensions to be a lady, and no more inclination to enter
the society of the Redcross upper class than the upper class had a mind
to receive her as an equal. Charles Robinson's first wife had been all
very well, though she was penniless. She had been a curate's daughter,
educated to fill the post of governess in high families. She had died
young, without children, and he had filled her place with the farmer's
daughter, who was the mother of Tom. Thenceforth the Robinson's house,
a good, old-fashioned house, though not so handsome as the shop in an
adjacent street, was effaced, nominally, from the visiting-lists of
those who had visiting-lists in Redcross. The family were ostracised,
and left to their own devices, receiving their sentence, in the case of
the farmer's daughter and her husband, with apparent equanimity.

But there was an exception made in favour of Tom. He went to the Grammar
School along with the other better-class boys in the town and
neighbourhood, and was accepted as their companion and playfellow. He
was sent to college according to the traditions of his family, just as
Cyril Carey, of Carey's Bank, and Ned Hewett, of the Rectory, were sent
according to the traditions of theirs. Presumably the three young men
were on one footing at Cambridge, unless, indeed, Tom had the advantage.
He was slightly the elder of the three, and he took his degree with a
fair amount of honour; while, sad to say, for the credit of Redcross,
neither Cyril nor Ned made their last pass. It was confidently believed
that Tom Robinson would cut the shop, so far as any active management of
it was concerned, and enter either a gallant or a learned profession. If
he had ever entertained the intention, it was put a stop to in the first
place by the death of his father, followed within three months by that
of his mother, shortly after Tom had completed his course at the
university. He stayed at home for a time, to put his house in order it
was supposed. Then all at once, in the most cold-blooded fashion, he
told those who asked him that "Robinson's" was a good business, which he
did not see himself justified in throwing up in these hard times. He was
not such a conceited ass as to believe he must necessarily succeed in
the crowded ranks of the professions, for none of which had he any
particular bent, while he had, he added, with a certain manliness and
doggedness for a pacific fellow like Robinson, a considerable interest
in the great old shop. It had been in the family for three generations;
he had known it from childhood; many of his father's old trusted
servants still served in it. In short, he meant to keep it in his own
hands, and not to let it go to sticks and staves, possibly, in the hands
of others. He did not, for his part, see any mark of gentle breeding
and fine feeling in devolving his responsibilities on others, and only
reserving that tie to the shop which had to do with pecuniary profits.
As for his university training and academic degree, if they did not
benefit him in all circumstances they were not much worth. The town of
Redcross was caught in a trap. The gentle-folks of the place had already
received him as a man and a brother, and they could not refuse to know
him any longer because he stuck to the paternal shop, though they might
exercise their discretion in looking coldly on him in future. For that
matter, there was another opinion among the older professional men--the
Rector, whose tithes were only quarter paid; Dr. Millar, whose paying
patients were no longer able to call him in on all occasions; Carey, the
banker, whose private bank, it was whispered darkly, was struggling in
deep waters; Colonel Russell, who had come home from India on half-pay
and his savings, which every year he found more inadequate for the
expenses of an increasing family. All these gray-headed men, growing
haggard and careworn, agreed that in the present depressed state of the
commercial world, young Robinson was showing himself a sensible fellow
and ought to be commended for his decision. They declared that they were
the more inclined to take him up because of it. It was their wives,
where they had wives, and especially their daughters, with the young men
who had not known the brunt of the battle, and felt inclined to clutch
their professional dignities and privileges, that were of a different
mind. Girls like the Millars turned up their saucy little noses at the
shop. They thought it was mean-spirited and vulgar-minded, "low" of Tom
Robinson to sit down with such a calling. They held it audacious of him
to lift his eyes to Dora, and to follow his eyes with his voice, silent
fellow though he was generally, in asking her from her father.

Certainly it did not help to redeem Tom Robinson's drawbacks in the
judgment of a rash young world that he lacked his late father's fine
presence. Though gentleman-like enough, he was insignificant in person,
and he had little to say for himself. Probably it would have struck his
critics as little short of profane to make the comparison, otherwise
there is a great example that might have stood him and all men not
giants and glib of tongue in good stead. It is written of an apostle,
and he not the least of the apostles, that he might have been termed in
bodily presence mean, and in speech contemptible. But boys and girls are
not wont to take up such examples and ponder their meaning in foolish
young hearts.

The Millars, as one of the girls had said, were brought up in the Old
Doctor's House at Redcross. It would seem that professions and trades
were hereditary in the old-fashioned, stationary town. Dr. Millar's
father had not only been a doctor before him, he had been _the_ doctor
in Redcross, with a practice extending from an aristocratic county to a
parish-poor class of patients. His pretty sister Penny, whom Annie was
not unlike, had married into the county, General Beauchamp of Wayland's
younger son. The marriage, with all its consequences, was a thing of the
long past, leaving little trace in the present. For young Beauchamp,
though he was a squire's son, had not been able to get on at the bar,
and had emigrated with his wife while emigration was still comparatively
untried in Australia, where it was to be hoped his county extraction had
served him in the Bush at least as well as Tom Robinson's university
education would avail him in the shop. It had all happened an age before
the young Millars could remember, still the tradition of a marriage of a
member of a former generation of the Millars into the squirearchy had
its effect on her collateral descendants. It did not signify that the
reigning Beauchamps of Waylands had almost ceased to remember the
ancient alliance in their dealings with their doctor. That dim and
distant distinction established the superior position of the Millars in
their native town, to the girls' entire satisfaction. Dora to marry
Robinson, of "Robinson's," a farthing candle of a man, when her
Grand-aunt Penny had married a Beauchamp of Waylands, by all accounts
the handsomest, most dashing member of the Hunt in his day, was a
descent not to be thought of for a moment.




CHAPTER II.

THE "COUP DE GRÂCE."


The crisis had come. Dr. Millar had granted a final formal interview,
not without some agitation on the father's part, to the still more
agitated suitor; and after assuring him of the paternal good-will, had
turned him over to the daughter--the whole being done with a sorrowful
prescience, shared by the unfortunate young man, of what the answer
would be.

Poor Dora was hardly less to be pitied, for she had to be brought up to
the supreme effort of dealing the _coup de grâce_. Nobody could do it
for her, even her mother told her that severely, in order to brace the
girlish nerves, when Dora gave way to the first cowardly instinct of
seeking to shirk the ordeal. If a girl was old enough to receive an
offer of marriage, she was old enough to answer it for herself in
person. It was the least return she could make for the high compliment
which had been paid to her, to see the man and tell him with her own
lips that she would have nothing to say to the honest heart and liberal
hand, for he had hinted at generous settlements, which he had been only
too eager to lay at her feet.

It was little use even for mild Dora to protest that she had not
wished for such a compliment, and had done nothing to provoke it, so
that the reckless compliment-payer was but receiving his deserts in an
unconditional refusal. It did not make the step easier for her. It was
no joke to her, whatever it might be to her hard-hearted young sisters.

To tell the truth, Rose and May, aye, even Annie, took much lively
diversion, as Dora guessed, in secretly watching the entire proceeding.
The sisters found out the hour of the compulsory interview. They
covertly looked out for the arrival of the commonplace wooer--anything
save their idea of a lover and hero. They keenly took note of him from
an upper window as he walked with a certain studied composure, yet with
a blankness of aspect, through the shrubbery. They even deigned--Annie
as well as Rose and May--surreptitiously to inspect the poor wretch
between the bannisters of the staircase, as he ran desperately up the
stairs, thrusting one hand through his foxy hair and carrying his hat
in the other, and vanished into the drawing-room.

After this brutal behaviour on the part of a trio of English girls, one
must show a little moderation in condemning the cruel conduct of the
Roman dames, who contemplated with zest the deadly contests of the
gladiators in the arena; at least the gladiators were strangers and
barbarians, not fellow-townsmen and near relations.

As for the present victim, he was happily unconscious of any spectator
beyond Bella the house-maid, but he felt relieved to be delivered from
her compassionate stare. He had an instinctive sense that she knew as
well as he did what he had come there for, and was pitying him--an
inference in which he was quite correct. For Bella was older than the
unseen "chorus" on the landing, who did not think of pitying him. She
had seen more of the world, and was better acquainted with its cares
and troubles. She called him in her own mind "the poor young gent!" It
occurred to her as it did not occur to the others, that he might take
to bad ways and be a lost man, like Jem Wade the carpenter, after her
pretty, flighty sister Lotty had given him the sack. Nothing less than
that might be the end of this day's work.

But such a way of looking on a lover and his woes was far from the
thoughts of Bella's young mistresses. On the contrary, they had
difficulty in restraining merry little titters, though Annie did take
herself to task and murmur "For shame!" when Rose made a solemn, stupid
face like what she considered Tom Robinson's on this occasion.

To do the girls justice, however, they did not laugh when Dora, who had
been with her mother, came slowly across the lobby and followed the
visitor into the drawing-room in order to administer the _coup de
grâce_. It might have been a veritable dagger-thrust to be dealt by a
weak little shrinking hand, with the owner's head turned and face
averted--such a white, grieved, frightened girl's face it was.

Her companions' eyes were opened, for the instant a fellow-feeling smote
them. This was no light jest or piece of child's play; it might be their
turn next. Oh! who would not be sorry for Dora to have to inflict real
pain and bitter disappointment, to be condemned to kill a man's faith
in woman, perhaps, certainly to murder his peace and happiness for the
present, to extinguish the sweetest, brightest dream of his early
manhood, for he would never have another quite so tender and radiant?
Would Dora ever be quite the same again after she had done so hard a
thing?

Annie pulled herself up and accused herself of getting absolutely
maudlin. The idea of Tom Robinson of "Robinson's," with his middle size,
matter-of-fact air, and foxy hair and moustache, entertaining such a
dream and relinquishing it with a pang of mortal anguish that would
leave a long sickening heart-ache behind! It was the infection of all
the silly love stories she had ever read which had received a kind of
spurious galvanic life from the very ordinary circumstance, the feather
in her cap, as so many girls would have regarded it, of Dora, having to
receive and refuse an offer of marriage. Why, she--Annie--and her
sisters, including Dora herself, had been much diverted by it, as well
as interested in it, until the dramatic crisis had somehow taken their
breath away also, and startled them by a glimpse of the other side of
the question. But though Annie strove to recover her equanimity, and
Rose tried to hum a tune softly as the girls still loitered behind the
bannisters, to see the end of the play, they said nothing more to each
other; a sort of shyness and shame had stolen over them. It was not
enough to make them run away, especially as each did not realize that
what she felt was common to all. Only their lips were chained
simultaneously, and they were disposed to turn aside their heads and
avert their eyes, like Dora when she killed her man.

The deed did not take long--not more than was necessary for him to plead
once or twice with small variation on the words, "Will you not think of
it, Dora? Can you not give it a little consideration? Perhaps if I were
to wait, and you were to try----"

And for Dora to answer with drooping head, panting breast, and still
less variety in her phrases, "Oh, no, no, Mr. Tom. Of course, I am very
much obliged to you for thinking a great deal more of me than I deserve.
But, indeed, indeed, it cannot be--you must give it up--this foolish
fancy. It is a great pity that you have wasted time on such an absurd
idea."

"Wasted time!" he repeated, with a little irony and a little pathos.
"Well, I don't think it wasted even at this moment--and--and the idea
does not seem so absurd to me; but I will not distress you by forcing my
wishes upon you when you are so averse to them. You will allow me to
continue your friend, Miss Dora?"

"Yes, oh yes," sighed Dora, who would have said anything, short of
agreeing to marry him, to get him to go away, "if you like, after what
has happened. I know I don't deserve your friendship; but, indeed, I
could not help it, Mr. Robinson. I never guessed till lately that you
thought of anything else, and then I would have stopped you, but I
could not."

"Don't blame yourself," he said with a faint smile, "I am not blaming
you. I shall count it a favour, an honour, if you will let me do
anything for you that I can."

"Thank you very much," she murmured humbly.

"Then you will accept a little mark of my friendly feelings?" He took a
small case from his waistcoat pocket, opened it, and drew from it a
valuable ring, holding it out to her.

They were the most beautiful rubies and sapphires she had ever seen. But
she would not touch it; she even put her hands behind her back in her
confusion and dismay. "I could not; I ought not. It is far too costly a
thing, I can see that at a glance. You must keep it; you will find some
far fitter girl to give it to."

He shook his head, hesitated, and then took an old-fashioned little
vinaigrette case, shaped like a tiny gold box, from the watch-chain at
which he wore it. "Will you accept this from me, then? It was my
mother's, and I should like you to have it."

"It's so good of you," the girl faltered. "I don't like to deprive you
of what was your mother's, but if you care that I should have it----"

"I do care," he said.

That last little episode was entirely between themselves. When she
quitted the room, not crying, but paler than before, she had the
vinaigrette case clasped tightly in her hand, while nobody except
Tom Robinson knew of the gift.

He let her go, and then he left the house. When he did so there was that
in his face which caused Rose Millar to cry under her breath, "Come
away. It is not fair to spy upon him. I'll never want to see anybody
refused again." As for "little May," she burst into tears, though the
principals had shed no tears.

"Hold your tongue, you little goose," remonstrated the disturbed Annie.
"He may hear you. School-girls like you and Rose should not meddle in
grown-up people's affairs."

"I thought I had left school after the Christmas holidays," said Rose,
interrogating the world in an abstract fashion. She was herself again on
the instant, carrying her funny little crumpled nose well in the air.

"It is dreadful," said May, with a half-suppressed sob, "and he was
so good-natured. He promised only last week to get Rose and me a
fox-terrier puppy."

"Oh, you selfish little creature! It is over the failure of the
prospective puppy and not over the sorrows of the rejected man you are
lamenting. Never mind, Maisie, I doubt if mother would have allowed us
to keep the puppy. As for Mr. Tom Robinson, he is cut up just now, of
course; but he will soon get over it. How long does it take a man to
forget, Annie? Anyhow, presently he will be busily directing his
attentions in another quarter, until the day may come, after he is
successful and triumphant, well pleased with himself and his choice,
when he will heartily thank Dora there for having administered to him
the cold bath of a rejection, so nipping his first raw aspirations in
the bud."

"No, no," insisted May; "you are so cynical, Rose, like everybody else
now-a-days, and I hate it. He can never be glad to have lost Dora."

"Don't you agree with me, Annie?" Rose maintained her point.

"Really, you seem to be so well informed on the subject yourself--though
I cannot think where you have got your experience, any more than your
slang, unless at second-hand"--said Annie sarcastically, "that my
opinion is of no importance."

"Now, don't be nasty and elder-sisterish," was Rose's quick rejoinder.

Though Dora shed no tears of contrition in public, Annie, who shared her
sister's room, heard her in the night crying softly.

"What ails you, Dora dear?" Annie sat up and asked sleepily. "What is
the matter? It can't be, no," rousing herself, "it can _not_ be--you
don't mean that you repent what you've done, and would swallow the shop,
foxy hair, and everything?"

"Oh, no," denied Dora, "but I didn't think a man would care like that;
such a queer, gray shade came over his face, though I durst hardly look
at him; and his hands which were--well, were holding mine for a second,
you know----"

"No, I don't know," interrupted Annie, smiling to herself; "but go on,
what about the hands?"

"They were as cold as ice."

"Very likely, it is only the month of April."

"And it is not above a year since he lost both his father and
mother--all the near relations he had."

"Poor man!" admitted Annie. "But you could not help that, and many men,
young men especially, seem to get on quite well without near relations."

There was a strain of hardness about pretty Annie, whether bred of that
cynicism in the air of which May had complained, whether it was an
integral part of Annie, or whether, as in the case of some valuable
kinds of timber, it was merely an indication of the closer grain, the
slower ripening, and the greater power of endurance of the moral fibre.

"Men are not like women." Annie was continuing her lecture. "I dare say
Tom Robinson will do very well--all the better, perhaps, because he has
no ambition, and is content to make money in the most humdrum way as a
tradesman."

Dora sat up in turn, like a white ghost in her place in her little bed,
seen by the dim light. She had the instinct which causes women to look
back upon the men who have made love or proposed to them, even though
the women have rejected the men--as in a sense their property, if not
their prey, so as not by any means to relish the men's depreciation at
the hands of other women. Then it becomes a point of honour alike with
the proudest and the meekest of her sex to stand up in his absence in
defence of the discarded swain.

"I don't know about ambition," began Dora hesitatingly, "but father says
Tom Robinson is not at all stupid; he took his degree with credit at
Cambridge, and was not plucked like poor Ned Hewett, or that fop, Cyril
Carey. Father says when he worked with Mr. Robinson in getting up the
bill to lay before Parliament for closing the old churchyard, he could
not have desired a more intelligent, diligent fellow-worker. All the
salesmen and women at 'Robinson's' have been well looked after, and are
superior to the other shop-people in the town, don't you know? There is
Miss Franklin at the head of both the millinery and mantua-making
departments; I am sure she looks and speaks, as well as dresses,
like a lady?"

"Yes, and everybody is civil to her, but nobody thinks of making
her acquaintance out of the shop, and she is wise enough to keep
to her proper sphere. They say she is a distant relation of Tom
Robinson's--you see he is not altogether destitute of kindred.
Why does the man not marry her? That would be a suitable match."

"Annie!" protested Dora, in nearly speechless indignation, and then she
recovered breath and words. "She's forty if she's a day; and she's as
fat as a pin-cushion, with her cheeks a mottled red all over."

"How can you make such unkind remarks on your neighbours' looks? _He_
is not an Adonis, I may be allowed to say; and I have noticed that
shopkeepers are apt to marry women older than themselves, women who
have been in the trade--to keep the business together, I suppose."

"At least, his father did not marry like that either in his first or in
his second marriage," retorted Dora; "for the first Mrs. Robinson was
the daughter of a curate, and the second of a farmer, and she was not
half his age, though she did not survive him long."

"As you please. What's Hecuba to me, or what am I to Hecuba?" demanded
Annie airily.

"Besides," Dora returned laboriously to the charge, "there are
shopkeepers and shopkeepers, as you must be aware, Annie. Father says
old Mr. Robinson was a man of independent ideas and original mind, and
had his own theories of trade."

"I have nothing to say against it, especially at this hour of the night,
or morning," said Annie, professing to strangle a yawn; "only that I do
not think a linen-draper's business, however large and well-conducted,
is exactly the career of a gentleman, a man of fair ability and
education. He might leave it to any respectable well-disposed tradesman.
However, if you are going to exalt Tom Robinson, with his shop, into a
patriot and philanthropist cherishing a noble scheme for the public
good, and all that kind of thing, do it if you like, nobody will hinder
you. Call him back if you care to, I dare say it is still possible if
you are willing to make the concession. But oh, Dora!" appealed Annie,
who had talked herself wide awake by this time, "don't forget the loss
of position involved in really keeping a shop, however eccentric and
meritorious a man's intentions may be. Why, he had better become a
stonemason or a ploughman, if he is to do the thing at all; far better a
gamekeeper or a soldier in time of war, the plunge would be deeper but
more picturesque. Think of the entire breaking with the county with
which we have a right to hold ourselves connected, not merely because
father's patients are willing to take us up and make quite a fuss about
us sometimes, but because his Aunt Penny married and was welcomed into
that set. You have not yourself alone to consider, remember, Dora; you
might not mind, but you have the rest of us to think of, some of whom
would mind very much."

"You need have no anxiety about the matter," said poor Dora hotly and
huffily. "I am not going to marry Tom Robinson; you know I have refused
him this very afternoon."

But Annie was determined to empty out her whole budget of warnings.
"Even professional people like father, all our friends and
acquaintances, our relations on both sides of the house would begin to
drop us, and fight shy of us. What people that had any pretensions to
being gentle-folks would care to be mixed up with our brother-in-law the
linen-draper? And it is not as if the temptation were great; I cannot
see wherein the attraction lies; but instead of letting it beset you,
please don't lose sight of the three hundred and sixty-five days to be
spent every year in Tom Robinson's silent company. Think of the three
hundred and sixty-five breakfasts, dinners, and suppers to be eaten
opposite his mute figure."

"Stop, Annie," Dora cried energetically: "you know as well as I do that
I could never face such a thing, that I never dreamt of it. Only loving
a man could make it possible for a girl to give up her family in order
to belong to him; and even if there had been no 'Robinson's' to shock
you, I do not care the least little bit for poor Tom Robinson; yet
surely for that very reason," protested Dora with a sudden revulsion of
feeling, "I am at liberty to pity him."

"If you will take my advice, Dora," said shrewd Annie, sinking back on
her pillow as a sign that the untimely discussion ought to come to an
end, "you will get rid of your pity as quickly as you can. It is not
your pity which he seeks--very likely he would rage like a bear, for as
quiet as he can look, at the mere mention of it. But it strikes me that
it is not safe for either of you."




CHAPTER III.

THE HEADS OF THE HOUSE LOOK GRAVE.


"It is a thousand pities," said Dr. Millar, holding a consultation with
his wife, while he sipped his glass of sherry and ate his biscuit,
before retiring for the night, after his last round among the patients
in greatest need of his visits.

In spite of his daughter Dora's preference for tall men, the Doctor was
short and rather stout. He ought to have looked comfortable, he had the
physique and air of a comfortable man, but a certain harassed, careworn
expression was beginning to settle down on the spectacled face which had
once been round, rosy, and very comely. He was at least twenty years
older than his wife. The old-fashioned practice had prevailed in the
old-fashioned town, of elderly men, whether bachelors or widowers,
ending by marrying for the first or the second time women a score or
more years their juniors. Indeed, Dr. Millar was hard upon seventy,
though he had till recent bad times carried his years so well that he
had looked ten years younger than his actual age.

Mrs. Millar also began to look worried as a rule, though she had more of
the woman's faculty of putting the best face on things, both in public
and in private. She was a tall woman, who had enjoyed the advantages of
what was called "an elegant figure" in her youth. Now she was large and
heavy, with a mixture of unconscious stateliness and wistful
motherliness in her gait and gestures. Like Dr. Millar, she ought to
have seemed at least easy-minded, but circumstances were becoming more
and more against the happy condition, of which a pervading atmosphere of
content and cheerfulness should have been the outward expression.

The man and woman were not cut out, so to speak, for adversity. They had
not been seasoned to it in their younger days. On the contrary, they had
been cradled for many years in the lap--if not of luxury, of fair
middle-class prosperity. It was a few tolerably rough jolts which had
shaken them from their cradle. Still the trouble was more in
apprehension than in reality. As yet it had not caused the sufferers to
change any one of the domestic habits which had grown second nature to
them. It had not induced them to darken the sunny sky over their young
daughters' heads with a shadow of the clouds which were already looming
black on the parents' horizon. It may be said at once, that Dr. and Mrs.
Millar, though they were reckoned clever, sensible people enough by
their contemporaries, had softer hearts than they had hard heads. They
had not been used to painful self-denial and stern discipline, either
where they themselves or their children were concerned.

The couple were sitting now together in the dining-room with its solidly
handsome furniture, Russian leather and walnut wood, bits of family
plate on the sideboard, bronze chimney-piece ornaments, and good
engravings on the walls. Husband and wife had spent the last part of the
evening there, for four-and-twenty years, every night they were in
Redcross, when the Doctor was not kept out late, or when the couple were
not abroad in company, or seeing company at home. Dr. Millar, in his
slightly old-fashioned professional black coat and white tie, was
leaning back in his easy-chair sipping his sherry, and occasionally
drumming lightly on the table near him with these fine long sensitive
fingers which were a born doctor's fingers.

Mrs. Millar wore a demi-toilet in the shape of an expensive cashmere and
silk gown--not an evening dress, but an approach to it, as became the
wife of one of the leading professional men in Redcross, connected with
the county to boot. Her lace cap was a costly trifle of its kind, but
it had an awkward habit--the odder in a woman who was neat to formality
in the other details of her dress--of slipping to one side, or tilting
forwards or backwards on the brown hair, still abundant and just
streaked with gray; so that one or other of her daughters was constantly
calling Mrs. Millar's cap to order and setting it right. She was sitting
in an arm-chair, opposite her husband. Mechanically she put one daintily
slippered, very neat foot, considering the weight it helped to carry,
beyond her skirts, and stretched it towards the fire. There was still a
good fire blazing in the steel grate, though the spring was well
advanced, the weather was not more than chilly, and the hour was late.
It was as if coals were not a marketable commodity and a serious item in
the expenses of an embarrassed household. She held up a Japanese fan
between her face and the fire, from mere custom, for she had ceased to
pay much heed to the exigencies of a florid complexion.

"It's a thousand pities," repeated the little Doctor, looking quite
portentously regretful and oppressed. "It is not only that Tom Robinson
is an excellent fellow and would have made Dora the best of
husbands--given her a safe and happy home, and all that sort of thing;
but in case of anything happening, I am convinced he would have been as
good as a brother to the other girls, and a son to you. A man like him
is a stay and support to a household of helpless women."

"But nothing is going to happen, Jonathan," said Mrs. Millar, with an
involuntary nervous quiver which sent her cap hovering over one eyebrow.
"At least nothing worse than we know. Your practice is not so lucrative
as it used to be; how can it, in these bad times, with so many poor
young fellows of doctors settling here and there and everywhere in
Redcross and the villages around, starving themselves out, while they
impoverish their seniors? Nothing more than that, except the little
trouble at Carey's Bank."

"Quite enough too, Maria, quite enough," commented the Doctor deep down
in his throat, prolonging the words a little as if he were chanting the
refrain of a dismal song; "and when a man is my age and has plenty of
the young rivals you refer to, it is high time he should be looking out
for something happening. A family of girls, too. God help me! If they
had been four boys, who might have made their own way in the world, and
provided for you among them, I could have faced it better." He struck
the table again, with spasmodic force this time.

"Now, Jonathan, you will wake up the house. This is not like you,"
remonstrated his wife--all the more energetically that her heart sank
while she spoke. "I should not have expected you to give way in this
manner." She gave a quick push back to her unruly cap. "I am sure there
is no occasion for it. We are in no worse position than we were last
year, even the year before that."

"Save that I am growing older every year," he said grimly, "and the
affairs of the bank are not mending, as I hoped they might."

"Can't you sell out?" she suggested breathlessly, as she clasped her
hands on her knees.

"I have put it off too long, supposing I had the conscience to transfer
my liabilities to some simpleton who might not draw half a dozen of the
dividends of which I have drawn scores. Besides, the thing is
impossible, as I am telling you. Between you and me, the shares are far
below par."

"What is par, Jonathan?" interrupted Mrs. Millar in a praiseworthy
attempt to understand her husband.

"Oh, bother," he cried, running his hand in mild exasperation through
his white hair; "the standard value, or the original value, whichever
you like best. I should not dare to propose to sell out at such a loss;
it would not only be to impoverish myself at once in order to avoid the
risk of greater ruin, it would draw attention. It would have a most
suspicious look, and might bring the rotten affair down about our ears
instantly, while I should get the blame of the downfall."

"But some of the large foreign investments might be realized any
day--you told me the last time you spoke of business--with the first
good turn of trade," she reminded him anxiously.

"I trust so still, and I believe old Carey is an honest man and a
perfect gentleman--that is one comfort; but I cannot help thinking he
has got into bad hands. I tell you, Maria, I don't like that
brother-in-law of his who comes down from London to attend the Redcross
meetings, and tries to blarney us all round. And I cannot approve of the
bolstering up of Carey's cousins, the Carters, in their chemical works
at Stokeleigh, which it strikes me will never do much good. It--the
bolstering up--has been going on for a long time now, to what extent I
am not prepared to show. Unfortunately I have a bad head for figures,"
he shrugged his shoulders as if anticipating a reproach, "the less
reason why I should have laid out my savings on bank shares, you will
say? No doubt, no doubt, but there had been fewer troubles with banks in
my day. When I made the first investment everything appeared right, and
the dividends announced were tempting."

"I am not finding fault with what you did, Jonathan; I never thought of
such a thing," the perturbed woman found voice to reassure her husband.
"I know you did it for the best; and for that matter, I am convinced it
will all come right in the end," she ended with a little sigh.

"It is very good and pretty of you to say so, Maria," he said with a
certain old-fashioned, stiff gallantry which, while it complimented her,
treated her as a much younger and more irresponsible being than he was.
As he spoke he took up the hand which lay in her lap and held it for a
moment clasped in his. "And I can say you have been all that I could
have wished as a wife and mother, you have never once failed me during
the whole of our married life."

"Oh! thank you, thank you, Jonathan." She acknowledged his praise with a
momentary choke in her voice, and a bend of her head which was not
without a docile dignity.

"We are all in the same boat," resumed the Doctor in the deep tones
which somehow sounded like bass recitative; "the Rector, Colonel
Russell, and I--not to say Carey himself. We all wished to increase our
incomes with as little trouble and risk as possible--so it seemed then,
but if the bank comes to smash, all the old Redcross gentle-folks, as we
were pleased to call ourselves, will go with it."

"Don't mention such a thing, don't think of it," cried Mrs. Millar in
her dismay.

He went on without noticing her. "The Bishop won't let the Rector come
down, and Russell is twenty years younger than I. He is no older than
you are, though a foreign climate has told a good deal on him; still, he
is patched up, and with care ought to have lasted as long as the rest of
us. He may exert his interest, and get a post in India again, though I
should be afraid it would finish him in six months."

The poor middle-aged lady who sat listening with dry lips apart, and
pleasant hazel eyes distended with fright and distress, though she was
no older than the unfortunate colonel, had not been exposed to a foreign
climate, and had hardly suffered from a serious illness in her life, did
not look much like such an arduous undertaking as going out to India to
redeem a wrecked fortune. She pulled herself together, however, and set
herself to the good woman's business of comforting and encouraging her
husband. "I am certain it is right to go on hoping. You often say that
in your profession you have no such helpful allies as hope and courage;
you must practice what you've preached, Doctor," and the faithful soul
actually contrived to impart a playful ring to her unsteady voice. "The
Rector has not preached the duty more strenuously than you have; and
you are not going to be the first to break down, especially when there
is no real occasion. Depend upon it, Carey's Bank will pull through like
some of your most doubtful patients, with time and care."

"With all my heart," he said, absently taking off his spectacles,
polishing, and replacing them. Then he resumed his former line of
thought. "Tom Robinson is out of the mess. He, and his father before
him, found other ways of disposing of their capital where it was more
under their own inspection and control. If that foolish girl of ours,
Maria, could only have brought herself to listen to Robinson," he worked
himself up into a fresh access of vexation, "the liking would have come
in good time. I did not expect her to have a fancy for him on the spot,
for quiet, steady young fellows like him are not apt to take girls'
fancies--the worse for the girls."

"But, father"--remonstrated Mrs. Millar, involuntarily bestowing on her
husband the title the girls gave him--she drew herself up as she spoke,
and again destroyed the equilibrium of her cap--"you cannot surely think
that Tom Robinson would have been a fit match for Dora, or any of her
sisters. He is well enough in himself, I say nothing against him, but he
has not gone into a profession, instead he has identified himself with
'Robinson's'--that shop;" a shade of ineffable disgust stole into her
ordinarily good-humoured voice.

"Showed his good sense and manliness," said the Doctor gruffly. "I wish
every one else had been as wise. I wish all of us had big paying shops
at our backs instead of Carey's shaky bank. I for one would swallow the
indignity cheerfully. Why, my father kept on his dispensary in the days
when the practice was at its best. The greater fool I to give it up. I
tell you England will never be what it was till it gets rid of this
rubbish of despising trades and shops. Don't you help to put it into
these silly girls' heads. It makes me sick to think how they may live to
wish they were connected with an honest, solvent shop."

"My dear, I think you are going a little too far." Mrs. Millar fired up
in defence of her young like a ruffled mother-pigeon. "I should be very
sorry to teach the girls to look down on anybody; but that there are
different sorts and conditions of men, they may learn from their very
Bibles and prayer-books. There are such things as education and
culture--not to speak of good birth. You yourself, Dr. Millar, are
fairly well born and well connected for a professional man." She
instanced this with an imperceptible bridle and toss of her matronly
head, which hinted broadly, "If it had not been so, Jonathan, I should
never have been Mrs. Millar." The movement threatened to deposit her cap
on the carpet behind her, but she recovered it in time, and took up the
thread of her discourse by quoting the much-prized family
distinction--"There was your Aunt Penny, who married into the county."

"Oh! are you at that humbug?" he cried, with a man's disrespectful
impatience. "I thought it had seen its day, and was long over and done
with. I could not have conceived that you--" ("were such a fool," he was
going to say, when he caught himself up.) He was quick-tempered and
impulsive, but he was also suave by nature, and his long habit of
courteous indulgence to his wife caused him to alter the phrase. "I did
not know that you had so lively an imagination as to persist in
believing that old myth, Maria."

"But your Aunt Penny did marry one of the Beauchamps of Waylands,"
insisted Mrs. Millar.

"Certainly; and she made the poorest marriage of anybody that I have
ever had to do with, though I have always understood that he was not a
bad sort, beyond being as thick-headed as his brother the squire or an
officer of dragoons. He get on at the bar! I dare say not. And he was no
quicker-witted or longer-sighted in Australia. You must have heard me
say how grieved I was once when I came across a fellow from Sydney who
had been up the country, and remembered something of the Beauchamps and
their straits. They were regularly hard up, and went through no end of
trouble. Poor Aunt Penny seldom had a woman-servant--women-servants were
more difficult to get out there in those days. She had to wash, cook,
and scour for the men at the station."

"Why didn't they come home?" inquired Mrs. Millar rather weakly.

"Come home! They had nothing to come home with, or to. You don't suppose
his brother, the squire, with a wife and family of his own, would have
kept them, though the Beauchamps had received her civilly enough at the
time of the marriage! She had to milk the cows when the cow-man was
otherwise wanted. I do not say that many a better born woman than she
was has not done as much and thought little of it, only it was not in
Aunt Penny's line. I can just remember her when I was a small boy, a
pretty creature who read Italian, sang to her guitar, and made bread
seals for her amusement. She had such a mortal terror where cows were
concerned that she would run like a lapwing when she heard one come
lowing up the lane behind the house. Paton, the man from Sydney who
remembered them, thought they did a little better towards the end, when
they got a store, and Mrs. Beauchamp kept it. Do you hear that, Maria?"
cried the Doctor, with a half-humorous, half-indignant emphasis.

"Yes, I hear," replied Mrs. Millar, with an obstinate inflection of her
voice which said, "I am of my own opinion still." She illustrated this
by adding, in an undertone, "They were in Australia."

"A store," continued the Doctor, "is the rudest, most uncouth kind of
shop; and Beauchamp was not fit to keep it, he had to turn it over to
his wife, who was thankful to serve shepherds and bush-rangers for aught
I know. She lost one child in the bush, God help her! The little thing
wandered away and was never heard of again; and her other child, a boy,
who grew up, did not turn out well. I tell you, I never like to think or
speak of the mother."

"Poor Aunt Penny!" said Mrs. Millar hastily. "But there is one
thing"--with a sudden accent of triumph in the perception that she had
the advantage of her husband at last--"your Aunt Penny married the man
she cared for; she got her choice, and in that light she had no reason
to complain, though she had to abide by it."

The Doctor was a little taken aback. "I do not know that she
complained--at least her people at home heard nothing of it. And you
must do me the justice of owning that I have done nothing to force
Dora's inclinations. Indeed, I am not clear that I have done my duty. I
ought to have reasoned with the girl. Robinson is not only a good man,
he is also a gentleman, every inch of him, so was his father before
him."

"In the choice of Jenny Coppock, of Coppock's Farm, for a wife!"
exclaimed Mrs. Millar, still rebellious, even satirical and disdainful.

"He was entitled to choose whom he would, I suppose, so long as she was
an honest woman, and Jenny Coppock was that quite as much as her husband
was a gentleman. She made him happy, I believe, strange as it may sound
to some people, as ladies do not always make their husbands happy--you
know I mean nothing personal, Maria. Whether she was quite happy herself
is a different question, of which I have had no means of judging. But I
have heard you yourself say that she never presumed on her rise in rank,
or sought to thrust her comely, kindly face where it was not wanted. Her
son has a look of her, without her good looks. Poor Mrs. Robinson! I was
with her in her first and last illness, as you are aware, and a more
courageous, self-forgetful soul I had never the privilege to attend."

Mrs. Millar turned back in the conversation, and took to dogmatizing.
"People who are well-informed and well-bred will never descend to a
lower level without great discomfort and serious loss. I for one, though
I have not profited by the advantages the girls have commanded, and I
daresay have not their brains"--she made the frank admission with
womanly, motherly humility--"though I could not to save my life make one
of Rose's beautiful water-colour sketches, or read Greek and Latin like
'little May,' or even talk to the point on every subject under the sun
like Annie, still I should not be happy if I had to keep company with
Wilkins the butcher's or Ord the baker's wife, and they would not be
happy either. It would not matter, in one sense, though I knew they were
respectable, worthy women, and were ever so much better off as to money
than I. That would not keep me from feeling thoroughly out of place and
having hardly an idea in common with my neighbours in their
plush-trimmed gowns and fur-lined mantles. I could not stand such
degradation for my girls," she protested, with rising agitation. "I had
far rather that they and I should be the poorest ladies in the land,
should have to pinch and deny ourselves all round."

"It is little you know of it," muttered Dr. Millar, shaking his white
head, and pensively contemplating his finger-nails.

"While we still retained the position to which we were born, and the
associations among which we were reared," ended Mrs. Millar, with a
gasp.

"Bless the woman, what does she mean?" cried Dr. Millar after his lively
fashion, with an air of injured innocence. "Does she pretend that Tom
Robinson has not been educated--stamped, for that matter, with the last
university brand, to which he does credit, I must say? Stay, there goes
the night-bell. I am wanted for somebody."

"You'll never go out again to-night, Jonathan," pleaded Mrs. Millar,
"after all your worry, when you have not had more than a couple of
hours' rest." She was already reproaching herself keenly for having
contradicted and argued with him. She had never been able to comprehend,
for her comfort, that to a man like him an argument is both rousing and
refreshing. In the middle of her remorse she instinctively held up her
head, and balanced her cap as a Dutchwoman of the last century balanced
her milk-pail, or a girl of the Roman Campagna her sheaf of grass and
wild flowers. "It is a shame," she reflected indignantly; "it is very
likely nothing of any consequence, just one of those inconsiderate
people who think that a professional man ought to be always at their
beck and call."

"There, Maria, you're scoring another point for trade," said the little
doctor, getting on his feet, and buttoning up his coat as a preliminary
to obeying the call. "I'll warrant Wilkins and Ord will be toasting
their toes, and retiring to bed with the comfortable conviction that
their night's rest will not be disturbed; since Wilkins's head-man
attends to the slaughter-house, and the eldest journeyman baker sees to
the setting of the sponge. Why don't you say, _noblesse oblige_, Maria?
But I think I know the name of the inconsiderate individual who has
interrupted our conversation, and I assure you he would not if he could.
It is little Johnny Fleming--Fleming the grocer's son--whose case is
critical, I fear. I told his mother if he got worse to send for me at
once. When I am out, at any rate, I'll just look in on old Todd, in
Skinners' Buildings. He appeared in a dying state this morning; but as
the family have not sent to let me know of the death, if he has hung on
so long, the chance is he will rally and come round this bout. I'll be
some time; don't sit up for me, my dear."

"It is too bad," Mrs. Millar fretted. "They ought to send at night for
Newton or Capes from Woodleigh--it is only a step for any of the young
doctors, instead of disturbing a man of your age."

"Good heavens! don't breathe such a thing. I could not afford it. I
thought of taking a young partner twenty years ago, but I put it off
till it was too late. Perhaps it was a mistake; we all make mistakes,"
he sighed. "An active young practitioner, well up to date, might have
kept the business better together."

"Nonsense!" cried his wife energetically. "Nobody would have looked at
him when they could have had your skill and experience."

"Then be thankful I'm still fit for work--one must take the bad with the
good. It is the fortune of war, Maria," said the gallant old doctor as
he departed.




CHAPTER IV.

THE CRASH.


Within a month Carey's Bank broke, not altogether unexpectedly. The
breaking carried dismay and desolation into not a few households in
Redcross, and administered a sharp shock--productive of much startled
speculation, and roused distrust, even in those quarters which had not
suffered financially by the bankruptcy. The stoppage of a bank, with
little hope of its resuming its functions, is like the stoppage of a
heart which will never beat again. It may have been dreaded as a
possible calamity, and occasionally hinted at in awed whispers; but when
the blow falls it does so with a stunning, crushing force because of its
irreparable nature and far-reaching ruin.

There was just a little preparation to herald the catastrophe. Poor
Carey, an honest, weak tool of dishonest speculators and birds of prey
in the shape of needy, unscrupulous relations, when the appalling
tidings reached him which could only betoken immediate wreck, did all
that there was left to him to do. He called a meeting of the Redcross
shareholders. These were the leading professional men in the town who
had invested their savings, and a small proportion of the neighbouring
country gentlemen who had put a little capital--not often to spare in
those days--in a concern once regarded as sound and incapable of
collapse as the Bank of England itself. With a faltering tongue and a
hanging head the nominal head of the firm told to those nearly concerned
what was coming on them. Nobody reproached him; either no man had the
heart, or all felt the uselessness of reproaches. Certainly these
shareholders' silence was his heaviest punishment.

They made a hasty examination, as far as they could, for themselves, and
then the meeting broke up. Its members did not even linger to consult,
being well assured that consultation, like reproaches, would be of no
avail; the failure was so much more extensive and complete than their
worst fears had led them to anticipate. The men looked blankly in each
other's whitening faces and sought the refuge of their own houses at
first. There would be time enough for outcry, for desperate plans and
schemes a little later.

Poor Dr. Millar had not even this breathing space. It happened to be a
particularly busy day with him. Various neutral individuals, in no way
concerned with Carey's Bank, even when its misfortunes should be made
public, took that inconvenient time for falling ill, and their medical
man had to attend upon them with spasmodic promptitude and mechanical
attention--projected, as it were, against the dazed and confused
background of his brain. After all he was glad of his profession with
its outward and immediate calls, taking him out of himself in the hour
when he had heard the worst. He preferred to be about the town doing
battle with this man's attack of paralysis and that woman's symptoms of
typhoid, even though his ears were ringing with clamorous questions
which no one else could hear or answer. How was he to pay up the
liabilities of his bank shares from his dwindling practice? What about
inexperienced young girls driven out to make their own way in the world,
and the gentlewoman (in every sense of the word) whom he had loved and
cherished for four-and-twenty years, soon to be left a desolate, all but
unprovided for widow? But better a thousand times to be dragged in
different directions than to be sitting like Russell, locked in his
room, his little children and their young mother shut out, holding
between his hands the erect head of a soldier who had come out of many a
hard battle, but none so hard as this ambuscade which had been sprung
upon him after he had been invalided a dozen years before, and returned
home to spend his declining years in peace. Better than to have to write
sermons and read prayers, like the Rector, and pause between every
sentence to take himself sternly to task. Was it common forethought and
prudence, with the necessity of providing for the wants of a household,
which even the apostle Paul had commended, or was it worldly-mindedness
and greed which had brought him, a beneficed clergyman, a priest in holy
orders, the vowed servant of a King whose kingdom was not of this world,
to this lamentable pass? Yes; he would be dishonoured in the eyes of
men, a debtor who could not pay his debts, and even with the support of
his bishop would be scarcely able to weather the storm, while he must
make up his mind, as he was an honest man, that he and his should endure
the pinch of poverty for the rest of his days.

Annie and Dora had been out on a shopping expedition, and were coming in
talking and laughing as usual, when they were startled by the apparition
of their mother standing in the doorway of her room, and motioning to
them to come in directly and speak with her. The poor lady really looked
like a ghost, as she stood there with her fine colour gone, beckoning to
her daughters with her hand, as if the power of speech had suddenly
forsaken her.

"What is it, mother?" cried the alarmed girls in one breath, hurrying
towards her. "Has anything happened? Is anybody ill?"

"Hush! hush, my dears," said Mrs. Millar in a low tone, carefully
shutting the door of her room behind the girls, as if she were ready to
guard her secret with her life--at the same time painfully sensible that
the bad news would be all over Redcross the next day, or the next after
that. "I thought it would be better to tell you myself; nobody in the
house knows anything of it yet, except your father and me."

"But what is it, mother; you have not told us?" Annie urged; while Mrs.
Millar sank down in a low wicker chair, and her daughter Dora
instinctively stooped over her, and began to set her vagrant cap right.

"Never mind my cap, my love," said Mrs. Millar hurriedly, and then she
grew incoherent. "What does it matter, when perhaps I may not long have
a cap to wear."

Annie and Dora stared at each other in consternation. Was their mother
going out of her senses?

"It is the bank, Carey's Bank," said Mrs. Millar, recovering herself,
"Oh dear! I am afraid it is in a very bad way."

"Is that it?" cried Annie vaguely but gravely, opening wide her brown
eyes. "Is it going to fail?" She, too, spoke of the bank as if it were a
responsible being.

"Annie, Annie, take care what you say. Girls are so heedless. I tell you
it is very dangerous to make such broad statements. You do not know what
harm you may do by a single word when you are so childishly outspoken."
Mrs. Millar felt bound even yet to give her own words the timid
qualification, though she was forced to add the next moment, "Your
father has suspected things were going wrong for some time, and spoken
of his suspicions to me repeatedly. He has just come back from a private
meeting of the Redcross shareholders. He says in consequence of some
additional losses in South America, I think, and inability to realize
capital there, the bank cannot meet two or three heavy calls at home. I
daresay I am not telling you rightly, for I don't understand business,
and I don't suppose you do."

"I understand so far, that if this is not failure, I don't know what
is," said Annie.

"Don't, Annie," said Dora; "let mother tell us in her own way; it is not
easy for her, it is a dreadful misfortune."

"You may say that, Dora," exclaimed her mother. "Your father does not
believe the bank can hold out for another week; it may stop payment
to-morrow, since there are rumours afloat which will destroy what credit
it has left."

"Will no other bank help it?" cried Annie shrewdly.

"I believe not," said Mrs. Millar dolefully.

"Then there will be a run, like what one has read of in similar
circumstances--a rush of the people, and a riot in the town," suggested
Annie, getting excited over the idea. "The police may have to guard the
bank and the Bank house--soldiers may have to come from Nenthorn!"

"Oh, surely not," cried Dora; "the poor Careys--who could treat them so
cruelly?"

"No, no," said Mrs. Millar; "there is one good thing, your father does
not think there will be much ill-feeling, or anything like an angry mob,
or tumult--not even when the people see the closed doors. There has
always been such confidence in Carey's Bank, the Careys have been
respected for generations; even now it is James Carey's misfortune and
not his fault, though he may have been misled and imposed upon; and,
after all, the depositors are tolerably sure of their money in time. But
your father is afraid," she ended, her voice sinking, "that it will go
hard with the shareholders."

"And poor father is one of them," said Annie quickly.

"Poor father!" echoed Dora piteously; "and you, poor, poor mother, to
have to think of us, and break it to us, while your heart is with
father."

"And he has not even been left in peace for a single afternoon, to make
up his mind what we shall do," lamented his sympathetic wife. "As usual,
so many tiresome people have fallen ill--as if they did it on purpose,
and sent for him."

"I daresay they could not help it," said Annie, "and I don't think it
would quite suit father if they were never ill."

"Don't speak so unfeelingly, child," remonstrated her mother; "well, I
suppose I gave you a bad example," she corrected herself immediately,
"but I have been in such trouble since lunch time."

"Poor mother!" repeated Dora in a voice that was only more soft and
caressing because of its sorrowfulness. She was very fond of her mother,
who reciprocated the special fondness, while Dr. Millar was rather
inclined to favour Annie and Rose, and both father and mother petted
May.

"Will it ruin us, mother?" inquired Annie directly, but before her
mother could answer her, Annie's practical mind took a sudden flight. It
went straight back to the purchases which she and Rose had been making
that afternoon. They had been at "Robinson's," of all places. But Tom
Robinson was only to be seen in the glass office, or walking about the
place in the morning, at hours which these two customers had carefully
avoided. Dora's heart had quaked all the same, in dread of an event
which, bad enough when it was confined to a passing bow, or a limp
hand-shake and half a dozen words exchanged in the street, would have
been intolerable in "Robinson's," under the eyes of his satellites. Yet
for the Millars to have refrained altogether from going to the one great
shop in the town, where women oft did congregate, would have been to
expose an event, the participators in which devoutly hoped was buried in
oblivion. They had been in Miss Franklin's department without anything
untoward happening; but it was neither "Robinson's" nor the person who
served them there that flashed like lightning across Annie's thoughts at
this crisis. It was the articles the girls had been buying, the Tussore
silk and Torchon lace for frocks that Annie and Dora had meant to wear
at a garden-party--for which the Dyers, the new people who had come to
Redcross Manor-house, had sent out invitations. If the Millars were
ruined, they were not likely to go to many more garden-parties, and
though the sisters might still want frocks, yet frocks of Tussore silk
trimmed with Torchon lace--granted that the materials had appeared a
modest and becoming wear for a doctor's daughters an hour before--might
not be quite an appropriate selection in the family's altered
circumstances.

"It depends upon what you call ruin," Mrs. Millar was saying
falteringly, "and of course the bank's assets may turn out better than
is thought just now, though your father is far from hopeful. He says all
his savings will go, and he may count on having to pay bank 'calls' on
his income till the business is wound up, which may not be in his
lifetime. No doubt he is taking the darkest view of things at present."
Then she yielded to the relief of pouring forth some of the coming woes
in detail. "Oh, my dears, your father says, though nothing can be
settled in a moment, there is one thing certain--this house must be
given up."

"Our house!" cried both of the girls in dismay.

"Where we were all born, where father himself was born," pleaded Dora,
still hanging about her mother.

"The Old Doctor's House--why, it seems to belong to the practice,"
protested Annie, sitting down, taking off her hat and tossing it on the
bed as if the better to realize the situation.

"No, I don't think it would hurt the practice--not in a town the size of
Redcross, where everybody would know where your father was to be found,
though he were to change his house again and again. Still it does seem
hard," she admitted, as she covertly wiped away a tear, "particularly
when the fault has not been ours--we have always lived within your
father's income, even though his practice has been falling off in these
bad times, what with his getting up in years, and what with these young
doctors trying to get in their hands everywhere. He tells me that he has
never had to find fault with me for extravagance," she finished
wistfully.

"I should think not," said Annie emphatically. "Why you have always been
as simple as simple could be in your own tastes and habits, not a woman
in your circle dresses more quietly. You have hardly even driven in the
brougham when father was not wanting it, in case you should over-work
the horse--you have always said, but I really believe that you chose to
walk for the simple reason that many of your acquaintances had no
choice. Nobody can ever reflect upon you, mother, for having wasted
either father's means or other people's," said Annie, with a bright
glance which became her infinitely.

"Thank you, my love, for saying so," replied her mother gratefully; "and
you see it is as well that I did not accustom myself to driving, among
other indulgences, for another of the retrenchments which your father
mentioned was putting down the brougham. Yet how he is to manage his
more distant patients on foot, at his age, I cannot imagine," she broke
off in helpless distress, clasping her hands tightly together, according
to a way she had. "It seems downright madness to propose it."

"Then you may be sure it will be prevented," said Dora with earnest
trustfulness, as she gently patted her mother's cap. "Nobody can ask a
sacrifice from him which he is unable to make. Mother, do you know what
I was thinking? that the only occasions on which you and father were
regardless of expense have been where the profit or pleasure of us girls
was concerned. You have given us every advantage you could get for us in
the shape of education. You sent Annie and me to London to take these
costly music-lessons;--Annie, I wish we had made more of them. You
arranged that we should go on that foreign tour with the Ludlows."

"We did our best for you--your father and I. I think I may say that,"
admitted Mrs. Millar simply.

Dora went on eagerly with her generous catalogue. "There was the young
artist who exhibits at the Academy and the Grosvenor, who was sketching
at Nenthorn, you had him over at a high price once a week, and he
condescended to help Rose with her drawing and painting. Then there was
Mr. Blake, the university man whom father considered so far in advance
of any classical master Miss Burridge could afford, he was induced so
long as he was staying at Woodleigh to bring on May with her Latin and
Greek."

"So far so good," said Mrs. Millar, in her excitement borrowing one of
her husband's brisk, cut and dry phrases. "I hope you will reap the
benefit of any effort we made, dears, because"--she hesitated, and
nearly broke down--"well, I don't think you need mind so much your
father's giving up this house and going into a smaller one; I'm sure I
don't mind it at all when I think what other people will have to suffer;
and as for you, why, you may not be here--not always, at least. We are
afraid, your father and I, that you'll need to go and do something to
keep yourselves."

"To be sure," said Annie promptly. "Don't trouble about that, mother;
we'll be only too glad to be of use!"

"We'll be too thankful to relieve you and father as much as we can,"
said Dora in a voice soft and fervent, but less assured.

"That will be the least trial," asserted Annie fearlessly.

"Oh, you don't know what you're saying!" cried Mrs. Millar, fairly
giving way and permitting herself to sob for a minute or two behind her
handkerchief. "You are dear, good girls! I knew you would be, and so
brave that I ought to take courage; but young people are so hopeful and
inexperienced. I don't wish you to be unhopeful, of course, still you
cannot tell what it is for your father and me to send our girls--our own
girls whom we have been so proud and fond of, that have been making the
old house brighter and brighter ever since they were born--out into a
cold world, to have to struggle for a pittance, to lose their youth and
its privileges, to be knocked about, and perhaps ill-treated, and looked
down upon by people in every way their inferiors."

"Don't, mother," interrupted Annie with decision; "you're conjuring up
bogies which have ceased to exist now-a-days. Think of the women who go
out into the world by no compulsion, simply for the honour and pleasure
of the thing, because they will not stay at home to lead idle, useless
lives, when there is needful work to be done abroad. I don't question
that they have difficulties to encounter, but I have yet to learn that
staying at home will keep away crosses. Brave women can bear whatever
trouble comes. I have often thought of such workers, if you will believe
me"--the girl was in a glow of animation--"with both shame and envy. It
is true I have not proposed to join them," she added in a lower tone,
"because I knew I was young for such work and not half good enough or
clever enough, and because we were all so happy at home--you and father
made us so," and Annie turned away her head, and forthwith came tumbling
down a few steps from the exalted position she had taken up.

"No, don't tell me, Annie Millar," said her mother with something like
passionate resistance, "that any good father or mother can be glad to
send their young daughters out into the wide world to fight and suffer
by themselves. It is not natural and it is not true. It is an altogether
different thing to give them to good men who will take care of them and
make them happy."

"But if the good men are not forthcoming, or if they happen to be the
wrong men," protested Annie. There was an irresistible twinkle in her
dark eyes, in spite of the care and trouble that had come upon the
household, which she was too sensible and warm-hearted a girl not to
share fully.

Dora stood conscience-stricken and guilty-looking, until, as she stroked
her mother's locked hands, she at last found words to put in her humble
petition, "We shan't all go away, mother dear. Father and you must let
one of us stay to take care of you and cheer you?"

"Oh, my dear, we are not old enough, at least I am not old enough to
accept such a boon, supposing we are very poor," said Mrs. Millar
sadly, "and in that case it might be sacrificing one of you, and
spoiling your prospects in life."

"No, no," cried Dora vehemently.

"Dora means that one of us ought to stay at home to set your cap right,"
said Annie brusquely.

It sounded an inopportune jest, positively unfeeling. The truth was
Annie still laboured under the common youthful necessity to hide her
deeper feelings, an obligation made up of a touch of hysterical
excitement, pride, shyness, and possibly the unsubdued buoyance of
two-and-twenty years. The last is apt to rebound swiftly, with a mixture
of cheerfulness and defiance from any sorrow, short of the one sorrow
which cannot be trampled down or made light of, that has its root in a
grave. Annie must find something to laugh at, to get fun out of, in the
tribulation which she nevertheless felt in every nerve of her body, to
the core of her heart.

"I ought to be able to keep my cap straight," said poor Mrs. Millar very
literally and meekly, looking a little puzzled by Annie's ill-timed
nonsense, and apparent hardness. "I daresay I should pin it, but the
pins drag my hair so and hurt me."

"Never think of it, mother," said mild Dora indignantly, looking daggers
at Annie.

"Of course I did not mean that, mother. I was not in earnest," Annie
made the penitent amendment.

"You are right to make the best of things," said Mrs. Millar, giving a
little shivering sigh on her own account. "It is the will of Providence.
We are in God's hands, poor Mr. Carey and all of us, as we were a year
ago--twenty years ago when you two were babies."

They were simple truisms which she uttered, but they were honest words,
which meant a great deal to her. They borrowed impressiveness from the
truthfulness of the speaker, in addition to the truth of the sayings,
and by force of sympathy told on the listening girls, quieting and
controlling them.

"Poor Mr. Carey as you say, mother," Annie caught up the words. "Well, I
suppose the Careys will be in a far worse plight than we can be, and
Cyril has been such a fool, though I don't suppose he meant much harm,
with his dandyisms and idleness and his college airs--all that he has
brought back from college."

"Hush! child," exclaimed the elder, more tolerant woman. "He has been a
silly, selfish lad, but as he will know it now, to his cost, I do not
like to hear you casting it in his teeth to-day. Perhaps it will steady
him, and then this misfortune will be a blessing so far as he is
concerned."

"Rather hard that we should all be sacrificed to prop up Cyril's weak
moral nature," muttered Annie.

"And the Russells," suggested Dora. "I have heard Colonel Russell
speaking to father, as if he and the Rector also had to do with the
bank. Oh! there is Ned Hewett, who has not passed his Cambridge
examination any more than Cyril Carey. Not that it has been Ned's fault,
or that he goes in for nothing save amusement, only he is so slow over
his books, poor fellow! He will grudge his father's having spent money
over him to no purpose more than ever now; and Lucy and Bell will be
sorry for him--they are so fond of Ned."




CHAPTER V.

PROMOTION.


At that moment a rush was heard on the stairs, and Rose and May burst
into their mother's room, Rose at the last moment bethinking herself
that she had left school, accordingly she must be grown up, or on the
brink of it, if Annie would but allow it, and therefore trying to
moderate the headlong pace, which would have better become a troop of
boys than a pair of girls.

"Little May," who, in spite of her height, was still in frocks an inch
from the ground, was not troubled by any such scruples. She scampered up
to her mother, and hailed her breathlessly--"Mother, we want you to let
us--Rose and me--go with Ella and Phyllis Carey a walk to the Beeches.
Ella says she saw some periwinkles and young ferns there, and we need,
oh! ever so many fresh roots for the rockery. We should have gone
without coming home to tell you, because you wouldn't mind, but we might
have kept tea waiting, and we'll be horribly late. Besides, we are not
coming home for tea; Ella and Phyllis say we must go up with them to the
Bank House."

"No, no, my dears, you can't do that," said Mrs. Millar, hurriedly but
decidedly. "I am sorry that you should be disappointed, but you must not
think of such a thing. Ella and Phyllis don't understand--don't
know--that their mother is particularly engaged this afternoon. She will
not wish to have people in the house, not even in the schoolroom."

Rose and May looked in wonder at their mother, discomposed enough in her
own person, sitting leaning back in her chair doing nothing; she whose
motherly hands were wont to be busy with some little bit of sewing or
knitting.

Annie, too, was sitting idle at a short distance, with her hat thrown on
the bed, but still wearing her jacket; and Dora, in her walking dress,
was standing like a lady-in-waiting, or a sentry, behind Mrs. Millar's
chair.

Annie and Dora remained silent, looking at the intruders in a peculiar
manner. At the same time the first pair did not tell the second more or
less curtly, as the elder girls had been in the habit of doing not so
very long ago, to go away and leave grown-up people to finish important
discussions in peace.

What other new thing could have come about? Was there a fresh wooer in
the field, a second offer of marriage to be laid at reluctant feet? Was
it Annie, their beauty, who was in request this time? Who was the lover?
not Cyril Carey, with his plush waistcoat and gold chains and odious
snuff-box? He had no means of keeping a wife, unless his father took him
into partnership in the bank, and their father would not hear of Cyril;
besides, Annie held him in supreme disdain. She had more patience with
Tom Robinson and "the shop" than with the nineteenth century dandy, whom
she pronounced a mistaken revival of one of the many curiosities of
Queen Anne's reign.

But Rose and May had no certainty that Annie was the object of pursuit.
She was pretty enough, they had all pinned their faith to her beauty,
yet already Dora had been preferred before her, though it was only by
the head of "Robinson's." Was it possible that now it might be Rose,
unsuspecting, unconsulted? Could her own mother and sisters be so unfair
as to arrogate to themselves the settlement of her affairs without her
consent or knowledge, without so much as admitting her into the
conclave?

Annie took the initiative, she was sufficiently quick to see both behind
and before her. She had a head for directing and managing which her
mother did not possess.

"Mother, don't you see they had better be told at once?" she said, with
the aplomb of a girl who, however young and irresponsible, is capable of
arriving at independent conclusions and reversing existing conditions.
"They are, as Rose says, all but grown up; indeed not so very much
younger than Dora and I. I think Rose and May are entitled to be told."

Annie was proceeding to act upon the permission implied in her mother's
nod. She was not without some small sense of personal importance in
being the mouthpiece which was to announce the calamity to her younger
sisters. She did it in a very different fashion from that in which their
mother had broken the news to her and Dora.

"What we are going to speak to you about is not a thing that can be long
concealed. It will not be a secret for more than a few days, if for so
long. But that does not mean that you are not to shut this room door
which you have left wide open. Thanks, May. Don't bang it! You are not
to show that you know what is going to happen. And, after it has
happened, you are not to chatter about it before the servants or to your
companions. We are trusting you because you have almost come to the
years of discretion, and ought to have a notion how to behave under the
circumstances."

"Well, this is too bad of you, Annie!" cried Rose, showing instant
symptoms of revolt. "What have May and I done that we should be spoken
to as if we were a pair of tell-tales, or babies--and geese into the
bargain? Dora and you are not so much older, as you confess; neither are
you so much wiser with all your pretensions. If something of so much
consequence to everybody is on the eve of happening, I think we might
have been told before. Surely mother is not afraid that we should repeat
anything which we ought not to mention," and she glanced with burning
reproach at her mother.

Rose was both high-spirited and touchy. She was not disposed to play the
second part without a murmur like Dora. She was not content, with her
art as a balance to Annie's beauty and May's budding scholarship. Rose
desired everybody to acknowledge her mother-wit and trustworthiness.

Dora and Mrs. Millar spoke together in reply. "Mother only told Annie
and me this afternoon," said the general peacemaker.

"It was not such a pleasant piece of information for me to give, or you
to receive, child, that you and May should grudge my keeping it from you
as long as I could, as I dared," was the mother's weary reply. "Besides,
your father did not wish it spoken about before; it would have been
wrong, a great risk to many others as well as to ourselves, to have
mentioned such a thing."

"Then don't tell us now if you don't care to, mother, and if father
disapproves of our hearing it," said Rose magnanimously, for she was
dying to be at the bottom of the mystery.

"No, don't, mother dear, please don't, if it will hurt you," said May
affectionately, with something of a childish ring in her voice. Her
mother took her hand at the words and clasped it tightly.

"Mother has made up her mind and father has given her leave to speak,"
said Annie with determination, "because you must hear soon anyhow. There
is something wrong with the bank, Mr. Carey's bank. We have all, even
May, read and heard of bank failures, and have some idea how disastrous
they are."

"The Carey's bank!" cried Rose, with sufficient intelligence in her
astonishment. "I understand now why we were not to go home with Ella and
Phyllis."

"Then somebody must run over and tell them that we are not coming,"
interrupted May. "Do let Bella take the message, mother, in case I
should look as if I knew something. Poor Mr. Carey! he was always so
kind to us. I am so sorry; but the bank has not anything to do with us;
father is not the banker, he is just a doctor like grandfather," ended
May composedly.

"O May, you are a baby, though you read the Greek Testament and have
something to say to Tacitus in the original," exclaimed Annie
indignantly.

"Your father has shares in the bank, my dear," explained her mother with
patient reiteration. "He bought them with his savings, and he will get
nothing for them. Nobody will buy them from him again, they will be no
better than waste paper. But that is not the worst. The shares make him
responsible for the bank's debts--I am sure I cannot tell you how far;
he told me, I daresay, but I was so grieved for him and for all of you,
and so confused, I could not take it in. But he says that what he will
have to pay up will be as much as he can do, with a hard fight, for the
rest of his days."

"I am so sorry for father," murmured May in an awed tone, but with a
little of a parrot note, just as she had pitied Mr. Carey, who was only
an old acquaintance and the father of her friends. The fact was that the
young girl, brought away suddenly from her girlish interests and her
whole past experience, and plunged into the cares of older people, was
thoroughly staggered and bewildered, in spite of a small head which was
capable of construing Latin and conjugating Greek.

There was a moment's pause. "Will it make a great difference to father
and the rest of us?" asked Rose, in spite of her quickness, and in spite
of what her mother had said.

"Certainly," Annie took it upon her to answer, with a mixture of fire
and conviction, "we'll all have to earn our living."

"Oh, don't make such sweeping statements, Annie, frightening your
sisters," said their mother reproachfully; and unquestionably May looked
scared, and dropped her gloves without noticing it. "You must do what
you can to help your poor dear father, and I am sure you'll do that
willingly, but so long as he is spared to work for all of us----" She
stopped short, unable to say any more.

Then her daughters closed round her, from the youngest to the eldest,
and told her in concert that she was not to be concerned for them. They
were ready for the occasion and equal to it, and they would not mind in
the very least.

"Mind!" declared Rose, with her eyes beginning to shine and her cheeks
to flush like Annie's. "Why, it is the one great comfort that we'll have
to make our way in the world, and push our fortunes like boys. We'll
have plenty of adventures and rise triumphant over them all, and be such
a help to you and father. Think of that, May, you little coward,"
appealing to her younger sister who, in spite of her small dabbling in
masculine acquirements, did not look as if the prospect of pushing her
fortune like a boy was full of unmixed charm for her. But she
brightened up at the visionary honour and delight of being a great help
to their father and mother, and cried, "Yes, yes, Rose," with subdued
enthusiasm.

Dora also echoed the "yes" with a quiet intensity.

Annie, on her part, graciously approved of her juniors, and rewarded
them by patronizing them tremendously.

"That is right. I don't very well know yet what Dora and I can do, but
we'll find something. However, you two young ones are the geniuses of
the family, and we'll look to you. I suspect Dora and I will have to
march under your wings. You, Rose, must be quick and paint Academy
pictures, get them hung on the line, and have them sold before the
opening day. May must pass all her examinations in no time, gain a
scholarship, and be appointed classical mistress to a Girls' Day-school,
of which she will eventually become the head. Fancy 'little May' a
full-blown school ma'am."

"Dear! what creatures girls are! They are jesting and laughing already
over their own and other people's misfortunes. It is little they know of
life, it is little they guess what will befall them," sighed Mrs. Millar
to herself. Nevertheless, in the middle of her anxiety and sorrow, she
was in some respects a happy woman, and she had a dim but consoling
perception of the truth.




CHAPTER VI.

THE CLOUD DEEPENS.


The storm burst, but the cloud did not disperse, it only closed in more
darkly over Redcross. At the same time, as the bank authorities had
foreseen, there was little or nothing of the wild, panic-stricken run on
the capital which heralds and intensifies many a bank's fall. The losers
went about their ordinary occupations. The Rector preached, presided
over meetings of the vestry and Christian Associations, and attended to
his sick. Doctor Millar looked after his sick. Colonel Russell even went
to the Literary Institute and read the newspapers as usual. Every one of
them wore his customary face, however abnormal the working of his heart.
The Redcross victims, and many another innocent man besides, behaved
like gentlemen, Englishmen, and Christians. There was neither outward
fuss nor fury.

The individual who came nearest to breaking down was naturally Mr.
Carey. The very forbearance with which he was treated cut to the quick
the honest man who had been the tool of fools and knaves, brazening out
their share of the business and contriving to escape with the least
damage of anybody. They had been impecunious, trading upon other
people's funds to begin with, and Carey's Bank's failure only left them
where they were originally, under circumstances in which no reasonable
person would expect redress from them. But poor James Carey, who had
been credulous and weak, was made of other stuff.

"I'm not easy about Carey," the little doctor confided to his wife. "He
was talking quite in a stupid, dazed way to Russell and me this morning.
Do you observe his eyes? Have you noticed the veins on his forehead and
his throat? I'm far from comfortable about him." (As if he felt
comfortable about anything at this period!) "I question much whether
he'll ever get over it."

The public of Redcross, who could remark the glassy look of the eyes,
though they might not be qualified to speak of the condition of the
veins, were still more struck by the immediate and melancholy effect the
bank's failure had on Mr. Carey, when their attention was drawn to Mrs.
Carey's behaviour. She was a woman who had seldom left her house save
for her daily drive, now she walked out with her husband every fine
afternoon. Her arm was drawn through his; but it was evident at the
merest glance that she was supporting his failing steps and not he hers.
She was a little, thin, somewhat wizened woman, but she looked equal to
the task she had set herself, if a strong will would do it. There was a
peculiarity to be seen in her eyes too, by those who could read the
sign. It was a fixed desperate determination to keep her husband and the
father of her children by sustaining his weakness with her strength, to
fight and vanquish the enemy whose icy touch was already on his heart
and brain.

But although there was little outward demonstration in Redcross, much
inner ferment and growing concern prevailed beneath the surface in what
had been considered the principal houses in Redcross--houses safe and
sure as they were honourable in their ascendancy in the past. After the
affairs of the bank were in the hands of liquidators, and it became
clear that the ruin was great and complete, hope had hardly a hole or
corner left to linger in, even in the hearts of the most simple and
sanguine. The impending changes which must follow became the talk of the
town, extending to circles far beyond that on which the blow had fallen.
Within the narrower limits, the anxious question what was to be done
became the one engrossing, breathless subject of the hour.

Some of the reforms and retrenchments were marked by the spasmodic haste
and severity which are apt to defeat themselves. These formed pendants
to the spurts of grovelling distrust and quaking care for one's own
welfare which caused Wilkins the butcher to send in his quarter's bill
before it was due to Colonel Russell, and have the debt discharged
within the hour. In like manner, Honeyman the grocer felt bound
delicately to intimate to the Careys that he declined to give the family
more than a week's credit. He was answered in a formally polite note
from Mrs. Carey to the effect that she had not intended to ask for any
longer credit thenceforth, but from that date she would pay ready money.
These offensively defensive acts and vulgar tokens that times were
changed got wind, and were discussed in awed, indignant whispers by the
mass of Wilkins's and Honeyman's fellow-townsmen.

There was little need to remind the poor Careys of their altered
circumstances, since it was in the Bank House that some of the spasmodic
sweeping reforms referred to had at once been practised by Mrs. Carey.
She had always been the ruling spirit in the house, and people now said
openly that it would have been well for everybody if she had been the
ruling spirit in the bank also. She was a woman with locally
aristocratic connections, of a more tangible kind than what constituted
the Millars' shadowy link with the county. Her brother was Sir Charles
Luxmore of Headley Grange, and her nephew had allied himself to the
peerage by marrying an Honourable Victoria Brackenridge. All the greater
the glaring recklessness and insolence of Honeyman to take the word into
his own mouth and refuse the Careys credit. At the same time Sir
Charles's place was nearer the town of Nenthorn than that of Redcross,
and he did not deal with Redcross tradesmen unless at election times. As
for his daughter-in-law, the Honourable Victoria, she came so seldom to
see her aunt-in-law that her face could not be said to be known in
Redcross streets, where she never entered even the "fancy shop" which
the other county ladies patronized occasionally in search of missing
shades of silks or wools.

Mrs. Carey had stooped considerably when she became the wife of Mr.
Carey of the bank, though the bank was nominally his own, and the Careys
were a highly respectable family of old standing in Redcross. When it
came to that, there had only been two generations of the Luxmores at
Headley Grange, and the original baronet's rise to the honours of
knighthood and a baronetage was due to his success and favour in high
places as a fashionable physician. Mrs. Carey had not been very young
at the date of her marriage, and her fortune was moderate enough, for
the moneyed strength of her grandfather and father had gone to found a
family and support a baronetage. Still, she had been accustomed to carry
herself, after she became Mrs. Carey, not in an obtrusive and offensive
manner, but in a quiet, well-bred way, as one who had been undeniably
better born and bred than her neighbours. Indeed, under any
circumstances she would have been a reserved woman, who would, in homely
parlance, have kept herself to herself.

This was the woman who, with an absence of any sense of proportion, and
an equal lack of humour, sometimes to be found in women of her class and
character, together with an excess of mingled fiery zeal and feverish
apprehension, hidden under a quiet exterior, took her measures on the
very day after the bank's failure. These measures made a thorough
exposure of the conclusion which she had arrived at, and subjected
herself and the whole family to immediate privations, for which they
were unprepared. They were injurious as well as useless and uncalled
for, and had a ludicrous side. Acting for Mr. Carey, she dismissed the
coachman and the gardener, paying them their month's wages which were
unearned. She let the valuable horses take their chance of casual
grooming and feeding, till they were sold off. She left the garden at
the most critical time of the year, as the old gardener said with tears
in his eyes, when the young vegetables were only coming into use, and
the whole fruit would be lost unless it were properly seen to. The wood
pigeons would have all the later seeds springing in the beds, and the
place on which he had bestowed so much time and labour would lie waste,
instead of providing a considerable part of the food of the household in
summer and autumn. "But there was never no sense in them ladies like
missus, no more in their sparing than in their spending." At one fell
swoop she dismissed her own maid, the cook, and the parlour-maid,
retaining only a young table-maid to "do" for the family.

Mrs. Carey had hitherto been an indulgent mother, but all at once she
told the scandalized university dandy and failure, Cyril, that he must
brush his own boots and help his schoolboy brothers to clean the knives,
if he were not satisfied with what a maid-of-all-work could accomplish
in these departments.

As for Ella and Phyllis, looking on aghast at the wholesale destruction
of what they had been accustomed to consider the ordinary comforts--not
to say the luxuries and refinements of their home--the girls were
informed that they were not to go back to Miss Burridge's, where their
quarters were paid in advance. The younger brothers might continue at
the Grammar School, because the fees were low; they would be kept out of
harm, and they could do nothing else to speak of. But Ella and Phyllis
had better lose no time in learning to make beds, sweep floors, and lay
tables. "For myself, I have your father to see to," said Mrs. Carey in
her somewhat deep and strong voice, the measured steadiness of which had
acquired a ringing vibration. "I do not mean to conceal from you that
Dr. Millar is apprehensive on your father's account, and I intend to
devote myself to him. We must pull him through and save him at any cost,
though his health and nerves may be shattered from this date, and he may
never be able to retrieve his losses and those of other people, which,
of course, press most heavily upon him. We can try at least for the
credit as well as the life which is so dear to us, and never have it
said for his sake, still more than for ours, that he was blind and
imposed upon, and then let himself slip out of the misery which he had
helped to bring about, while others who were not accountable were
condemned to pay the penalty."

Mrs. Carey would fain not have touched a farthing of the income allowed
the family till the bank's affairs were wound up--that winding-up which
Dr. Millar said might last throughout his life. She would willingly
have resigned the bulk of her small fortune in favour of the bank's
creditors, but marriage settlements and trustees are stubborn facts to
deal with. All she could do was to stint and punish herself and her
family in the manner described, and inasmuch as the stinting and
punishment were done in good faith, doubtless they would serve their
purpose and have their reward.

The Rector was a widower. Hitherto he had kept an efficient housekeeper
and chaperon for his daughters, the elder of whom must now take the
housekeeper's place. He, too, put down what had served him for a
carriage. It was remarkable how uniformly the first idea of retrenchment
took this form in Redcross, but it was natural under the circumstances.
It was difficult to say at once what was to be cut down from a not very
extensive list of supernumeraries, unless one was prepared to make a
clean sweep like Mrs. Carey. The Rector had been simple enough in his
tastes and habits. He was a member of the Church of England Temperance
Society, and so had no valuable cellar of wine to dispose of. He did not
possess more silver plate than was wanted for the Rectory table. His
library contained no rare and costly books. The very carriage in
question was no more than one of those pony-phaetons with regard to
which Bishop Pattison appealed, in one of his letters from Melanesia to
his brethren in peaceful, pleasant country rectories and vicarages at
home, asking the astonished clergymen, with their clergywomen in the
background, if they really considered the clerical equipage, with its
modest expense, equivalent to a divine institution? The Rector proved
his freedom from the superstition by doing away with the phaeton and its
pair, and falling back, as he was a spare man, on an old pony which the
children had ridden by turns. Though he was not a book fancier, he had
entertained a fondness for art, and since he could not indulge in much
picture buying, had dabbled in old prints, of which he had rather a fine
collection. This all at once vanished along with the phaeton.

Bell Hewett, the second daughter, who was several years younger than her
sister Lucy, but had left Miss Burridge's some time before, and was as
far removed from a school-girl as Annie Millar herself, unexpectedly
appeared again on the familiar benches. She was not there as a junior
governess, she was not sufficiently clever or educated, since Miss
Burridge sought to work up to the new standards. Poor Bell was in her
old place, in her old classes, as a pupil once more, only she sat
looking deeply affronted, and nervously trying to make up for lost time,
among a set of young girls like May Millar.

There was not much difference made in Colonel Russell's establishment.
But this was caused by one of two things. There was the probability of
the establishment's soon being broken up, if its master succeeded in
getting a post which should enable him to return to India. On the other
hand, the second Mrs. Russell was too foolish and self-willed to
comprehend without a prolonged struggle how she and her babies could get
along unless they were fortified by every imaginable aid in the shape of
an expensive table, fine clothes, a couple of under nurses, and a boy in
buttons. Fanny Russell, the Colonel's grown-up daughter by his first
wife, looked sad enough over the prospect of her father's departure at
his age, with his shattered constitution, and over what was to become of
herself, left behind with the frivolous, unreasonable young stepmother
with whom Fanny had never been able to agree.

The Millars were still in the old quaintly spacious house with its great
bowery garden, for the plausible reason that Dr. Millar could not, on
the spur of the moment, find a purchaser or an available tenant. He took
some credit to himself for having more breadth of view and controlling
common sense than poor Mrs. Carey, otherwise he might have rushed off
and crammed his family into a small inconvenient house, for which, at
the same time, he would have had to pay rent, that was not called for,
unless in the form of rates and taxes, where his old house was
concerned. There might be something to say on the other side of the
question, but as yet that had not occurred to Dr. and Mrs. Millar.
However, the Doctor's brougham, like the Rector's phaeton, was a thing
of the past. He trudged manfully on foot to his patients. There are few
evils which do not offer some compensations. It really seemed as if the
Doctor's deprivation, which weighed heavily on his wife's mind, served
to divert it from other trials, by the degree to which it was occupied
in looking after her husband's changes of coats and boots, in order to
ward off evil consequences to his health.

The four girls were so engrossed with what had happened and was going to
happen to them from the failure of Mr. Carey's bank, that they had
largely lost sight of the first wooer in the family. This was strong
evidence of the extent to which their minds were filled by the rapid
descent of what they called poverty on themselves and their neighbours.
Rose and May ceased to have qualms of conscience when they caught sight
of Tom Robinson fishing in the Dewes, not knowing what desperate
promptings of despair might not suddenly lay hold of a rejected and
forlorn lover. They left off glancing covertly at him in his pew at
church, for the purpose of detecting the earliest symptoms of a broken
heart and a galloping consumption. Instead they speculated on whether
Bell Hewett would have had a new hat if it had not been for the bank's
failure; and whether her brother's absence from home was owing to his
having gone to London for the first look at the columns of the
advertising newspapers, and that he might be on the spot to apply in
person at the addresses given, and to haunt the agency offices, as young
men are represented doing in novels.

Inevitably Tom Robinson's recent intercourse with the family had been
confined to a formal call or two, awkward and unpleasant to all
concerned. Only Dr. Millar brought him into the conversation
occasionally, dealing with his name in the spirit of a faithful
partisan. "That good fellow Robinson did not draw out a farthing of his
deposit at the bank after disquieting rumours must have reached him.
Carey tells me that Robinson, in place of seeking to be reassured, did
his best to reassure him, Carey; told him never to mind him, he could
lie out of the money; he was willing to let others who had more need be
paid first. Ah! well, it is good to have it in your power to be both
just and generous, and it is still better to have a heart to use the
power. Robinson has acted handsomely throughout, in short, like the
gentleman he is. I wonder if his behaviour on this occasion will weigh
with snobs against the iniquity of his having a shop. I thought
Thackeray had done something to demolish similar rubbish when he
described the young cads who gave the schoolboy Dobbin the nickname
'Figs.'"

The speaker was guilty of glaring rather fiercely at his daughters,
assembled for afternoon tea. They became eminently innocent and
meek-looking on the instant, but when the sisterhood were left to
themselves Annie delivered her opinion with admirable fairness and
candour.

"I am sure I am glad that Tom Robinson should behave himself like a
gentleman, but that does not make his trade a profession fit for a
gentleman, neither does it render the man, with his lack of ambition and
his commonplaceness and dulness, an interesting specimen of humanity."

"Not a man that a woman would care to die for," said Rose, wrinkling her
forehead and crumpling up her nose till her face was half its natural
length. "Oh, I say, think of any woman being so infatuated as to be
willing to die for an insignificant, foxy-headed, well-bred shopkeeper!"

"Don't be slangy, Rose," Annie rebuked her sister.

"Still I am very glad," said Dora's soft voice quite distinctly, and
while she blushed furiously she reared her little neck with an
unconscious gesture. It said plainly, "Yes, I am glad that the man who
sought me for his wife has shown himself liberal and merciful, so that I
can always think of him and his wishes with respect and gratitude."

"And so am I glad," agreed May warmly. "It is so nice that 'Robinson's'
has not made its master grasping and greedy."

"I don't know that rapacity is confined to trade," admitted Annie. "You
ought to know, May, for you have a good deal of intercourse with royalty
in your reading; but I have a notion that it has been the distinguishing
characteristic of a good many kings and emperors."

Annie and Rose had grown more and more eager to take up their burdens
from the first day they were aware that there were burdens for them to
take up. They were becoming positively enamoured of pushing their
fortunes and encountering adventures--not in the least understanding, in
spite of their bright wits, what the burdens, fortunes, adventures might
mean. The two sisters' enthusiasm was just kept within bounds by two
drags on its quicksilver quality. These laggard spirits, Dora and May,
weighed upon their more enterprising companions. Neither could Annie and
Rose quite shut their eyes to the increase of wrinkles on their father's
face, and to their mother's red eyes when she came down of a morning.
If it had not been for these small drawbacks, it is to be feared that
Annie and Rose would have arrived at such a height of _tête exaltée_
that they would have begun to rejoice in their own and their neighbours'
misfortunes. There was something so fresh and exciting in looking about
for openings and careers, in calculating how they were to earn their
bread--which would taste so sweet to those who earned it--and at the
same time save money. They were not quite so insane as to propose to
amass fortunes and fling them into the gulf caused by the crumbling away
of the late bank in order to redeem their father's pledge as a
shareholder. But surely in the course of a year or two they might help
him, and generally assist in keeping the old folks at home in state and
bounty.

Annie and Rose looked on working for themselves in a very different
light from that in which they regarded Tom Robinson's sticking to his
father's and grandfather's shop. To be sure, they did not start with any
intention of keeping shops. Even if they had done so, the descent might
have been redeemed by a dash of sentiment and romance which did not
apply in the least to a man with only himself to look to, a man of
independent means to boot, who had forgotten what was expected from a
gentleman.

There was no danger of Dora or May's being infected with their sisters'
frame of mind. Dora and May were mortally ashamed of themselves. They
feared they were not of the stuff of which heroines--not to say
martyrs--were made. They looked back almost as fondly and sadly as their
mother looked on the old state of matters. They dreaded with a shrinking
terror going away from home, leaving their people, facing the cold,
critical world, being left to their own slender resources. It was bad
enough in Dora, but it was really dreadfully disappointing in May, with
her youthful learning, to have so little spirit and courage; still so it
was, and in the meantime there was no help for it. Dora might have been
glad for purely personal reasons to get away from Redcross for a time;
but she was not thrown into Tom Robinson's company, and the fact of his
refusal had been kept so quiet by the Millars that, unless he himself
betrayed it, which was not likely, the greatest gossip in the place
could only suspect the truth.

It was a small comfort to the unheroic pair, and perhaps to Annie and
Rose also, though they did not consciously take it into account, that
all the older professional men in the town, the leaders and those who
were on most intimate terms, were "in the same boat," as Dr. Millar had
said. But there was a family named Dyer lately settled at Redcross, a
semi-retired stockbroker, with his wife and daughters, who had come from
London to occupy Redcross Manor-house--naturally they had nothing to do
with Carey's Bank, and were still supposed to be rolling in wealth, as
they had been reported from the first. However, there was a notion that
the Dyers' riches had not been acquired in any very refined fashion.
Cyril Carey had always insisted, as he settled his collar and twirled
his cane, that stockbroker was simply pawnbroker writ large. Anyhow the
Dyers were not so distinguished in mind and manners as they were
wealthy. Old conservative folks sighed at the idea of Redcross
Manor-house, which had belonged to the Cliftons from time immemorial,
till the last Clifton fell into the hands of the Jews before he was
twenty, and was driven to break the entail by the time he was forty,
passing to a family of Dyers. The best that could be said of them was,
that the old people were comparatively inoffensive and the young were
presentable. They were inclined to be friendly with the town--it might
be till they could secure a footing with the county people, if that were
possible. They dressed well, thanks to their milliners and dressmakers,
kept a good table, a good stable, and a good staff of domestics, and
furnished Redcross--especially young Redcross--with country-house
hospitalities and gay gatherings, which they would otherwise have
lacked. Yet fanatics of young people like Annie and Rose Millar, who
were persuaded that they were now well acquainted with a reverse of
fortune, began to behave as if they considered it was no longer the
_crême de la crême_ of human experience to amass and retain a fortune.
They began to pity the rampantly prosperous family for the lack on their
part of any knowledge of life's vicissitudes, with their trumpet call to
earnest effort and supreme self-devotion--all that makes man or woman
worthy of the name. As for the younger Dyers, they were content to echo
the sentiments of their mouthpiece, the head of their house. He spoke in
the privacy of his family with a half-affable, half-contemptuous concern
for those unfortunate beggars of uppish Redcross townspeople who had all
come to smash by the failure of one paltry twopenny-halfpenny local
bank.

The Millars were constantly hearing of fresh examples of hardship, and
courage to meet the hardship, piquing and inciting them to enterprise
and self-sacrifice on their own account. Now it would be May, who would
come in from Miss Burridge's with a blanched face, crying, "Oh! you
girls, do you know Ella Carey has gone and is not coming back again?
Phyllis is crying her eyes out, because she and Ella were never
separated before. No, Ella has not gone to be a lady-help, as she
thought she might do, after she had got a little more practice in
washing dishes and peeling potatoes. It is nothing bad, except that she
is gone for good and all, and it has been so sudden. And Mrs. Carey says
Ella is not to come back. One of her sisters, the one without children,
Mrs. Tyrrel, wrote and offered to take either of the girls. And what do
you think Mrs. Carey said? That Ella must go, because if she went there
would be a mouth less to feed. She was sorry, because she said it was
giving up Ella, and she told her she must not expect to have much more
to do with Phyllis and the rest of them at home, for it would be out of
the question, in the different circumstances of the Tyrrels and Careys,
for them to carry on frequent or intimate intercourse. Ella would have
refused if she had dared, for she is so fond of Phyllis and all of them,
even of her mother, though she has grown very hard since the bank
failed. She used to let the girls have their own way. Don't you
remember, Rose, she allowed us to dress up for charades out of her
wardrobe? Why, you once wore her wedding-gown pinned up round you. But
Mrs. Carey would not give Ella any choice. She repeated that there would
be one mouth the less to feed. She said Ella was the elder, and it was
her duty to her father and his creditors to go. So all poor Ella's
things were sought out and packed up last night--the letter only came
yesterday. She has had no time to bid Rose and me, or any of her other
friends, good-bye. She started with Cyril early this morning, and I
don't know what Phyllis will do without her."

"She must do the best she can," said Annie promptly, "and occupy herself
with something better than gossiping with you when she chances to meet
you coming from school. I suppose that was the manner in which you heard
all this; I don't think Mrs. Carey will approve of such a waste of
time."

"But, Annie," pled May, with her dark eyes ready to brim over, "poor
Phyllis has only me now, and she has a great many messages to go,
because their single servant has so much work to do in the house that
she cannot get out marketing. Mrs. Carey is always walking or sitting
with Mr. Carey. If it were not so, Phyllis is sure that her mother would
go out and not mind taking the market-basket herself--a rough, heavy
market-basket. The Careys' servants used to complain because one of them
was expected to carry it in the mornings. Phyllis is glad to let me have
it sometimes, her arms get tired and ache so. You see Jack and Dick are
not often home from school in time, and then they have the boots and
knives to clean. Cyril would carry it for her after it was dark, but
Mrs. Carey won't let her go out then, and sends her off to bed that she
may get up earlier for what she has to do in the morning."

That rough market-basket over which the Careys' former servants had
grumbled, was like a badge of honour in certain shining eyes--far more
so than Thirza Dyer's thoroughbred, or Camilla and Gussy Dyer's
exquisite hats and dainty parasols. Even Annie Millar was not too old or
too wise to refrain from wishing that Mrs. Millar, who still would not
let her daughters soil their fingers if she could help it, had sent them
out marketing in their native town, each in her turn flourishing a
market-basket.

At another time it would be Rose who would arrive flushed and breathless
with the great piece of news that Ned Hewett had taken the post of
station-master at a small station somewhere on the Yorkshire moors. He
had done it when nothing else turned up, without waiting to consult his
father. But the Rector had not forbidden him when he heard. Steadiness
and punctuality had always been Ned's strong points, so that, though he
had not taken his degree at the university, and his old masters had said
they were not surprised to hear it, he might be trusted not to wreck
trains, slay their passengers, and find himself tried for manslaughter.
The difficulty was to fancy a big, slow fellow like Ned rushing here and
there in a noisy, fussy little station. After all, it would only be
noisy and fussy at long intervals, and on rare occasions, "somewhere on
the Yorkshire moors." Ned might have time and space to walk about in.
But what of the uniform? Would the poor boy--they had all known him as a
boy--who had once cherished the notion of going into the army, have to
wear a railway company's coat and a station-master's cap? How funny it
sounded! Well, not altogether funny. There were Dora and May crying at
the bare anticipation. If they were ever on the Yorkshire moors, and had
to greet Ned in this extraordinary guise, it would be awkward for all
parties, to say the least. What were they thinking of? Of course they
would be proud to greet him when he was twice the man that he had ever
been. No doubt Cyril Carey would be glad to have Ned's chance; Cyril,
who had renounced his delicate plush vests and Indian gold chains and
charms, his loitering and dawdling, and taken to a shabby shooting-suit
and spade-husbandry. He was getting rid of his time and keeping out of
his mother's way by digging aimlessly in the garden. He was inquiring,
in a desultory fashion, all over Redcross for any opening in an office
which he could fill. He was not likely to find such an opening unless
it were made for him out of charity. He had not been trained to office
work, and he was far from having Ned Hewett's reputation for steadiness
and punctuality. If Tom Robinson should be the charitable man and ask
Cyril, a schoolfellow and college chum, to help him with his accounts,
the head of "Robinson's" would have to be at the trouble of running up
every column of figures over again. Cyril might ride to hounds and row
in a boat-race with the best; he might even have some elegant
acquaintance with the renaissance and old French, and be capable of
distinguishing himself in stately Latin verse, though that sounded more
than doubtful when he had been plucked at his university--the
inhabitants of Redcross did not, as a rule, pretend to be judges in such
matters. What they did know, because it had oozed out some time before,
was that Cyril Carey, though a banker's son, was lamentably weak in
arithmetic, and his handwriting would have been held a disgrace to any
shop-boy.

Money was required to start lads in the world in the humblest fashion.
Ned Hewett wanted an outfit, and if possible furniture for his
station-house, that he might not begin on credit. Even girls, though
they had been a good deal set aside in such consideration, could not
enter on an independent career without money any more than boys could.
The Millars were therefore thankful that Mrs. Millar had a little money
of her own, not above a hundred and fifty pounds a year, settled upon
her from the first, by one of those marriage contracts which are so hard
to break, and she could use it to supply what was needed for the girls,
who were going into the world with such dauntless spirits and light
hearts.




CHAPTER VII.

ROSE GOES WEST AND ANNIE GOES EAST.


In the end it was settled, to Annie and Rose's great satisfaction, and
no less to the temporary relief of Dora and May's quaking hearts, that
the two former were to take the first plunge into unknown waters. If
things had been as they were formerly, and there had been leisure to
spare from rougher rubs for highly delicate considerations, it might, as
has been hinted, have been held that Dora should have been the sister
selected to go away from Redcross--at least for a time.

But a great deal had happened since Tom Robinson's unsuccessful suit and
all connected with it had been in honour hushed up. People had too many
weighty matters to think of to keep in mind that small sentimental
episode between a couple of young people.

Rose's fate was chalked out from the first. She was to be an
artist--that went without saying. She had certainly artistic talent, she
might have genius. But though she had been tolerably well trained so
far, by a good drawing-master at Miss Burridge's, and by the lessons she
had received from the wandering exhibitor at the Academy and the
Grosvenor, neither she nor her family could be sufficiently infatuated
to imagine she wanted no more teaching. Their conceptions of art might
be crude, and their faith in Rose unbounded, but they did not suppose
that she had only to open her portfolio and sell its contents as often
as it was full. Dr. and Mrs. Millar made up their minds, Rose agreeing
with them, that she should have at least a year in a London studio.

All the three considered it very fortunate when the artist who had
given her lessons at Redcross, hearing of her intention, and of what
had rendered it incumbent on her to work for her living, not only
recommended a studio in which art classes were held, but good-naturedly
gave her a testimonial and helped her to a post as assistant
drawing-mistress in a ladies' school, a situation which she could fill
on two days of the week, while she attended the art classes on the
remaining four. The salary thus obtained was of the smallest, but it
would supplement Mrs. Millar's allowance to Rose, and help to pay her
board in some quiet, respectable family living midway between the
school and the studio. Rose was a lucky girl, and she thought herself
so. Indeed that minimum salary raised her to such a giddy pinnacle in
her own estimation that it nearly turned her head. It was only her
sisters, the wise Annie among them, who regarded the assistant
drawing-mistress-ship with impatience as a waste of Rose's valuable
time and remarkable talents.

A qualification came soon to Rose's exultation and to her pride in being
the first of her father's daughters--and she the third in point of
age--who had just left school, and had hardly been reckoned grown-up by
Annie till quite lately--to earn real tangible money, gold guineas,
however few. For something better still befell Annie. If Rose was lucky,
Annie was luckier. True, she would never be a great artist, she would
never get hundreds and thousands for a picture. At the utmost she would
only be at the head of a charitable institution. She might save the
greater part of her income then, and hand it over to her father, but
that was a very different prospect from the other. Still, from the
beginning Annie would be, so to speak, self-supporting; she need not
cost her mother or anybody else a penny, her very dress would be
provided for her. Above all Annie was going to do a great deal of good,
to be a comfort and blessing, not only to her people, but to multitudes
besides. She was, please God, to help to lessen the great crushing mass
of pain and misery in the world, not by passive, sentimental sympathy,
not by little fitful, desultory doles of practical aid, but by the
constant daily work of her life. Young as Rose was, and enamoured of art
in her way, she was able to comprehend that if Annie could do that
worthy deed, her life would be greater in a sense, fuller in its
humanity, perhaps also sweeter than that of the most famous and
successful painter.

Annie had always taken a lively interest in her father's profession, and
he had liked her to do so. He had been fond of talking to her about it,
and enlightening her on some of its leading principles. He had even
pressed her into his service in little things, and been gratified by the
hereditary firmness and lightness of grasp and touch, the control over
her own nerves and power of holding those of others in check, the quick
and correct faculty of observation she had displayed. But with all his
loyal allegiance to the calling which had been his father's before it
was his, which he would have liked to see his son fill, if a son had
been born to him, he was taken aback and well-nigh dismayed, as her
mother was, when Annie came and told them quietly that she had made up
her mind, if they would consent, to go into an hospital and be trained
for a nurse. He laid before her as calmly and clearly as he could the
conditions of the undertaking, and reminded her that it could not be
gone into by halves, while he thought, as he spoke, that Annie was not
the style of young woman to go into anything by halves.

Mrs. Millar followed with a trembling recital of the painfulness, the
absolute horror to a young girl of many of the details of the office.
But Annie was not shaken in the least. "I should not mind that," she
asserted with conviction. "I know there must be strict discipline and
hard trying work, with no respite or relaxation to speak of; but I am
young and strong, fitter to stand such an ordeal than most girls of my
age are qualified. I am too young, you say? Yes, I admit that; it is a
pity--at least I know I have always reckoned myself too young when the
thought crossed my mind six months--a year ago, of leaving home and
becoming trained for a nurse."

"You don't mean to say, Annie, that you ever thought of going out into
the world before our misfortunes in connection with the bank?" cried
both father and mother in one breath.

Annie hung her shapely head a little, then held it up, and confessed
frankly, "Yes, I have. Oh, you must forgive me. It was not from any
failure of kindness on your part, or, I trust, any failure on mine to
appreciate your kindness, for I believe you are the best, dearest father
and mother in the world," she cried, carried out of herself, and
betrayed into enthusiasm. "But what were you to do with a houseful of
girls, when one would have served to give you all the help you need,
mother, in your housekeeping and the company you see? I _have_ hated the
idea of being of no use in the world, unless I chanced to marry," ended
Annie, with a quick, impatient sigh.

"My dear, you are talking exaggerated nonsense." Mrs. Millar reproved
her daughter with unusual severity, dislodging her cap by the energy
of her remonstrance, so that Annie had to step forward promptly,
arrest it on its downward path, and set it straight before the
conversation went any further. "Nobody said such things when I was
young. I was one of a household of girls, far enough scattered now,
poor dears!"--parenthetically apostrophizing herself and her youthful
companions with unconscious pathos--"I would have liked to hear any
one say to us, or to our father and mother, that we were no good in
the world. I call it a positive sin in the young people of this
generation to be so restless and dissatisfied, and so ready to take
responsibilities upon themselves. It is a temptation of Providence to
send such calamities as the one we are suffering from. You will know
more about life when you are forced to work for yourself, and do not
set about it out of pure presumption and self-will, with a good home
to fall back upon when you are tired of your fad."

Mrs. Millar had been hurt and mortified by Annie's avowal. She had been
further nettled by the slighting reflection on a houseful of girls, made
by one of themselves, while she, their mother, the author of their
being, poor unsophisticated woman! had always been proud of her band of
bright, fair young daughters, and felt consoled by their very number for
the lack of a son.

"Come, come, mother," said Dr. Millar, "you must make allowance for the
march of ideas."

"I cannot help it," said Annie, with another quick sigh. "I suppose
girls are not so easily satisfied as they once were, or they have been
taken so far, and not far enough, out of their place. I could not have
remained content with tennis-playing and skating, or _réchauffé_ school
music, French and German, or fancy work, however artistic--not even with
teaching once a week in the Rector's Sunday-school--for my object in
life. But after the way in which things have turned out, there is no
need to discuss former views. Mother dear, it is surely well that I had
not a hankering after idleness, after lying in bed half the forenoon, as
people say the Dyers do, getting up only to read the silliest and
fastest of novels, with secret aspirations after diamonds and a carriage
and pair, if not a coach and six. Of course I should not have been
contented with a one-horse shay, a mere doctor's pill-box, such as you
have put down, father, which Rose and May are determined to set up for
you again before they are many year's older."

"Good little chits!" exclaimed the little Doctor, blowing his nose
suspiciously. "Tell them, Annie, that I like walking above all things. I
find it a great improvement on driving. I have been troubled with--let
me see, oh! yes, cold feet--a deficiency in the circulation, not at all
uncommon when one gets up in years, and after walking a bit I feel my
toes all tingling and as warm as a toast."

"I should prefer nursing to any other mode of earning my living," said
Annie, keeping to her point. "I may be presumptuous, like the girls of
my day, as mother says, but I really think that I have a natural turn
for nursing, derived from you father, and grandfather, no doubt, which
might have made me also a good doctor supposing I had been a man, or
supposing I had sought from the first to be a medical woman and had been
educated accordingly. If I am wrong, you will set me right, won't you?"

In place of contradicting her, he simply nodded in acquiescence, while
he linked his hands across the small of his back.

"Mother, I do not think I should shrink from dressing wounds, if I only
knew the best thing to do to avoid danger and give relief. You remember
when Bella burnt her arm badly from the elbow to the wrist, I tied it up
to keep out the air, before father came in, and he said it was rightly
done, and would not change the dressing. And when poor Tim, who has lost
his place with the putting down of the brougham, gave his hand the
terrible hack with the axe in breaking wood for cook, I was able to stop
the loss of blood, and did not get in the least faint myself. Yes, I
know it would be very pitiful to see a human creature die whom we could
not save," she added, in a lower tone, "and very sad to prepare such a
one for the grave. But, dear mother, somebody has to do it at some time,
and I may be the somebody one day, anyhow I shall have to be indebted to
my neighbour to do the last charitable offices for me. It might be all
the easier to look forward to in my own case if I had done it for other
people, not merely because they were my own, just because they were
God's creatures, and He had set me, among other women, to do the
sorrowful work, and would lend me strength for the task."

"I believe it, Annie," said Dr. Millar firmly, as he looked at the
reverently bent head, and listened to the faltering yet faithful words.

Mrs. Millar said no more, though the poor lady still shivered, as she
looked at the girl in her brilliant youthful bloom. It was too terrible
to think of her associated with disease and death, she whom her father
and mother would have sheltered from every rough wind. Yet what was
pretty Annie in the ranks of humanity, in the march of history? The
frivolous product of a heathen world, the feminine counterpart of some

    "Idle singer of an empty day"?

or--

    "A creature breathing thoughtful breath,
     A traveller 'twixt life and death"--

a Christian girl who with all true Christians had the Lord Christ, who
went about doing good, for an everlasting example? And had there not all
along been something fine in Annie, under her superficial hardness and
inclination to conceal her feelings, something which her family had not
suspected, brought to light by their troubles? something of which
everybody connected with her would be prouder in all humility, with
reason, in the days to come, than they had ever been proud of her
supreme prettiness and lively tongue in times past.

"It is a pity about my age," went on Annie ingenuously, lamenting over
her deficiency in years as other people lament over their superfluity in
that respect, "but it is a fault which will mend every day. I have
found out that there are two hospitals which make twenty-three--just a
year older than I am--the age of admission for probationers, and there
is one hospital that admits them at twenty. Would not the fact of my
being a doctor's daughter go for something? Have you not interest,
father, if you care to exert it, to get the hospital authorities to
stretch a point where I am concerned? You might tell them that I am the
eldest of the family," drawing up her not very tall figure, "that I have
been treated as grown-up for years and years, and that I have several
younger sisters whom I have tried to keep in order." There was a
returning twinkle in Annie's brown eyes and a comical curve of her rosy
lips.

But she relapsed into extreme gravity the next moment; indeed, she was
more agitated than she had yet been, and for Annie to betray an approach
to tearfulness was a rare spectacle.

"There is something worse than my age. I am afraid I am not half good
enough. I have a hasty temper; you have frequently said so, mother. I
often speak sharply, and am not always aware when I am doing it. I hurt
people, as I hurt myself, without being able to help it--something seems
to come over me and impel me to do it. Often I cannot resist making game
of people. I am so silly and fond of fun, like a child, a great deal
worse than 'little May' ever is, when the fit is upon me. Now, if I
could think that I should lose patience with poor sick people, and wound
instead of comforting them, or that I should find them food for my love
of the ridiculous, and forget and neglect their wants in following my
own amusement, I should hate myself--I would die sooner than so disgrace
a nurse's calling."

"You would not do it, my dear," said Dr. Millar, with calm conviction.

"Why, what treason is this you are speaking against yourself?" cried
Mrs. Millar, bristling up in her daughter's defence, the assailant being
that daughter. "You unkind or unfeeling when there was any call for
kindness--whoever heard of such a thing? I should as soon suspect Dora
of harshness or levity in the same circumstances. Don't you remember my
bad eyes last winter, when I had to get that tincture dropped into them
so often that your father could not always be at home to do it? You
dropped the tincture as well as your father could, and though I know I
must have made faces wry enough to frighten a cat, you never vouchsafed
a remark, and I did not hear the ghost of a laugh. Poor Dora was ready
to read to me by the hour, and to fetch and carry for me all day long,
but when she tried to drop the tincture her hand shook so that she sent
the liquid down my cheeks; and she was so frightened for giving me pain
that I could see when I opened my eyes she was as white as a sheet, and
fit to faint herself."

"Dora's hand will get steadier and her heart harder by and by," said Dr.
Millar, laughing. "Not that she has the knack of the operator, any more
than you have, Maria. I don't think one of you has it, except Annie
here."

"That was nothing," said Annie quickly. She added in a lower tone, "And
oh, mother, how could you imagine that I should laugh at your pain?"

"It was only for a moment, and I daresay it was not agonizing, as I was
tempted to call it; very likely your father and you would not have so
much as winced at it. Then there was Miss Sill, poor old Miss Sill.
Annie, I am afraid you girls laughed at her. Girls will be girls, and
she does dress outrageously. You all said her mantles were worse than my
cap," tenderly touching that untrustworthy piece of head-gear. "When she
sent for your father all of a sudden, just when he had been summoned to
Dr. Hewett's brother, who was very ill, as we knew, while we thought
Miss Sill had only one of her maiden-lady fancies, your father told you
to go over and say he would be with her in the course of the day. But
you found her nearly choking with bronchitis. How you were not
frightened out of your senses, I, who am a great deal more than twice
your age, and the mother of a family, cannot tell. You propped her up
in exactly the right position, saw to the temperature of the room, and
caused her cook to bring in the kitchen boiler and set it to steam on
the hob, before another doctor could be found. Miss Sill told me all
about it afterwards; she believes she owes her life to you."

"Oh, nonsense," protested Annie, "I was a little better than her two
servants, who stood looking at her, and beginning to sob and cry; but I
made several gross mistakes. You told me about them afterwards, father;
it was a great mercy that I did not cause her death."

"So far from that," continued Mrs. Millar, in triumphant defiance, "she
calls you her young doctor to this day, and says she will send for you
in preference to your father or any other doctor the next time she has
an attack."

"Infatuated woman!" declared Annie.

"I have not needed to talk to you in order to get you to go with your
sisters and see her since then. You have gone of your own accord twice
as often, and I am sure you have not laughed at her half so much. In
fact, I believe you are becoming quite attached to her."

"I suppose I am grateful to her for not dying in my unskilled hands. I
am afraid I still think her rather fantastic and foolish; but it does
make a difference in one's judgment of a person to have really rendered
him or her a service. I ought to be fond of Miss Sill, after all, if she
is to rank as my first patient."

Mrs. Millar sank into silence on the instant. She stood convicted in her
own eyes. What had she been doing? Proving to her daughter's
satisfaction that she had the special talents of a nurse!

"I am very glad that mother and you think me--not by any means good
enough, of course, not that, but not too impatient, sarcastic, and
trifling to be a nurse," said Annie brightly, addressing her father, who
simply acquiesced in an absent-minded fashion.

After that there was no serious objection made to Annie's wish, great as
the wonder was at first--a shock to her relations no less than to her
acquaintances. The former reconciled themselves sooner to it than did
the latter, with an entire faith in Annie and an affectionate admiration
which was genuine homage. It swelled Dora's heart well-nigh to bursting
with sister-worship. How good Annie was showing herself, how capable of
great acts of self-denial and self-consecration, while she was prettier
than ever with her graceful head, her merry brown eyes, and that soft,
warm colour of hers!

Only Mrs. Millar lay awake at night and cried quietly over what lay
before her young daughter, her first-born, the flower of the flock, as
people had called her in reference to her beauty. Annie's pretty
Grand-aunt Penny had at least enjoyed her day; she had had her triumph,
however short-lived, in marrying the man of her heart, who was also a
Beauchamp of Waylands, and in being raised for even a brief space to the
charmed circle of the county. What she had to go through--whether she
would or not--in the end, was not worse than Annie was proposing to
encounter in the beginning, to live in an hospital, to spend her
blooming life amidst frightful accidents, raging fevers, the spasm of
agony replaced by the chill silence and stillness of death. Annie's
father's time and strength had been given in much the same cause, ever
since he was a young man passing his examinations and taking his
diploma. But he was a man, which changed the whole aspect of affairs;
besides he had always had a cheerful home to come back to, with the
command of all the social advantages which Redcross, his native town,
could afford. He had not lived among his patients with no life to speak
of separate from theirs.

At the same time Mrs. Millar felt herself powerless. She dared no more
interfere to keep back Annie from her calling than a good Roman Catholic
mother would forbid her daughter's "vocation."




CHAPTER VIII.

STANDING AND WAITING.


It was all over in its earlier stages, that dividing and dispersing of
the goodly young group of sisters, that bereaving and impoverishing of
the abandoned home to which Dora and May had looked forward with such
fear and pain, for which all Dr. Millar's fortitude and all his wife's
meekness had been wanted to enable them to bear it with tolerable
calmness. It was only Annie and Rose doing what every young man, with
few exceptions, has to do. It was only their going away to work out
their bents in London. They had often gone from home and followed
various impulses and promptings before. But this was different. All who
were left behind had a sure intuition that this was the beginning of the
end, the sifting and scattering which every large family must undergo if
their time is to be long on earth. Annie and Rose might often come back
on visits. Rose might even set up a studio in Redcross and work there,
but it would not be the same. She would be an independent member of
society, with her own interests to think of--however faithfully and
affectionately she might still be concerned for the interests of
others--and her individual career to follow. Her separate existence
would no longer be merged in that of a band of sisters; it would stand
out clearly and distinctly far apart from the old state of tutelage and
subserviency of each unit to the mass. The lament of the tender old
Scotch song over the departing bride applied equally to Annie and Rose,
though there were no gallant "Jamies" to accuse of taking them "awa',
awa'." In the same manner it was not so much over the cause of their
going that Dora and May lamented, or the father and mother's hearts were
sorrowful, as

    "Just that they'd aye be awa', awa'."

One day as May was coming back from school she met Tom Robinson, and he
stopped her to ask how the family were, and to tell her something. There
had always been less restraint in his and May's greetings than there had
been in those of the others since his dismissal as a suitor. There was
something in May's mingled studiousness and simplicity, and in the
strong dash of the child in her, which dissipated his shyness and
tickled his fancy. If matters had turned out otherwise than they had
done, he told himself vaguely, he and "little May" would have been a
pair of friends. He had no sister, and she had no brother, and he would
have liked to play the brother to this most artless of learned ladies.
"Look here, Miss May," he said, after the usual formulas, while he
turned and walked a few paces by her side, "do you remember the
fox-terrier puppy I was to have got for you and your sister Rose, in the
spring? Well, he died of distemper, poor little brute; but I have heard
of another of the same kind that has had the complaint. I could get him
for you if you cared to have him."

"Oh! I am so much obliged to you, Mr. Robinson, so very much obliged,"
cried May, beaming with gratitude and pleasure. "Rose and I did so wish
to have that dear little puppy which you brought down to show to us
once--don't you remember? and so it is dead, poor little pet; and Rose
has gone away to London to be regularly trained as an artist, just as
Annie is in St. Ebbe's learning to be a nurse. I suppose you have
heard," she ended a little solemnly.

"Yes, I have heard--let me carry these books for you a bit--what is
there of Redcross news that one does not hear?" Then he paused abruptly,
while there darted simultaneously across his mind and May's whether his
speech did not sound as if he thought that Dora Millar's refusal of him
must be public property? "For that very reason," he went on with a
momentary shade of awkwardness, "I mean, because two of your sisters are
gone, I fancied you might like this other little dog to keep you
company."

"I have Dora," said May simply, and then she dashed on in an unhappy
consciousness that she ought not to have mentioned Dora's name to him on
any account. "I should like it immensely though--thank you a hundred
thousand times, it was so good of you to think of me. But Rose could not
have it now, could she? and she wished it quite as much as I did. It
does not seem nice to have it when she is not here to share it,"
finished May, with wistful jealousy for Rose's rights in the matter.

"I do not see the force of that objection," said Tom Robinson,
cheerfully. "Rose has something else instead. She has all London to
occupy her. I am certain she would like you to make the best of Redcross
without her."

"Yes, and of course the little dog would be half hers, the same as if
Rose were here. She would see it every time she came home. She might
have her turn of it at her studio, when she gets a studio. In the
meantime I could write full particulars of it, how it grew and what it
learnt. Oh, Mr. Robinson, has it white boots like the other you
brought?"

"I am afraid I did not attend to his boots, or to his stockings either
for that matter," said Tom with a laugh; "but he has a coal-black
muzzle, his teeth are in perfect order, and I believe he has the correct
tan spots."

"If mother would let us," said May longingly. "You know Rose and I had
not spoken to her about it; we were waiting for a good opportunity to
ask her, when you were so kind as to give us the chance of having the
other little dog. Mother seldom refuses us anything which she can let us
have, still Rose was not sure that mother would give her consent. You
see she is troubled about the stair-carpets and the drawing-room rugs,
and the garden-beds, and we were afraid she would think we should have
the dog with us everywhere."

"Then it rested with yourself, I should say, to show her that you could
keep a dog in his proper place."

"But I doubt if I could," said May candidly, shaking her head, with the
brown hair which had till recently hung loose on her shoulders, now
combed smoothly back, and twisted into as "grown-up" a twist as she
could accomplish the feat; while to keep the tucked-up hair in company,
her skirt was let down to the regulation length for young ladies.
"Indeed, I am almost certain I could not refuse anything to a dear
little dog coming to me and sitting up and begging for what he wanted.
What is more, if I could Dora couldn't." She could have bitten out her
tongue the next instant. What was she doing always speaking of Dora?
What would he think? That she was wilfully dragging her sister's name
into the conversation? And what had tempted her to say that Dora could
not refuse anything to a dog, when she had refused her heart in exchange
for his to the man walking beside May?

He made no remark. If his mouth twitched a little in reproach or
sarcasm, she could not see it under his red moustache; besides, she
dared not look at him.

"I wonder," continued Miss Malapropos, "how I could let you know what
mother thought." She never once suggested his bringing the dog for
inspection, as he had brought the other, or calling for her answer.

"You might drop me a note," he said, stopping to give her back her
books, "and I hope for your sake that it may be favourable, for this is
a nice little dog, and I think you would like him."

May went home more nearly on the wings of the wind than she had done
since Rose's departure, and presented her petition. Mrs. Millar could
not find it in her heart to refuse it, though the stair-carpet, the
drawing-room rugs, and the garden-beds were all to be sacrificed.

"Poor little May! she misses Rose, though Dora and May have become great
friends of late. Dora is very good, and puts herself on an equality with
May, as Annie could not have done. Still, she does not rouse the child
as Rose roused her. What do you think, Jonathan? Would a little dog be
in your way? Would its barking disturb you?" Mrs. Millar appealed to her
husband.

"Not in reason, Maria; not if it does not take to baying at the moon,
or yelping beyond bounds. Dora gives in too much to May, in place of
taking the child from her books, on which naturally she is inclined
to fall back. Dora has become her audience, and listens to her
performances--even aids and abets them. I caught them at it yesterday.
First May actually declaimed several paragraphs from a speech of
Cicero's, and next she got Dora to repeat after her the most crabbed
of the Greek verbs. I shall have a couple of blue-stockings, and what
is worse, one of them spurious, in the room of the single real
production I reckoned upon among my daughters. By all means let May
have a howling monster. She is not too old for a game of romps; and I
must say, though I have never opposed the higher education of women,
I don't want her cultivated into a gossamer, a woman all nerves and
sensations, before she is out of her teens."

"Do you suppose Tom Robinson can still be thinking of Dora?" suggested
Mrs. Millar dubiously.

"I wish he were," said the little Doctor, ruefully. "I wish he were.
Yes, Mrs. Millar, I am sufficiently mercenary or sordid, or whatever you
like to call it, where one of my daughters is concerned, to give
expression to that sentiment. But I should say he is not, unfortunately.
Robinson is a shy man, and, no doubt, proud after his fashion. It must
have taken a great effort--premature, therefore mistaken, according to
my judgment--for him to screw himself up to the pitch of proposing for a
girl of whose answering regard he was uncertain. Having made the blunder
and paid the penalty, he is not at all likely to put his fate to the
touch again, so far as Dora is concerned. He is not the style of
pertinacious, overbearing fellow who would persecute a woman with his
attentions and ask her twice. Poor Dora has lost her chance, I take it."

"I cannot say that I think it any great loss, to this day," answered
Mrs. Millar, stubbornly. She gave a toss of her head, of such unusual
spirit, that it so nearly dislodged her cap. Dr. Millar involuntarily
put out a finger and thumb to lay hold of the truant. "We have our
worldly losses, to be sure, and the other poor dear girls have gone out
into the world very cheerfully. I must say I could not have done what
they have done with so good a grace--so heroic a grace, not to save my
life, Jonathan. But that is not to say that they are to be in haste to
marry--tradesmen. Indeed, when I come to think of it, the fact of their
being so independent and able to provide for themselves, ought to be
like having so many fortunes. It should entitle them to be more
particular, and free to pick and choose the husbands who exactly suit
them. Another thing, if our daughters are not worthy of being wooed and
wooed, and asked--not twice, but half a dozen times, before they are
persuaded to say yes, I don't know who is. The idea of their jumping at
any man!--you have drawn me into vulgar language, Jonathan,--the moment
he makes his bow is too bad or too good, I do not know which to say. You
do not mean that I ever accustomed you to such forward behaviour?"

"No, no, Maria," the gentleman assured her with a smile, "far from it.
There was a bad epidemic raging at the time our little business came
off, don't you remember? I forget now whether it was small-pox or
scarlet fever, but I know I was not only tremendously busy, I dared not
go to your father's house. Then I heard that another swain--an officer
fellow from the barracks at Craigton was hanging about either you or
your poor sister Dolly, nobody could tell which, and I dared not delay
longer. I was driven to the supreme rashness of committing my suit to
paper, and what do you think you wrote back? Have you forgotten? You
thanked me very prettily for the compliment I had paid you, and you
promised to give the substance of my letter your best consideration.
Literally that was all--to a man worn off his feet with work and
hungering for a word of assurance."

"Go away with you, sir," exclaimed his wife, restored to high good
humour, and tapping him on the shoulder. "You understood me
perfectly--you had wit enough for that. You went off directly and
ordered new drawing-room furniture, what we have to this day, on the
strength of that letter--you know you did."

"Showed how far gone, and what a confiding simpleton I was," he said,
and then he tried again to set her right with regard to Tom Robinson.
"You don't understand Robinson, Maria. It is not that he was not in
earnest, or that he is fickle or anything of the kind. It is rather a
case of the better man being beaten, and fools rushing in where angels
fear to tread. Such men as he is accept a sentence without disputing it,
because they do not think too much of themselves while they think a
great deal of other people. It is not a flaw in their sensitive
manliness, it is part and parcel of it, to know when they are dismissed,
and take the dismissal as final. They are not the most light-hearted and
sanguine of mortals, but they are constant enough, and brave enough to
boot, and a brave man is not without his compensations--

    "'For sudden the worst turns the best to the brave,'

"some poet has written."

"So much the better," said Mrs. Millar, again with a suspicion of
hauteur in her voice. "It is lucky for all parties, since I have not the
slightest reason to suppose that Dora would change her mind."

"Then why find fault with poor Tom Robinson?" Dr. Millar remonstrated in
vain.

The appearance of the dog on the scene with his fine pointed nose, alert
eyes, incessantly vibrating little tail, and miniver black and white
coat picked out with tan, caused May as much excitement and delight as
if she did not know one Greek letter from another, and were innocent of
Latin quantities. She was so wrapped up in her acquisition, so devoted
to his tastes in food, the state of his appetite, his sleeping place,
the collar he was to have, that for the first time in her life she had
to be reminded of her books. It needed her great superiority to her
companions in any approach to scholarly intellect and attainment to
enable her to retain the first place in Miss Burridge's classical
department.

"What shall we call him, Dora?" she earnestly consulted her sister,
hanging breathless on the important answer.

"Call him whatever you like, May. You know he is your dog," said Dora
with decision.

"Mine and Rose's," the faithful May made the amendment. "Of course Rose
must agree to any name we think of, or it cannot stand. Perhaps she
would like to choose the name as she is away. Don't you think it ought
to be put in her power--that she ought to have the compliment?"
suggested May quite seriously and anxiously. "I shall write to her this
very minute."

But Rose, like Dora, left the name to May.

"It was so kind of Tom Robinson to remember and offer him to me," said
May meditatively. "O Dora! do you think I might call him 'Tom'?"

"Certainly not," said Dora, with still greater decision. "What are you
thinking of, May? I don't suppose Mr. Robinson would relish having a
dog named for him. Besides, other people might wonder. 'Tom' is not an
ordinary name for a dog, though it is common enough for a man."

"Nobody, not even the person most concerned, would know if I were to
call him 'Son,' the termination of 'Robinson,' you know," explained May,
after a moment spent in concocting this subtle amendment, and in
fondling the unconscious recipient of a title which was to distinguish
him from the mass of dogs.

"Are you out of your senses, May?" was the sole comment Dora deigned to
deliver with some energy.

"'Friend,'" speculated May; "there is nothing very distinctive about
'Friend,' and I am sure it was the act of a friend to get him for me."

"'Foe' would be shorter and more easily said," was Dora's provoking
comment; "or why not 'Fox,' since he is a fox-terrier? You might also
desire to commemorate the donor's complexion, which you all used to call
foxy," said Dora, half reproachfully, half dryly.

"I don't like _doubles entendres_," said May with dignity, "and if I
ever said anything unkind of Tom Robinson I don't wish to be reminded of
it now; anyhow, I could never give a sneer in return for a kindness."

"No, I don't believe you could, May," said Dora, penitently.

May continued a little nettled in spite of her natural good temper.

"What are Shakespeare's names for little dogs?" she asked. "'Blanche,'
'Tray,' and 'Sweetheart.' You could not be 'Blanche,' could you, pet,
unless you were '_Blanche et Noir_'? and that is too long and reminds
one of a gaming-table. You could not be 'Sweetheart,'" went on May,
revenging herself with great coolness and deliberation in view of the
red that flew into Dora's cheeks; "no, of course not, because Mr. Tom
Robinson is not, never has been, and never will be _my_ sweetheart.
There is only 'Tray' left. Well, I think it is rather a good name,"
considered May, critically. "'Old dog Tray' is an English classic. It is
not altogether appropriate, because my Tray is just a baby terrier yet,
but we trust, he and I, that he will live to see a venerable age."




CHAPTER IX.

A WILFUL DOG WILL HAVE HIS WAY.


Dora and May walked out together regularly, a practice enforced by their
father as a provision for their health. To have Tray to form a third
person in their somewhat formal promenades certainly robbed them of
their formality, and introduced such an element of lively excitement
into them as to bear out Dora's comparison of their progresses
thenceforth to a succession of fox-hunts. For Tray was still in the
later stages of his puppyhood. He was frequently inspired by a demon of
mischief or haunted by a variety of vagabond instincts which such
training as he had received, without the support of prolonged discipline
and practical experience, failed to extinguish.

May was very particular about his education in theory, but in practice
she fell considerably short of her excellent intentions. She always
carried a whip with a whistle in the handle; and the sight of the
instrument of punishment ought to have been enough for Tray, since
there was no farther application of it. In reality, the sharp-sighted
little animal no more obeyed the veritable whistle than he winced under
the supposititious lash of the whip. He took his own way and did very
much what he liked in spite of the animated protests of his mistress.
Dora and May went out walking with Tray instead of Tray going on a walk
with them, and not infrequently the walk degenerated into an agitated
scamper at his heels. The scamper was diversified by a number of
ineffectual attempts to reclaim him from forcing his way into back-yards
and returning triumphantly with a bone or a crust between his teeth, "as
if we starved him, as if his dish at home was not generally half full,
though we've tried so hard to find out what he likes," said May
plaintively. If otherwise engaged it would be in chasing cats, running
down fowls, barking at message boys--to whom he had the greatest
antipathy--or, most serious foible of all, threatening to engage in
single combat with dogs twice his size and three times his age.

There is no accounting for tastes, seeing that these tumultuous walks
were the delight of May's days, and that even Dora, with her inveterate
sympathy, enjoyed them, though they deranged somewhat her sense of
maidenly dignity and decorum. It was to be hoped that as Tray grew in
years he would grow in discretion, and would show a little forbearance
to the friends who were so forbearing to him.

Tray, Dora, and May had gone on their customary expedition. The human
beings of the party were inclined to direct their steps as quickly as
possible to one of the country roads. Tray's eccentricities at the
present stage of his development were hardly calculated for the
comfortable traversing of a succession of streets and lanes. But the
canine leader of the party decided for the main street, and Dora and May
gave up their own inclinations, and followed in his erratic track with
their wonted cheerful submission.

It was a fine October afternoon, when Redcross was looking its best. It
was rather a dull town, with little trade and few manufactories, but its
worst enemy could not deny it the corresponding virtues of cleanliness
and freedom from smoke. Here and there there was a grand old tree wedged
between the houses. In one or two instances, where the under part of the
house was brick, and the upper--an afterthought--was a projecting storey
of wood, the latter was built round the tree, with its branches
sheltering the roof in a picturesque, half foreign fashion. Here and
there were massive old houses and shops, with some approach to the size
and the substantial--even costly--fittings of "Robinson's." A side
street led down to a little sluggish canal which joined the Dewes, a
river of considerable size on which Redcross had originally been built.
This canal was crossed by a short solid stone bridge, bearing a quaint
enough bridge-house, still used as a dwelling-place.

The sun was bright and warm without any oppressive heat. The leaves,
where leaves were to be seen, had yellow, russet, and red streaks and
stains, suggestive of brown nuts and scarlet berries in the hedges.

The flowers in the many window-boxes in which Redcross indulged were
still, for the most part, gay with the deeper tints of autumn, the
purple of asters and the orange of chrysanthemums setting off the
geraniums blossoming on till the frost shrivelled them, and the seeded
green and straw-coloured spikes of the still fragrant mignonette.

It was market-day, which gave but a slight agreeable stir to the drowsy
town. The ruddy faces and burly figures of farmers, whose imposing bulk
somehow did not decrease in keeping with the attenuated profits of
long-continued agricultural depression, were prominent on the pavement.
Little market carts, which closely shawled and bonneted elderly women,
laden with their market baskets, still found themselves disengaged
enough to drive, rattled over the cobble stones. An occasional farm
labourer in a well-nigh exploded smock frock, who had come in with a
bullock or two, or a small flock of sheep, to the slaughter-house,
trudging home with a straw between his teeth, and his faithful collie at
his heels, made a variety in the town population.

The latter consisted, at this hour, of shop boys and girls, boys from
the grammar school, a file of boarders from Miss Burridge's, who walked
as if "eyes right" and "eyes left" were the only motion permitted to
them, notwithstanding May's frantic signs to them to behold and admire
Tray's gambols; a professional man, or a tradesman, leisurely doing a
business errand; one or two ladies carrying the latest fashion in
card-cases, suggestive of afternoon calls.

Tray's devious path took him in the direction of "Robinson's," in the
windows of which the golden brown of sable furs, the silver gray of rare
foxes', and the commoner dim blue of long-haired goats', were beginning
to enrich the usual display of silk and woollen goods.

Following his own sweet will, Tray, considerably in advance of his
companions, darted into the shop.

"Oh, what shall we do, May?" cried Dora in dismay; "you ought really to
put that dog in a leash when he _will_ go into the town."

"Better say a chain at once," answered May indignantly, vexed by the
imputation on her pet. "I am sure he has been as good as gold to-day. He
has not chased a single thing, and he has only once run away from us.
Couldn't I go in and fetch him out? I should not stay above a minute."

"And I am to wait at the door while you hunt him round all the counters
and through the showrooms? I had much rather go in with you; but neither
do I care to enter the shop when I do not wish to buy anything. Really
Tray is too troublesome!"

"Oh! don't say that," exclaimed May in distress. "Don't reflect on him
in case anything should happen to him," as if Dora's speech were likely
to bring down the vengeance of Heaven on the heads of all three. "He
soon finds out all he wants when he goes on private expeditions, and
then he runs back and looks for us. I think if we walked _very_ slowly
his dear bright face, with one ear cocked up, would appear in the
doorway by the time we reached it."

"Or some shop-lad may ask him what his business is, and turn him out. It
will be a lesson for him in future," said Dora, severely.

Accordingly the sisters had to slacken their steps to a snail's pace as
they approached the great shop. They had a full view of the interior,
though it was a little dark, unless to the most modern taste. There was
an air of old-fashioned substantiality, comfort, and something like
modest dignity about the long-lasting, glossy brown roof and walls, in
harmony with the heavy counters and shelves, not too heavy for the bales
of every description, which with the contents of the innumerable boxes
had an established reputation of being "all of the best quality," not
figuratively but literally. The famous oak staircase, with the broad
shallow steps and the twisted balustrade, which would not have disgraced
a manor house, ran up right in the centre and terminated in a
gallery--like a musician's gallery--hung with Turkey carpets, Moorish
rugs, and "muslin from the Indies," and from the gallery various work
and show rooms opened. It was evident that "Robinson's" was considerably
older than the lifetime of the first Robinson--the silk-weaver and
wool-stapler who had used it as a mart for his wares. Though it was only
the product of a country town, it bore a resemblance to old London city
places of business. These were wont to have a Dutch atmosphere of
industry and sobriety, together with a fair share of the learning and
refinement of the times hanging about them, so that their masters
figured as honoured and influential citizens of the metropolis.
Belonging to the category were the linen shop of a certain Alexander
Pope's father, and the law-stationer's shop, from which issued, in his
day, a beautiful youth known as "Master John Milton."

There was the customary bustle of a market day at "Robinson's." Miss
Franklin was moving about in the women's department, seeing that
everybody there was served, and giving an occasional direction to the
women who served. She was, as Dora Millar had once described her, as
"fat as a pin-cushion," with what had been originally a fair
pink-and-white complexion, degenerated into the mottled "red all over,"
into which such complexions occasionally pass in middle life. But she
looked like a lady by many small traits--by her quiet, easy movements;
by the clear enunciation and pleasant tones, which could be ringing when
necessary, of a cultivated voice that reached the ears of the
bystanders. She did not wear the conventional black silk or cashmere of
a shop-woman. There might be a lingering protest or a lurking vanity in
the myrtle-green gown and the little lace cap, with its tiny _noeuds_
of dark green riband, which she wore instead. One might guess by their
dainty decorum and becomingness that Miss Franklin had thought a good
deal, and to purpose, about dress, in her day--had made a study of it,
and taken pleasure in its finer effects. In that light she was the right
woman in the right place--presiding over the shop-women in a
linen-draper's shop. At the same time she belonged as clearly to the
upper middle class as did the two girls advancing towards the shop, who,
in place of being studiously well and handsomely dressed, were just a
little shabby, and careless how they looked in their last year's gray
velveteens, with hats to match, which Dora in her conscientious economy
had re-trimmed not very nicely.

Lag as the girls might, they could not delay their progress much longer,
and their bosoms were torn with conflicting emotions. What were they to
do? Leave the truant Tray to his fate? Boldly halt before the next shop
window, and trust to his seeing and joining them there? Still more
boldly, enter and request "the body of the culprit" to be delivered up
to his owner? Before they could come to a decision, Tom Robinson himself
appeared in the foreground. He was speaking, or rather listening to a
giant of a farmer in a light overcoat and streaming cravat, who, in
place of treating the master of "Robinson's" as "a whipper-snapper of a
counter-jumper," was behaving to him with the most unsophisticated
deference. Yet Tom's under size and pale complexion looked more
insignificant than ever beside the mighty thews and sinews and perennial
bloom of his customer. In spite of that, Tom Robinson was as undeniably
a gentleman in the surroundings, as Miss Franklin was a lady, and the
big honest farmer recognized and accepted the fact. While the pair stood
there, and the farmer made an elaborate explanation of the matter in
hand--broadcloth or blankets probably--to which Tom attended
courteously, as courteously as he would have heard the deliverances of
the member of the county or the bishop, Tray flashed out of the mellow
obscurity of the background and sniffed vigorously at the trowser ankles
of the master of "Robinson's."

"Hallo!" cried Tom, looking down at his feet.

"A bit fine terrier-dawg, Mister Robinson, sir," remarked the farmer;
"but I'm thinking he's strayed."

At the same instant both Tray and Tom caught sight of May's anxious face
peering in at the shop door. Tray rushed to his mistress with a
boisterously gracious greeting, which did not include the slightest
self-consciousness or sense of wrongdoing in its affability. Tom took a
couple of steps after him.

"I'm afraid, Miss May, you're spoiling that dog," he said, in friendly
remonstrance, before he observed who was with May, and stopped and bowed
with some constraint.

"Oh! Mr. Robinson," replied May, in her volubility effacing any shy
attempt at greeting on Dora's part, "I am so sorry for Tray's rudeness
in going into your shop without being invited; but I do think he knew
you again, I am almost sure of it," she said eagerly, as if the
assurance were sufficient propitiation for any trifling lack of ceremony
where a reasonable human being was concerned.

"It might have been better if I had known a little more of him," said
Tom musingly, biting his moustache, as he took leave of the three.

Tray meandered down the street, followed hurriedly by his mistress and
Dora. Tom looked after them, and speculated into how many more scrapes
the brute would get the girls, wondered too if one of them would think
she had him to thank for the infliction, and that it was an odd instance
of the friendship which he had pressed her to give him in lieu of a
warmer feeling. That friendship was not progressing very rapidly, though
the world might consider the Millars more in need of friends than when
he had begged to make one of the number. But Tom Robinson knew better.
These girls were enough for themselves in any emergency. They would
never fall back on friends or depend upon them. Even Dora, who had
stayed at home with May, would suffer in silence and bear anything with
and for her family, before she would complain or ask help.

Tray's errant fancy finally took him down a lane leading to the Dewes
and to a sheltered walk between rows of yellowing elms by the side of
the river. The girls were at last able to enjoy themselves. They
sauntered along, talking at their ease, watching the bars of sunlight on
the water, and the crowds of flies in the golden mist which the approach
of sunset was drawing down over everything, and listening to a robin
singing on a bough, when their misadventures for one day culminated and
their worst apprehensions were fulfilled. A mongrel collie advancing in
the opposite direction, with no better qualified guardian than a young
servant girl, who had also a perambulator containing a couple of small
children to look after, aroused the warlike spirit of Tray. He growled
defiance and bristled in every hair, while Dora caught nervously at his
elegant morocco collar, which burst asunder in her grasp, and May
shrieked agitated soothing endearments to no purpose. What unmagnanimous
cur could resist such a challenge? In another instant the inequal combat
was raging furiously. The two dogs first stood on their hind legs,
grappled together, and glared at each other for a second, like two
pugilists trying a preliminary fall, or a couple of duellists pointing
their pistols. The next moment the dogs were rolling over and over each
other on the narrow path, worrying each other with the horrible
snarling noise that accompanies such a performance.

May danced a frantic dance round the combatants, screamed shrilly, and
made dangerous, ineffectual darts at Tray. The servant girl neither
danced, nor screamed, nor made darts; she stood stolidly still, with
something between a gape and a grin on her broad red face. She had not
the passion for dog-fights entertained by the _gamins_ of the streets,
such fights were simply immaterial trifles to her amidst the weightier
concerns of her life; and she had seen her master's dog get too many
kicks in the ribs--a discipline from which he rose up howling but not
greatly injured--to be troubled with any sensitive fears as to his
safety. Besides his enemy was a small beast, a lady's dog, whom Growler
could dispose of in a twinkling, if his temper were up.

"Oh! can you not call off your dog?" wailed May in her agony. "He will
kill Tray. Oh! my Tray, my Tray," and she made another rush to rescue
her pet.

"Don't, May, you'll be bitten," implored Dora.

"He don't mind me, miss, not one bit, our Growler don't," said the
composed damsel, as if Growler's indifference were rather a feather in
his cap.

Alas! for any attention that the victim paid to May's desperate
remonstrances. She had in fact no right to reproach the enemy's
temporary proprietress for her lack of authority over her four-footed
companion. But poor May in her misery was neither logical nor just. She
turned on the other with a passionate challenge, "What business have you
to bring out a horrid brute like that, which you cannot master, to kill
other people's dear little pets?"

"Hush, hush, May," besought Dora, "I think they are leaving off." There
was a slight cessation in the hostilities. "The noise you are making may
set them on again."

"It were your dog as begun it." Growler's sponsor defended both herself
and Growler defiantly.

"Oh!" screamed May, "they're at it again. Tray is down and the cruel
monster is at his throat. Will nobody help us? Will nobody save my poor
little dog?"

The girls were carrying neither sunshades nor umbrellas. They could not
reach the lower boughs of the trees to pull down a switch, but just as
May was springing forward to dare the worst herself, sooner than see
Tray perish unaided before her eyes, Dora caught sight of a large
half-loose stone in the path. "Stand back, May," she gasped, as she tore
it up. Dora's face was as white as paper; she was sick with fright and
distress; she would fain have shut her eyes if she had not known that
she needed every advantage which sight could give her to prevent her
hitting Tray, instead of his foe, as the two rolled over each other in
the struggle which was growing deadlier every second.

"Stop," cried a voice of command behind her, "you'll have the dog turn
upon you as soon as he has finished his present job," and a welcome
deliverer ran forward just in time. He seized the first tail he could
grasp--luckily for him it was Tray's and not Growler's--and hung on to
it like a vice. The "redder" of the combatants, regardless of "the
redder's lick," which was likely to be his portion, continued to hold
the tail of the now yelling Tray, and at the same time seized him by the
scruff of the neck with the other hand, and dragged both animals, still
locked together, with his whole force nearer and nearer to the edge of
the bank by the river.

A new terror beset May. "Take care, you'll have them in the water."

No sooner said than done. With a plunge the two dogs fell heavily into
the Dewes, while the man who had brought them to this pass kept his own
footing with difficulty.

"They'll both be drowned," cried May, clasping her hands in the last
depths of anguish.

"Not at all," said Tom Robinson, panting a little from his exertions
and wiping his hands with his handkerchief. "I did it on purpose--don't
you see? It was the only way to make the beggars lose their grip. Look
there, they are swimming like brothers down the stream--that small
spitfire of yours is not badly hurt. I told you that you were spoiling
him--you ought to make him obey and come to heel, or he will become the
torment of your life. The bank shelves a little a few yards further
down; you will find that he will come to shore shaking himself nothing
the worse. It may be a lesson to him; if not, I should like to give him
a bit of my mind."

True enough, Tray scrambled up the bank presently, bearing no more
alarming traces of the fray than were to be found in his limping on
three legs, and halting every other minute that he might ruefully attend
to the fourth.

Growler also landed, and after glancing askance at his antagonist and at
the champion who had suddenly interposed between Tray and his deserts,
wisely agreed with the small maid-servant on the judiciousness of
immediately taking themselves off, in company with the perambulator and
the babies, to avoid any chance of awkward inquiries.

May ran to Tray, clasped him all dripping in her arms, and prepared to
carry him tenderly home. But in spite of the injuries, for which he was
exceedingly sorry, he asserted his spirit of independence, and declined
to be made a baby of.

"I am afraid we have given you a great deal of trouble, Mr. Tom," said
Dora, while May was still devoting herself to her rescued treasure. Dora
spoke shyly, and inadvertently used the old familiar name, which he had
borne when his father was alive.

"Don't mention it," he said gravely, as shy as she was; "I feel
answerable for inflicting that wretched dog on you--that is, on your
sister. I was sure he would lead you a pretty dance after he was in the
shop this afternoon."

"Oh! Mr. Robinson," cried May, tearing herself away from the
contemplation of her darling in order to pour forth her sense of relief
and the depth of her gratitude, "what a good thing it was you came up to
us! What should we have done without you? Oh! you don't think dear
little Tray is lamed for life--do you? Of course that is ever so much
better than having him killed outright in our sight; still if he would
only let me pick him up and rest his poor hurt leg it might help him,"
protested May wistfully.

"Let him alone, he is all right," he said in his short stiff way. Then
he made a bantering amendment on his speech, because he was quick to see
that his want of sympathy vexed the young girl, perhaps rendered her
burden of gratitude more difficult to bear.

"At the worst, you know he would be as well off as Horatius Cocles, and
he is likely to escape the beating which he richly deserves."

"Oh! Mr. Robinson, beat him! when he meant no harm, when he has been all
but drowned or worried to death by that great, coarse, rough creature,"
cried May, opening large brown eyes of astonishment and indignation.

"I wonder what _he_ would call Tray if he could speak--an insolent
little rascal, who had no proper respect for his superiors."

Dora did not join in the conversation. Her colour came and went, and she
kept glancing at the handkerchief which Tom Robinson was fluttering
about in his hand.

It was May who stopped short and cried in fresh dismay, "There is blood
on your handkerchief; I believe you have been bitten. What shall we do?"

"What should you do, Miss May?" he answered with a laugh. "It is only a
minute impression left by the fine teeth of your friend. You would have
it that he knew me a little while ago, and it seems we were destined to
be more intimately acquainted."

"Come home with us this minute," cried May, so dead in earnest, that
she grasped his arm, and made as if she would have dragged him forward.
"Father will dress it and heal it. I am so sorry, so ashamed, though
Tray did not know what he was doing."

He laughed again quite merrily, as it sounded. "If Tray did not know, he
did his small best to get rid of me. I daresay I was not treating him
with much ceremony. I am afraid I gave his tail as sharp a pinch as I
could administer before I could get at his neck. No, I am not going home
with you; thanks for the invitation. Do you wish Dr. Millar to think me
crazy? Do you apply to your father for medical assistance when you give
yourself a pin-prick?"

"But the bite of a dog is very different, though Tray is the dog,"
moaned May.

"Tray is in excellent health and spirits; I can vouch for that," said
Tom. "I have not the slightest apprehension of hydrophobia."

"O--h!" said May, with a deeper moan.

Dora had continued silent; indeed she could hardly speak, and her face
had grown more like ashes than paper.

He was standing still, and raising his hat a little awkwardly with his
left hand, in lieu of shaking hands with his right, as they came to the
point where their roads parted.

Dora made a great effort and uttered her remonstrance: "I wish you would
come home with us, and let father look at your hand."

"You too, Miss Dora--nonsense," he said sharply as it sounded.

"If Annie had been here," she persisted, "she would have been of a
hundred times more use than I, but if you'll let me I'll try to tie it
up for you."

She spoke so humbly that he answered her with quick kindness, "And pain
you by exposing a scratch to your notice? No, indeed, all that I'll ask
of you is never to fling stones at strange dogs, though they should be
tearing that unlucky imp of mischief limb from limb."

"It was very unkind of him to speak so rudely of poor Tray," sighed May,
as the sisters hurried home; "although it was Tom Robinson who gave him
to me, I don't think the man has ever put a proper value on the dog. But
I daresay he will call to-morrow though he has not come with us just
now, to ask for Tray, and to see how we are after our fright."

"No, he won't come," said Dora with conviction, and she walked on
silently thinking to herself, "How strong and resolute he was, though he
is not a big man, and how little he minded being bitten. Men are
different from women. Of course, he is nothing to me, but I may be
permitted to admire his courage and coolness. No, he will not come, I
am sure of that, he is the last man to take advantage of an accident and
of his coming to our assistance. Even if he did, and I had ever cared
for him, and there had been no 'Robinson's,' it would be too late and
too bad to change one's mind after we had grown poor and had to work for
ourselves."

Dora was right. Tom Robinson did not come. He contented himself with
intercepting Dr. Millar on his rounds, learning that Dora and May were
no worse for their misadventure, and giving their father a piece of
information.

In consequence of that hint, and under the pretence of having Tray's
wounded leg properly seen to, he was, to May's intense chagrin and
disgust, despatched to a veterinary surgeon's, where he remained for
some time, returning at last a sadder and a wiser dog.




CHAPTER X.

LIFE IN AN HOSPITAL WARD.


St. Ebbe's was a model hospital, with every enlightened improvement in
the treatment of the sick poor, and every humane ordinance which the
highly developed skill and the strongly stimulated benevolence of the
nineteenth century could enforce.

Annie Millar was one of six lady probationers, including a bishop's
daughter, two daughters of squires, and three doctor's daughters like
herself. The matron was the widow of a doctor, who had been eminent
alike for professional talent and philanthropy. She was like-minded. If
she had not her late husband's knowledge and acumen as a medical man,
she had much of his experience, and was full of energy and determination
to better the world, the sick, and the poor, almost whether they would
or not. Very few people could look Mrs. Hull in the face and contradict
her high motives and determined will.

Fortunately, Annie's beauty had not worked the scathing destruction
which Mrs. Millar had anticipated with fear and trembling. An
inflammable medical student or two might have been just singed by the
fire of her charms; an older member of the fraternity might have
neglected for an instant to look up at the card above a bed in order to
turn his head and cast a second admiring glance after the new recruit in
the hospital uniform; but no man forgot his duty or was false to earlier
vows through her allurements.

Mrs. Hull had cast a sharp glance at the dainty figure and flower-like
face under the nurse's linen gown and close cap. Annie's sister
probationers, four of them considerably older than herself, had
telegraphed to each other emphatic--perhaps pardonable enough--signals
that the last accession to their number was so very ornamental they
could hardly expect her to be useful. They must look out for defects,
and prepare to atone for failures by their surpassing attainments. But
the mistake was soon rectified, and fresh light dawned on the doubtful
question. Mrs. Hull was the first to recognize and testify that nothing
was to be feared from Annie Millar's youth and beauty, while something
might be gained by them, because she was far more than pretty--she was a
bright, clever girl, very obedient to orders, and exceedingly anxious
to learn her business. In her St. Ebbe's had secured an auxiliary of the
highest promise. The elder sister probationers soon found that instead
of wanting indulgence, forbearance, and pity, the newcomer was more in
danger of awakening their envy as well as their respect by her quickness
in mastering details, her mental grasp of principles, her inexhaustible
spirit.

Yet poor Annie had no light apprenticeship to serve. The programme,
which extends from making poultices and making beds to receiving
doctors' instructions, understanding them, remembering them, and acting
on them, is neither short nor easy, though a fairly good and trained
intellect and an unswerving devotion to duty will get through it
triumphantly in time. Annie underwent the entire ordeal, while she
doubtless brought a little additional intelligence and capacity and a
few more grains of experience to the task than would have existed if she
had not been Dr. Millar's daughter. In spite of the warm woollen jacket
and cuffs which she wore under her linen gown, her little hands were
covered with the chaps and chilblains which are the scourge of
maids-of-all-work, because of their early rising, hard scrubbing, and
the frequency with which their fingers are wet and dried on chill winter
mornings. Her legs ached, as they had never ached after a night's
dancing, with being on her feet all day long, and day after day,
waiting on her patients and attending on the sisters who were placed
over the respective wards. Her mind, too, was kept on the stretch with
the serious charge of pulses and temperatures, with the grave
responsibility of shelves on shelves of medicine bottles, with acquiring
the best modes of bandaging, fomenting, bleeding, stopping the flow of
blood, so that during the little leisure she had she could not turn to a
book for relief; she fell asleep with sheer fatigue more frequently.

Annie was too high-spirited and independent to feel the loneliness of
her position among strangers, whom she soon converted into friendly
acquaintances, if nothing more, as many a girl--as Dora, for
instance--would have done. But, accustomed as Annie had been all her
life to much closer and warmer relations, she clung to the presence of
Rose in London; and it was a proof of how much the elder sister was used
up, when, even on her days and hours for getting out, it was often with
difficulty that she could bring herself to go and see Rose, or to meet
and walk a portion of the way with her on Rose's progress from Mrs.
Jennings's boarding-house to the Misses Stone's school, where she taught
drawing, or to Mr. St. Foy's art classes, where she learned it.

Annie had suffered considerably from what is known as hospital or
infirmary sore throat, because it is understood to be caused by inhaling
the fumes from the carbolic acid used in the wards. Her rich colour had
to Rose's dismay grown poor and pale for a time. She had laboured under
the still more trying and more dangerous infliction, when the senses
morbidly excited become morbidly acute, and she seemed still to smell
the peculiar air of the wards wherever she went. Then Mrs. Hull insisted
on Annie's leaving for a few days, and bundled her off, without the
power of resistance, to a sister of the matron's, who kindly consented,
as her part of the work, to receive and recruit the temporarily overdone
servants of St. Ebbe's Hospital.

In spite of the strength of Annie's nerves, and her power of controlling
them, she sickened once or twice with a deadly sickness at sights and
sounds worse than her most vivid imagination could have conceived
possible. She had to summon all her courage, together with the
conviction that if she did not overcome the weakness speedily, she would
be compelled to own that she had mistaken her calling, in order to
vanquish the insidious foe.

Sometimes, while she was ready to thank God that it was rather the
exception than the rule, she had to witness the lowest moral degradation
in addition to the sharpest human suffering, and this at an age and with
a nature when the feeling of extreme repulsion, amounting to positive
loathing, is in danger of prevailing. It needed all her faith to do
battle with this worst temptation, and force pity to conquer disgust, to
recognize humbly the frailty of the best and wisest men and women, to
acknowledge willingly, even thankfully, the propriety, if one may so use
the word, of what a preacher has called each Christian's suffering, "the
just for the unjust."

No wonder poor Annie's bright face took frequently a worn and harassed
look in those early days of hospital work.

Yet so great is the elasticity of youth, and so brave and cheerful was
the girl's temperament for the most part, that within an hour of such
prostrating attacks and violent revolts, she would be on her way with
her own little tea-pot to the retiring-room, where the lady probationers
and sisters assembled in order to profit by the great boiler steaming on
the hob for their women's refreshment of tea. It was about the only
servile act which they were required to do for themselves, while they
were the servants of others, and they all enjoyed doing it with true
housewifely relish. Annie, especially, was an adept at such tea-making,
and would propound her theories and circulate specimens of her
performance among her companions who profited by her skill, with a glee
not far removed from the mirth of the Millar girls on many a happy
family gathering in the old nursery or the drawing-room at Redcross.

The whole circumstances of one of the bad days in her lot Annie could
never quite forget. It was a raw, gray winter's day, cheerless above and
below, and all went wrong on it, from the moment Annie opened her sleepy
eyes, leapt shivering out of bed, washed in cold water by her own
choice, in order to rouse herself, dressed by gaslight, swallowed her
coffee scalding hot, and hastened to her particular ward. The sister and
the house-surgeon were, as if affected by the day, a little sour and
surly, and every patient seemed more or less out of tune, dismal,
grumbling, delirious, or in a state of collapse.

It was one of Annie's out-days, and as a matter of duty, but by no means
of enjoyment, she braced herself to change her hospital dress for a
walking dress. After she felt chilled to the bone, she started for a
walk, either to be jostled and forced along in a crowded thoroughfare,
where she too might have said--


    "Although so many surround me,
     I know not one I meet"--

or to creep the length of the cleanest side of the pavement in a
depressingly empty street, where the varying arrangement of the shabby
window curtains and the cards in the dingy windows, offering an endless
supply of rooms to the absent lodging hunter, furnished the sole
entertainment to the listless passer-by.

Annie had been afraid that she would miss Rose on her way to her
classes, and the fear was amply fulfilled--not the most distant glimpse
of Rose was forthcoming. Instead, at a crossing, Ella Carey, in her Aunt
Tyrrel's carriage, whirled by the pedestrian and administered a slight
spattering of mud to her dress. "It ought to have been the other way,"
said Annie bitterly to herself, while she stood still to wipe the sleeve
of her jacket. Yet she knew very well all the time that Ella's offence
had been quite involuntary, and that she had not for a moment recognized
Annie. If it had been so, Ella's round girlish face under its smart hat,
leaning back among the soft cushions not discontentedly, would have
brightened immensely. She would have stopped the carriage and been down
in the street at Annie's side in a moment, for the girl was as
warm-hearted as she had been docile. There was nothing she would have
liked better than to hail a Redcross face, and hear the last news about
Phyllis and May, and Ella's father and mother.

When Annie re-entered the hospital colder and more unrefreshed than she
had left it, she thought that she was at last going to be compensated
for life's rubs--beyond her deserts, she told herself a little
remorsefully. She had been longing all the morning for a letter from
Redcross, small reason as she had to complain of the negligence of her
correspondents there, and a letter with the Redcross post-mark was
awaiting her. She saw before she opened it that it was not from any of
her family. None of them used such creamily smooth and thick note-paper,
or exhibited such a cunningly contrived, elegantly designed monogram.
But even a slight communication from the merest acquaintance was welcome
as a flower in spring, when the acquaintance dwelt in dear old Redcross.
Annie had been thinking fondly of it all day as a place of human
well-being and geniality, free from continual sights and sounds of pain
and sorrow, where everybody got up and sat down, went out and came in,
worked and read, even dawdled and dreamt at will, subject to a few
simple household rules. There was no unyielding iron discipline at
Redcross. There was no hard and fast routine entering through the flesh
and penetrating into the very soul. It was just, dear, deliberate,
mannerly, yet comfortable and kindly Redcross. The writer was Thirza
Dyer, and the reason why one of the Dyers, who had hesitated about
shaking hands with one of the Millars after she was guilty of proposing
to earn her livelihood, wrote a letter to a nurse probationer and
addressed it to a public hospital, calls for an explanation. The Dyers,
in their unceasing efforts to gain by their wealth and its liberal
expenditure a footing in the county circle, had got one foot within the
coveted precincts, and there Thirza found to her own and her sisters'
amazement that nursing, not the rich and great, but common poor people,
was a curious fashion of the day. Lady Luxmore had a cousin who was a
nurse. General Wentworth's wife had a friend professionally engaged in a
London hospital for nine months out of the twelve, who was visiting the
Wentworths this winter. Of course it had begun with the Crimean War, and
the _éclat_ with which lady nurses went out to attend on the wounded
soldiers in the exceptional hospital at Scutari. But whatever was its
origin, the rule was established that nursing even day-labourers and
mechanics with their wives and children, was something very different
from being a drudging governess or broken-down companion. It was like
being a member of the Kyrle Society, with which one of the princes had
to do, or like singing in an East of London concert-room, quite _chic_,
perfectly good form, anybody might take it up and gain rather than lose
caste by the act.

Accordingly, it became an obvious obligation on the Dyers to cultivate
and not to cut the only nurse on their visiting list. With unblushing,
well-nigh naïve suddenness, Thirza Dyer, to Annie Millar's bewildered
astonishment, proceeded to start and maintain a correspondence with her.
Two are required for a bargain-making, and Annie was not altogether
disinterested in scribbling the few lines occasionally which warranted
the continuance of the correspondence on Thirza's part. For if Thirza
had lived anywhere else than where she did live, near Redcross, the
answer to her first letter might have been different. Therefore Annie
did not perhaps deserve much solace from these letters, and certainly
this one did not contribute to her exaltation of spirit. It was chiefly
occupied with an account of several _recherchée_ afternoon teas which the
Dyers had held lately at the Manor-house, together with a full
description of the tea-gowns of salmon, canary, and cherry-coloured
plush, lined with _eau-de-nil_ satin, which the Miss Dyers had worn on
these occasions.

Now poor Annie was rather above hankering unduly after tea-gowns, or for
that matter "smart" or "swell" dress of any kind. She liked pretty
things, and things which became her charming person, at their proper
time and season, well enough, but she was not greatly discomposed by
the lack of such adornment, and hardly at all troubled when her
neighbours displayed what she did not possess.

It was because the foolishly exultant gorgeous description, which ought
to have been set to a fashion-plate, carried Annie back with a flash to
one winter's day last year, that it made her heart sore. On the day in
question Annie and Dora, and for that matter Rose and May, acting as
deeply interested assistants, had been tremendously busy and merry in
the old nursery, travestying national and historic costumes in calico.
It was all on behalf of a certain scenic entertainment given in the
Town-hall for the delectation of the scholars in the Rector's
Sunday-school and night classes. It had been a very simple and
intentionally inexpensive affair, and the principal charm to the
performers had lain in the contriving of their costumes. Annie and Dora
had appeared in magnificent chintz sacques--which might have represented
tea-gowns--and mob caps, and had been declared by Cyril Carey, who was
supposed to be no mean judge, a most satisfactory eighteenth century
pair. Cyril himself had broken the rule as to material, and had figured
in the black satin trunk hose, velvet doublet, and lace collar of a
Spanish grandee. But Ned Hewett had stuck to Turkey-red cotton for a
Venetian senator or a Roman cardinal, nobody had been quite certain
which. And Tom Robinson had been a Scotch beggarman, Sir Walter Scott's
immortal Edie Ochiltree, in a blue cotton gown and a goatskin beard,
which she (Annie) had wickedly pretended must have been manufactured out
of tufts purloined from the stock of boas at "Robinson's." Lucy Hewett
had been shrouded in white cotton wool, to represent the Empress Matilda
escaping from Oxford, "through the lines of King Stephen's soldiers,"
under shelter of a snowstorm. Fanny Russell had never looked better than
she looked that night as a Norman peasant girl. It was all very well for
Cyril Carey to condescend to the deceit of praising Annie and Dora up to
the skies, when everybody knew whom he admired most, with reason. That
was Fanny Russell, with her splendid black eyes and hair, and the Norman
strength and fineness of her profile.

What was Nurse Annie, in her holland gown, apron, and cap, recalling and
revelling in? The silly vanities and child's play of the past. Well,
what harm was there in them? These had been blithe moments while they
lasted, which had set young hearts bounding, young feet skipping, and
young voices laughing and singing in a manner which was natural, and not
to be forbidden lest worse came of it.

Annie was roused from her pleasant reverie and plunged into another of
a totally different description. The last was made up of garbled
reality, but with what truth was in it tending to a false, doleful
vision. It would represent St. Ebbe's as a gloomy, ghastly prison-house
of suffering and death, and she in her tender youth and sweet beauty
immured in it by an error of judgment, a fatal mistake incidental to
rash enthusiasm and total inexperience. If Annie ever arrived at that
rueful conclusion, how could she bear the penalty she must pay?

Annie had heard and read of young women on whom the world did not cry
shame, who turned from the decay and death they had not gone to seek,
which Providence had brought to their doors, in paroxysms of repugnance
and rebellion. They could not bear that their perfection of health and
life should come into contact with something so chillingly, gruesomely
different, that their glowing youth should be wasted in the dim shadows
of sick-rooms or amidst the dank vapours hovering over the dark river
which all must ford when their time comes. Those standing round who
heard or read the outcry called it natural, piteous, well-nigh
praiseworthy, it was so sincere. How could Annie realize for herself in
a moment that such heroines(!) are the daughters in spirit of the women
who, in outbreaks of mediæval pestilence and latter-day cholera, have
literally abandoned their nearest and dearest, fleeing from spectacles
of anguish and risks of infection? How could she guess that such women
are the spiritual sisters of poor heathen and savage Hottentot and Malay
mothers and daughters, who, sooner than be burdened with the wailing
helplessness of infancy and the mumbling fatuity of age, will expose the
children dependent on these murderesses, and the hoary heads that once
planned and prayed for the welfare of their slayers, to perish of cold
and hunger?

It was Annie's hour for resuming work, and it was well for her, though
she went but languidly into the spotlessly white and clean ward, among
its rows of beds with the flower-stand, illuminated texts and
oleographs, which generous supporters of the hospital sent to brighten
its cold bareness and soften and cheer what was harsh and subdued in its
atmosphere. Annie was not even greatly affected by the greeting of one
of her patients, an elderly man recovering from an operation, and still
slightly off his head when the fever rose on him. She went to him with a
cooling, soothing application, and he told her incoherently to come
again and give him his dinner and his tea. He liked a young lass or
lady, be she which she liked, with red cheeks and shining eyes to wait
upon him. It minded him of a bit wench of a daughter of his he had lost
when she was twelve years--the age of the little wench in the Bible, for
parson had preached about her the Sunday after his lass's funeral. It
broke her mother's heart for all that, and he buried her too within
three months. Then the place got lonesome, and he took what was not good
for him, till he had come to this; though whether it were the House or
just an hospital he was lying in he could not clearly say.

Then there happened what Annie was wont to describe as a miracle of
mercy to bring her to a better mind. A young boy whose leg had been
crushed by a waggon was carried into the operating theatre for an
immediate operation. It was the lecture hour, and a great professor of
surgery with his class of students, together with several of the other
doctors connected with St. Ebbe's, was in attendance. But it was also
customary, especially where a female patient or a patient so young as
the boy in question was concerned, for a nurse, generally the sister of
the ward, to be present to hold the sufferer's hand if it were wished,
or when it was possible to support the poor head against her breast. It
so chanced that the sister was out, and other available nurses were
engaged, so in circumstances which would admit of no delay Annie was for
the first time called to the front and summoned to undertake the
responsibility of the situation. Already she had lost sight of herself,
and was standing looking so calm, firm, and prepared for every
emergency, that the operating surgeon, with a glance at her, put her
youth and position as a probationer aside, and accepted what help she
could give.

It was a critical case, and for some medical reason no anæsthetic could
be administered. The boy was past the unconsciousness of childhood, and
though nearly fainting with fright, pain, and weakness, remained quite
sensible of the further ordeal he had to undergo. He was keenly alive to
the humane motive which induced the surgeon to turn his back upon him in
selecting his instruments. He even heard, with ears morbidly acute, the
low words addressed to the interested spectators, "Now, gentlemen, I am
about to begin."

With a stifled sob the poor little fellow suddenly managed to raise
himself from the table on which he was stretched. He looked round wildly
on the circle of men's faces, controlled and expectant, with a certain
every-day expression in anticipation of what, in its blind terror and
life and death importance to him, was a familiar occurrence to them, and
on the one woman's face, controlled too, but with an indescribable
wistfulness under the control. Then he made his childish appeal, shrill
with misery, "Oh, gentlemen, will you not stop till I say my prayers?"

There was an instant pause of surprise, commiseration, constraint--the
peculiar awkwardness which in Englishmen waits on any provocation to
betray feeling. Nobody liked to look at his neighbour to see how he
looked, lest there should be the most distant sign of emotion in his own
face. Some strong men there had ceased to pray or to believe in prayer,
yet all were more or less touched by the lad's implicit faith.

As for Annie she had been praying at that very moment, praying fervently
in the silence of her heart, that she might be saved from breaking down
and allowed to be of some service to the boy.

"Certainly, certainly, my little chap; but you must be quick about it,"
said the great surgeon a little hoarsely.

"Our-Father-which-art-in-Heaven," began the boy, running the words
together and speaking with a parrot-like monotony in an unnaturally
high-pitched key. Then his voice began to quaver a little till he
stopped short with a cry of despair--"I cannot mind the words, I cannot
say my prayers. Oh! will nobody say them for me? If mother, as is not in
Lon'on, were here, she would do it fast," he ended, flinging out one
thin arm and clutching convulsively at the air in a kind of
panic-stricken terror.

There was another second's dead silence. It was broken by a woman's
voice. Annie had taken a step forward close to the boy's elbow, so that
her voice was in his ear. She could not kneel, but instinctively she
clasped her hands and bent her head reverently as she said in low but
clear tones which were carried throughout the length and breadth of the
room, and thrilled in every ear, the Lord's Prayer. At its close she
went on without hesitation in the same wonderfully audible voice: "God
bless this little boy. Forgive him every wrong he has ever done. Keep
him safe, and raise him up again, for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen."

Another voice--a deeper one--responded to the "Amen." It was said by the
famous operator's enemies that he was lax in his religious opinions, and
that he rarely found time to go to church. Nevertheless it was he who
with grave heartiness repeated the Amen.

The little lad had sunk back when she began to speak, and there he lay
without giving her a word or sign of thanks--his best acknowledgment of
her compliance with what might be his last wish being his quaking
submission. He could not keep still his quivering flesh, or hold back
altogether his piercing cries and piteous moans, but he bit his tongue
in seeking to stifle them. For he was not fighting with his Maker and
his fate; he was trying in his boyish way, with his small fortitude and
resignation, to endure, in the might of the support which had been asked
for him.

Annie too clenched her teeth, while she opened her eyes to take in
everything that passed before them, as a mirror may be turned to receive
the minutest impression from the scene it reflects. But she did not hear
a single shriek or wail, because her ears were filled with the higher
harmonies which she had called forth. She clasped one of the boy's
trembling hands in her own warm one, which did not grow cold in the
contact. She was on the alert to meet his only half-seeing gaze, and to
give back a glance of tender sympathy and protection--the true mother's
look that is to be found when occasion calls for it in every good
woman's face,--ay, it may even be seen in the precociously earnest,
kindly eyes of many a loving woman-child.

There were plenty of other helpers to render the surgeon all the
assistance he needed in his work, with far more celerity and ability
than Annie could have supplied. But while sense lingered in the little
patient's eyes, it was to the woman he turned for the pity and aid which
did not fail him; it was through her that he drew from One mightier than
all, the spiritual strength for his terrible bodily conflict. In a sense
Annie and he were both on their trial, they served their novitiate
together, and helped each other to bear and overcome. When the operation
was over he lay, with the sweat drops of agony which Annie was gently
wiping off, not gone from his forehead, but also with the reflection
still lingering on his white face of the courage and patience with which
he had been ready to meet death.

"You have behaved remarkably well, and shown no want of pluck, my lad,"
said the surgeon as a parting word of encouragement and cheer. "Lie
still and you'll be able to see your friends by and by. I believe you'll
do famously, and we'll see whether a substitute cannot be found for the
limb you have lost."

He turned to Annie who had done all, and more than all, that was
required of her, probably because she had entirely forgotten herself.
She was not even then sensible of a swift reaction, an overwhelming
tide of embarrassment. She continued more than half unconscious of the
number of eyes which, now that the operation was over, were fixed upon
her, marvelling, admiring, condemning, or ridiculing. For what act is
there, let it be ever so disinterested or self-sacrificing, against
which no voice will rise in condemnation or in mockery?

But it was not the operating surgeon who either condemned or scoffed at
Annie's conduct. He drew her aside, not speaking to her on the religious
side of the episode, which he did not conceive that he had the smallest
right or title to do, but addressing her on the purely medical aspect of
the incident, on which he considered that he was entitled, nay, even
bound to speak. His manner was a little blunt and brusque rather than
suave, like that of a man who had no time to waste in paying compliments
or making soft speeches, but it was thoroughly approving.

"You did quite right, nurse; I'm much obliged to you. That poor boy
wanted all the comfort he could get. If he had gone on and worked
himself into a frenzy before I had taken up the knife, I do not know
that I could have done my work, and certainly the probability of his
recovery would have been greatly lessened."

"I am glad," said Annie simply, with a little gasp of returning
consciousness. "It is good of you to say so, doctor," but it was
doubtful whether she knew what she was saying. She was penetrated
through and through with thankfulness, yet thanks to herself seemed so
irrelevant that she did not care to hear them.

There was more than Annie who thought that thanks to her were out of
place and superfluous. This was specially so with one among the group of
younger men, who at the moment of entering the ward had been fully alive
to the circumstance that "the pretty nurse," as she was known to them,
was on active duty. They had speculated on whether she would stand an
operation, and what a disturbance and nice mess there would be if she
fell flat on the small of her back on the floor, or went off in a fit of
hysterics in the middle of it; and how their "boss" would endure such a
disconcerting interruption to the proceedings. As it happened, the
speculators were in their turn startled, abashed, or irritated,
according to their respective temperaments and frames of mind, by what
followed.

But there was a young giant, with a blonde beard, who let his blue eyes
fall on the floor, drew back till he leant against the wall, and
thrusting his hands into his pockets, asked himself in a dazed, humbled
way, if an angel had come down among them, and where was the good of
presuming to thank an angel? It was a thousand times more officious and
audacious than to disregard the hackneyed quotation about the folly of
painting a lily and perfuming a rose.

Annie, the moment she could be spared, went to her own room, fell down
on her knees, and cried as if her heart would break. Yet they were not
unhappy, but blissful tears, though they were as much for her own
unworthiness as for God's unmerited goodness.

Then she snatched up a sheet of paper and wrote home. "I was so
discontented--such a peevish wretch, this morning, but I have had a
tonic, and now I am so unspeakably satisfied with my lot in life that I
believe I am the happiest girl in England to-night. I would not change
places with a hundred old Aunt Pennys, only I know, alas! that I am not
half good enough to be a nurse. Yet I would rather be a nurse than any
other character in the world, and I would not go back for a permanency
to dear old Redcross, after which I was hankering this very morning, and
live at home with you all again, leading the aimless, self-seeking life
I led, not though Mr. Carey's bank were to rise out of its ashes and
flourish to an extent that its greatest upholders never dreamt of--not
though I were to get a pension or an earl's ransom, or whatever else
people count magnificent compensations and rewards. But you must not
think that it is because I do not love you all as well and a thousand
times better than I ever loved you, for that would be a great mistake,
since I am just beginning to know your true value. But don't you
understand it would break my heart to think that I should no longer be a
nurse and never have such another experience as I have had this
afternoon." And then she told them in a very few words what had happened
and what the surgeon had said to her. How the sister of the ward, and
the matron, and everybody she knew in St. Ebbe's had congratulated her.
They had all united in promising that the poor little fellow should be
her patient in future; they had begun already to call him "Miss Millar's
boy."

The little Doctor not only wiped his spectacles, he held his head
higher. Mrs. Millar read the letter again and again, appropriating it
and carrying it in her pocket till it was worn to fragments. These were
still religiously preserved and portions read to select and sympathetic
audiences. And every time she read the lines herself with a full heart,
she called on God to bless her good Annie, and thought she was honoured
among mothers in having such a daughter.

As for Dora and May they were long of ceasing to talk with bated breath
and the height of loving enthusiasm of how Annie had mastered herself,
and what a stay she had been in the hour of need to the lad. They
planned and carried out their plans at every spare moment, in the
manufacture of knitted socks and cravats for his benefit. But their
great achievement was a quilted dressing-gown which Dora contrived to
cut out, and May, in spite of her bad sewing, to help to sew together,
that in his convalescence he might sit up in bed like a little sick
prince.




CHAPTER XI.

MRS. JENNINGS AND HER DAUGHTER HESTER.


Rose Millar had made up her mind to like everything, if possible, in her
new surroundings, and when she came up to town it was not only by a
piece of good fortune, it was to the girl's credit, that she found so
much she could appreciate, and so little, comparatively, that it was
difficult to put up with.

In the first place, and as of primary consequence to Rose's well-being,
Mrs. Jennings, the lady with whom Rose was boarded, turned out an
excellently-disposed gentlewoman. She had a well-ordered house, pervaded
with the spirit of a gentlewoman. The whole establishment was full of
the self-respect which showed itself in a scrupulous consideration for
the rights and claims, the doings and feelings, of others.

Rose did not complain because Mrs. Jennings and her house alike were
also antiquated and formal. But the lady was not merely formal; it was a
point of honour and an inveterate weakness with her to refuse to own
that she had anything to do with such small but welcome boons to her as
boarders. There she sat, serenely disclaiming the slightest knowledge of
what had taken place, and attributing every attention to her old servant
Susan, who had been with Mrs. Jennings since her marriage
five-and-thirty years before. Or, if it was not Susan, it was her
coadjutor, Marianne, in her housemaid's neat dress, whom Susan, in her
working housekeeper's black cap and gold-rimmed spectacles, had trained
to all fit and proper service in a gentlewoman's house.

In person Mrs. Jennings was tall and thin, sallow, and slightly
hook-nosed, but still handsome. Her upright, broad-shouldered, and, by
comparison, slender waisted figure was conventionally good; but it was
hard to say how far it was her own, or how much it was made up. For she
was one of those women who consider that it is a duty which they owe to
the world not only to show themselves to the best advantage in bodily
presence to the last, but so to conceal and atone for the ravages of
time as to preserve a semblance of their maturity after it is long past.
The performance is not altogether successful. For one thing, it is apt
to call forth a spirit of contemptuous pity in the youthful spectator
who is still a long way from needing to employ such laborious,
self-denying arts.

Mrs. Jennings added to her natural air of dignity by a filmy shawl of
black lace in summer, and of white Shetland wool in winter, draped round
her without so much as a fold out of order, and by a somewhat elaborate
modification of a widow's cap which added half an inch to her height. As
Rose wrote in an early letter home, Mrs. Jennings's cap looked as if she
had been born with it on her coal black hair, or as if it were glued and
gummed there beyond any possibility of being displaced. Mother ought to
see it, take an example, and abandon her flighty, waggling head-gear.
No, on second thoughts, Rose would not like to see mother with a cap
fitted on her head like the bowl of a helmet, and giving the idea of
such stony stability that it might have been fastened with invisible
nails hammered into her skull.

Hester Jennings, Mrs. Jennings's daughter, was the young art student
like Rose's self, to whom she and her friends had naturally looked for
congenial companionship where the girl was concerned; and if she did not
find it with Hester, she was not likely to discover it in any of the
other residents at No. 12 Welby Square. Naturally Rose did not greatly
affect the remaining members of that elderly society, on which Mrs.
Jennings professed to set store. She could not help liking Mrs.
Jennings, though, alas! Rose scarcely believed in her so much as she
would have been justified in doing.

In Mrs. Jennings's daughter, who had been from the first thought of as
a friend for Rose, she believed entirely. Yet Rose had been in the
beginning both startled by Hester Jennings and disappointed in her.

Hester Jennings looked considerably older than she was, which was about
Annie Millar's age; in fact, she was prematurely worn with study and
work. She was like her mother on a larger scale, with advantages of a
fair paleness and remarkable violet-blue eyes, which Mrs. Jennings had
never possessed. Hester might have passed for a lovely young woman if
she had cared in the least to do it. But never was girl more indifferent
to such claims or more capable of doing her worst to qualify them and
render them the next thing to null and void. When Annie Millar made
Hester Jennings's acquaintance, Annie maintained that there was
something left out in Hester's composition, the part which makes a woman
desire to look well in the eyes of her neighbours, and win admiration,
though the admiration be as skin deep as the beauty which creates it.

To think that a daughter of Mrs. Jennings, an artist in her own right,
could dress so badly, with such a careless contempt for patterns and
colours, in such ill-fitting frocks and dowdy or grotesque hats! Her
preference for strident aniline dyes and gigantic stripes and checks in
the different articles of her costume looked very like perversity;
especially when it was shown that with reference to other persons, in
arranging to paint a portrait, for instance, no one, not Mrs. Jennings,
displayed such a fine sense of fitness and harmony as Hester exhibited.
Dress was to her, in her private character, mere necessary clothing,
warm or cool as the season required. It was not worth the waste of
thought implied by turning it over in her mind. Her mother dressed for
the family; or, if she did not, Hester understood that her married
sisters and sisters-in-law devoted, with success, a great deal of time
which they did not value in other respects, to the subject in question.

Speak of Rose Millar's professional notions as to the human figure being
left easy and untrammelled! Rose was a pattern of decorous neatness and
trimness compared to Hester; indeed, Rose was appalled by the total
absence of order and ceremony, not to say of embellishment, in her
friend's toilet. Hester abandoned herself permanently to deshabilles.
She appeared in a jacket indoors as well as out. She dispensed with
collars in morning and lace in evening wear. She did her hair once when
she got up, and regarded passing her hand over her head when she took
off her hat as all that was incumbent upon her afterwards. Without
intending it, and without dreaming of copying the bushes of hair in
Rossetti's pictures, Hester Jennings's sandy-coloured locks, not a good
point in her personal appearance, were, as her great-grandmother would
have cried in horror, more like a dish-mop than anything else. She
stopped short of dirt in her slovenliness because of her purity of soul,
her deep respect for the laws of health, and because of the traditions
of her class, from which she could not altogether escape. But between
her bondage to work, and her scornful neglect of other claims which she
had known over-exalted and exaggerated, she had accomplished marvels.

Hester Jennings had attained such eminence in her recklessness of
consequences, that, in place of being a nearly lovely woman, in
accordance with her profile, complexion, and glorious eyes, she was
barely good-looking because of them, in a style which repulsed many more
people than it attracted others. The sight of Hester was one of the
numerous lessons which she was destined to give to Rose Millar. It
frightened Rose into becoming tamely conventional and elaborately tidy
in dress, to the surprise and edification of her sister Annie, for it
was just at the time when Annie was most spent by her new life and
labours, and least inclined to put off her hospital gown and cap.




CHAPTER XII.

A YOUNG ARTIST'S EXPERIENCE.


Rose respected Hester Jennings. She could not help respecting her--a
creature so much in earnest, so indefatigably industrious, so
indifferent to all the distractions of the outer world which might have
taken her out of herself and away from her work, while she was not above
three or four years Rose's senior. If Hester would have let her, the
respect would have deepened to reverence, when Rose discovered what the
elder girl neither hid nor boasted of, that she was not only paying for
her art lessons at the art school, and in other respects freeing her
mother from the burden of her maintenance,--she was steadily earning a
small independent income by working incessantly at every spare moment
snatched from her studies. She worked at all sorts of designs for the
most insignificant and obscure cheaply illustrated books and periodicals
which cannot exist entirely on old plates excavated from forgotten
stores, bought by the thousand at trade sales, procured by transfer
from America, or even--now that national costumes are dying out--from
France and Germany. These attempts at art were intended to pass into the
hands of children--not the favoured children reared on the charming
fancies of Caldecott and Kate Greenaway; but homelier, more stolid, and
easily satisfied children. Such art was also for the masses of the
people who cannot pay for original art, save in its first uncertain
developments, when the stagier it is, the blacker, the bolder, the more
meretriciously pretty or fantastically horrible, the better it is
relished by its public. Even the stereotyped representations of the
coarser fashion-plates, and the eccentric symbols and arbitrary groups
employed in the humbler trade advertisements which the magnates in such
advertising have left far behind, were food for Hester's unresting
pencil. She might have injured herself irreparably by such illegitimate
practice had she not studied as faithfully as she designed, with
something of a stern, merciless severity, hunting out and correcting in
her studies the errors of her crude work.

Stress of circumstances had lent what the French would have called a
brutal side to Hester's natural candour and sincerity. It was one
comfort that she was still more brutal to herself than to the rest of
the world.

When Rose Millar showed her sister-artist some of Rose's sketches,
Hester gave them a glance and a toss aside one after the other.

"There is nothing in that," she said coolly, "though I can see you have
taken some trouble with it. This is not so bad. No, don't show that
thing to anybody else--it will do you harm." Her highest praise was the
"not bad" of mildest negative approval. "When you go to the class
to-morrow morning," predicted the slashing critic, "you may depend upon
it you will be turned back to a course of free-hand, or to copying from
the round again. I don't mean that Mr. St. Foy will be as plain-spoken
as I have been; he is a great deal too much afraid of hurting your
feelings and his own, and of losing a pupil, though he is not what I
should call either a bad man or a bad teacher. He is just like the rest;
but wait and see if he does not politely turn you back to very nearly
the beginning."

"I have had good teachers before," said Rose, crumpling up her nose and
her forehead tightly, and swelling a little with wounded self-respect as
well as wounded vanity. "It is queer, to say the least, if all my
teachers were in a conspiracy to push me on to what I was not fit for,
and to give me work altogether beyond my powers."

"You asked my opinion," said Hester Jennings, with inflexible calmness,
"and I am not surprised that you do not like it when you have got
it--few people do. The truth is not generally palatable. Not that I go
in for infallibility of judgment. Wait and see what Mr. St. Foy
does--not says--to-morrow."

"But why were the others--one of them an exhibitor at the Academy and
the Grosvenor--so much mistaken?" inquired Rose, with natural
indignation.

"How can I tell? But I hope you do not imagine that exhibitors are
necessarily geniuses, or not as other men, or that they must be able to
do a little bit of tolerable teaching when it pays them to condescend to
it? Mr. St. Foy never exhibits--very likely for the good reason that his
pictures are not accepted; but it does not follow on that account that
he cannot paint a fairly good picture--better even than some which are
hung on the line--and teach very tolerably to boot."

This was a new, bewildering doctrine, and a thoroughly disheartening
state of matters, to which Rose, extinguished as she was on her own
merits, did not make any reply.

"What I think, if you care to hear further what I think," said Hester,
with a dry smile, "is that in not taking time and in being wild to paint
a complete picture--something which everybody could recognize as a
picture, and your friends admire--as if such a thing can be done to any
good purpose for years and years--you have fallen into the disastrous
habit of forgetting, or of only half remembering, what you learnt
before, as you went on learning more. At least, that is the only way in
which I can account for the wretchedness of some of your drawing, and
the badness of your perspective, when you have got so far as to have a
feeling for a scale of colour and the tone of a picture."

"Well, I suppose I can learn it all over again," said Rose, with a
mixture of spirit and doggedness, forcing herself not to betray further
resentment, and to swallow a little girlish weakness at the
uncompromising treatment she was receiving. What would May and Dora say?
But she durst not trust herself to think of them.

"Of course," answered Hester, opening widely a pair of singularly clear
keen eyes. "Do you think I should have taken the trouble to say as much
if I had thought otherwise?"

It was the one dubious compliment which Rose extracted, without meaning
it, from the fault-finder.

Hester's openly expressed desire was to be an artist out and out, to
live like an artist, not to be troubled with the hindrances and petty
restrictions of an ordinary woman's life, which she was tempted to
despise, to which, if she yielded at all in her mother's house, it was
with scarcely concealed reluctance and aversion. Very likely she had
only the most one-sided conception of the life she would have chosen.
Certainly her notions of Bohemianism were about as ingenuous as "little
May's" might have been; to go where art called her, to do what art
demanded of her, to be art's humble, diligent, faithful servant all her
days, without being held back and fettered on every hand by set meals,
obtrusive servants, changes of dress, the obligation to pay and receive
visits. The dream of her life was to get to Paris and have lessons in
one of the French studios, where she was led to believe women have as
good a chance of being well taught as men possess. She would prefer to
live with some young women students like herself _en fille_--a
modified--much modified version of _en garçon_. They would hire an
_étage_ in some cheap, convenient quarter, get the wife or daughter of
the _conciergerie_ to prepare breakfast and supper for them, dine at one
of Duval's restaurants work all day, and sleep the sleep of the
labouring woman at night. She said she knew quite well how such artists
were considered in Paris, that they were regarded as _vauriennes_, to
whom there was no occasion to pay the respect and consideration which
were reserved for the potent _mesdames_ and the _jeunes filles ingénues_
of society. But what had she to do with society? She belonged to the
great republic of art, and had infinitely more to occupy her than to
listen for what society would say. As to not being able to take care of
herself and behave so that the slightest indignity to her would never be
ventured upon, the bare mention of such a possibility was received by
Hester with a wrath which bordered on fierceness, and for the most part
silenced her opponents effectually. Any displeasure which Annie Millar
had displayed on a similar supposition was mild by comparison.

Hester was not an only child. Mrs. Jennings had sons, all in the army or
navy, the mother was proud to say; but none of them in those days of
competitive examinations and expensive living was high enough up in the
service to be able to help his mother. On the contrary, grown men, with
men's callings, as they were, they found themselves under the necessity
of taking help from her. There were also other daughters besides Hester
married to men in professions as unexceptionable as those of their
brothers-in-law, but neither were they in circumstances which could make
them feel justified in granting the smallest subsidy to Mrs. Jennings.
Only Hester toiled for her mother at every moment which she could take
from her studies and her natural rest. Yet the two women, who had dwelt
under the same roof since Hester's babyhood, who were united by the
strongest and most sacred tie, were without one taste in common, were
irreconcilably different in every mode of thought and impulse of
feeling, were only alike in each being well-intentioned and desirous of
fulfilling her intuitions and justifying her beliefs. Being wise, the
pair agreed to differ. But oh! the pity of it where aims, ideals and
standards, hopes and fears, were all equally wide apart.

Mrs. Jennings did not interfere with Hester's freedom farther than she
could help. Hester had her own engagements, her own circle of friends.

It may not surprise those who are acquainted with the various versions
of Hester Jennings to be met with in this generation, that she was a
red-hot radical in contrast to her mother's conservatism--well-nigh a
_communiste_, to whom woman's rights and wrongs meant a burning question
of the day, which, next to her love of art, came very near to her heart.
She was almost powerless to assist her sister women, so overworked was
she on her own account, but whenever she could snatch a moment half a
dozen clubs and societies claimed her for their own. She had really a
wide personal knowledge of the working-women of London, employed and
unemployed.




CHAPTER XIII.

MR. ST. FOY'S AND THE MISSES STONE'S.


There was a second and large portion of Rose's life which belonged to
her art classes, and to the classes in which she was one of the teachers
and not one of the taught. In the art classes Hester Jennings's
influence still dominated over Rose. In spite of Mr. St. Foy's
professional qualifications, for which Hester had vouched, he had not so
potent a personality as that possessed by one of his favourite pupils.
He was tall, thin, gentleman-like, and delicate-looking, with a habit of
languidly winking his eyes every second or two, as if they were weary of
the trying sights of this world. He was kind to Rose in his courteous
way, but she would not have been certain either of his ability to judge
her work or of his honest opinion of it, if it had not been for what
Hester told her.

There were fifty pupils among whom she and Hester ranked. These occupied
the desks, worked at the easels, copied from copies, from the round
or--height of promotion--from well-known models attached to the
institution. There was the old market woman who obligingly sat alike for
wicked old hags and doting grandmothers. There was the athletic young
porter, off duty, who was a brigand or a pilot as occasion served.

The pupils were of various styles, idle and chattering, picturesque and
sentimental, industrious, commonplace, but the most of them were
variations on that last accepted version of the lady artist--the
individual girl who aims at being independent and natural to the verge
of harmless lawlessness and Philistinism--strange reaction from
æstheticism. There were many Hester Jennings's though none so pronounced
as Hester.

The Misses Stone's select boarding-school carried Rose twice a week into
another region, where the wind did not blow so freely and the air was a
trifle stifling. Sometimes she wondered if the Misses Stone knew the
tone of a large proportion of the young lady artists at Mr. St. Foy's
classes--not that Rose herself could see anything absolutely wrong in
it--whether they would care to have an assistant drawing-mistress from
those half-emancipated, more than half insubordinate ranks. However,
Rose's appointment was not in any great danger of being cancelled. She
had involuntarily become doubly careful in her dress and demeanour
lately, and she discovered that the Misses Stone were old and intimate
friends of Mrs. Jennings, whom they pitied sincerely for having so
troublesome a daughter.

At first Rose did not dislike the office of teacher, which brought her
in a little income before she was out of her teens. The whole place
reminded her pleasantly of Miss Burridge's school which she had quitted
but recently, only instead of having a metropolitan superiority in
enlightenment and progress, strange to say, the Misses Stone's
establishment, as if drawing within itself and shrinking back from the
constantly moving, restlessly advancing world around, was really
older-fashioned, less in the van of public opinion than the school at
Redcross. The Misses Stone, their teachers and pupils, were well-bred,
and what might have been called in past days "prettily behaved," though
the behaviour was a little formal. Women and girls were elegantly
accomplished, in place of being solidly informed or scientifically
crammed, in accordance with the fashion of the nineteenth century. Above
all, they declined with a gentle unconquerable doggedness to be turned
from the even tenor of their ways. Italian was still largely taught in
the school, while only a fraction of the pupils learnt German. Latin had
no standing ground save in the derivation of words, Greek was unknown.
The word mathematics was not mentioned. The voice of the drill-sergeant
was not heard, but the dancing-master with his kit attended twice a
week, like Rose, all the year round. The harp was played by the pupils
instead of the violin. Withal there was much careful learning and
repeating of Sunday Collects and the Church Catechism.

The school found ample support. What it attempted to do was in the main
well done. Undoubtedly there was an attraction, half-graceful,
half-quaint, in all connected with it, from the gentle manners of the
elderly Misses Stone, who were only bitter against what was bold,
impertinent, and eccentric, to the most dainty of their small pupils.
Strictly conservative people felt that their daughters were safe in such
an atmosphere, and patronized it accordingly. Undoubtedly they learnt a
good deal which was worth learning.

Rose began by receiving nothing save the most considerate kindness and
approval in that house. It was a libel on its forms and ceremonies to
imagine that they contained anything tyrannical and harsh in their
essence. The very law of their being was amiability, combined with mild
steadfastness in withstanding the subversive attitude of the time. The
most highly-born, richly-endowed girl within the precincts--and the
school was rather aristocratic--would no more have ventured on being
rude to Miss Rose Millar, the junior drawing-mistress, than the girl
would have presumed to stamp her foot at one of the Misses Stone. If
Rose had dropped her pencil in the course of her work, the highly-born
pupil, by force of example, if for no other reason, would immediately
have risen and picked it up, though she might not have made the speech
about a Titian being worthy to be served by a Cæsar. In fact Rose was in
danger of being killed with kindness. Soon she was conscious of
something choking, crushing, dwarfing in this artificial system. This
was made more conspicuous to her by the choice of art subjects for the
girls' study. There was no end of flower and fruit pieces. There were
the stereotyped noble ruins, and cottages, either embowered in roses or
half-buried in snow. There were the Dutch and Venetian boats which had
never sailed on familiar waters. Stags abounded, and Rose ceased to ask
why so many of them stood at bay. The sleeping baby, which might have
been a dead baby or a stone baby, was there; so was the long-nosed,
wooden-legged collie, watching the shepherd's plaid. With what a lively
hatred Rose grew to hate that collie!

Rose felt herself "cribbed, cabined, and confined" when she came from
the comparative open air and robust life of Mr. St. Foy's classes. Yet
even these were not the world of art. She got nervous in the fear of
unworthily committing solecisms against the silken softness and steely
rigidity of the Misses Stone's shrine. She thought if she caught up and
reproduced any of Hester's vagabond notes--the Misses Stone were
necessarily slightly acquainted with Hester, of whom, however, they
never spoke--it would be like throwing a bombshell among these quiet,
unalterable proprieties. She came to have a morbid, feverish craving to
do it, or to see some other person do it. For instance, if young Lady
Maud Devereux would but bid Rose tie her shoe, or even if she would
contradict Miss Stone, or Miss Lucilla, or Miss Charlotte, without
prefacing the contradiction by "I beg your pardon!"

At last these two days a week of giving lessons at the Misses Stone's,
from being merely the agreeable lucrative variety in her life which they
had promised to be, became gray days of penance to Rose Millar, when she
felt she was under a spell, and did her duty badly. She ceased to refer
to them in her letters home.

Rose arrived one morning at the Misses Stone's in a peculiarly excitable
and yet depressed frame of mind. She had not been to Mr. St. Foy's
classes that day; but Hester Jennings had known, the afternoon before, a
piece of unwelcome news which she thought fit to communicate to Rose in
the course of their morning walk, that ran so far in the same
direction. A group of peasants, with which Rose Millar had been taking a
great deal of pains, had been summarily condemned and dismissed by the
master. Rose waxed hot and restive under the sentence, and began to
dispute it vehemently, Hester defending it with equal vehemence, in what
she considered justice to Mr. St. Foy, on the ground of a lack of
dignity and repose in the central peasant. Hester was at that moment
tearing along a thoroughfare, and showing so little dignity and repose
not only in her gait, but in her "loud," ill-assorted garments, that, as
frequently happened, to Rose's vexation, several people among the
passers-by turned and looked after them. Hester to talk of a want of
dignity and repose! It was like Satan reproving sin.

At the same time, while it is hard to admit the justness of a criticism
unaffected by the inconsistency of the person who utters it and of the
circumstances under which it is uttered, Rose was perfectly well aware
that Hester Jennings was as excellent a judge of dignity and repose,
apart from her personal proceedings, as any artist could be.

Rose did not retaliate, save in self-defence. Hester was her senior in
art-knowledge still more than in years. She was not her sister to be
treated without ceremony, and pretty deep down in Rose's girlish heart
there was a respectful tolerance, an approach to tender reverence, for
the turbulent-minded, chaotic, gifted creature beside her. Still Rose's
equanimity was considerably disturbed.

The unruffled serenity of the Misses Stone's domain, far from restoring
Rose's composure, seemed to smite her by contrast with an intolerable
sense of personal reproach, and to goad her into rebellion. Rose was
conscious of her variable spirits--the heritage of her years--getting
more and more uncertain, and of being wrought up to a perilously
high-strung pitch. She felt as if she were panting for liberty to
breathe, to express her discordant mood in some unconventional manner.

As it happened, the principal drawing-mistress, a highly decorous,
self-controlled young woman, ten years Rose's senior, was absent, and
her assistant was alone at her post, with the whole class in and on her
hands. Rose had already taken off her hat and gloves, and she tried to
compose her ruffled feelings before she began her round of the
drawing-boards, as Mr. St. Foy inspected his easels. The analogy with
its disproportion struck her, and moved her to silent, unsteady
laughter, which she could not restrain, so that it broke out into a
ringing peal at the first enormity in drawing which she came across.

Nobody laughed like that at the Misses Stone's --certainly no
low-voiced, quietly conducted teacher. Rose was further aggrieved and
tormented by the astonished heads privily raised, and the wondering eyes
covertly looking at her. She laughed no more. She went on examining,
commending, correcting, till she was tired out. Surely the morning hours
were endless that day. She was exhausted, not merely by the "smart walk"
from Welby Square, which, taken at Hester Jennings's pace, was always
tiring, as Rose knew to her cost, but also by the turmoil of spirit she
had been in. All the toils, disappointments, and drudgery of the life
which lay before her seemed suddenly to press upon her and overwhelm
her, and before she knew what she was doing she was sobbing behind her
handkerchief. She had one grain of sense left, she turned her back; but
her heaving shoulders and the muffled sound of a "good cry" were not
hidden from the electrified class.

Nobody cried like that at the Misses Stone's, unless it might be to
somebody's pillow in the darkness of the night. For any teacher to cry
in her class was unheard of. Rose conquered herself in less time than it
has taken to recount her weakness, and resumed the lesson with moist
eyes, a reddened nose, and her whole girlish body tingling and smarting
with girlish mortification. All the rest of the morning she seemed to
hear two startling statements repeated alternately and without pause.

"Miss Rose Millar laughed loudly in the middle of her teaching;" and oh!
shame of shames, for the womanly dignity of the last year of Rose's
teens--"Miss Rose Millar cried before the whole class."

Rose had once joined in a girls' play, full of girlish cleverness and
girlish points and hits. No less a personage than Queen Elizabeth was
introduced into it. In the course of the plot great stress was laid on
the fact that the Queen had laughed at Lord Essex's expense, behind his
back. This was done in order to pique the proud, spoilt young courtier
to resent the laughter, and, in homely parlance, to give Her Majesty
more to laugh at. The phrase "_and the Queen laughed_," had been
emphatically repeated again and again in Lord Essex's hearing, with much
malicious meaning and effect.

That mocking quotation was resounding in Rose's ears with a
characteristic variation. It was no longer "_and the Queen laughed_," it
was "and Miss Rose Millar laughed," then alas! alas! as a fit pendant,
"and Miss Rose Millar cried."

What a big baby she had shown herself, without the decent reticence of a
gentlewoman's good breeding, or the proper pride of a girl who
respected herself. How these school-girls must despise her! What was she
to do? Wait for the girls to whisper and chatter as all girls will,
however trained? Or go at once to the Miss Stone with whom she had most
to do, tell her the solecism of which she, Rose, had been guilty in the
best behaved of schools, and abide by Miss Stone's decision, though it
should be that she and her sisters would in future dispense with the
services of Miss Rose Millar as assistant drawing-mistress.

Rose had the courage and honesty to adopt the latter course, and she
tried to think that the fresh affront it brought her, was part of the
penalty which she was bound to pay for her disgraceful childishness.

Miss Lucilla Stone listened with a little personal discomfiture, for she
was, like Mrs. Jennings, so thoroughly mistress of herself and the
situation, that any _gaucherie_ or boisterous indiscretion was positive
pain to her. Besides, the bad example to the girls for whom Miss Lucilla
and her sisters were responsible, made a matter which people who did not
understand might wrongly consider a trifle, really a serious affair. "No
doubt," acquiesced Miss Lucilla, "something had put you out, as you tell
me," in low-voiced rebuke, which yet sunk Rose in the dust, deeper than
she had been, when she was making her impulsive confession. "You were
tired with your walk, of course, but, my dear Miss Rose Millar, it is
necessary to learn to practise self-control, especially in the presence
of young people. They are so quick to notice and to encroach on their
elders and those placed in authority over them, when the necessary
distance of perfect self-control on the one side--if possible on both
sides--is not preserved between them. Perhaps," added Miss Lucilla
meditatively, and beginning to brighten a little, for she hated to give
the lecture well-nigh as much as Rose hated to receive it, "if you had
swallowed just a teaspoonful of _sel-volatile_ or something of that
kind, when you came in, the little scene would have been avoided. I
shall speak to my sister Charlotte, who has the key of our medicine
chest, and get her to administer a tiny dose to you every drawing day;
you will step into the study the first thing, and it will be ready for
you."

"Oh, no, thank you, Miss Lucilla," exclaimed Rose hastily, "I never took
_sel-volatile_ in my life. Father says not one of us is hysterical, or
is likely to faint on an emergency, not even Dora or May. He is quite
proud of Annie--my sister Annie--for her nerve, and she needs it all,
since she is in training for a nurse."

Miss Lucilla shook her head dubiously, whether at the modern
institution of lady nurses, or at the superiority in nerve of any family
to which Miss Rose Millar belonged.

"You may not have been hysterical before," said Miss Lucilla with mild
obstinacy; "but that is no reason why you should not be so now. If you
dislike _sel-volatile_, you ought to try red lavender drops. I know they
have gone out of fashion, but my dear mother still used them and found
much benefit from them till she was seventy-seven years of age."

Rose longed to say that there was a great gulf between seventy-seven and
nineteen and two months. She was stopped by the quiet determination and
self-satisfaction visible in Miss Lucilla's face and manner, as she rose
and graciously but summarily dismissed the trespasser on her valuable
time.

"Yes, I hope this will meet the case. You have been overdoing
yourself--that explains itself to everybody. Dear Mrs. Jennings must
forbid you tea and coffee and limit you to cocoa in the meantime;
indeed, my sisters and I take that precaution before any mischief
appears. Don't forget Miss Stone's study the first thing on drawing
mornings. I trust a little sedative and stimulant in one will prepare
you nicely for the drawing lessons."

To Rose's disgust she was compelled to make wry faces and choke over so
many doses of _sel-volatile_ and red lavender to the end of the term.
She made secret unfulfilled threats to write to her father and get him
to say that he would not permit her constitution to be tampered with, he
would himself order her what she required, if she needed to be quieted
like an incipient mad woman or a weak emotional fool.

Rose was not sure that Annie ought not to have come to her help. The
younger sister did not see what advantage there was to the family in the
elder sister's being a nurse if she was not to interfere on occasions of
this kind. But Annie had the bad taste to take the story as a good joke
against Rose; and as for Hester Jennings, it was an instance of "_the
Queen laughed_" with a vengeance. However, Hester stepped in so far. She
would not let the soothing regimen, on which Rose was put, go the length
of depriving her of her tea and coffee in Welby Square.

Within the next few weeks Hester did Rose a still better turn. She
(Hester) came to her friend with an order for decorative designs in
scroll-work, which had reached the elder girl from a decorator of some
repute.

"I think you could do it, Rose," said Hester. "It would not take much
time, and if your work satisfied the great tradesman who has given such
an impetus to this kind of art, it might be a perfect windfall to art
students wishing to keep themselves. You need not despise it in the
light of house-painting. If you read your Ruskin, you will find him as
good as calling Titian and Veronese house-painters, though to be sure
frescoes are rather an extension of scroll-work."

"Indeed, I should never dream of despising it. I should be only too
thankful for any kind of copying or pattern-drawing, or designing for
Christmas-cards--like poor Fanny Russell--if it were the beginning of
the least little bit of an order," said Rose meekly, with a stifled sigh
given to her and May's old magnificent ideas of commissions. "But why
don't you keep the work for yourself, Hester?" the young girl inquired.
"You could do it so well and so easily, and it would be no pain to you;
it would be a pleasure, for it is graceful and true work so far as it
goes--not like these cruel illustrations."

But Hester waived aside the undertaking. "You have been more accustomed
to this kind of thing than I have. No, I mean to stick to my
illustrations, cruel or kind. There is a new man in the publisher's
office who is giving me more of my own way, and I feel it would not be
fair to leave him in the lurch. Who knows that we may not, between us,
lead the way to a revolution in the style of the cheapest original
English wood-cut. Besides, I do not want any more diversions from my
main business. I am already on four different committees for women's
trade unions, the female franchise, and all the rest of it. I must crib
a little more time for my hand and foot. Don't you know?--Drawing my own
hand and foot from their reflection in a looking-glass till I can put
them in any position, and foreshorten them to my mind."

Rose competed for the scroll-work order, and did it so well that she got
the order, and along with it a note of commendation, a tolerably large
extension of the commission, and the first instalment of a liberal
payment for the kind of work. Her elation knew no bounds--

"Oh! Hester, I should never, never even have heard of this delightful
job but for you. What can I ever do for you?"

"Don't hug me," said Hester, retreating in veritable terror, for she had
a peculiar genuine aversion to caresses, still more than to thanks.
"Don't knock off my hat, for I cannot spare another minute to put it
straight again."

The next thing Hester heard was a half-impetuous, half-shamefaced
admission from Rose that she had resigned her post as assistant
drawing-mistress at the Misses Stone's school.

Hester looked grave on the instant. "What did you do that for?" she
demanded gruffly. "Did you mention it to your sister? Have you told them
at home?"

"No," Rose was forced to own--at least not till the deed was done. She
had acted on her own responsibility. "But indeed, Hester, it is the best
plan," she argued volubly. "Annie and all of them will say so when they
know how I mean to cultivate this scroll-work, which is paying me twice
as well already. I put it to you if I could do two things at once, and
if it would be wise to sacrifice the more profitable for the less
remunerative. Why it would be quite shortsighted and cowardly."

"Humph," said Hester, without the smallest disguise, "much experience
you have had of it! Do you know, Rose Millar, these decorators' fads are
constantly changing? Perhaps in three months they will all be for
mosaic, or tiles, or peacocks' feathers again. If I had thought you were
such a rash idiotic little goose, I should never have breathed a word to
you of this man and his scroll-work."

"Oh! but, Hester," pled Rose, determined not to be offended, "I was only
relieving the poor Misses Stone of a painful necessity. I am sure they
have never put any dependence on me since the day I broke down--I grant
you idiotically. I cannot stand the repression--suppression--whatever
you like to call it. Now that there is a way out of it, I have felt
like a wild beast in the school--the girls are so very tame--so much
tamer than we were at Miss Burridge's--where I was not a black
sheep--May will tell you if you care to ask her," protested Rose with
wounded feeling. "But I am so tired of the rosy and snowy cottages and
the ruins, and of that long-nosed collie. Sometimes I feel as if I would
give the world for him to wag his tail one day, just to give me an
excuse for crying out and flinging my india-rubber at him. I wish May
saw him; it might stop her ecstasies over her new acquisition--the brute
at home. I feel that this other brute, and the rest of the Misses
Stone's copies and models, are injuring my drawing--I know they are
making it cramped; while the scrolls help my freedom of touch like
Hogarth's line of beauty or Giotto's O. And it is such humbug, and so
horrid to have to swallow these doses of _sel-volatile_--a great healthy
girl like me!"

"Humph!" said Hester again, "I hope you may not repent what you have
done--if so, you need not blame me."




CHAPTER XIV.

THE OLD TOWN, WITH ITS AIR STAGNANT YET TROUBLED. IS MAY TO BECOME A
SCHOLAR OR A SHOP-GIRL?


The spring found Redcross still staggering under the failure of Carey's
Bank. Hardly a week passed yet without some painful result of the
disaster coming to light. These results had ceased to startle, there had
been so many of them; but they still held plenty of interest for the
fellow-sufferers, and Dora and May's letters were full of the details.

Bell Hewett had left Miss Burridge's; she had got a situation, or
rather, she had been appointed to a junior form in the Girls' Day School
at Deweshurst, going in the morning and returning in the afternoon by
train. It was a good thing for Bell on the whole. She was more
independent, had a recognized position as a public school-mistress,
which she would not have had as a private governess; and if she
continued to study, and passed various examinations, she might rise to
higher and higher forms until she blossomed into a head-mistress--fancy
Bell a head-mistress! She had quite a handsome salary, more than poor
Ned's according to the chroniclers, Dora and May. That was the bright
side of it. Unluckily for Bell, as most people thought, there was
another. The daily journeys, together with the school-work, constituted
a heavy task for a girl. Bell, toiling up from the railway station on a
rainy day, with her umbrella ready to turn inside out, and her
waterproof flying open, because her left hand, cramped and numb, was
laden with a great bundle of exercises to correct at home, presented a
dejected figure, tired out and three-fourths beaten. So the Miss Dyers
thought as they rolled past her in their carriage, and debated whether
they should not stop to pick her up and save her walking the rest of the
road. But she was such a fright, positively bedraggled with mud enough
to soil the cushions, and she could speak of nothing now save the
Deweshurst Girls' Day School and her duties there. It was too tiresome
to be borne with. Poor Bell was not clever, she was one-idea'd and slow
at work like Ned, and she had also his conscientiousness. Probably
promotion was not for her; she must drudge on as best she might. Her
great encouragement at this time, next to her father's and sister's
approbation and sympathy, was, as she told Dora, the prospect of
spending her Easter holidays with Ned at his station-house. What did she
care for its being only a station-house? after the fagging school-work
it would be great fun to put Ned's small house in order, and play at
housekeeping with him for a fortnight. She was bent on making him
comfortable, and cheering him as well as herself. If the weather would
but be fine they might have glorious rambles on the Yorkshire moors when
no trains were due.

Colonel Russell was sailing once more for India, to lay his bones there
without fail, the little Doctor prophesied sadly. In the meantime he had
got, and been glad to get, a subordinate post in his old field. At the
last moment, after he had established Mrs. Russell and her children in a
cheerful house in Bath, he made up his mind to take his grown-up
daughter out with him. But she was not to stay in his bungalow, for he
was going to a small out-of-the-way station where there would be no
accommodation or society in the barrack circle for a solitary young
lady. Fanny was to be left with a cousin of her father's, in the Bombay
Presidency. The lady had offered to take charge of her, and have her for
a long visit.

Did Annie and Rose know what that meant? Could they form an indignant,
affronted guess? "Father said," Dora quoted, "that if Colonel Russell,
an honourable gentleman and gallant officer, had not lived in the old
days and had his feelings blunted to the situation, he would never have
consented to such an arrangement for his daughter. But he had seen his
sisters come out to India for the well-understood purpose of getting
married to any eligible man in want of a wife, so why should not Fanny
do the same thing, when his pecuniary losses rendered it particularly
desirable and the opportunity offered itself? It was not in Colonel
Russell's eyes an unworthy resource. Of course Fanny was going out to be
married and creditably disposed of within a given time, else her father
would not have felt justified in paying her outfit and passage-money.
Certainly he had no intention of paying her passage-money home as a
single woman."

What would the Millars have done in Fanny's case? For was it not
dreadful--particularly when all the young people interested in the
subject remembered quite well that there had been "something" between
Cyril Carey and Fanny Russell for more than a year back? Annie had
always wondered what Fanny could see in a silly, trifling fop like
Cyril. Rose had not been without a corresponding sense of wonder as to
what Cyril could find in Fanny, who, in spite of her grand Norman
peasant's carriage and profile, was dawdling and discontented with
things in general, and though she pretended to a little knowledge of
art, did not in the least understand what she was talking about.
However, Annie's and Rose's opinions were of very little consequence
when the matter concerned--not them--but Cyril and Fanny. There had been
"something" between them which had changed the whole world to them last
summer. They would never entirely outlive and forget it--not though
Fanny went to far Cathay and married, not one, but half a dozen of
Nabobs. For she was going to obey her father, and give herself to the
first eligible bidder for her hand. No doubt she would do it with set
lips, blanched face, and great black eyes looking not only twice as
large as their natural size, but hollow and worn in the young face,
because of the dark rings round them. These were produced by the
sleepless nights which she pretended were occasioned by the hurry of her
preparations, and of her having to say good-bye to all her old friends.
But she would do it all the same.

Dora had only once caught Fanny Russell alone, and ventured on a timid,
heart-felt expostulation.

"Must you go to India, Fanny? We shall all miss you so much, and it is
not as if you were to be with your father, but just to stay with a
distant relative whom you have never seen; it does appear such a
sacrifice."

"And what should I do if I stayed behind papa, Dora?" asked Fanny,
turning upon her with those great burning eyes and parched lips. "The
house here is to be given up and the furniture sold immediately--of
course you know that. It will take all that he can spare after
discharging his share of the bank debts to keep Mrs. Russell and the
children. I am a useless sort of person--a blank in the world. I could
not nurse like Annie, or paint like Rose. I could not even be a
school-mistress like Bell Hewett. Supposing I were qualified I should
break down in a month. I was born in India, and spent the first five
years of my life there, so that I am idle and languid, without stamina
or moral courage; I am like the poor Bengalees, whom I can just
remember. There is nobody who will undertake to keep me in England,"
ended Fanny, with a short, hard laugh.

And Dora, thinking of Cyril Carey--still one of the unemployed, with his
old supercilious airs lost in the gait that was getting slouching, in
keeping with the clothes becoming shabbier and shabbier, and the
downcast, moody looks--could not find words with which to contradict
her.

Indeed, when Dora was betrayed into giving her mother a hint of that
"something," unsuspected by the seniors of the circle, which had been
between Cyril Carey and Fanny Russell, and rendered Fanny's destination
still more heartless and hateful, Mrs. Millar took an entirely
different view of the circumstances from that taken by her daughters,
and was both indignant and intolerant. "What presumption in Cyril
Carey!" broke out the gentle mother of marriageable daughters, full of
righteous wrath. "To dream of making up to a girl and perhaps engaging
her simple affections, with the danger of breaking her heart and
spoiling her prospects, when he had just failed to pass at college, and
had not so much as a calling--not to say an income, with which to keep a
wife! I shall think worse of him than I did before, after hearing this."

"But you forget, mother," remonstrated Dora, "that the bank was in
existence then. His father might have been able to do something for
Cyril."

"He was not going to live on the bank's capital and credit. There was
too much of that going on already with poor James Carey's encroaching,
dishonest relations and their friends. And I beg to tell you, Dora, that
a man who cannot help himself, but has to wait for his father to do
something for him, is a very poor match for any girl. Fanny Russell is
well rid of him. I have no doubt she will think so before she is many
years older--that is, if this is not all a piece of foolish nonsense
such as girls are apt to take into their heads about their companions.
If there was anything in it, and she had not been going away, her
father ought to have been warned, and Cyril Carey spoken to in the way
he deserved--selfish scapegrace! As it is, the bare suspicion is enough
to reconcile one to Fanny Russell's going out to India, though that
custom for girls has fallen into disrepute, and I never had any liking
for it. Still I hope that Fanny will soon make an excellent marriage,
and will learn to laugh at Cyril Carey and his unwarrantable
presumption, together with any girlish folly of which she may have been
guilty."

Mrs. Millar spoke in another fashion to the little Doctor. She had
happened to be at the railway station on the raw, chill morning when
Fanny Russell, in her smart new gray travelling suit--part of her
outfit--was put into a railway carriage by her father and left there
alone, while he went to look after the luggage and find a
smoking-carriage for himself.

Fanny sat like a statue. She did not even raise her veil when she was
bidding farewell to Lucy Hewett and Dora, who were seeing her off--not
to take a last look at Redcross, where she had spent her youth.

Mrs. Millar understood it better when she stumbled against Cyril Carey
half hidden by a lamp-post, watching the vanishing train. She might have
taken the opportunity to rebuke him for his unprincipled recklessness;
instead of doing so--after one glance at the young fellow's haggard
face--the ordinary words of greeting died away on the kind woman's lips.
She turned aside in another direction, making as if she had not seen
him, without breathing a word of the encounter until she had her
husband's ear all to herself in the privacy of the dining-room.

"O Jonathan!" she said, "I am so glad, so thankful that you did not
interfere and use any influence, any pressure on Dora about Tom
Robinson. I think it would have broken my heart to see any daughter of
mine going off as Fanny Russell went to-day, leaving the look I declare
I beheld on that poor lad's face. I should not wonder though she has
given him the last push on the road to destruction."

"Oh, come now; it is not so bad as that," protested Dr. Millar, and then
he was guilty of a most audacious paraphrase of a piece of schoolboy
slang, for which he had some excuse in the habits of his wife--"Keep
your cap on, Maria. In the first place, I see no analogy between the
cases. Dora had not a private love affair--at least I was never told of
it."

"Father, what are you thinking of? A private love affair in this house!
It was very different with poor Fanny Russell, who had only her silly,
selfish young stepmother between her and her father. I dare say she
would never have looked at an empty coxcomb like Cyril Carey if she had
been happy at home."

"And did I not hear you say," asked the gentleman, who had before now
been made the recipient of the disastrous complication of the story,
"that the girl was well quit of the jackanapes, for she could not have a
worse bargain made for her than she had nearly blundered into on her own
account?"

"Yes, I did say so," the lady admitted, when thus brought to book; "and
I'd say it again, if I had not seen that miserable, desperate expression
on his face, and he so young, and such a light-hearted, foolish dandy
only the other day. I may be sorry for him, I suppose, though I have no
son of my own. And I am grieved for poor James Carey, who is breaking up
so fast, and for poor, poor Mrs. Carey."

It was a positive relief when Dr. Millar came in one day and announced
that he had a piece of good news for the family, by far the best where
the Careys were concerned that he had heard for many a day. Cyril had
got an appointment at last; he had been offered the command of the
mounted police at Deweshurst.

"A policeman. Oh! what a downfall," cried Mrs. Millar and Dora. But when
the Doctor reminded them that there were policemen and policemen,
insisted on the fact that the practice of placing gentlemen at the head
of the constabulary was gaining ground, and asked them what they had
been in the habit of calling Colonel Shaw and Sir Edmund Henderson when
they were the chiefs of the London police, his womankind gave in.

Mrs. Carey did not say there would be another mouth less for her to
feed, but she remarked, with the same sardonic calmness, that Cyril's
clothes would be provided for him, which would be one good thing. Cyril
himself was only too glad to get away. He would have something to do,
however unpalatable in itself, instead of digging in the garden, and
going through the form of helping Robinson, his clerks, and cashier,
with their books. He would have a good horse under him once more, if he
were only to ride it to police drill.

Dora could not be sure whether he experienced a throb of thankfulness at
the thought that this had not happened till Fanny Russell was gone.
Where was constancy to draw the line? A man was not less a man because
he was also a mounted policeman. He might even be grandiloquently
styled, by those who were particular about the names of things, the
soldier of peace. Still Dora had an irresistible conception of the
pained disdain, the latent superciliousness, which would have sprung
into full force in Fanny's dark eyes, if she had ever seen the once
magnificent Cyril in the most careful modification of a _bobby's_
braided tunic and helmet.

Bell Hewett would not look so, if she, in her school-mistress character,
met Cyril at Deweshurst. Bell, like Dora, would feel her heart soften
and warm to Cyril in his misfortunes. She would think of Ned, and hurry
up to Ned's old playfellow and chum, to tell him the last news from
Yorkshire, and ask what message from him she should send to Ned in her
next letter. Dora was tempted to go on and wonder whether Cyril's heart
would not be touched in turn by the cordial recognition of his Rector's
daughter, who had, on the whole, kept her position better than he, with
his advantages, had kept his, whose frank greeting had become a kind of
credential of gentle birth and breeding afforded to him in full sight of
the natives of Deweshurst. If he felt all that, he must recognize how
womanly and sweet Bell was, though she was not pretty and not one bit
clever, and be full of gratitude to her. And gratitude combined with
considerable isolation on the one hand, and on the other the constantly
present possibility of agreeable encounters with a loyal old friend,
might lead to anything--to a good deal more than Dora cared to say even
to herself, feeling frightened at the length to which she had gone on
the spur of the moment in this most recklessly unworldly match-making.
Yet was it reckless, when Bell would be such a good poor man's wife, and
when marriage with a woman like Bell might make another man of Cyril
Carey?

However, the Careys' adversity, with its reaction on their old
associates, approached a climax shortly after Cyril left. His father
grew so much more helpless an invalid that it was found absolutely
necessary to have a resident nurse for him. Then Mrs. Carey, though she
continued the nurse-in-chief, stated clearly and dispassionately that
she was now sufficiently disengaged to look after her house and give her
single servant what assistance she required. Therefore, as it was high
time that Phyllis should be doing something for herself, Mrs. Carey
proposed to put her at once into "Robinson's," under Miss Franklin, if
Mr. Robinson would receive Phyllis for an apprentice.

It was in vain that Phyllis cried and implored her mother to take back
her resolution, and that all her friends apprised of the proposed step
remonstrated; Dr. Millar even called expressly to enter his protest.

Mrs. Carey would hear of no objections. Phyllis must do something for
herself, and she was not clever or qualified in any way to be a
governess. Mrs. Carey had every confidence in "Robinson's" as an
excellent shop, conducted on the best principles. She had a great
respect for both Mr. Robinson and Miss Franklin--she would never find a
more desirable place for Phyllis. As to cutting her off from all her
connections and the circumstances of her birth and education, that had
been done already pretty effectually. The sooner everybody found his or
her level the better for the world in general. If Mrs. Carey was not
much mistaken, more girls than Phyllis would have to learn that lesson
before these hard times were over. No, it was not Phyllis who was to be
cut off from her connections--from those who ought to be nearest and
dearest to her. It was poor Ella who was separated from the rest of the
family, and condemned to gilded exile. Mrs. Carey was doing her best to
keep Phyllis, not only for her mother and her poor father, but for her
brothers, who must all start in life in a humble way, by putting the
girl into "Robinson's," since Mr. Robinson had reluctantly consented to
have her.

Dr. Millar retired from the field beaten.

The unheard-of destination of her friend Phyllis played the most
extraordinary pranks with May Millar's mind. The fact was, there were
two Mays dwelling side by side in one goodly young tabernacle of flesh.
There was the May with the exceptional scholarly proclivities. She had
a life of her own into which none of the family except her father
possessed so much as the tools to penetrate. She cherished dreams of
Greece and Rome, with the mighty music of the undying voices of their
sages and poets, and the rich treasures of learning, among which a poor
little English girl, far far down in the centuries, could only walk with
reverend foot and bated breath.

And there was the other May, hanging about her mother, running to bring
her father's slippers, sitting on his knee to this day, taking
possession of Dora, ordering her about like a young tyrant, adoring
Tray--the most guileless, helpless, petted simpleton of a child-woman
that ever existed. The second May was at the present date the more
prominent and prevailing of the two, so much so that all the
sharp-tongued, practical-minded ladies in Redcross made a unanimous
remark. Dr. and Mrs. Millar's youngest daughter was the most
disgracefully spoilt, badly brought-up, childish creature for her years
whom the critics knew. It was a poor preparation in view of her having
to work to maintain herself. They could not tell what was to become of
her.

At first May lamented, day and night, over the fate of Phyllis Carey, to
have to stand behind counters, sort drawers full of ribands, tape, and
reels of cotton, and wait on her townswomen! May could think of no
fitting parallel unless the pathetic one of that miserable young
princess apprenticed to the button-maker, dying with her cheek on an
open Bible, at the text, "Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest."

Then, as Phyllis accommodated herself to the new yoke, and found it not
so galling as she had expected it to be, her friend May altered her tone
with sympathetic quickness, and reflected Phyllis's change of mood
almost before the mood was established. Phyllis was in mental
constitution like her father, single-hearted and submissive--not bright
any more than Bell Hewett was bright, but contented and trustful as long
as she was suffered to be so. She had been enduring harder and harder
lines at home. She found existence actually brightening instead of
darkening round her when she was transferred to "Robinson's." For
everybody, knowing all about her and her father and mother, with their
altered circumstances, began, at least, by treating her with kindly
respect and forbearance, in spite of Mrs. Carey's austere request that
she should be dealt with exactly like the other shop-girls.

Shop-work, in which Phyllis was to be gradually trained, felt
comparatively easy to a girl who had been taken from school and
launched into the coarsest drudgery of house-work under an
inexperienced, flurried, over-burdened maid-of-all-work. Mrs. Carey was
sufficiently just to exact no more home-work from Phyllis, and to
arrange that she should have her time to herself, like other shop-girls,
after "Robinson's" was closed, while the master of "Robinson's" was
inflexible in setting his face against late hours, except for the elder
hands on one evening in the week. Everybody was good to Phyllis, who, in
truth, just because she was enough of a little lady to be free from
arrogance and assumption, while she was willing to do her best to oblige
her neighbours, provoked no harsh treatment. Above all Tom Robinson for
one person could not be too considerate to her.

Miss Franklin looked on Phyllis Carey as a godsend, a harbinger of other
better-class girls going into trade. The woman not only took the girl
under her wing, she fell back instinctively and inevitably on Phyllis
for companionship, with a selection flattering in a woman to a girl.

Then a complete revolution was wrought in May's opinions and wishes.
Nothing would serve her but that she too must go as a shop-girl to
"Robinson's," and share the fortunes of her friend.

May did not yet confide her purpose to her father and mother, but she
poured it in daily and nightly outbursts into the startled ears of
Dora, to whom the hallucination sounded like a mocking retribution on
the young Millars' old scornful estimate of shopkeepers and shops. May
stuck to her point with a tenacity which, touching as it did a tender,
trembling chord in Dora's heart, threatened also to subvert her
judgment, that was at once sounder and more matured than May's.

The vibrating chord lay in the knowledge that May too was destined to
quit Redcross at no distant day, with the aching reluctance of Dora to
give her up, and to find herself in the position that domineering,
selfish girls sometimes covet--that of being the only girl at home,
having none to share with her in the rights and privileges of the
daughter of the house.

A sort of feverish anxiety, which was in itself ominous, had taken hold
of Dr. Millar to see all he had projected accomplished in so far as it
was still possible. That is, he would fain set in motion, at least, the
wheels which would carry out his purpose. Perhaps he had reason to
distrust his health and life; perhaps it was simply that he was not
insensible to the fact, that money had a trick of running through his
fingers and those of Mrs. Millar like water, though they did their best
to catch it up and arrest it in its rapid course. Mrs. Millar's little
private income was still in part free, and not engulfed in the needs of
the household at Redcross, as it might not long continue. Rose had only
sixty pounds of it, and Annie fifteen for pocket-money till she should
have passed her probation and be in a position to receive her nurse's
salary, which would be as soon as she had completed her first year in
the hospital. There were seventy-five pounds remaining, which might
serve to keep May at Thirlwall Hall in St. Ambrose's with the chance of
her gaining a scholarship and partly maintaining herself for the rest of
her stay in college. "Little May's" maintaining herself in any degree
was a notion half to laugh at, half to cry over, while it took
possession of Dr. Millar's imagination just as serving in "Robinson's"
along with Phyllis Carey had hold of May's.

Another year (who knew?) it might not be in the Millars' power to afford
May the opportunity of growing up a scholar, on which her father had set
his heart. That consciousness, and the sense of the value which her
husband put on May's abilities and their culture, brought round Mrs.
Millar. She began to contemplate with something like composure what she
would otherwise have strongly objected to, the sending forth of her
youngest darling--the child who so clung to her and to home--into an
indifferent or hostile world.

Truth to tell, it was May herself who was the great obstacle. She was
not cast in the heroic mould of Annie and Rose. It was like tearing up
her heart-strings to drag her away from her father and mother, Dora,
Tray, the Old Doctor's House, Redcross itself. She had enough perception
of what was due to everybody concerned--herself included--and just
sufficient self-control not to disgrace herself and vex her father by
openly opposing and actively fighting against his plans for her welfare.
But she threw all the discouraging weight of a passive resistance and
dumb protest into the scale.




CHAPTER XV.

TOM ROBINSON TAKEN INTO COUNSEL.


At last May, in the innocence of her heart, took a rash step. She heard
her father say it was good, showery, fishing weather, and she was aware
Tom Robinson often fished in the Dewes; what was to hinder her from
making a detour by the river on her way home from school, and if she saw
Tom near the old bridge--the pools below were specially patronized by
fishers--she might go up to him and ask him frankly if he had an opening
for her services, along with those of Phyllis Carey, in his shop? If he
had, would he do her the great favour to speak to her father and mother,
and ask them not to send her away to be a scholar at St. Ambrose, but to
let her stay and be a shop-woman in Redcross?

Tom Robinson, at the first word of her appeal, put up his fishing-rod,
slung his basket, in which there were only a couple of fish, on his
back, shouldered her books, and turned and walked back with her, as if
it was he who was seeking her company and not she his. How else was he
to make the little girl who might have been his pet sister see that
there was any harm in the irregular course she had pursued? How,
otherwise, was she to understand that she was big enough--nearly a head
taller than her sister Dora--and old enough with her seventeen years,
though she was still the child of the family, to render it indecorous
for her to come, out of her own head, without the knowledge of anybody,
to have a private interview with him on the banks of the Dewes?

"'Robinson's' is highly honoured," he told her, in a tone partly
bantering, partly serious, and wholly friendly, "and I too should, and
do, thank you for the trust in me which your proposal implies, but I am
afraid it would not do, Miss May."

May's fair young face fell.

"Oh! I am so sorry," she said simply; "but, please, may I know why you
have Phyllis and will not have me?"

"The case is altogether different. Mrs. Carey made up her mind that Miss
Phyllis should go into a shop--mine or another's. Phyllis was not happy
at home; she is not a clever, studious girl, though she is your friend
and is very nice--of course all young ladies are nice. There is no
comparison between you and her."

"But why shouldn't clever people go and work in shops?" persisted May,
in her half-childish way--"not that I mean I am clever; that would be
too conceited. But I am sure it would be a great deal better for shops
if they had the very cleverest people to work in them."

"It depends on the kind of cleverness," he told her. "With regard to one
sort you are right, of course; with respect to another it would not
answer, and it would be horrible waste."

She opened her brown eyes wide. "Why do you waste your abilities and
college education?" she asked him naïvely--"not that everybody calls it
a waste; some people say 'Robinson's' is the high-class shop it is,
because its masters have not only been respectable people, they have
always been educated men and gentlemen."

"I ought to say for myself and my predecessors that I am much obliged to
'some people' for acknowledging that," he remarked coolly.

"I beg your pardon, Mr. Robinson," said May humbly. "I know I have been
very rude--I am constantly saying stupid things."

"Not at all; and though you did, never mind--say them to me if you
like," he gave her _carte blanche_ to comfort her. "But look here, Miss
May, I don't wish you to make mistakes. Indeed it is my duty, since I am
a great deal older than you--old enough to be, well, your uncle I
should say--to prevent it if I can."

"I don't see how you could be my uncle," said May bluntly, "when you are
not more than five or six years older than Annie--I have heard her say
so--you are more like my brother."

The instant she mentioned the relationship to which he had aspired in
vain, she felt the blood tingling to her finger-tips, and she could see
him redden under the shade of his soft felt hat.

May groaned inwardly. "Oh! I am a blundering goose; I wonder anybody can
be so infatuated as to think me clever."

"I have not said what I wished to say," he resumed, for somehow, in
spite of her forgetfulness and lack of tact, he could talk well enough
to May. "I must set you right. I have not a grain of the scholar in me
such as you have, neither do I believe that those who went before me
had; we could never have been more than fair students. We did not go out
of our way to get learning. We did what our associates and
contemporaries did, that was all. I fancy I may take the small credit to
us of saying that we had no objection to learn what the ancients
thought, saw, and did, after we had been lugged through the Latin
grammar and caned into familiarity with Greek verbs. We were like other
men who had the same advantages. I honestly believe if we had anything
special and individual about us it was a turn for trade. That is the
only manner in which I can account for our sticking to the shop, unless
we were mere money-grubbers. But all that signifies very little; what
does signify is that you are not quite like other girls. What, May, do
you pretend that you do not prize the roll of a sonorous passage, or the
trip of an exquisite phrase in Latin or Greek? That it does not tickle
your ears, cling to your memory, and haunt you as a theme in music
haunts a composer? Do you not care to go any deeper in Plato or in the
dramatists? Is it a fact that you can bear to have heard the last of
Antigone, and Alcestis, and Electra?"

May hung her head like one accused of gross unfaithfulness, with some
show of reason.

"No, I cannot say that, Mr. Robinson," she owned, "I shall think and
dream of them all my life. They are so grand and persecuted and sad. But
there--if I do not turn my back on them and my books, I must go to St.
Ambrose's, there is no choice," ended May disconsolately.

"But why not go to St. Ambrose's?"

"Oh! you do not know, Mr. Robinson," protested May with fresh energy.
"In the first place you are a man and cannot understand. In the second,
I suppose it is because I am so silly and childish and cowardly," she
went on incoherently. "Annie always said it was cowardly; she and Rose
went away quite bravely and cheerfully, keeping up their own and
everybody's spirits to the last. But Dora and I could not do it, yet I
do not know that anybody ever thought of calling our Dora cowardly
exactly, or silly, and childish. She was not a bit cowardly with the
horrid big dog and dear little Tray, you remember?--she would not let me
interfere, but she would have stoned the dog herself."

"Which would have been very foolish of her," said Tom Robinson with
decision. "I should say she was timid, not cowardly--there is a broad
distinction between the two conditions."

"It is just that we cannot leave home for any length of time, Dora and
I," said May piteously.

"So you and your sister Dora cannot leave home--that is the objection,
is it?" he repeated, slowly pulling his red moustache. "What do you call
home? The Old Doctor's House or Redcross?"

"Both," cried May quickly; "where father and mother and the rest of us
are, of course."

"But the rest of you are gone, and what if your father and mother were
to go too?"

"They won't, they never will," insisted May--"not until they come to
die. You were not meaning that? Oh! you could not be so cruel, so
barbarous," cried May, passionately, "when death is such a long way off,
I trust. I know that God is good whether we live or die, and that we
shall meet again in a better world. But we are not parted yet, and it is
not wrong to pray that we may be a long time together here on this very
earth, which we know so well, where we have been so happy. Why, father
and mother are not more than middle-aged--mother is not, and if father
is older, he is as strong and hale as anybody. Think how he was able to
give up his carriage and attend his patients on foot last autumn without
feeling it," urged the girl defiantly, in her passion of love and roused
dread, which she would not admit.

"Certainly," he strove to reassure her, feeling himself a savage for
frightening her by his inadvertence, "I never saw anybody wear so well
as Dr. Millar. He might be sixty or fifty--he may live to be a
hundred--I hope with all my heart he will; and I shall not be astonished
if I live to see it. As for Mrs. Millar, it is an insult to call her
middle-aged. It is something quite out of keeping to come across her
with such a tall daughter as you are."

"Yes, I am the tallest of the four," exclaimed May complacently,
diverted from the main topic, as he had intended her to be. "And I have
not done growing yet; my last summer's frock had to be let down half an
inch."

"Is it possible? What are we all coming to? You will soon have to stoop
to take my arm--if you ever condescend to take my arm."

"No," she denied encouragingly, "I am not so far above your shoulder
now," measuring the distance with a critical eye. "I shall not grow so
much as that comes to. You are bigger than father, and you would not
call him a little man; you are hardly even short."

"Thanks, you are too kind," said Tom Robinson, with the utmost gravity.
"But I say, Miss May, if I were you, I don't think I should do anything
to vex and thwart Dr. Millar, though he is so strong and active--long
may he continue so. You know how disappointed he would be if you were to
close your books."

"I am afraid he would," said May reluctantly. "I had almost forgotten
all about it for the last minute or two. But don't you think if you
spoke to him as I came to ask if you would," she continued unblushingly
and coaxingly, "if you were to try and show him--it would be so kind of
you--how comfortable and happy I should be with Phyllis Carey in your
shop--doing my best--indeed, I should try hard to please you and Miss
Franklin, all day--and getting home every evening--he might change his
mind?"

"No, he would not," said Tom with conviction; "and what is more, he
ought not. He would never cease to regret his shattered hopes for
you--which, remember, you would have shattered--and your spoilt life."

"But your life is not spoilt?" she said wistfully, unable to resign her
last hope.

"How can you tell?" he said, with a slight sharpness in his accent. Then
he added quickly, "No, for I am a born shopkeeper in another sense than
because I am one of a nation of shopkeepers."

He gave himself a reassuring shake, and resumed briskly--"I crave leave
to say, Miss May, that I actually enjoy making up accounts, turning over
samples, and giving orders. Sometimes I hit on a good idea which the
commercial world acknowledges, and then I am as proud as if I had
unearthed an ancient manuscript, or found the philosopher's stone. I
pulled a fellow through a difficulty the other day, and it felt like
taking part in an exciting fight. I have speculated occasionally when I
was fishing--paying myself a huge compliment, no doubt--whether old
Izaak Walton felt like me about trade."

"Was he in trade?" inquired May, with some surprise. "I know he wrote
_The Complete Angler_, and was a friend of Dr. Donne's and George
Herbert's, and is very much thought of to this day."

"Deservedly," said Tom Robinson emphatically. "Yes, I am proud to say,
he was a hosier to begin with, and a linen-draper to end
with--well-to-do in both lines. They say his first wife, whom he married
while he was still in business, was a niece of the Archbishop of
Canterbury of the day, and his second wife, whom he married after he had
retired to live on his earnings, was a half-sister of good Bishop Ken's;
but I do not pretend to vouch for the truth of these statements. Now,
about your father. I cannot do what you ask--I cannot in conscience.
Will you ever forgive me, 'little May'--that is what your father and
mother and your sisters call you sometimes to this day, ain't it? and it
is what I should have called you if I had been--your uncle say? Shall we
be no longer friends?" he demanded ruefully.

"Of course we shall," said May, with a suspicion of petulance. "You are
not bound to do what I bid you--I never thought that; and you are father
and mother's friend--how could I help being your friend?"

"Don't try to help it," he charged her.

Tom Robinson went farther than not feeling bound to do what May begged
of him, he was constrained to remonstrate in another quarter to prevent
trouble and disappointment to all concerned. He screwed up his courage,
and everybody knows he was a modest man, and called at the Old Doctor's
House for the express purpose. He had called seldom during the past
year--just often enough to keep up the form of visiting--to show that he
was not the surly boor, without self-respect or consideration for the
Millars, which he would have been if he had dropped all intercourse with
the family because one of them had refused to marry him. But though he
had begged for Dora's friendship when he could not have her love, and
had meant what he said, the wound was too recent for him to act as if
nothing had happened. In addition to the pain and self-consciousness,
there was a traditional atmosphere of agitation and alarm, a kind of
conventional awkwardness, together with an anxious countenance, and
protection sedulously afforded by the initiated and interested
spectators to Tom and Dora, which, like many other instances of
countenance and protection, went far towards doing the mischief they
were intended to prevent.

Tom saw through the punctilious feints and solemn stratagems clearly;
Dora did the same as plainly. Indeed the two would have been idiots if
they could have escaped from the discomfiting perception of the care
which was taken of them and their feelings, and the fact that every eye
was upon them.

The sole result was to render the couple more wretchedly uncomfortable
than if they had been set aside and sentenced to the company of each
other and of no one else for a bad five minutes every day of their
lives.

Another unhappy consequence of their being thus elaborately spared and
shielded was, that when by some unfortunate chance the tactics failed,
the couple felt as flurried and guilty as if they had contrived the
fruitless accident to serve their own nefarious ends.

Tom Robinson called on the Millars between four and five the day after
May had made her raid upon him, expecting to find what was left of the
family gathering together for afternoon tea. He had the ulterior design
of drawing May's father and mother apart, and letting them judge for
themselves the advisability of her going up at once to St. Ambrose's,
before her whole heart and mind were disastrously set against her
natural and honourable destiny. He was distinctly put out by finding
Dora alone. As for Dora, she told a faltering tale of her father's
having been called away to a poor patient who was a pensioner of her
mother's, and of Mrs. Millar's having walked over to Stokeleigh with
him to see what she could do for old Hannah Lightfoot; while May was
spending the afternoon with the Hewetts at the Rectory.

He hesitated whether to go or stay under the circumstances, but he hated
to beat an ignominious retreat, as if _he_ thought that _she_ thought he
could not be beside her for a quarter of an hour without making an ass
of himself again and pestering her. Why should he not accept the cup of
tea which she faintly offered from the hands that visibly trembled with
nervousness? When he came to consider it, why should he not transact his
business with Dora? She was as deeply interested as anybody, unless the
culprit herself; she probably knew better what May was foolishly
planning than either their father or mother did, and would convey to
them the necessary information.

As for Dora, she was thinking in a restless fever, "I hope--I hope he
does not see how much I mind being alone with him. It is just because I
am not used to it. How I wish somebody would come in,--not mother,
perhaps, for she would start and look put out herself, and sit down
without so much as getting rid of her sunshade; and, oh dear, not May,
for she would stare, and I do not know what on earth she would
think--some wild absurdity, I dare say; anyhow, she would look exactly
what she thought."

"Look here, Miss Dora," he said abruptly; "you don't think your sister
May ought to renounce the object of her education hitherto, and your
father's views for her, in order to do like Miss Phyllis Carey? You are
aware that May has become enamoured of Phyllis Carey's example, and is
bent on following in her footsteps; but it won't do, and I have told her
so. I trust nobody suspects me of encouraging young ladies to become
shop-women," he added, with a slightly foolish laugh, "as old actors
used to be accused of decoying young men of rank and fashion into going
on the stage, and recruiting sergeants of beguiling country bumpkins
into taking the king's shilling."

"Has May spoken to you about it?" cried Dora, startled out of her
engrossing private reflections. "What a child she is! I am sorry she has
troubled you; she ought not to have done that. I hope you will excuse
her."

"Don't speak of it," he said a little stiffly, as he put down his cup
and signified he would have no more tea.

"And you said no," remarked Dora, with an involuntary fall of her voice
reflecting the sinking of her heart. "Of course you could not do
otherwise. It was a foolish notion. I am afraid Phyllis Carey is enough
of a nuisance to Miss Franklin--and other people. It is hard that you
should be bothered by these girls. Only I suspect poor 'little May' will
be most dreadfully, unreasonably disappointed;" and there was an attempt
to smile and a quiver of the soft lips which she could not hide.

"I am not bothered, and I hate to disappoint your sister,--I trust you
understand that," he said quickly and earnestly. "But it would be
sacrificing her and overturning your father's arrangements for
her--disappointing what I am sure are among his dearest wishes."

She did not ask, like May, why he did not count himself sacrificed. She
only said shyly and wistfully, "I knew it was out of the question, but
if it had not been so, or if there had been any other way, it would have
been such a boon to poor May not to be torn from home." At the harrowing
picture thus conjured up her voice fairly shook, and the tears started
into her dovelike eyes.

"Home," he said impatiently, "is not everything; at least, not the home
from which every boy must go, as a matter of course. 'Torn from home' in
order to go to school! Surely the first part of the sentence is tall
language."

"It is neither too tall nor too strong where May is concerned," said
Dora, rousing herself to plead May's cause. "She has not been away from
home and from father--especially from mother, and one or other of the
rest of us, for longer than a week since she was born."

"Then the sooner she begins the better for her," he said brutally, as it
sounded to himself, to the loving, shrinking girl he was addressing.

"She has always been the little one, the pet," urged Dora; "she will not
know what to do without some of us to take care of her and be good to
her."

"But she must go away some day," he continued his remonstrance. "How old
is your sister?"

"She was seventeen last Christmas," Dora answered shamefacedly.

"Why, many a woman is married before she is May's age," he protested.
"Many a woman has left her native country, gone among strangers, and had
to maintain her independence and dignity unaided, by the time she was
seventeen. Queen Charlotte was not more than sixteen when she landed in
England and married George the Third."

Dora could not help laughing, as he meant her to do. "May and Queen
Charlotte! they are as far removed as fire and water. But," she answered
meekly, "I know the Princess Royal was no older when she went to Berlin;
and poor Marie Antoinette was a great deal younger, as May would have
reminded me if she had been here, in the old days when she travelled
from Vienna to Paris. But there--it is all so different. They were
princesses from whom a great deal is expected, and the Princess Royal
was the eldest instead of the youngest of the Queen's children."

"Does seniority make so great a difference?" he said, with an inflection
of his voice which she noticed, though he hastened to make her forget it
by speaking again gravely the next minute. "Should May not learn to
stand alone? Would it not be dwarfing and cramping her, all her life
probably, to give way to her now. Can it ever be too early to acquire
self-reliance, and is it not one of the most necessary lessons for a
responsible human being to learn? Besides, '_ce n'est que le premier pas
qui coute_.' It is only the first wrench which will hurt her. She will
find plenty of fresh interests and congenial occupations at St.
Ambrose's. In a week, a fortnight, she will not miss you too much."

Dora shook her head incredulously. It was little he knew of May, with
her fond family attachments, and her helplessness when left to herself
in common things.

"Follow my advice, Miss Dora," he said, rising to take his leave, "don't
aid and abet Miss May in seeking to shirk her obligations.
Unquestionably the one nearest to her at present is that she should go
to St. Ambrose's. Don't prevent her from beginning to think and act for
herself--not like a charming child, but in the light of her dawning
womanhood."

He gave a swift glance round him as he spoke, and a recollection which
had been in the background of both their thoughts during the whole of
the interview, flashed into the foreground. It was of that day a year
ago, a breezy spring day like this, when, as it seemed, there were the
same jonquils in the jar on the chimney-piece, and the same
cherry-blossom seen through the window against the blue sky, and he had
asked her with his heart on his lips, and the happiness of his life at
stake, to be his wife, and she had told him, with agitation and distress
almost equal to his, that he could never be anything to her. He caught
her half-averted eyes, and felt the whole scene was present with her as
with him once more, and the consciousness brought back all his old
shyness and reserve, and hurried his leave-taking. The slightest touch
to her hand, and he had bowed himself out and was gone.

"How silly he must think me," Dora reflected, walking up and down the
empty room in perturbation, "both about poor 'little May,' and about
remembering the last time we were alone together. I dare say he is
right about May, though men never do understand what girls feel. If she
should fall ill, and break her heart, and die of home-sickness--such
things have happened before now--I wonder what he would say then about
her learning to stand alone? Very likely he would assert that St.
Ambrose's is not St. Petersburg, or even Shetland or the Scilly Isles.
It is not far away, and if she were not well or happy, she could come
back in half a day, as the other girls could come down from London. But
then he would despise her, for as quiet and good-natured as he is, and
though people have said that he himself had no proper pride in
consenting to have a shop. And I don't think May could bear contempt
from anybody whom she had ever looked on as a friend. Men are hard--the
best of them are, and they don't understand. He is kind--I am sure he
means it all in kindness; but he is not yielding; he is as masterful as
when he dragged the dogs to the edge of the bank and let them drop into
the Dewes for their good. He will never be turned from what he thinks
right. I wish he had not guessed what I could not help remembering--he
was quick enough in doing that; and I could not tell him that I did not
imagine for a moment--I was not so foolish--that he was under the same
delusion he suffered from twelve months ago. If he had been oftener
here in the interval, and we had met and been together naturally as we
used to be, sometimes, I should have forgotten all about it, and so
would he, no doubt. But how could I help thinking of it when there has
always been such a point made of mother or some one else being present
when he called? I am certain it is quite unnecessary and a great
mistake. He will not speak to me again as he spoke that day. There is no
danger of his running away with me," Dora told herself with an unsteady
laugh. "I hope he is not under the impression that I did not think and
act for myself when I was forced to do it. Because, although they all
knew about it, and of course Annie and the others teased me about
'Robinson's,' and the colour of his hair, and his size, father and
mother told me to decide for myself, and I did not hesitate for a
moment. I could no more have borne to leave them all of my own free will
than May could. Surely it was proof positive I did not like him in that
way," Dora represented to herself with the greatest emphasis.

Tom Robinson was marching home with his hands in his pockets and his hat
drawn over his eyes. "How hard she must think me--little short of a
pragmatical, supercilious brute--not to do my best to keep 'little May'
at home, where the child wants to be. I asked her to let me call myself
her friend, and this is the first specimen of my friendship! she will
take precious good care not to ask for another. She will be horribly
dull left by herself without one girl companion, only the old people.
These sisters were so happy together--I liked to see them, perhaps all
the more because I had neither brothers nor sisters of my own--I thought
it was an assurance of what they might be in other relations of life. I
suppose she will tackle that little spitfire of a dog which I inflicted
on them. May will lay her parting injunctions on Dora to plague herself
perpetually with the monster, and these will be like dying words to
Dora, she will sooner die herself than intermit a single harassing
attention. And it will be impossible for her to avoid many deprivations.
There are more partings to be faced in the future. Millar is an old man,
even if he could hope to pay up the bank's calls and make some provision
for his widow and daughters. It was a pity poor Dora could not care for
me, when there need have been no partings where we two were concerned,
save that material separation of death which is quoted in the marriage
service. She would not have believed, nor I either, that it could touch
the spiritual side of the question and the love which is worth having,
that is God-like and belongs to immortality. I might have done what I
could if Dora had married me, so far as the other girls would have let
me, to serve as a buffer between the family and the adversity which I am
afraid not all their high spirit and gallant fight will hold entirely at
bay. It was not to be, and there is an end on't. I wonder where I found
the heart, and the cheek too for that matter, to bully Dora about May,
though, Heaven knows, I spoke no more than the truth. Well, she has her
revenge, and I am punished for it. It cut me up at the time to hurt her,
and the recollection of having contradicted and pained so sweet and
gentle a creature is very much as if I had dealt a lamb a blow or wrung
a pigeon's neck--on principle."

Half an hour afterwards Mrs. Millar bustled into her drawing-room with
an expression of mingled annoyance and excited expectation on her still
comely face.

"My dear Dora, I am so sorry; he gave his name to Jane, and she has told
me who has been calling in my absence. I wish I had not left you by
yourself. But who was to guess that Tom Robinson would call this
afternoon? It must have been exceedingly disagreeable for you."

"I don't know," said Dora, vaguely and desperately; "we must meet
sometimes when there is nobody by, if we continue to live in the same
town. I wish you would not mind it for me, mother, and keep on trying to
avoid such accidents, for I really think it makes them worse when they
do happen."

"Very well, my dear, you know your own feelings best," said Mrs. Millar,
a little puzzled. In her day it was reckoned no more than what was due
to maidenly delicacy and social propriety to preserve a respectful
distance between a rejected man and his rejector. As if the gentleman
might, as Dora had said, carry off the lady by force, or shoot her or
himself with the pistol hidden in his breast!




CHAPTER XVI.

ROSE'S FOLLY AND ANNIE'S WISDOM.


Annie Millar not only warmed to her work in St. Ebbe's, she recovered
her full glow of health and spirits. She not only liked her nursing, she
enjoyed her holiday hours intensely with the peculiarly keen enjoyment
of busy women doing excellent service in the world. If any one wishes to
know what such enjoyment is like let him have recourse to a great
authority. "_In the few hours of holiday that--only now and then--they
(a nursing sisterhood) allow themselves, they show none of the weariness
that sometimes follows the industry of toiling after self-amusement.
Reaction, after great strain on the powers of self-sacrifice and
endurance that they have to exert, may be thought to account in some
part for the happy result; but, whatever the cause, their society has in
it all that can best and most surely attract--grace, freshness, and
natural charm._"[1]

[Footnote 1: Kinglake in his _History of the Crimean
War_, vol. vi. p. 436.]

Rose felt as if she had never sufficiently appreciated Annie before. She
was very proud of her sister now when she came to Welby Square, and
everybody, whether in Mrs. Jennings's set or in Hester's, was struck
with Annie's beauty and brightness.

Even Hester Jennings saw nothing to find fault with on the ornamental
side of a girl who had gone in so heartily for the serious business of
life, nine-tenths of whose hours were occupied with grave tasks, to
which Hester owned honestly that she with all her public spirit was not
equal.

Annie's face was not only the most unclouded, her laugh the merriest of
all the faces and laughs which appeared and were heard in Welby Square.
She became almost as much of a peacemaker, a smoother-down of rough
interludes, an allayer of irritating ebullitions, as Dora was wont to be
at home.

"Annie is so much improved," Rose wrote to May, "I never saw her looking
prettier. She is just splendid when she comes out of St. Ebbe's for an
afternoon and evening. Everybody is delighted to see her, and wants to
have her for his or her particular friend. She and I have such jolly
walks and talks; she hardly ever calls me back or puts me down now."

After pronouncing this high encomium it was rather a shock to Rose not
only to incur Annie's righteous displeasure, but to discover that on
occasions Annie could be as severe and relentless in her sentences as
ever.

Rose, like most middle-class girls not fairly out of their teens, and
committed to their own discretion in the huge motley world of London,
had been solemnly charged to behave with the greatest wariness. She was
to treat every man or woman she encountered well-nigh as a dangerous
enemy in disguise till her suspicions were proved to be misplaced, and
the stranger shown to Rose's satisfaction and that of her seniors and
guardians to be a harmless friend.

To do Rose justice, she remembered for the most part what had been told
her, and was careful not to expose herself to the slightest chance of
misapprehension--not to say rudeness, such as would have frightened her
mother and incensed her father. Rose would not be tempted by the
fearless independence of Hester Jennings and her cronies. They
maintained, in theory at least, that though there might be dens of vice
and dark places of cruelty in the great city, for those whose feet trod
the downward path, yet its crowded thoroughfares, to those who honestly
went about their own business, or to the messengers of divine charity
and mercy, were as safe, and safer, than any quiet country road.
Womanhood in the strength and confidence of its purity and fearlessness
might traverse them alone at any hour of the day or night.

But Rose submitted to the ordinary if antiquated code, which implies the
timidity and defencelessness of young women whenever and wherever
assailed. She had not gone far enough in her emancipation to reckon as
part of it, immunity from apprehension of every kind, including the
strife of evil tongues.

However, one day in the beginning of May, Rose went to Covent Garden in
pursuit of a pot of tulips, which she suddenly felt she must have,
without delay, as an accessory in one of her sketches. She was coming
home laden with her spoil by way of Burnet's, where there was an equal
necessity for her to procure, on the instant, a yard or two of gauzy
stuff of a certain uncertain hue, when a thunder-storm unexpectedly
broke over the haunt of artists. Torrents of rain followed, enough to
wash away whole pyramids of flowers and piles of art-materials. If the
downpour did nothing else it cleared the crowded street, with the
celerity of magic only seen in such circumstances, and left Rose
cowering in a doorway, alone as it seemed to her, but for a cab-driver
who took refuge in his cab, drawn up before one of the opposite houses.
The rain looked as if it meant to continue, while, laden as Rose was,
she could not have held up an umbrella even if she had found one ready
to her hand.

Her slender funds did not set her up in cabs, as she had told herself on
many a weary trudge in fog and drizzle between Mr. Foy's class-rooms and
Welby Square. Besides she would like to see Hester Jennings's face when
she (Rose Millar) proposed to indulge in such a luxury. But there would
be more lost than gained if she stood shivering in that doorway till her
best spring frock was ruined, waiting for an omnibus which was sure to
arrive with every available inch of space occupied. She would catch a
chill or an influenza with no kind father near to save her a doctor's
bill, and cure her simply for the pleasure of doing it. She would brave
Hester's eagle eye, supposing it could scan Rose's misdeeds from some
coigne of vantage commanding this end of the street. She signalled to
the cab-driver opposite, who put his head out of the cab window and
signalled back that he had a fare besides himself at present ensconced
in one of the inhospitable-looking houses.

Should she bid the thunder, lightning, and rain do their worst, and set
out to walk home in defiance of them? While she still paused irresolute,
peeping out disconsolately at the inky sky from which the downpour fell,
a young man in the conscious superiority of a waterproof and an ample
umbrella, walked leisurely along the sloppy, deserted pavement. He
looked at her, seemed arrested by something which struck him in her
appearance, hesitated a little undecidedly, stopped short, and addressed
her, colouring up to his frank, honest blue eyes as he did so.

"I am afraid you have been caught in this tremendous shower. Can I do
nothing to help you--call a cab, for instance?"

"Oh! thank you very much," she said gratefully, forgetting all about the
cunning enemy in disguise for whom she was to be always looking out.
Indeed she had felt so lonely a minute before that she was rather
disposed to welcome a comrade in misfortune. "The cabman in the cab
opposite tells me he is engaged, and I do not remember any cab-stand
near this."

"There is one round the corner, which I passed a minute ago, but it was
vacant; all the world is wanting cabs in such weather. However, I can
shelter you a little, if you will allow me," and he held the umbrella in
front of her.

"No, please; I am keeping you here in the wet, and you are exposing
yourself to the rain," protested Rose, remorsefully. "I was just
thinking of walking on, sooner than stand any longer getting gradually
soaked," she confided to him with pleasant inconsiderateness.

"Then will you take the use of my umbrella?" he asked promptly; "and
perhaps you will let me carry your parcels for you," he suggested in the
humblest manner possible, eyeing covetously her flower-pot, and the
paper wisp from "Burnet's."

"Oh dear, no," said Rose, pulling herself together when it was too late,
and with an adorable frankness, which was another mistake so far as an
unauthorized acquaintance's being nipped in the bud went. "I should be
taking you out of your way; you must want your own umbrella, and I can
manage perfectly well. I am accustomed to go about by myself"--the last
piece of information given with a proud inflection of the voice which
told its own tale.

"In storm and shine?" he took it upon him to question her, with the
slightest rallying tone, and a twinkle in his blue eyes, but still with
the greatest respect in his attitude and manner--"not in storm, surely.
I shall not be going out of my way. I am only taking a stroll--that is,
I generally do take a stroll in some direction on my way back to my
lodgings. You may not think the weather nice for strolling, but I don't
mind it. I am as strong as a horse, and I certainly don't want an
umbrella. I have this waterproof affair, which, like the umbrella, is
rather a nuisance than otherwise."

She could see at a glance that he was a broad-shouldered young fellow,
over six feet, and that his kindly, deferential face, seen through the
steaming atmosphere, was as ruddy as youth and a vigorous constitution
could make it. He was evidently speaking the truth, and she could not
resist the temptation of the friendly aid arriving thus opportunely, and
so obligingly pressed upon her.

"Only for a little way," she bargained cheerfully. "The rain may stop in
a minute, though I must say it does not look like it, or we may come on
a return cab; anyhow, it cannot be long till an omnibus overtakes us."

She would have demurred at his ridding her of her flowers and parcel,
which he disposed of easily under his arm and in his disengaged hand, as
if he were well accustomed to being cumbered with such small
impediments, had not a comical idea crossed her mind. He might think
that she did not trust his honesty, and was beset by a fear that he
would rush down a side street and disappear with her goods before she
could cry, "Stop, thief!" and arouse the scanty passers-by.

Then Rose felt impelled to explain why she walked about London burdened
with flower-pots and rolls of gauze. "I have just been to Covent
Garden," she said. "I wished to get this pot of tulips--parrot
tulips--yellow and scarlet, you know, to harmonize with a Chinese screen
in a little picture I am painting. Then I had to go into 'Burnet's,'
for 'Liberty's' is too far away, for some blue stuff of the right shade
which I could drape into a frock for the little girl who is my model."

"Are you fond of painting?" he caught her up, being to the full as
willing to speak as she was. "So is my sister, and she also goes to
'Liberty's' for queer rags and tags. I suppose they are part of the
amateur's stock-in-trade."

"I am going to be a professional artist," said Rose again, with that
proud little inflection of the voice. But all the effect which her
communication had upon him was that he took it as an invitation, or at
least as a warrant, for responsive confidences on his own part.

"I am a doctor," he announced. "I have been entitled to write myself one
for the last two months. I have just passed my final exams, and got my
degree--stiffish work for a fellow who does not take to sapping as
easily as to the air he breathes."

"My father is a doctor," said Rose, brightly, with her tongue fairly
loosened. "I forget whether he says examinations were easier or more
difficult when he was young. He is Dr. Millar of Redcross."

"Millar!" exclaimed the tall young man so excitedly, that he stopped
short for an instant, in the middle of the dismally lashing rain, and
looked at her with a gleam of delight in his blue eyes. "I thought so,
I saw it at the first glance. You have a sister among the lady
probationers at St. Ebbe's."

"Yes--Annie," cried Rose, with equal ecstasy in the acquiescence; and
she, too, stood still for a second in the rain. "Do you know St. Ebbe's?
Have you seen Annie?"

"I should think I do, I should think I have," he answered her fervently.
"St. Ebbe's is my hospital. I have been 'walking it' for a year past. I
was there to-day, and Miss Millar is well known all over the place. She
is a great favourite with the matron, Mrs. Hull, and the house surgeon,
and especially with the operating surgeon. He is always asking to have
Miss Millar in his cases since that boy had his leg cut off."

"I know, I know," chimed in Rose, "the little boy who begged you to wait
till he had said his prayers, and when he could not do it for himself,
Annie was able to do it for him. Now he is hopping about on his crutches
quite actively and happily; and she has got him an engagement, to clean
the knives and boots at Mrs. Jennings, the boarding-house in Welby
Square where I stay. Isn't it too funny and nice that you should happen
to have to do with St. Ebbe's and Annie?"

"It has been a great pleasure to me--well, these are not the right
words," said the young fellow with sudden gravity and a shade of
agitation in his manner. "I count it the greatest piece of good fortune
which ever befell me that I took St. Ebbe's for my hospital. But I ought
not to presume on my acquaintance with Miss Millar," he began again
immediately, with an infusion of cautious reserve and something like
vexation creeping into his tone; "it is purely professional. We are far
too busy people at St. Ebbe's to know each other as private persons.
Very likely if you ask her, she will deny all knowledge of me as an
individual; she may not even be able to recall the fact of my existence
apart from a circle of big uncouth medical students in the train of the
doctors--all alike to her. At the same time I have drunk tea in her
company both in the matron's room and in Dr. Moss's, and I have often
sat near her in the services at the hospital chapel," he ended a little
defiantly.

The speech, save for its ring of half-boyish mortification, was
suspicious, as if he were providing a loophole for escape in case Annie
refused to indorse his assertion of mutual acquaintance. But Rose, in
spite of her spirit and quickness, was hardly more given to suspicion
than her sister May showed herself, and saw nothing dubious in his
remark. She was carried away with the agreeable surprise of having
stumbled on somebody connected with St. Ebbe's who knew all about Annie.
She chatted on in the frankest, friendliest way, plying him with
girlish questions, and supplying free comments on his answers; and he
was an auditor who was nothing loth to be so treated, and to be
furnished with stores of information on points which had aroused his
ardent curiosity. She forgot all about taking him out of his way, and
when they reached Welby Square she crowned her unbounded faith in him by
inviting him into the house. On his acceptance of her invitation, after
a moment's hesitation, she presented him to Mrs. Jennings as a friend of
Annie's from St. Ebbe's.

The young man had the grace to feel his ears tingle while Mrs. Jennings,
looking a little astonished, took him on Rose's word, bowed her welcome,
begged him to sit down with her usual gracious, languid good-breeding,
and said she was glad to see any friend of Miss Annie Millar's.

He did his best, with a flushed face, to remedy his and Rose's rashness.
He put down his card, with Harry Ironside, M.D., engraved on it, at Mrs.
Jennings's elbow. He set himself with a strenuous and sincere effort to
talk to her, and so to conduct himself as to do credit to Rose's
voucher.

Mrs. Jennings was easily propitiated on receiving the attention which
was due to her. She thought the young man's manners perfectly good; they
had well-bred ease, and at the same time the modesty which ought to
accompany youth, though his introduction to her had been somewhat
informal.

Irregularity and singularity were among the fashions of the day. She
would have been glad if her daughter Hester, in carrying out these
fashions, had brought forward no rougher, or commoner-looking, or more
eccentric satellites and protégés--secretaries of those horrid women's
unions and clubs--than this friend of Rose and Annie Millar's.

Mrs. Jennings never forgot a name and its social connection. "Ironside?"
she repeated tentatively, but with an air of agreeable expectation. "I
am familiar with the name. One of my sons, Captain Lawrence Jennings,
when his regiment was at Manchester, knew and received much kindness
from a family named Ironside."

"It must have been the family of one of my uncles," said Dr. Harry
Ironside, eagerly. "My Uncle John, and my Uncle Charles too, for that
matter, stay in Manchester. Both are married men with families. My Uncle
John was mayor a few years ago."

"The same," cried Mrs. Jennings with bland satisfaction. "Lawrie's
Ironsides were the family of the mayor, I remember perfectly when you
mention it;" and she added the mental note, "They were among the richest
cotton-brokers in the place--well-nigh millionaires."

"Were you all named from Cromwell's Ironsides?" inquired Rose, lightly,
inclined to laugh and colour at the absurd recollection that, though she
had seemed to know all about him from the moment he spoke of St. Ebbe's
and Annie, she had been ignorant of his very name till he put down his
card. If he had not done so, she would have had to describe him to Annie
as the big, fair-haired young doctor with the Roman nose, or by some
other nonsensical item, such as the signet-ring on his left hand, or the
trick of putting his hand to his chin.

"I am sure I cannot tell"--he met her question with an answering
laugh--"except that, so far as I know, we have had more to do with
cotton than with cannon-balls. My father was a Manchester man, like my
uncles. I have struck out a new line in handling--not to say a sword,
but a lancet."

"Ah!" said Mrs. Jennings with mild superiority, "all my sons are in the
services--I have given them to their Queen and country. Two of my
sons-in-law are also in the army, and I often say of the third--a
clergyman in a sadly heathen part of the Black Country--that, engaged as
he is in the Church militant, he is as much a fighter as the rest of
them." Having thus in the mildest, most ladylike manner, established her
social supremacy, Mrs. Jennings was doubly gracious to the visitor.
They made such progress in their acquaintance by means of the Manchester
Ironsides and other members of her very large circle of friends, with
regard to whom the two discovered the names at least of several were
also known to Harry Ironside, that the lady made another marked
concession. When he said he was in rooms in London, and had his only
sister with him, she signified with a kind and graceful bend of the
lace-enfolded shoulders and the bewigged head within the wonderful
edifice of a cap, that she meant to have the pleasure of calling on Miss
Ironside.

Rose could hardly believe her ears; and she did not wonder, though she
was glad that he had the sense and good feeling to thank Mrs. Jennings
with warmth, since Rose knew what a testimony it was to the genuine
liking which the mistress of the house had taken to her chance guest.
For Mrs. Jennings went very little out, and was exceedingly particular
in adding to her visiting-list, as became the head of a select
boarding-house, and the mother of so many officers and gentlemen, not to
say gentlewomen.

But matters did not end even there. He managed to convey the impression
that his sister and he were rather lonely in their rooms, while he
alluded to the facts that he and she were orphans, and with the
exception of each other had neither brother nor sister. They had looked
forward to being together, and making a home as soon as Kate left
school, and he had taken furnished lodgings at Campden Hill till he
settled down somewhere. But somehow the lodgings were not very
home-like. He should prize highly the friendship of Mrs. Jennings for
his sister. At this point the slightest gleam of a business interest
awoke in Mrs. Jennings's steel gray eyes, though she only told him
softly that she had known it all--the loneliness of one or two members
of a family in London, the comfortlessness of even the best of furnished
apartments. It was such considerations, in a great measure, which had
induced her to utilize her large house, much too large for herself and
the only daughter left at home with her, to receive a few old friends as
suitable boarders into her family. She had hoped to form a cheerful and
refined little society round her, and so to be of a little use to her
fellow-creatures. She might say she had succeeded in her humble mission,
she finished with artless benevolence. He met her half-way with
breathless alacrity. Had he and Kate but known in time Mrs. Jennings's
generous idea, what a boon it would have been if she had let them avail
themselves of it! Even yet if there ever occurred any change, any
opening--but he was afraid, he added in disconsolate tones, there never
would--the fortunate people would know too well when they were
happy--it would be doing him and Kate the greatest favour, the utmost
kindness to let them know. This was exactly the complimentary,
beseeching, deprecatory mode in which Mrs. Jennings liked business to be
conducted; whereas, if Hester had been present, she would have said in
the clumsiest, coarsest manner, "Mamma, there are some rooms vacant,
which any respectable person who cares to pay the rent may have."

But that was not Mrs. Jennings's plan. She said in her blandest
voice--"Well, Dr. Ironside, we must see what we can do for you and your
sister; I cannot bear to think of your feeling forlorn after what your
cousins did for my son Lawrence. We must stretch a point with regard to
accommodating you--that is, if you are not, both of you, dreadfully
particular. No, you are not at all difficult to put up, you and your
sister, you say? I am happy to hear it. It is such a good thing for
young people to be easily pleased. I am not sure that something could
not be contrived in the course of a week or two. I think I heard my old
servant speak of rooms which were to have been kept for cousins of my
friend Mr. Lyle, two charming ladies who were to have come up from the
country for the season. But their dear old aunt died unexpectedly, and
of course they are not inclined for any gaiety at present. I leave the
details of arranging the sets of rooms and letting them to my Susan. I
never interfere with her; she knows far better than I what is wanted,
and she is a sensible, practical person to deal with. If you care to
speak to Susan, I shall ring for her to see you in the dining-room, and
she will tell you at once what she can do for you," Mrs. Jennings
finished sweetly.

He did care; indeed he was so intent on benefiting by what Mrs.
Jennings, in her ladylike way, made so great an obligation conferred by
her on her fellow-creatures, that he caught at the hope held out to him.
He had an interview with the potent Susan, and came back radiant to tell
that the housekeeper had been nearly as kind to him as her mistress had
shown herself. He and Susan had settled everything. He was free to give
up the rooms which he and his sister were occupying the following week.

"What, without consulting Miss Ironside?" protested Mrs. Jennings in
pretty alarm.

"Oh! Kate will like any arrangement I make," he cried confidently; and
Rose came to the conclusion either that "Kate" was the simple
school-girl he represented her, or that Dr. Harry Ironside was an
autocrat in his domestic relations.

He insisted on furnishing references, because business was business,
even in the light of the dawning friendship which he trusted Mrs.
Jennings was going to extend to him and Kate, and they would come as
soon as she would let them.

Oh! he must arrange it all with Susan. Mrs. Jennings put up her still
dainty hands, and waived him off playfully. She dared not interfere with
Susan. All she would say was that she was delighted to look forward to
such an agreeable addition to her pleasant little circle. She was fond
of having young people about her, and was always ready to do what she
could (which was no more than the truth) to make them happy.

Rose was driven to the conclusion that Dr. Harry Ironside must have
found furnished lodgings such a pandemonium, that he was induced to
believe a select boarding-house must be a paradise by comparison. It was
comical how it had all come about. It did seem as if Rose's
heedlessness, if she had been heedless in drifting without an
introduction into an acquaintance with one of Annie's doctors, was
likely to bear good fruits to Mrs. Jennings, among other people. Hester
had been looking worried lately, and had not scrupled to give as the
reason of her pre-occupation--family affairs not prosperous. The whole
of the house was not let. Old Mr. and Mrs. Foljambe had actually been
unreasonable enough to try to exchange the best rooms, which they had
chosen for themselves in the winter for shabbier, cheaper quarters
during the summer, when the husband and wife might be occasionally
absent paying visits. Old Susan, in her black cap and gold-rimmed
spectacles, was especially triumphant in seeing the scheme balked, and
confided her mingled exultation and indignation to Rose, who had helped
to balk the schemers. The confidential family servant even forgot some
of her polite mannerliness in her excitement. "Now, Miss Millar, them
Foljambes has done for themselves; serve them right for seeking to get a
catch from a friend like Missus, as is that kind to her boarders, which
you can testify, Miss; they might be her own flesh and blood. Bless you!
she'll never make a rap by keeping boarders. She never grudges them
anythink, and would sooner deny herself than that they should go without
their fancies. But there, now, that fine young gentleman you brought,"
went on Susan with the slightest respectful significance, "I'm sure
we're greatly indebted to you, Miss--speaks as if he meant to stay on
here with his sister for the present. He has taken our largest rooms off
our hands, so that we may be easy on that head, and I for one won't be
sorry if Mr. and Mrs. Foljambe ain't able to shift back into them at
their will and pleasure. The young gent, as is a gent, had no
hargle-bargling about terms. He was satisfied to pay what we asked,
because he knew that though it was not a common boarding-house, and
though it was no more than right that he and his sister should pay for
the privilege of being under the roof of a real lady like Missus, we
were not the sort to ask more than our due."

The moment Rose got quit of Susan, she said to herself complacently, "It
is very nice to have done such a service to Mrs. Jennings and Hester and
everybody, instead of having got into a scrape and being scolded, as I
almost feared at one moment. If only Miss Kate Ironside is not too much
of a dumb belle and a mere school-girl," reflected Rose, with the
supercilious consciousness of maturity in a girl who had been more than
a year away from all teaching except what she had herself practised, and
what she received as a grown-up woman at Mr. St. Foy's. "I wonder if Dr.
Harry Ironside will have spoken of our encounter, and what came of it,
to Annie before I can tell her. I should like to see her face when she
learns that I know somebody who goes to St. Ebbe's," ended Rose, with
persistent audacity.

Annie's face was a study when she heard of it. Rose had been guilty of a
little wilful self-deception, still she received a shock.

The first time the sisters were able to meet and have a walk together,
after Rose's encounter with Dr. Ironside, Rose broached the great piece
of news, and witnessed the effect it produced. The girls had managed to
reach the Marble Arch into Hyde Park, beyond which they found a seat for
a few minutes. It was not too early in the season for them to take
possession of it, and they were still sufficiently strangers in London
to suppose that seats were placed for the accommodation of the weary of
all ranks and both sexes, and not merely for the benefit of nurse-maids
and their charges, or of able-bodied tramps. The sisters prepared to
talk over their own concerns and Redcross with the _empressement_ of
girls, to forget all about the moving crowd around them, and the
grinding of that great mill of London in the traffic that is never for
an instant still.

"Oh! Annie, have you seen him lately?" began Rose--"Dr. Harry Ironside,
I mean. Has he told you that he and his sister are coming to board at
Mrs. Jennings's?"

"Seen him! Dr. Harry Ironside! What do you know about Dr. Harry
Ironside? What are you saying, Rose?" cried Annie, sitting bolt upright,
opening wide her dark eyes, and fixing them in the most amazed,
displeased, discomfiting gaze on Rose. The rate at which the two had
been walking and talking, the suspicion of east wind, the premature heat
of the May sun, had converted the soft red in Annie's cheeks to a
brilliant scarlet.

"What I am saying," answered Rose, nodding gaily, and trying hard not to
flinch under the trying reception of her precious piece of information,
"is that, by the funniest chance, I made the acquaintance of a friend of
yours at St. Ebbe's. And the laughable coincidence of our meeting and
happening to speak to each other, and then of my finding out that he
knew all about you, is going to be a very good thing for poor dear Mrs.
Jennings," Rose hastened to add, taking the first word in self-defence.
"He is coming with his sister to board in Welby Square."

"He is not a friend of mine," said Annie, severely. "Is it possible that
you are such a simpleton as to believe that all the doctors, medical
students, and nurses--the whole staff of St. Ebbe's, in fact, are
intimately acquainted with each other, are acquainted at all, for the
most part, unless as doctors and nurses? Please, Rose, tell me at once
what nonsense this is--what foolish thing you have been about."

When Annie said "please" to her sisters the situation was alarming.

On the other hand, Rose had not come up to London to be an artist, who
was already getting orders for scroll-work and executing them
successfully, to be put down by a sister not above four years her
senior.

"What are you making such a fuss about, Annie?" protested Rose, "I am
telling you as fast as you will let me. I came out this morning for the
express purpose, and I thought--I was almost sure--you would be amused
and interested, instead of 'getting into a wax'"--using one of Hester
Jennings's slang words, which set Annie's fine little teeth on edge. "It
is you who ought to explain and apologize to me," proceeded Rose,
boldly; "I am surely at liberty to make the acquaintance of anybody you
know without your looking annoyed, and accusing me of being foolish and
nonsensical. It is very unjust and ungrateful of you besides, for he
spoke very highly of you," Rose finished innocently.

"He spoke highly of me to my own sister!" repeated Annie, her lips
curling with unutterable disdain, and her cheeks in a wilder flame than
ever. "He had nothing to do speaking of me at all. And how did he come
to speak to you? I insist upon your telling me, Rose. I am older than
you, and we are alone in London. I am answerable for you to father and
mother."

"Well, I always thought I was answerable for myself," said Rose,
indignantly. "But I don't want to conceal anything from you; it is
insulting me to suppose so," and Rose showed herself highly resentful
in her turn. "As to how I met and spoke with Dr. Harry Ironside, I was
just coming to that," she was going on deliberately, when she was
stopped by Annie's irritable protest--

"I wish you would not bring forward that man's name and dwell upon it in
the way you are doing."

"Why, Annie, what ails you?" cried Rose in her bewilderment at Annie's
unreasonableness and excitement, forgetting any verdict that might be
passed on her own neglect of the code of conduct imposed upon her.

"Well, if you only knew how I have been tried--and molested--and laughed
at," Annie began wrathfully, saying the last words as if to be laughed
at was equivalent to being burnt alive. Then she stopped short and
turned again upon Rose. "What have you been doing? tell me this instant,
Rose."

"I don't think you ought to speak to me in this manner," said Rose,
rebelliously, holding her head high in the air, and forgetting in her
soreness of spirit either to crumple her nose or wrinkle her forehead;
"and I am not at all ashamed of myself. I have done nothing wrong;
indeed, I believe I have conferred a real benefit on Mrs. Jennings,
though she is apt to put it the other way, and indirectly on Hester. I
_am_ fond of Mrs. Jennings and Hester--_they_ always treat me, even
Hester does, like a rational creature. Oh! you need not fret and
fume--I am not trying to avoid telling you, though you have no right, no
sister has, to demand an account of my proceedings. Father and mother
may have, but they would never brandish their rights in my face or
refuse to trust me. I was coming home from Covent Garden on Saturday
afternoon, carrying a little pot of tulips for my picture, if you must
know, and I had also got a small parcel from 'Burnet's.' I was caught in
the thunder-storm. I was standing in a doorway not knowing what to do
when a gentleman passed--Dr. Harry Ironside, if I am to be allowed to
say his name, though I did not know it then. He was good-natured and
polite, like any other gentleman. He saw how I was encumbered, and he
must have felt the pelting rain. He stopped and asked if he could do
anything for me--call a cab or anything, and he wished to give me the
use of his umbrella till we reached a cab-stand or till an omnibus came
up. I thought I had better tell him why I was carrying things, for he
might have thought me just a shop-girl, so I merely said I required them
for a painting, and that I was learning to be an artist. He seemed to
think he ought to tell me in return what he was, and he said he was a
doctor. Then I said father was a doctor too, Dr. Millar of Redcross. He
cried out at that something about a likeness which he had seen, and he
asked had I a sister a nurse in St. Ebbe's, and oh! Annie, he looked so
pleased, and he did say you were such a favourite with the matron and
the doctors."

"Stop!" cried Annie, peremptorily, with an evident storm raging in her
gentle breast, to which she was too proud and self-restrained to give
free expression, "you are a greater baby than May is. You are not fit to
be left to yourself--a girl who would speak to any man she might meet in
the streets of London, and tell him all about herself and her family."

The accusation was too outrageous to be received with anything save
indignant silence.

"And then, I suppose, the next thing was you took him to Mrs. Jennings
and arranged between you that he and his sister should board there."

"I did not," Rose was goaded to speak. "When he had walked so far with
me in the rain I could not do less than invite him into the house. Then
I believe he gave his name, and Mrs. Jennings, who has a great deal of
knowledge of the world and a great deal of discrimination," put in poor
Rose with much emphasis, "seemed to like him immensely. She found that
one of her sons knew relations of his in Manchester, and they had other
friends in common. He spoke of his sister, who is with him, and of their
not liking living in lodgings, and who glad he would be if there ever
happened to be a vacancy in Mrs. Jennings's establishment which she
would permit them to fill. She referred him to Susan to see if there
were rooms which the Ironsides could have. It all came about quite
naturally, and was settled in less time than I have taken to tell it,
and I had nothing whatever to do with it. I should not dream of taking
it upon me to interfere with Mrs. Jennings's or anybody else's domestic
affairs."

"I do not know," said Annie, gloomily, "after the mess you have got
yourself and other people into. But there is one thing I can tell you
for your satisfaction, I shall not put my foot within Mrs. Jennings's
door so long as he--as Dr. Ironside and his sister are staying there.
You may keep your friends to yourself and do without your sister. You
can take them instead of me; perhaps you will not miss me or care for
the loss of an occasional hour or two of my society."

"Oh! Annie, how can you say so?" Rose was reduced to expostulation and
pleading. "What has come over you? You must not stay away; it would be
so unkind to me, so rude to everybody, and such a marked slight. We are
all so happy when you come to Welby Square, and I am sure the change is
good for you too. How can you be so cross?"

"No," said Annie with unbending decision, "it shall not be said of me
that I went and struck up a friendship, apart from our intercourse in
the wards, with any doctor at St. Ebbe's--one of the medical students,
the other day! I am not going to make his sister's acquaintance and get
up an intimacy with her, because you have chosen to introduce them to
Mrs. Jennings. A fine story to be circulated, and tittered over, about a
girl; a fine example to the working nurses, who are always seeking to
evade the rules, to become on familiar terms with their patients and to
gossip and philander with them, when they ought to have a great deal
more to do. I call it disgusting trifling, and it was not for that I
came up to London to be trained as a nurse."

Annie kept her word to Rose's and other people's deep chagrin. She made
no further ferment about what had happened. She did not write home and
complain of Rose's thoughtlessness, or take a single step to prevent
Mrs. Jennings securing a profitable pair of boarders--as a matter of
fact, she dropped the subject, perhaps she felt a little ashamed of the
animus she had shown. But for nearly three months, if Rose wished to see
her sister, the only plan was for her to go to St. Ebbe's, or to make an
appointment with Annie at the Academy or the British Museum, or to eat
their lunch together at some convenient restaurant.

In whatever manner Annie disposed of her few spare moments, not one of
them was now spent in Welby Square--just at the time, too, when the
boarding-house was particularly social and cheerful (for the new-comers
found special favour with the old, and promoted much good fellowship).
At least Dr. Harry Ironside did. He was a young fellow born to be
popular whether he would or not; handsome, with pleasant manners,
kind-hearted, possessed of a respectable competence independent of his
profession, to which he brought considerable abilities and great
singleness of purpose. Everybody "took" to him, from crusty Mr. Foljambe
to jaunty Mr. Lyle; from Miss Perkins, whose ear-trumpet he improved
upon, to old Susan, into whose gold-rimmed spectacles he put new glasses
which made her see like a girl again. The one drawback to his success in
everything he aimed at was, that he was always tremendously in earnest,
so that his very earnestness overweighted him, rendering him incapable
of measuring obstacles, and marshalling his forces, as a more
indifferent man might have done.

His sister Kate, apart from such importance as might be implied in her
finding herself presently in the enjoyment of a very pretty little
income for a young lady, was a simple, good-natured school-girl, in the
echoing and imitative stage of school-girl life. She looked up to her
brother in everything, and was disposed to regard whatever was by his
decree as infallibly best.

Yes, Annie kept her word after the fashion of most of us, till she saw
good reason to break it. She announced herself changeless till she
changed, which, to do her justice, was when the interests of others,
still more than her own, cried out against her maintaining her
resolution.




CHAPTER XVII.

MAY HAS TO FIGHT HER OWN BATTLE.


All May's frantic efforts at resistance were useless; her destiny was
too strong for her. She had to go away from her mother and father, Dora,
and Tray, and face life all by herself as one of the girl-graduates at
Thirlwall Hall, St. Ambrose's. Dr. Millar had learnt that she would just
be in reasonable time for one of the earlier examinations at the close
of the term. Having passed it without difficulty, she might compete for
one of the Thirlwall scholarships. If she got that--as he allowed
himself to think she had a fair chance of doing--it would greatly
increase her status, as well as aid in defraying the expenses of her
residence at St. Ambrose's. The little Doctor was feverishly anxious to
compass both ends for his pet and scholar. In her own interest no notice
must be taken of her heart-broken looks, though it wrung a manly heart,
in addition to the tender hearts of Mrs. Millar and Dora, to witness
May's desperate unwillingness to depart.

It will be better to throw a veil over the anguish of that leave-taking,
including the final closeting with Tray and the torrents of tears shed
on his irresponsive hairy coat. We shall draw up the curtain on a new
scene--St. Ambrose's, in its classic glory and stately beauty, and
Thirlwall Hall, in its youthful strong-mindedness.

Poor May felt horribly forlorn when her father left her behind, and she
realized that she was for the first time in her life compelled to play
her part without the support of kith or kin. Nobody was in the least
unkind to her, any more than the conservative Miss Stones had been to
Rose, unless in calling "little May" "Miss Millar," a promotion which
somehow cut her to the heart.

The lady principal, Miss Lascelles, was an excellent intellectual woman,
of mingled aristocratic and _spirituelle_ antecedents. In another
country and nation she might have been a distinguished _dame de salon_.
As it was, she was sufficiently harassed and overworked in her double
office of decorous, authoritative chaperon and qualified guide,
philosopher, and friend to the girls under her charge. These might be
vestal virgins or nymphs of Minerva, but they were also girls, so long
as the world lasted--the most of them half curious, half friendly where
May was concerned. This was true even of the wonderful young American
who came and stayed with no other object in view than to say she had
kept her terms at St. Ambrose's, according to what was the sum total of
the ambition of many a young man at the great University. She _would_
call the Atlantic "the herring pond," and speak of "fixing" her hair;
still she was a girl like the rest of them. Miss Lascelles, with all the
other ladies in residence at Thirlwall Hall, the American included,
could not help wondering what the friends and guardians of a budding
beauty and helpless baby like Miss Millar intended by sending her to
live among a set of self-reliant, amply-occupied young women, who, as a
rule, knew exactly what they wanted to do and did it.

The whole place and system overwhelmed May. The hoary dignity of the old
colleges, receptacles of the concentrated learning of ages, the crowds
of capped and gowned tutors and professors, potent representatives of
the learning of the present, even the shoals of young men who were able
to care for none of these things, and to carry their responsibilities
lightly, all to be encountered in the course of a morning walk, struck
May with a sense of inadjustable disproportion, and of intolerable
presumption on her part in pretending to be a scholar. She was still one
of a household largely composed of women, as she had been at home, but
here the household was planted where it was an innovation, in the midst
of a colony of men, which constantly threatened to sweep over it and
submerge it.

The grown-up, independent, yet disciplined routine of Thirlwall Hall,
founded as closely as possible on the venerable routine of the men's
colleges, was widely, crushingly different from life in the Old Doctor's
House at Redcross. Morning chapel, the steady business of individual
reading, the attendance on the selected courses of lectures, with the
new experience of being spoken to, and expected to take notes like men;
the walks and talks, which even with the interruptions of tennis and
boating were apt to be academically shoppy; the very afternoon tea after
evening chapel had an impressively scholastic flavour utterly foreign to
the desultory proceedings of an ordinary family circle. So had the
further reading by one's self, for one's self, to get up a particular
branch of study; the "swell dinner," as May persisted in calling it in
her own mind, though it was simple and social enough--beyond certain
indispensable forms and ceremonies--to the initiated; the withdrawal
once more to the dreary retirement of her own room, since a new girl had
neither the requisite familiarity nor the heart to go and tap at her
neighbours' doors, where no substitute for "sporting the oak" had as
yet been found, and drop in for a little purely human chatter.

May was so "hard hit," as people say--not with love, but with
home-sickness--that she did not believe she could live to the end of the
summer term. She felt as if she must die of strangeness, fright, and
pining; and that was hard, for they would be very sorry at home, and so
would Annie and Rose in London, though both of them had been able to go
and stay away quite cheerfully like the girls at Thirlwall Hall. Perhaps
May and Dora were not like other girls. There was something wanting or
something in excess about them. Perhaps they were not fit to go through
the world, as she had once heard somebody say of her--May. Perhaps they
were meant to die young--like their Aunt Dolly--and not destined to live
long and struggle helplessly with adverse circumstances. In that case,
Dora was the happy one to be left to spend her short life at home,
though, save for father and mother, she too was all alone, and poor dear
Dora would feel that, and was, perhaps, crying in another empty room as
May was crying in hers at this very moment; but at least, Dora would
pass her last days with father and mother in the old familiar places.

This isolated doom for herself and Dora fascinated May's imagination.
She could not get it out of her head. She dreamt about it, and sat up
in her bed crying and shivering in the silence and solitude of night,
where even by day all was silent and solitary. She began to think
that she would never see Redcross or her mother again. With the
morbid sentimentality of early youth, and its lively capacity for
self-torture, in which to be sure there is that underlying luxury of
woe, she commenced to rehearse the loving farewells she would take on
paper, and the harrowing last messages she would send to every member
of her family.

Occasionally May's hallucination took the form of conjuring up a series
of disasters which should suddenly descend on her absent friends. If she
did not die herself, one or all of those she loved might die while she
was separated from them. Her father might fall down in a fit; her mother
might be seized with small-pox or typhoid fever; and what more likely
than that Dora should catch the infection waiting on her mother?

This distempered frame of mind was hardly calculated for the rapid
reception and assimilation of these particles, terminations, and cases
of philological nicety in which May began to recognize that she was
inaccurate and deficient.

If Tray could but have come to her, and laid his shining black nose in
her lap, barked in her face, and invited her to take a turn in the
grounds of Thirlwall Hall, he would have ceased to be the doleful,
shadowy phantom of a Tray she was constantly seeing now, along with
other phantoms. A game of romps with her four-footed friend would have
done something to dissipate the mental sickness which was prostrating
May's powers. But Thirlwall Hall was moulded on the men's colleges, and
there were no dogs for the girl any more than for the boy graduates.

Miss Lascelles was at once conscientious and kind, with considerable
natural sagacity; but she led a busy, rather over-burdened life, and had
little time to spare. Naturally she was tempted, in spite of the logical
faculty which made her a capital principal of Thirlwall Hall, to leap at
conclusions like many of her weaker-minded sisters. She had taken it for
granted that Miss Millar was simply a spoilt child, without more ability
and information than had just served her to surmount the preliminary
test of admission to Thirlwall Hall, where, nevertheless, she had no
business to be. Her time would be completely wasted; she would only be
wretched, and serve to make other people uncomfortable. However, as she
had stood the preliminary test, and was at Thirlwall Hall for the rest
of the term, the most humane thing to do was to set some other girl who
was not particularly engaged on her own account, who could be safely
trusted with such a charge, who had plenty of acquaintances at St.
Ambrose's to render the charge lighter, to make friends with the poor
girl, take her about, cheer and entertain her, as far as possible, till
the end of her stay.

Miss Lascelles, in default of better, fixed on Miss Vanhansen, the
American young lady, as a friend for May. Miss Vanhansen had plenty of
time on her hands, plenty of confidence, plenty of money. She had
taken even exclusive St. Ambrose's by storm, for Athens itself would
have found it difficult to resist her racy indifference, her shrewd
mother-wit, her superb frocks, and her sublime heaps of dollars. At
the same time she was perfectly good-natured and quite trustworthy in
her own free and easy way. She had scandalized Miss Lascelles in the
earlier days of their acquaintance by her energetic determination to
have "a good time of it." She had made the lady principal's hair stand
on end by calmly suggesting nice rides and rows and luncheons at
village inns, _tête-à-tête_ with the "mooniest" young fellows who
could be laid hold of and crammed with stories about America and the
doings of American girls.

But practically Miss Vanhansen had the good sense to do at Rome as the
Romans did; she confined her independence to those sallies of the
tongue, which were not without a rousing charm in a place grown partly
languid, partly esoteric, by dint of a superabundance of culture and of
college statutes elaborate, involved and irreversible as the laws of the
Medes and the Persians.

Keturah Vanhansen rather liked the task imposed upon her. It appealed
at once to her kindliness of nature and her love of creating a
sensation; she would rouse this drooping young beauty who showed such
a sinful disregard of her complexion and eyes. Miss Vanhansen was
herself as sallow as a nabob, her small eyes, by an unkind perversity
on the part of her fairy god-mother, were of a fishy paleness, yet she
managed to her great satisfaction, by dint of dress and carriage, to
be a striking-looking and all but a handsome girl, so that she had no
overpowering reason to be jealous of her better-endowed neighbours.
She would astonish Miss Millar's weak nerves, and give her "a wrinkle
or two," before she had done with her.

At first May shrank back a good deal from the advances of the conquering
princess from the Far West; but here the English girl's humility and
good feeling stood her in better stead than her judgment. May was
grateful to Miss Vanhansen, and went so far as to be flattered by her
attentions even when they gave the recipient no pleasure. That frame of
mind could not last at seventeen. May, the most unsophisticated and
easily pleased of human beings, was won from her sad dreams of Redcross.
She was deeply obliged, she was faintly amused. At last she was fairly
launched on such a mild course of St. Ambrose gaieties as two girls in
a college could with grace pursue. This included tennis parties, rowing
parties, water-lily and fritillary hunts, "strawberries," concerts
instead of lectures in the afternoons as well as in the evenings,
afternoon teas--not _tête-à-tête_, not confined to a party of three,
but under what even Miss Lascelles would have considered sufficient
surveillance in the rooms of liberal heads of houses, hospitable young
dons, social, idle undergraduates. These had no more business on their
hands than could be summed up in cricket-matches or boat-races, and in
meeting Miss Vanhansen and listening to her queer unconventional
remarks.

At all these gatherings, May Millar in the budding beauty of seventeen
and the simplicity of her youthful dress, with her modesty and
_naïveté_, was made very welcome. Soon she began to feel herself ashamed
of the extent to which she was enjoying herself, as she was swept along
by the stream.

She was able to write home now long letters full of girlish enthusiasm
over the kindness of Miss Vanhansen, and the beauties and delights of
St. Ambrose's. Dora, though greatly relieved in her ungrudging devotion
to May, to find that Tom Robinson's words were fulfilled, was still a
little puzzled to understand how May could find time for so many gay
doings, and her studies into the bargain. But Dr. and Mrs. Millar could
only be happy in the happiness of their child, and hug themselves on
having thought more of her welfare than of her feelings at the moment of
parting. It was right she should see all the charming sights which were
to be seen, and enter a little into the special attractions of the great
University town--_that_ would not prevent her from settling down and
doing her proper work presently. You might trust the lady principal and
a studious young creature like May, who liked to be busy with her books
far before any other occupation, with a great deal more license than
that came to.

Then a new turn was given to the dissipation in which May was dipping.
The longing in which she had indulged, ever since she had first heard of
its possible fulfilment, was granted--a Greek play was to be acted by
the young women who stood for the "Grecians" of the year at Thirlwall
Hall, and May was there to see. From the moment the play was decided
upon to the hour of the first rehearsal, May spoke, thought, and dreamed
of nothing save "Alcestis."

Miss Vanhansen gave her up in disgust. "The ungrateful, soft-spoken
wretch!" cried the forsaken fair one; "the hypocritical young blue-grass
Penelope Blue! she has been bluer than the blue clouds all the time she
has been imposing on me as a pining, bread-and-butter, home-sick miss
among us Titanesses and daughters of the gods. Here I am ready to
collapse with trotting her about among the few girls in St. Ambrose's
who are sensible enough not to know the Empire of the East from the
Empire of the West, and would not care which was which if they did know,
and the still wiser young men who spend the long summer days lying on
their backs in their own canoes, reading Mark Twain. Oh! she is a
brazen-faced impostor. 'Molasses!' and 'Great Scott!' are not enough to
say to her. I should like to try her with the final polite remarks of
the last chief of the Dogs' Noses."

But contemporaneously with May's being thus dropped by her first friend,
she was peremptorily claimed and appropriated by the actresses. They had
not failed to notice her interest in their enterprise, and some of the
cleverest of them had already mastered an astonishing problem.

They had been guilty of nicknaming Miss Millar "Baby," because she had
been so lachrymose and shiftless when she came to Thirlwall Hall, and
had never looked up till she was handed over to Miss Vanhansen, who had
given her "airings" and "outings" all very well for a baby, and much to
Baby's taste as it seemed, but not exactly severe study. Yet in spite of
it all, and in spite of the halting inaccuracy of the training in a
private ladies'-school, May Millar knew more by sheer instinct, as it
sounded, of Alcestis, and felt more with her and for her, than the best
of those who professed to be her interpreters.

It was therefore not with wisely repairing the breaches in her Latin and
Greek, and laying these foundations afresh, as Rose was doing with her
art under Mr. St. Foy in London, that May was engrossed. It was with
becoming a bond-slave to those ambitious players. She lent herself to
the minutest details of their attempt, coached herself in them day and
night, till she could coach everybody in turn, and figured behind backs
as universal prompter, dresser, stage-manager--the girl who had been so
lifeless and incapable of looking after herself when she first came
among them that they had styled her the baby of the establishment!

Miss Lascelles, who was deeply interested in the play, both in her
highly-finished scholarship, and for the credit of Thirlwall Hall,
was electrified when she discovered the efficient coadjutor whom
the performers had found. "I am afraid there has been a mistake
made, and time lost," she said to herself ruefully. "How could I be
so shortsighted, when there is the making of the finest scholar in
the Hall in Miss Millar, who threatened to hang so heavily on my hands
that I was fain to send her to play with our generous 'Barbarian.'
What discrimination, what taste and feeling with regard to the
selection and fit declamation of these passages which we were doubtful
whether to retain or reject, or what to do with them! With what pretty
girlish shyness and timidity she made the suggestions! Nothing but her
passionate love of the subject, and her jealousy for its honour, as it
were, with her intense craving to have it fitly expressed, would have
induced her to come forward. I should like to hear what Professor
Hennessy," naming a great name among classical authorities, "thinks
of this young girl's interpretation of several parts of the play when
he comes to hear them. I should like to introduce Miss Millar to him
if she were not so frightened, and if she had taken the place which
she ought to have held to begin with. It is too late to rectify the
mistake and set her to work this term, and she had much better not go
in for the Markham scholarship which her father spoke of--that would
be worse than useless. But we'll turn over a new leaf next term. After
all, she is very young; and I suppose it is of no great consequence
that she has wasted her first half. Her family are professional
people, and these are generally well off." (Miss Lascelles was the
portionless daughter of the impecunious younger son of a poor
nobleman.)

When the play was performed nearly all the classical scholars of St.
Ambrose's--and what was a man doing at St. Ambrose's if he were not a
classical scholar, unless, to be sure, he happened to be a philosopher
of the first water, or a profound expounder of Anglo-Saxon, or a
strangely and wonderfully informed pundit?--came with their wives
and daughters, and graciously applauded the daring deed.

As for Keturah Vanhansen, she wore her _rivière_ of diamonds, dripping,
dancing, flashing like water that was perpetually flowing, and yet, by
some enchantment, arrested in its flow in glorious suspension. Set in
the middle of the enchanted water was such a breast-knot of rare,
exquisite, uncannily grotesque orchids as no queen or princess had ever
been seen to wear in St. Ambrose's. Indeed, it might have suited the
Queen of Sheba.

Miss Vanhansen announced that she wore her war-paint to do honour to the
Thirlwall Hall play, and to May Millar, whom she had forgiven, for
rancour never yet dwelt in the Yankee breast. "Alcestis" was a little
long, and "real right down funny," as her Aunt Sally would have said,
though it was a tragedy, and she, Keturah Vanhansen, did not understand
a word of it, notwithstanding this was her last year at Thirlwall Hall.
One good joke was the man who was in cats' skins, and carried a kitchen
poker for a club, and was half a head shorter than she was, and she was
not big; they should see her Aunt Abe if they wanted to know what a big
woman was like. Another joke was the sacks for the ladies' frocks, with
holes for the head and feet, and holes for the arms, so nice and simple,
and so graceful; Worth ought to get a hint of the costume. Only it was
not very distinctive, when one regarded the corresponding sacks for the
gentlemen. There was really nothing to mark out the ladies except the
large towels which they wore hanging down their backs, while the
gentlemen had Inverness capes over their sacks, fastened on the
shoulders with Highland brooches. How came the Greeks, in the time of
Euripides, to know about Inverness capes and Highland brooches? She,
Keturah Vanhansen, had been so startled by what she feared might be a
frightful anachronism that all her false hair had fallen off, and she
had been left like one of her Aunt Abe's moulting fowls.

The truth was that, in the matter of hair, nature had favoured Miss
Vanhansen with a peculiarly fine and luxuriant crop, so that she had no
need to apply to art for its help.

But as for May, she saw nothing and heard nothing of the discrepancies
which might mar the ancient story to far less ostentatiously
matter-of-fact and mocking critics than the would-be barbarian from
beyond the herring-pond. The piteous tragedy was enacted in all its
terror and pathos to May. She forgot even to sigh for one of the
original great open-air amphitheatres, with the cloudless blue sky of
Greece overhead, which had been the fit setting to those old-world
plays; while she appreciated, without being conscious of the
appreciation, every scenic item--the double stage, the attendant chorus,
the classic dress, that had awakened Miss Vanhansen's ridicule, from the
sandal on the foot to the toque on the head--all which could lend
verisimilitude to the spectacle. For the benefit of happy May, Alcestis
lived again in modern St. Ambrose's. Once more she suffered and died
willingly in the room of Admetus; once more the miserable husband's
half-heroic, half-savage ally, Harakles, fought Death for his pale prey,
and brought back the sacrificed wife from Hades, to restore her--a
figure veiled and motionless, yet instinct with glad life, every vein
throbbing with love and thankfulness--to the arms of her husband, more
joyful, and at the same time, in the middle of his joy, more full of
yearning sorrow and self-abasement than ever was happy bridegroom.

On the day after the play, Miss Lascelles casually mentioned to May that
even if she went in for the coming examination, she, Miss Lascelles,
thought May had better not try for the Markham scholarship.

"But I must, Miss Lascelles," protested May, starting up as if she
were awakening from a dream, and opening great eyes of distress and
apprehension--feelings which were only at that moment called into
life. "My father would be so vexed and disappointed if I did not."

"If you will take my advice, my dear, you will wait till next year;
there will be another scholarship falling in then. Very many of the
Thirlwall Hall girls do much better the second year than they have done
the first," Miss Lascelles continued to warn her girl-graduate, with the
delicate consideration and tact which qualified the lady principal for
her office. "It is bad policy to enter hastily into a competition with
failure staring you in the face. It will only serve to dishearten you,
and to mislead people with regard to what I am now certain--I can
honestly congratulate you on my conviction--are your really exceptional
gifts. You will do Thirlwall Hall credit, and we shall all be proud of
you, if you will have patience. You are very young; you can afford to
wait. It is a common occurrence for clever, studious girls, and lads
too, to come up to St. Ambrose's from the country, from private schools
or home-teaching, who are not sufficiently exact in their scholarship,
and do nothing beyond remedying the defect in their first or even their
second year. You don't grudge giving what is but a fraction of your
life, after all, to thorough as opposed to superficial learning, do you,
dear? Remember, the one is worthy and the other worthless--a mere
pretentious waste."

"I cannot help it," said May, with a little gasp of despair. "To wait is
just what I cannot afford to do. I am almost certain that my coming up
next year depends on what I can do this term. We have grown quite poor.
Father has lost a great deal of money lately. Even if he were content
to send me back here, I do not think it would be right in me to come,
unless I could do something to lessen the expense. My sister Annie is
in London learning to be a nurse, and my sister Rose is coming out as
an artist."

"I thought they were doing it from choice. Why did you not apply
yourself before, Miss Millar? You knew what you could do, better than
any of us here could possibly guess your talents and attainments.
From your general behaviour until the play was started, I for one, I
confess, fell into the grave error of supposing that you could do
little or nothing, or that any progress you had made was entirely
forced work." Miss Lascelles spoke sharply, for she was considerably
discomfited, and full of unavailing regret for her share in the
misadventure.

May could not tell her that she had been too miserable about coming
away from home, and leaving her mother and father, Dora and Tray, to
apply herself to learning; neither would there have been much use in
her applying if she had been destined to fade away presently as she
had imagined, and to die, bereft, among the lexicons, commentaries,
and lecture-notes of Thirlwall Hall. She preferred to say with meek
contriteness that she knew she had been very idle, but she would do
her best to atone for her idleness by working every lawful moment of
every hour of the few weeks which were left to her, if Miss Lascelles
would but allow her to go in for the examination, preparatory to
trying for the scholarship.

Miss Lascelles could not prevent her, she told May a little dryly, for
the students of Thirlwall Hall, though some of them were no more than
seventeen--May's age--were all regarded and treated as grown-up young
women capable of judging and acting for themselves. What Miss Lascelles
was bound to do was to see that Miss Millar did not run into the
opposite extreme, and bring on a brain fever by over-study. "And you
know, my dear," finished the kind, experienced woman, who was easily
softened, who had always the greatest difficulty to keep from being
sympathetic, "that would be a great deal worse than merely being turned
back in your examinations, though Dr. Millar is not rich, and there may
be obstacles--I sincerely trust they will not be insurmountable--to your
coming back in the autumn, to work with a will and at the same time with
moderation."

Poor May did not work herself into a brain fever, but she did in
other respects exactly as Miss Lascelles--a woman who understood
the position--had clearly foreseen. May succeeded in fretting, and
worrying, and getting herself into a state of nervous agitation.
Her brain, or that part of it which had to do with grammatical
declensions, derivations, rules, and principles, became a complete
muddle, so that in place of taking in new information, it seemed to
be rapidly letting go the old which it had once held securely.

Before the eventful day of May's examination, she had lost the last
shred of hope, and so had all who had heard her or formed a correct
estimate of the contents of her papers, of her crossing the rubicon. Of
her own accord she sorrowfully refrained from making any move to enter
the lists for the scholarship.

It is the fashion at St. Ambrose's not to issue the result of the
examinations for a considerable number of weeks, during which the
unhappy candidates hang on the tenterhooks of expectation. A looker-on
is inclined to consider this a refinement of cruelty till he or she has
taken into consideration that the motive of the protracted suspense is
to suit the convenience and lessen the arduous labours of the toil-worn
professors and tutors who serve as examiners.

But in May Millar's case her failure was such a foregone conclusion, was
so remedial by reason of her youth, and so qualified by the share she
had taken in the Greek play, that a point was stretched for her, and she
was privately put out of pain at once. Latterly May had not entertained
the slightest expectation of any other sentence, yet the blow fell so
heavily upon her that it was well it was the end of the term.

To do Thirlwall Hall no more than justice, everybody was sorry for
their youngest, gentlest, prettiest, most inspired, and withal most
inoffensive and obliging student. Miss Lascelles took May into her
private sitting-room and recklessly lavished the few moments the lady
principal had in which to rest and recruit from the fatigue of
receiving company, and playing a becoming part in the academical
gaieties with which the summer term at St. Ambrose's closes, in order
to speak encouraging words to the poor crestfallen child. Miss
Vanhansen implored May to cross the herring-pond at her expense, and
have a good time among the Barbarian's relations in Ol' Virginny and
Kentuck. The girl who had played Alcestis wanted to inaugurate a
reading-party in which May should be coached all round every day.
Failing this, the same adventurous spirit would get up a series of
Greek plays in London drawing-rooms, with Miss Millar's assistance;
and so far as she herself was concerned, she would never be contented
till Miss Millar played Admetus to her Alcestis. A large deputation of
blue-stockinged maidens from Thirlwall Hall escorted May to the
railway station, and more than one was relieved to find that she was
going first to join her sisters in London instead of carrying the
mortification of her failure straight to her country-town home.

It might be the deferring of an ordeal, and yet it was with a white
face, as abashed and well-nigh as scared as if she had committed a
crime, that May awaited Annie in the drawing-room to which the
probationers' friends were free at St. Ebbe's. The consciousness had
come too late of having wasted the little money her father had to spare
on sentimental self-indulgence and the gratification of her own feelings
instead of employing it as it was meant to be employed, in controlling
herself and doing her duty, so as to acquire fitting arms for the battle
of life.

It was this horrible comprehension which made her wistful eyes grow
distended and fixed in their sense of guilt and disgrace. She might have
committed a forgery, and be come to tell Annie what she had done. May
was essentially one-idea'd at this period of her life, and she had dwelt
on the fact of her failure and exaggerated its importance, like the most
egotistical of human beings, till it filled her imagination and blotted
out every other consideration.

Annie, in the full career of a busy professional morning, snatched a
moment between two important engagements to see her sister.

May looked with imploring, fascinated eyes at Annie in her nurse's gown
and cap. The younger girl had some faint inkling of Annie's earlier
experience in the life of an hospital; yet there she was as fresh and
fair and bright as ever--a thousand times cooler and happier-looking
than her visitor.

"Here you are, May," Annie was saying in glad greeting, as she held her
sister by the two shoulders, after she had kissed her; "and I declare
you have grown since you went to St. Ambrose's. Oh, you incorrigible
girl, when you were so much the tallest of us before you went there."

May could only make one answer with parched lips, faltering tongue, and
eyes dry under their heavy cloud of grief, "Annie, I have failed in my
examination!"

Annie started in surprise, while her face fell for a second. "What a
pity!" she could not help exclaiming. "Father will be----" She broke off
in the middle of the sentence. "Don't fret about it," she added, quickly
taking another look into May's face; "that will do no good, and it is
not very much after all. I cannot stay another minute now, May," she
went on to tell the bewildered girl in the most matter-of-fact tone, so
that May was in danger of feeling half-offended at finding her
tribulation taken so cavalierly--"just like Annie!"

"You must wait for me," Annie was saying further. "There is a poor
fellow--a patient of mine--who is to have his arm amputated this
morning, and I must be with him when it is done."

"Oh dear!" cried May, completely taken aback, "that is dreadful. Will he
die, Annie? Will he die?" forgetting all her own high-strung woes, the
product of an advanced stage of civilization, in heart-felt, human
sympathy with the most primitive of all trials--bodily suffering and
loss.

"Not if we can help it, please God," said Annie emphatically. Then an
inspiration came to her as she gazed on the girl's white quivering face.
"You have been working too hard, 'little May'; you shake your head like
a tragedy queen. Then you've been worrying too much, which is a great
deal worse. I shall take you in hand, but I can't stay to talk about it.
Just you think how little my poor fellow would mind not passing an
examination, in comparison with the loss of an arm--fortunately it is
the left one. He is a printer who got his arm crushed under one of the
great rollers, and he has a wife and five little children dependent on
their bread-winner."

Annie was gone, leaving May suddenly transported out of herself, and
plunged into the trials of her neighbours, the awfully near, common
life-and-death trials, of which she had known so little. Her own seemed
to sink into insignificance beside them. St. Ambrose's and its
intellectual lists and wordy contests, even its lofty abstruse
thoughts--excellent things in their way, without which the unlettered
world would become rude, sordid and narrow--faded into the background.
She forgot everything but the poor man passing through a mortal crisis,
with Annie able to succour him in his need, and his wife and children
waiting to hear whether the end were life or death.

May held her breath, and watched, prayed, and waited in her turn, with
no thought left for the news she had brought to town, and was to carry
to Redcross. What did it signify if only the poor man lived when May
herself was well and strong, and all her dear friends were in health,
and likely to be spared to her.

When Annie came in again with a cheerful face, and said, "He has stood
it wonderfully; there is every prospect of his making a speedy
recovery," May's face too cleared till for the moment it was almost
radiant. She acquiesced, with responsive animation, in Annie's
arrangement that since she, Annie, had got leave of absence for the
rest of the day she would put on her walking-dress, and she and May
too would go and pick up Rose at Mr. St. Foy's class-rooms; and what
was to hinder all the three from having an expedition together in the
fine summer weather to Hampton Court, or Kew, or the Crystal Palace,
thus celebrating May's visit to town, and making the most of Annie's
holiday? It would be like dear old times of primrose hunting, blue-bell
gathering, maying, and nutting down at Redcross before the cares and
troubles of the world had taken hold of the girls. Annie had already
sent on May's luggage to Welby Square, to which May would return with
Rose. Annie excluded herself carefully from this part of the programme,
with a kind of unapproachable haughtiness which had three strains of
stubbornness and one strain of fiery youthful anger in its composition,
while it was a complete enigma to May. But all she cared to know was
that she was going with her own two sisters for an entire afternoon's
delightful excursion. In the morning she had felt that she could never
have the heart to be happy again. Even yet she would not be quite happy;
she would be very much affronted when she was telling Annie and Rose the
particulars of her, May's, silliness and selfishness; how she had given
herself up to moping, and then how she had played herself--first with
the St. Ambrose gaieties, and later with the Greek play, instead of
setting about her work methodically and diligently. Annie would,
perhaps, tell her a few home-truths, and Rose would crumple up her
nose, shake her head, and look superhumanly wise--Rose who in the
old days had been more thoughtless than May.

Still she deserved it all a thousand times over, and it would be a
relief to have disburdened herself of the sorry tale.

Her own sisters would defend her from every other assailant. They would
feel for her, seek to reassure her, even make much of her, as they were
doing by taking her away with them this afternoon. May was very sensible
that a burden was lifted off her back.




CHAPTER XVIII.

DORA IS THE NEXT MESSENGER WITH BAD TIDINGS.


There is a curious feeling abroad in the world, that no two things
happen alike on two days, or in two weeks, or months, running. If there
has been a railway accident on Monday, there will certainly not be
another of the same kind at the same place on Tuesday. Apart from the
fresh precautions sure to be taken, it is not at all likely, in the
chapter of accidents, that a facsimile will occur where the original has
preceded it so recently. On a similar principle, if a man has been
killed or badly injured by a fall from a horse, it goes against public
opinion that his son or his brother should also be thus injured. If the
singular repetition does take place, people will speak of it with bated
breath, as of a fate or doom hanging over the family, and therefore
bound to repeat itself again and again on the old lines. All this is in
spite of the fact that there is such a word as "coincidence" in the
language, and that there is hardly one of us who cannot remember
several startling coincidences in the course of his or her history.

Annie Millar had an experience of the kind at this time. It was on the
20th of June that May arrived unannounced at St. Ebbe's to recount her
lost battle. On the 21st Dora appeared, in a like unlooked-for manner,
to divulge her sorrowful news.

Annie was much more troubled by the spectacle of Dora standing alone in
the middle of the hospital drawing-room, pale and agitated, than she had
been by the discovery of May in that very condition the day before.
Annie's own colour died away while she ran forward and caught Dora's
hand. "What is it, Dora? Has anything happened to father or mother?--yet
if there had, you would not have left them and come up to town by
yourself. Why are you here? Tell me quickly, for it is killing me to
keep me in suspense."

"Don't be alarmed," entreated Dora's soft voice. "Father sent me up for
the express purpose that you might not be alarmed when you heard. I must
have managed badly to frighten you. I assure you nothing has happened,
at least nothing very particular, only,--well, father is very rheumatic,
and the warm weather has done him no good. He has not been out of the
house for a month, though we did not mention it in our letters, always
hoping that by the next time we wrote he would be better. But he has not
left his room till he contrived to go in the cab yesterday. Oh! Annie,
he has sold his business to Dr. Capes. He--father--said it was no use to
protract the struggle, it was only doing more mischief; he would never
be able, at his age, to go about again so as to act fairly by his
patients. He has given up everything to the bank's creditors, and will
pass through the bankruptcy court. He bade me tell you that he could see
no other way, and he was afraid Rose or you might read his name in the
_Gazette_ without being prepared for it."

"Father ill, old, and a bankrupt!" Annie's cry was bitter. "It is hard
after his long life of honourable industry. I can never forgive Mr.
Carey."

"Hush! hush! Annie, you must not say that. Nothing would grieve father
more. Nobody has suffered like the Careys. Besides, father always says
that he alone was to blame for buying the bank shares. He did it of his
own free-will, just that he might grow richer in the idlest manner
possible for him to do so. Dr. Capes has taken our house, the Old
Doctor's House too, and father and mother went into apartments--those
over Robarts the book-seller's--yesterday, till they could look about
them." Dora was crying quietly all the time she was speaking, and at the
same time she was breaking off to say with pathetic resigned trust like
her mother's, "But only think, Annie dear, how much worse it might have
been! What a great deal we have to be thankful for. Look at poor Mr.
Carey sitting paralyzed, and quite childish; and do you know the sad
news arrived last night that poor poor Colonel Russell is dead? He had a
sun-stroke, and died within twelve hours; he has not been three months
at his new post. Dear father has all his senses, and he says himself he
may live for years and years."

"I hope so," said Annie fervently; but it is doubtful whether she fully
appreciated the blessings of her lot at that moment. She busied herself
for a few minutes with Dora, her nurse's instinct as well as her
affection telling her that Dora must be seen to first. Annie took off
Dora's hat and jacket, seated her in the easiest chair, would hear
nothing more till she--Annie--had learnt when Dora had breakfasted, and
then rung for a basin of soup and made her swallow it. "Now, Dora," she
said, sitting down by her sister, "tell me all there is to tell. What
have father and mother to live upon? We must think and act for them
now."

Dora explained as well as she was able, since, like her mother, she had
no great head for business. In addition to the sum given for the
good-will of Dr. Millar's practice, and for his house and furniture,
which was to be paid over to the liquidators of the bank's debts, (in
return for which the debtor would get a discharge from farther
obligations,) a small percentage was to be allowed to him from his
successor's fees.

"I am afraid it will be very small," Dora made the despondent remark,
"because, though all his former patients are fond of father, they got to
see he was breaking up, and did not like to send for him during the
night, or at odd hours. Mother and I did what we could, going round for
him and inquiring after his patients; but, as he said, such a make-shift
could not last. We were always hearing of more families calling in Dr.
Capes or Mr. Newton. Father declared he could not blame them; he would
have done the same in their place, and that every dog must have his
day."

"That was like father," said Annie, looking up with a fleeting sparkle
in her eyes.

"Then we thought," went on Dora, "father and mother might have part of
mother's money, since you have always said you did not need it, while
Rose is getting paid for her work, and there is hardly any doubt"
(brightening up,) "but that 'little May' will take the scholarship.
She was working so hard to pass her examination when she wrote last,
that she was quite out of spirits about her chances, which father says
is always the way with the best men when they are going in for an
examination that they are safe to win. He supposes it will be still
more so with women. He tells mother that he will not mind taking help
from her, where her money is concerned, when he can no longer stir from
his chair--not to say to earn a fee, but to save his life. He has taken
so much more help from her in other ways during all their married life,
that this in addition will not count."




CHAPTER XIX.

THE UNEMPLOYED--A FAMILIAR FACE.


A lodging was found near the Hospital for Dora, who was to stay in town
and look out for a situation; and for the next week, a week of hot
summer weather, Annie, relieved from her hospital work, because it was
her first holiday time, went to and fro, spending as little as possible
on omnibus fares, with Dora and May in her train, in search of
employment for them. People were beginning to leave town, and the time
did not seem propitious. When was it ever propitious for such a pursuit
where women are concerned? Even under Annie's able guidance, with the
spirit which she could summon to her aid in all difficulties, the
intentional and unintentional rebuffs which the two girl candidates,
particularly Dora, got from agents and principals in connection with
ladies in want of useful companions and nursery-governesses were
innumerable. The swarms of needy, greedy applicants for similar
situations whom the Millars were perpetually encountering in their
rounds, were enough to cause the stoutest heart to quail, and to sink
the most sanguine nature into the depths of despondency.

Dora Millar was not constitutionally sanguine, and she grew more and
more nervous and dispirited as the fruitless efforts went on. Her little
figure drooped, her eyes had a dejected expression, her lips quivered
pathetically without any provocation. Annie was compelled to use strong
language. "The idiots!" she exclaimed, _apropos_ of the last persons who
had found Dora too young or too old, not strong enough looking, or not
lively enough looking ("not as if she could stand a large amount of
bullying and worrying," Annie read between the lines). "What a chance
they are letting slip through their fingers of getting the most
unexacting, contented creature in the world to minister to their
tiresome wants. They will never see her like again; serve them right for
their blindness."

One particularly glaring, airless afternoon, the three sisters were
toiling back to Dora's lodging, with the London pavement like heated
iron under the feet of the crowds that trod it, and the cloudless sky,
in which the sun blazed a ball of fire, like glowing brass over their
heads. Then as the Millars turned a corner and looked longingly at the
trees in a square with their leaves already yellowing and shrivelling,
May uttered a little shriek of delight and darted forward to greet a
familiar figure and face in the stream of strangers. What did it signify
that the figure was insignificant by comparison, and the face with
nothing distinguished in its pallor, under its red beard and
moustache?--"a little foxy-headed fellow," any sharp-tongued bystander
might have called him. It was a well-known face where all the others
were drearily unknown, a Redcross face in London, the face of a man who
might have shown himself an enemy, yet had proved a friend in need; and
though there had been presented to the girls the bearing of a Jupiter
and the lineaments of an Adonis, they could not have hailed him with
greater gladness. If anybody hung back in the general acclamation it was
Dora, for Annie did not say a word to rebuke May; she was too anxious to
hear the last news of her father.

More than one man among the passers-by, glancing at Tom Robinson
surrounded by a group of pretty girls, the two prettiest evidently
making much of him and hanging on his words, called him in their minds
"lucky dog," and speculated on the nature of the attraction.

"'_Prope'ty, prope'ty, prope'ty_,'" no doubt. It was disgraceful to see
how mercenary even quite young women were getting.

Tom received the ovation, at which, by the bye, he was a little taken
aback and puzzled, quietly and in a matter-of-fact way, as he received
most things. He had had the pleasure of seeing Dr. and Mrs. Millar
lately; indeed, he had availed himself of the privileges of an old
friend to call on them at once in their new quarters, he told Annie, and
he had found them, by their own account, fairly well and comfortable,
though the Doctor was still dead lame.

Tom did not tell either Annie, or any one else interested in the
information, that he had spent the last few days pushing the circulation
of a subscription list, which he had headed with the promise of a
handsome sum. It was to provide a testimonial not altogether inadequate
to mark the esteem in which the townspeople held their old Doctor for
his many virtues, and their sympathy with him in his misfortunes. A
liberal offering on the town's part might do something to relieve the
adversity which had befallen a fellow-townsman. The talk a little time
ago had been of presenting Dr. Millar with a new brougham and horse,
which, as they would have had to be maintained at the charge of a man
who had just put down his old brougham as beyond his diminished income,
was rather an illogical method of serving him. However, his complete
breakdown, with the sale of his practice, had at once knocked that idea
on the head, and had given its motive a much wider application. If the
little Doctor were to submit to accept help, it must be commensurate
with the dignity of Redcross and the county, and with his own
professional status and merit.

Tom Robinson looked at the girls as two of them looked at him. "It is
tiring weather," he suggested hesitatingly; "is it wise of you to walk
out in the heat?"

"Oh! Mr. Robinson," cried May effusively, "we are so tired--just dead
beat--though Annie there does not like me to talk slang--but it is so
expressive, don't you think so? It is not to-day only, but yesterday and
the day before, we have been hunting for situations, and have not found
them yet. Do you know, Dora and I are going to take situations
immediately if we can get them?"

His face changed, and he knit his brow involuntarily.

"What a magpie it is!" said Annie, impatiently. "But, of course, you
have heard all about the turn father's affairs have taken since this bad
rheumatic attack, which he does not believe he can shake off. It need
not be any secret that my sisters are looking out for situations."

He did not answer; he was prevented by the painful consciousness that
Dora appeared ready to sink into the ground.

"Won't you avail yourself of my arm, Miss Dora? Won't you let me see you
home?" he proposed hurriedly.

She could not refuse; indeed, she was only too thankful for the offered
support, though she murmured a protest against troubling him and taking
him out of his way. And she could not altogether conceal how put out as
well as weary she was, so that the little hand, which just touched his
coat-sleeve, fluttered on its resting-place like a newly-caught bird.

He hailed a cab, and wished to put them all into it.

"I dare say it would be better," said Annie, glancing at Dora's white
face, with the new trick of quivering which the lips had acquired. As
the cab was driving up, she gave Tom Robinson their address--"17, Little
St. Ebbe's Street," with the amount of the fare, looking at him almost
fiercely while she took the money from her purse. "Will you be good
enough to direct the man and pay him for us?" she said, and he dared not
dispute her will.

But when he yielded, she seemed to think his friendliness and power of
comprehension deserved something better than they had got. "Will you
come with us?" Annie invited him; and when she softened, it was always
in such a bright frank way that it was hard to resist her. "We'll be
very pleased to give you a cup of tea at Dora's lodging--at least we can
do that for you, and it may be acceptable on such an oppressive
afternoon."

He, a guest at a lodging of Dora Millar's: it sounded odd enough!

"Do come, Mr. Robinson," his friend May was imploring, while Dora,
sensible that something was due from her as the ostensible mistress of
the lodging, echoed shyly, without raising her eyes to his face, "Yes,
come, please."

Did she remember the last time she gave him tea in the drawing-room of
the Old Doctor's House, where they were not likely to meet again? How
awkward they found the _tête-à-tête_. How they shrank from their hands
touching, while he reproached her for aiding and abetting May in trying
to shirk going to St. Ambrose's; and she had borne his reproaches and
admitted the reasonableness of his arguments, with all the meek candour
of Dora, while still making a last stand for May.

He went with the girls as if he were in a dream; but he was not left to
dream in Dora's very plain lodging, where Annie and not the mistress of
the lodging poured out tea, and May insisted on helping him to bread
and butter. He saw Rose, too, who had been awaiting the return of her
sisters. It sent another pang to his brotherly heart to discover that
Rose also was subdued and well-nigh careworn. She still wrinkled her
forehead and crumpled up her nose, but it was no longer in the old saucy
way; it was under her share of the heavy burden of trouble which had
fallen on these dauntless girls and might end by crushing them.

May was not to be kept from the immense solace of making a clean breast
to her former ally of her stupid dawdling and trifling, and the
retribution which had at once befallen her. "Did father tell you, Mr.
Robinson, that I have failed in my examination?" she began plaintively.
"Yes, I have, and it was all my own fault. I was too silly; I would not
pull myself together and work hard from the first. Now it will never be
in my power to go back to St. Ambrose's. I'll not be able to atone for
my folly by showing that everybody was not wrong when it was believed
that I might be a fair scholar, win a scholarship, and rise to be
classical mistress in a girls' school." At the announcement of the
disastrous failure, by her own deed, of all the ambitious plans for her,
May threatened to break down, springing up and turning away, her
shoulders heaving in a paroxysm of mortification and grief.

Tom Robinson used to say, afterwards, that he never witnessed a
prettier sight than the manner in which the three other girls rallied
round their poor "little May," from Annie downwards. They took off her
hat, pulled off her gloves, smoothed her ruffled hair, patted her
tear-stained cheeks, seated her in an arm-chair, brought her tea, and
made her drink it, bidding her not be too disheartened. They pledged
themselves--even Dora pledged herself stoutly--that, if it rested with
them, and they were young and strong, they would find work of one kind
or another--May should go back to St. Ambrose's some day and vindicate
her scholarliness. Father and mother and all of them would be proud of
her.

It rendered the man doubly indignant from that day when he heard
scoffers say that there could be no true friendship between women, and
that the relation of sisters existed simply for the growth of rivalry
and jealousy.

May was still shaking her head disconsolately, and reminding him, "Ah,
Mr. Robinson, it would have been better if you had let me stay at home
and go into your shop, like Phyllis Carey. I might have done some good
there, though you may not believe it, and only feel glad that you got
rid of me."

Then he took her in hand, and administered his consolation. "Nonsense,
Miss May," he said, with sufficient peremptoriness for a man who had
been rather accustomed to efface himself in these girls' presence, "you
were not to be suffered to hide your light under a bushel. I wonder to
hear you--I thought you had more pluck and perseverance. How many times
do you think the young fellows at St. Ambrose's are turned back and have
to try again? If I passed in my first exam, it was by the merest fluke,
as three-fourths of the men will tell you they pass. As for my degree,
I had the common sense and modesty to put off taking it to the last
moment, and to stay up two different vacations, 'sapping' like a
Scotchman, before I ventured to undergo the test. You don't mean to say
you are too proud to do at Rome as the Romans do, that your genius will
brook no rejection, and declines to grapple with an obstacle? I'll tell
you what your father proposes for you, and let me say that I believe it
would do him a world of good--now that he has been forced to give up his
patients, and is confined to his chair. He has not lost heart and faith
in your powers--of course not. He is thinking quite eagerly of brushing
up his classics in his enforced leisure, and himself becoming your coach
for the next six months. I need not say that any small assistance I can
offer is heartily at your service also."

"Oh!" said May, with wistful brown eyes and a long-drawn sigh, "you are
a great deal too good to me, all of you. I don't deserve it. It would
only be too much happiness for me to have father and you to coach
me--but I know we could not afford it."

"Wait and see," said Tom succinctly.

"If I got that situation," said Dora timidly, "I might do something to
help May: I mean the one where the lady said she would take me into
consideration, but we thought it would not do, because I should have to
go out to Jamaica. On second thoughts, I am not sure that I'd mind so
very much going. The lady seemed to consider I might be able to do what
she required, and I should only be away for a year or two, since the
family are coming back then. The salary was very good."

Dora go out to Jamaica to help May, or any one else! Not though he had
to fling cheques in at the windows, and squeeze Bank of England notes
through the keyholes, to prevent it.

"Hester Jennings says she would not be very much surprised if she heard
of a buyer for my tulip picture; but I don't know," said Rose
doubtfully, glancing at the picture, which was on an adjoining table.

"May I look at it?" asked Tom Robinson, jumping up with alacrity,
probably to make a diversion in the conversation from the obnoxious
topic of Dora's problematical voyage to Jamaica. He had seen Rose's work
at Redcross, and he could give it as his honest opinion that she had
made a great advance in her art, though he did not profess to be a
judge. He said, however, that he had a friend, an old St. Ambrose crony,
who was an artist. They had happened to be together in Rome at a later
date, had been a good deal thrown on each other's company there, and had
continued to keep up a friendly intercourse. He requested permission for
his friend to call and look at the little picture. He might be of use to
Rose in disposing of it; he was always ready to help a fellow-artist.
Tom supposed the Millars had heard his friend's name, it was pretty well
known; indeed they might have seen him, for Pemberton and Lady Mary, his
wife, had spent a few days with Tom at Redcross, and had been in church
on the Sunday during their visit, the summer before last.

In spite of the obligations of good breeding, the Millars looked at each
other in open-mouthed astonishment. Certainly they had heard of
Pemberton the distinguished landscape painter, and they had been told
that he had married into the peerage, as Aunt Penny had married into the
county. The girls also remembered perfectly the quiet-looking young
couple who had been noticed walking about with Tom Robinson the July
before last. People had wondered languidly who the strangers could
be--whether they were cousins far removed on Tom's father's side of the
house, since they did not quite answer to the style of his mother's
yeomen kindred. But it was an effort to the provincial mind to identify
the unobtrusive-looking pair with the Pembertons, to realize that Mr.
Pemberton and his Lady Mary had actually come and stayed the better part
of a week with Tom Robinson. They could hardly have been ignorant of
"Robinson's," whose master was only received into the upper-class houses
of the town on a species of sufferance.

The peerage must have unique rules by which to frame its standards.
There was the Hon. Victoria, Mrs. Carey's niece by marriage, who, when
Carey's Bank was in full bloom, would hardly be seen in the streets of
Redcross, and scarcely deigned to acknowledge her own aunt-in-law. As to
the familiarity of staying a night in the Bank House, she would never
have dreamt of it. In this respect she did little credit to the teaching
of her old governess, Miss Franklin, who had shown herself a philosopher
in her own person. Perhaps, when it came to stooping at all, the peerage
felt it might as soon, and with a still more gracious and graceful
effect, bend low as bend slightly. Perhaps in the peerage, as in every
other class, there are all sorts and conditions of mind and heart.

A little clue might have been supplied to account for the eccentricity
of the Pembertons, and to lessen the shock of their conduct to the
Millars, if the latter had been made acquainted with one circumstance.
About the time of the stay of the artist and his wife in Rome, where he
had been only too glad to run up against a favourite old college chum,
when the three had been making a long excursion in company beyond the
Campagna, Pemberton had been suddenly attacked in a remote little town
with a violent illness.

His poor young wife would have been utterly frightened and forlorn had
it not been for the moral courage and untiring good offices of the third
person in the company--Tom Robinson.

Tom did not appear conscious of the sensation he had created by the
mention of his friend. He arranged when Mr. Pemberton should come and
view Rose's picture to suit Rose's convenience, and not that of the
famous and courted artist. Then he explained in all sincerity, before he
took his leave, that he, Tom Robinson, was very sorry he could not have
the pleasure of bringing Pemberton and introducing him personally,
because a business engagement called the master of "Robinson's" back to
Redcross early next morning.

The party he left were quite silent and still for a moment after he had
gone, till what she had heard of Mr. Pemberton went to Rose's head to
such a degree that she rose, whirled round on tiptoe, and caused her
spread-out frock to perform the feat which children call "making a
cheese."

"Won't it be delicious to know Mr. Pemberton and get his advice--perhaps
one day presume to ask him how he does his hay-fields and orchards? What
will Hester Jennings say! I say, we'll have Hester to meet him; she will
come for such a painter though the whole peerage would not get her to
budge an inch. I wish we could tone her down a little bit, but he must
just swallow her whole. She is good and clever enough to be permitted
that rugged line of her own. Oh! but isn't Tom Robinson a trump? I
_will_ be slangy, Annie--as May says, it is so expressive."

"Yes, yes," chimed in May enthusiastically, in reference to the man and
not to the slang. "I have known it ever since he came up like a
lion--why do you laugh, Rose?--and rescued Tray--don't you remember,
Dora?--from that horrid brute of a collie. Tray bit him--Mr. Robinson, I
mean--not knowing that he was his best friend, and he only laughed. He
was so kind about my wishing to go into his shop, like Phyllis Carey,
though he would not take me. I think it must be a privilege, as Miss
Franklin tells Phyllis, to serve him. She says all the nice people in
the shop have the greatest regard for him."

"I am so sorry and ashamed that I ever drew caricatures of him," said
Rose, in pensive penitence. "I think, whenever I am able, I must paint
his portrait, as I see him now, to make up for it."

"And ask him to have it hung above the oak staircase in the shop,"
suggested Annie, a little satirically. But she added immediately,
"Though it broke no bones to dwell on his lack of height and his foxy
complexion, I am rather sorry now that I did it, because I have ceased
to think that these objectionable details deserved to be made of any
consequence. On the contrary, I own to the infatuation of beginning to
see that there is something fine in them. I suppose I shall be calling
Tom Robinson's hair golden, or tawny, or chestnut soon, and his inches
the proper height for a man. It is true," broke off Annie, with sudden,
unaccountable perversity, "I do hate great lumbering flaxen-haired
giants." She blushed furiously after she had indulged in the last
digression, and hastened to resume the main thread of the conversation.
"As for Tom Robinson's having little to say, I declare that my present
impression is that he says quite enough, and very much to the purpose
too. It was so nice and like a gentleman of him not to propose
immediately to buy Rose's picture when she talked rashly of her anxiety
that it should find a purchaser."

"I don't think Cyril Carey, with all his airs, would have shown so much
delicacy in the old days," said Rose.

"Or that Ned Hewett, though Ned has such a kind heart, would have been
able to avoid blundering into some such offer," remarked May.

There was one person who remained absolutely silent while the others
sang Tom Robinson's praises, and it might be her silence which called
her sisters' attention to her.

"I wonder what you would have, Dora?" said Rose, with several shades of
superciliousness in her voice and in her lifted-up nose.

"I cannot understand how you could be such a cruel, hard-hearted girl,"
May actually reproached her devoted slave.

"There is such a thing as being too particular," Annie had the coolness
to say. "I am sure I do not go in for indiscriminate marriages or for
falling in love," she added with lofty decision. "It has always been a
mystery to me what poor Fanny Russell could see to care for, or to do
anything save laugh at, in Cyril Carey. I hope the elderly 'competition
wallah,' or commissioner, or whatever he is, whom she is going to marry,
has more sense as well as more money. For her marriage was arranged,
though the news had not reached England, mother writes, before the
tidings of Colonel Russell's death came. But when a man who can act as
Tom Robinson has acted crosses a woman's path and pays her the
compliment of asking her to be his wife, I do think she should be
careful what she answers."

Dora stared as if she were losing her senses. Were they laughing at her
still? Could they be in earnest? If so, how was it possible for them to
be so flagrantly inconsistent and unjust? She could only utter a single
exclamation. But as the worm will turn, the exclamation was emphatic and
indignant enough. "Well!" she cried, in utter amazement and incipient
rebellion. "Well!" and she returned the challenging gaze of the circle
with a counter-challenge, before which all eyes except Annie's fell.

Annie had the audacity to look Dora in the face and echo the "Well!"
nay, to say further, "You never heard of anything so disgraceful as for
us to turn upon you and find fault with you for refusing Tom Robinson,
when all the time it was we who laughed at him, and scouted his shop,
keeping you up to the point of dismissing him without delay? Quite true,
Dora, dear; but then it was you, and not _us_, whom he was proposing to
marry! and a girl old enough to receive such a proposal should have the
wit to judge for herself--should she not? She ought to cultivate the
penetration to look beneath the surface in so important a matter, and
then fewer lamentable mistakes would be made. However, nobody could
expect you to put force on your inclinations, and he does not bear you
malice."

Annie did not regard her share in the matter so cheerfully and lightly
when she was in the privacy of a ward of St. Ebbe's, where she had
begged to sit up with an unconscious patient, just to keep her hand in
and compose her feelings.

"What mischievous little wretches we were," she reflected, as she
deftly changed the wet cloth on the sick woman's hot forehead. "How
happy he might have made Dora, and how happy she might have made him!
She is so single-minded and tender-hearted, that she could hardly have
failed to see his merits, if we had given him the chance, let her
alone, and left the pair to themselves. Then, if the worst were to
come to the worst," and Annie frowned with anxiety and grief, as well
as with wholesome humiliation, "if poor father and mother cannot get
along, and none of us girls can help them effectually, his house might
have been their home, where he would never have let them feel other
than honoured guests. He would have been a son to them. But the
mischief is done, and there is no help for it. If Dora and he were an
ordinary couple, it might be mended; but now she will not look at him
when we none of us have a penny, because she refused him when we were
in comfortable circumstances; and he will not renew his suit with the
thought in his mind that it would look and feel to her as if any
favour he has magnanimously conferred on us, were a mere bribe to
compel her to listen to him. So, Annie Millar, this is a pretty kettle
of fish, of which you have been chief cook! There is the greater
reason for you to make up your mind from this moment to devote
yourself wholly to your family, and let nothing--_nothing_," she
protested with suspicious vehemence, "come between you and them."

"What is it, you poor soul?" the young nurse responded quickly to a
movement of the helpless ailing creature beside her. "Do you know there
is somebody here? Will it ease you to have your head raised on my arm,
do you think? You cannot hear or answer, but we'll try that, and then it
is just possible you may drop asleep." And for the rest of the watch
Annie was absorbed in care for her patient.




CHAPTER XX.

REDCROSS AGAIN.


Tom Robinson's subscription list attained the respectable sum-total of
two thousand pounds. Many of the subscribers were not only patients of
Dr. Millar, but creditors of the bank whose claims he had striven with
sturdy honesty to satisfy, till the task proved too hard for his years.

The little Doctor received the token of how greatly his courage and
staunchness in the fulfilment of his obligations had been respected,
with half pained, half pleased gratitude, and this was very much the
attitude of mind of his daughter Annie. The rest of his womankind, from
Mrs. Millar to May, only felt a glad surprise, and a soft, proud
thankfulness.

The relief from present difficulties was great, but of course the gift
did not obviate the necessity for the girls seeking work and wages. Even
May, when she ventured to hope that she might stay at home for a month
or two and be coached by her father and Tom Robinson in anticipation of
a more successful campaign at St. Ambrose's, was eagerly speculating
whether she might not become a coach in her turn. She was fain to earn a
little money by helping the very youngest of the Grammar School boys to
prepare their Latin grammar in the evenings, supposing she could get
them to sit still, and give over wishing her to play with them.

Mr. Pemberton had not only himself called on the Miss Millar who was the
artist, he had brought Lady Mary with him, and both husband and wife had
turned out the refined, thoroughly unassuming, kindly disposed couple
they had looked. They spoke warmly of Tom Robinson as their very good
friend, and went so far as to express enthusiasm for his beautiful old
shop. Mr. Pemberton did better than merely say a few words of languid,
indiscriminating praise of Rose's picture, and then bow himself out. He
examined the picture closely, and looked at her thoughtfully and
attentively out of the dark gray eyes, the only good feature in his
face. The next moment, to Hester Jennings's great edification, he
addressed Rose seriously as a member of the Guild of St. Luke--not an
amateur, "one of ourselves, so that you must not mind what I say to you,
Miss Millar." He first displayed a generous capacity for discovering
something good, whether it were to be found in the work of a tyro or of
a veteran. Next he took the trouble of pointing out the faults, and
urging their remedy, telling her the picture was worth the pains of
making it as true as possible, until Rose hung her head in blended pride
and humility.

What was more, he offered to enter into negotiations with a
picture-dealer on her behalf, and brought them to a triumphant
conclusion, making Rose happy with so fair a price as materially to
lighten the millstone of her resigned office at the Misses Stone's
hanging round her neck.

It was settled that May should go home and profit by the coaching which
awaited her at Redcross, taking the chance of finding some little boys
whose Latin grammar would be the better of her supervision.

Next Mr. Pemberton wrote that Lady Mary had been so charmed with the
neighbourhood of Redcross, and had spoken so highly of it to one of her
cousins, who had a great liking for English landscape, and was just
refurnishing his town house, that he wished to commission a set of
water-colour sketches of such and such spots for his morning-room. It
was Mr. Pemberton's opinion that Miss Rose Millar could execute the
commission to Sir John Neville's satisfaction, if she cared to accept of
it.

"It is to help me," said Rose humbly, "for there are hundreds of good
artists who would take the work and be thankful, and do it far better,
though I will do my very best. Tom Robinson is at the bottom of it
directly or indirectly, but he is like an old friend. I don't know a man
to whom I would sooner be obliged."

In the third instance, a totally unforeseen application was made to
Annie. A fever, in certain respects unfamiliar in its type, broke out at
Stokeleigh, one of several suburban villages on the outskirts of
Redcross. Some authorities called the fever Russian, and declared it had
been imported--they did not pretend to say how--from that remote empire.
Others insisted it was a slow fever, of English growth, with curious
complications. It appeared doubtful whether it were infectious; but
there was one thing which was unmistakable, that, whatever kind of
malaria brooding in the summer air was at the root of the complaint,
that malaria showed a disposition to spread extensively. It passed from
Stokeleigh to the adjoining village of Woodleigh, whence it took a bend
in the direction of the town, and proceeded to squat, as malarias can
squat, and settle indefinitely on all the low-lying districts of
Redcross. Neither did the epidemic improve in character with the change
of locality. For, whereas on the higher, less encumbered ground the
fever had been rarely fatal, the mortality increased with the transfer
of the disease to the crowded, damp purlieus of the older part of the
town, built more or less on the Dewes, and liable to be invaded by the
river in flood.

A combined meeting of the Town Council and Vestry, with the Mayor, who
happened to be a public-spirited man, and the Rector heading it,
determined on taking prompt action to stop the mischief. The town had
lately built a Corn Exchange in one of the highest, best-ventilated
situations in Redcross. It was to be committed to the care of a town's
officer and his wife, who were to have the adjoining rooms rent-free for
a domicile, together with certain perquisites, in return for sweeping,
scrubbing, and looking after the hall. But the place was just finished,
and had not yet been occupied in the manner intended. It was proposed to
convert it, in the absence of other accommodation, into a temporary ward
for the sufferers from fever. The doctors consulted, pledged themselves
that there was every probability of the unwelcome visitor being thus
stamped out, while the chances of recovery for the patients would be
multiplied. It was also agreed to bring a trained nurse from some
nursing institution, to mould the raw nursing materials which Redcross
supplied on the emergency. Dr. Millar's successor had a bright idea that
it might be a graceful act on his part to mention the old Doctor's
daughter, who had gone in for nursing as a profession. She had already
served nearly a year in a great London hospital, and was no doubt
competent to undertake the duties required. It would be a compliment to
her and her father to try and get her for the occasion, and there would
be a certain _éclat_ in her coming to the help of her native town in its
need. Dr. Capes was right as to the popularity of his motion. It was
received with unanimous approval. Annie, the matron, and the directors
of St. Ebbe's, were immediately applied to in proper form. Annie burned
to go, if such a step were admissible at the present stage of her
career. The favour she had won on all sides aided in the fulfilment of
her wishes. She was promoted from the ranks of the probationers to those
of the nurses while yet her year wanted a fraction of its complete
round, and was officially sent down to represent the nurses of St.
Ebbe's at Redcross.

"Of course, Dora, you cannot be left behind to go on by yourself hunting
for a situation with three-fourths of the great world out of town. I am
afraid you would make a poor job of it at the best, Dora dear, and at
the worst it is not to be thought of; it would be a waste of
nerve-tissue and muscle, as well as of pounds, shillings, and pence. You
will come too; we'll be all together, or nearly together, again, for a
holiday, after all."

Dora, who had been waiting patiently for Annie's decision, was nothing
loth.

"Rose's expenses and mine are more than paid," calculated the practical
Annie, "so that we shall be no drag on father and mother. I don't know
if Robarts's accommodation will extend beyond the additional bedroom for
Rose and May, but that can be easily managed. Oh! I have it, Dora, you
will stay with me at the hospital--the Corn Exchange I mean--and save me
from having a housekeeper for the short time one will be wanted. I'll
take care that no infection, if there be infection, will come near you.
Oh, 'won't it be jolly,' as Rose says, for you and me to keep house by
ourselves at dear old Redcross, of all places in the world?"

It was arranged so, with only a little demur from Mrs. Millar,
over-ruled by her husband.

There was another person, without right or power to enter his veto
against the existing order of things, who nevertheless decidedly
demurred at them. Tom Robinson showed that though he might be a humane
man there were bounds to his humanity. "It is all very well for Annie
Millar to come down and nurse the fever patients, it is in the way of
her business, she does as much every day, she is well acquainted with
all the precautions to take. But Dora is not a nurse, she never thinks
of herself, she will forget to take the precautions if she has ever
heard of them. She has not strong nerves, and she is used up with this
preposterous stumping of London in July in search of a situation. What
in the name of common sense and natural affection do they mean by
lugging Dora into the risk!" he grumbled and worried. "Oh! yes, of
course she would follow Annie or any of the rest of them fast enough if
she had the opportunity, though she were to die at the end of it; but
she ought never to have had the opportunity, it was preposterous to let
her. The whole thing is monstrous. I never heard of such rashness. What
can Dr. and Mrs. Millar be thinking of?"

It felt queer, to say the least of it, as well as "jolly," to be at
Redcross and not at the Old Doctor's House, over which a bride of
yesterday was presiding, for Dr. Capes's marriage had taken place
simultaneously with his purchase of Dr. Millar's practice.

Annie used to look over from the opposite side of the street, as she was
walking along, at the alterations which were being made in the garden,
and the new arrangement of the window curtains, and try to criticize
them impartially. Then she had to call and see Dr. Capes, and wait in
the familiar consulting-room till he insisted on taking her to the
drawing-room, in order to introduce her to his wife, who had come a
stranger to Redcross. Annie felt as if she were a disembodied spirit, or
a dreamer in a dream from which she could not awake, while she gazed on
the changed yet well-known aspect of everything around her. But she had
to think of Dr. and Mrs. Capes, in whose house she was, and talk civilly
to them of their improvements(!). She had to emulate the submission of
Dora, who had seen the transfer coming and taken part in it. She had to
copy the mercurial spirits of Rose and May. They were so pleased to be
with their father and mother again, and to take possession of Phyllis
Carey's every free moment, that they declared the Robarts's apartments
were the very nicest the girls had ever seen. They, the apartments, were
delightfully cosy (which meant stuffy in July). They were more cheerful
(noisier) than the Old Doctor's House. It was great fun for the pair to
stow themselves and their belongings within such narrow compass.

A serious vexation to Annie at the commencement of her enterprise was
the arrival of Dr. Harry Ironside to diagnose and make what he could of
the fever.

"What is he doing here? His coming at all is most impertinent," cried
Annie indignantly, sitting down on one of the still empty beds in the
barrack-like hall, and as it were daring Rose and May, who had brought
the news, and Dora who was listening to them, to contradict her.

"He is come in the pursuit of knowledge," said Rose, with full command
of her countenance. "He does not understand Russian fever, or whatever
it is, and he thinks he had better make its acquaintance as a wind up to
taking his degree. He is still a doctor at large; he has not fixed on
where he is to go and what he is to do next, so his sister Kate writes
to me."

"Then he and his sister Kate had better make up their minds to go away
together, somewhere else, and not trouble other people," cried Annie
quite illogically.

"Why, Annie, father thinks it is very praiseworthy of Dr. Ironside to
seek to get all the information he can before settling down as a
doctor," remonstrated May in the guilelessness of her heart. "He has
just been calling on father, who is delighted with him--so is mother;
and, for _my_ part," finished the speaker with unconscious emphasis, as
if her opinion were of the utmost consequence, "I have thought him very
nice since the first time I met him at Mrs. Jennings's. He is so big and
handsome, without being stuck up, or a swell, like what Cyril Carey used
to be--just frank and pleasant as a man should be. I cannot comprehend
why you have such a dislike to him."

"Upon my word!" exclaimed Annie, with a gasp. "But I don't care," she
added vehemently; "he shall not come and carry on his investigations
here. Dr. Capes and I, with father to appeal to, and Mr. Newton to call
in and consult, if necessary, are more than sufficient for all the
patients we are likely to get. I tell you, if he forces his way into my
hospital I'll have nothing more to do with it; I'll throw it all up and
go back to St. Ebbe's at once."

"But it is not your hospital, Annie," said Rose with provoking
matter-of-factness. "It is the town's, or if it is under the control of
any private person, it is under Dr. Capes's orders. For the sake of his
professional character, medical etiquette, and all that kind of thing,
he will not refuse to allow a fellow-doctor to study the fever cases
under his care. Dr. Harry was going to stay at the 'Crown,' but he met
Tom Robinson, who said he should be his guest, and carried him off to
his house."

"Just like Tom Robinson!" declared Annie with amazing asperity.

"Come along, May." Rose hurried away her sister and satellite, and then
let loose her glee. "It is too funny, May; too preposterously funny. It
is ever so much better than Dora and Tom Robinson. He was so easily
rebuffed, and she was so reluctant to rebuff him. But here is Annie
like one of the furies, and Harry Ironside is silly enough to mind her,
so that he can hardly open his mouth before her, and looks as if he had
lost his wits. Before Annie! What is our Annie, I should like to know,
that she should daunt a clever, high-spirited young fellow such as he
is? What strange glamour has she thrown over him? But he has plenty of
mettle and determination for all that, and she will no more manage by
her tirades to stop him from coming after her and laying siege to her
ladyship, than she can keep the sun from shining or the rain from
falling. For that matter, I believe the poor fellow cannot help himself;
it is the case of the moth and the candle."

"But what is it all about?" demanded May, in an utter confusion of
ideas. "She speaks as if she hated him, and I thought he had come to
Redcross to trace the course of the Russian fever."

"To trace the course of his own fortunes. I beg your pardon, my dear,
but you might have known enough of human nature to guess that there was
a private personal motive at the bottom of his philanthropy."

"Then it is the worse for him and a great pity," said May, with the
sweet seriousness into which one phase of her childishness was passing.
"I wonder you can laugh, Rose. I am always affronted when I remember
how we laughed at Tom Robinson and poor Dora, making game of what was no
joke to them. And Dora was not half so much opposed to Tom as Annie is
to this unfortunate, nice, pleasant young doctor. I could find it in my
heart to be very sorry for him."

"Oh! you are a simpleton apart from Latin and Greek. Don't you see that
Annie's wrath is neither more nor less than fright? She is frightened
out of her senses at him, because she wants to keep her independence and
share our fortunes. As I do not remember to have seen her in such a
scare before, I should say that she is paying him a high compliment."

"I think it is rather a queer compliment," objected May in much
perplexity.

    "'Though you should choose to dissemble your love,
      Why need you kick me down-stairs?"

quoted Rose. "Oh! but the poet did not know the world, or pretended not
to know it. I assure you there are many wise men who would much rather
be kicked in this way than be civilly spoken to. Kate Ironside thought
fit to confide to me how much interested she was in a suit which, if it
ever succeeded, would make us all brothers and sisters. She was so good
as to add that while she was aware Harry always knew best, and she had
entire faith in his choice, still she was not entirely of his mind--I
don't believe Annie has ever spoken to her, lest speech with the sister
should be taken for encouragement to the brother. It is only natural
perhaps that, as Kate ventured to admit, on the whole she would have
preferred _me_."

"And what did you say to that?" asked the deeply-interested May.

"No, thanks, though I was much obliged, or something like it. I added
with some dignity, I flatter myself, though really such dignity is
thrown away on Kate, that for the present I was wedded to my art, like
Queen Elizabeth to her kingdom, and to my sister Maisie. Besides,
nothing could, would, or should ever induce me to meddle with my sister
Annie's property, since, according to Kate's own account, it was for
love of Annie, and not of me, that Harry Ironside took up his residence
under Mrs. Jennings's roof."

But Annie had to give way to some extent. She was compelled to grant an
interview to the aggressor. Dr. Ironside arrived on a special errand to
the hospital, and he took up the position that Miss Millar was entitled
to be consulted. Tom Robinson had been attacked with every symptom of
the fever. He and Tom had agreed, in view of the public character of
"Robinson's," and with the idea that the step might do good, by serving
as an example, that the patient should come to the hospital and be laid
up there, where Dr. Harry Ironside was ready to devote himself to the
case.

"I believe Tom Robinson has taken the fever on purpose," said Annie to
the shocked Dora. "But he shall not have much of my attendance; he may
stick to his Dr. Ironside. Dr. Capes tells me he has induced a married
woman, with a family, who has a brother and a nephew lodging with her,
both of them down with fever, to send them here, so that I shall have
them to look after. Now that there is a beginning made," Annie smoothed
her ruffled plumes, and waxed cheerful, "if the hot weather does not
change, and the disease is not checked, we are likely to have plenty of
patients on our hands, with the opportunity of showing what service we
can render them and the town."

Just as Annie predicted, the rows of beds began to fill, and she had no
lack of occupation; but she changed her tale with regard to Tom Robinson
when his case, among many which yielded readily to treatment, and proved
triumphantly the gain to be got from a better locality and fresher air,
was first grave, then dangerous, and at last verged on hopeless. Now she
turned to the worst case on her list, and made it her chief care. She
became totally unmindful of the fact that she was thus brought into
constant contact with Harry Ironside, that it was he and she who were
together fighting death, inch by inch, with desperate endeavour, for the
prize which the last enemy threatened to snatch from their hands.
Indeed, so entirely did Annie, like the excellent nurse and kind-hearted
woman she was, lose sight of her own concerns in the interest of her
patient, that she was heard to contradict herself, and record her
sincere thankfulness for the strong support of Harry Ironside's presence
in the light of the valuable aid he could afford at such a time.

"He was thought very clever at St. Ebbe's. He took his degree with high
honours. He was held in much esteem by all the older doctors," she
explained to all who cared to hear. "He is in possession of all the
latest light on his profession. Now, I have heard father say, and what I
have seen confirms it, that though Dr. Capes is most painstaking, and
has had a good deal of experience as a general practitioner, he has no
great natural ability, and he was not in circumstances to pursue his
studies longer than was absolutely necessary to enable him to pass as a
medical man. After all I take back my word. I am very glad for poor Tom
Robinson's sake that Dr. Harry Ironside is here. No doubt we could have
summoned a great specialist from London, but he would only have stayed a
short time, and men like him have generally many critical cases on
their minds. Now Dr. Harry Ironside is on the spot, and he can watch
every turn of the disease which he came to master, and devote his whole
attention to this example. I consider Tom Robinson is exceedingly
fortunate in getting the chance of such scientific treatment."

But in spite of the good fortune and the devotion spent on him; it
looked as if Tom were going to slip through the hands so bent on
detaining him, and to die as quietly as he had lived.

When Redcross realized how even the balance was, and how heavily he was
swimming for his life, the whole town woke up to his good qualities as a
citizen, to what a useful life his comparatively short one had been, to
how many benefits he had conferred without the slightest assumption of
patronage or superiority of any kind.

It is unnecessary to say that "Robinson's" was figuratively in the
deepest mourning, only rousing itself from its despair to proclaim his
merits and those of his father before him, as masters. Men gravely
pointed out the old servants he had pensioned; those in middle age
whom he had kept on when their best days were past; the boys he had
already taken in, fitted out, and launched on the world by judicious,
unostentatious backing. Women tearfully reminded the listener how
carefully he had provided for their comfort and well-being throughout
his establishment, from the ample time allowed for their meals and the
seats to which they could retire when not actually serving, to the
early closing hours, which afforded them and the men who were their
associates, some leisure for out-of-doors exercise and indoors
recreation. As for mental and spiritual improvement, he was always
ready to subscribe liberally to libraries, choral unions, friendly
societies, Christian associations, missionary boxes--every conceivable
means of rational pleasure, culture, and true human elevation of which
his people would avail themselves.

Mrs. Carey called at the Corn Exchange and offered her unprofessional
services as a nurse, if further aid were wanted.

Mr. Pemberton, acquainted with the fact of Tom Robinson's illness
through communicating with Rose Millar on her commission, wrote that he
could hardly keep Lady Mary from descending on Redcross to see after
their friend, and if it would be the least good she would come down. It
would be but a poor return for the aid Robinson had lent her when her
husband lay desperately sick and she had nobody to appeal to, save the
fat and fatuous _padrone_ of a miserable little Italian inn.

May, who was at last prevented from coming to her sisters, presented
herself when they went to their father's, her eyes swollen with weeping
for her "coach."

Every time Annie left the transformed hall of the Exchange and repaired
to the rooms which she and Dora occupied, she found a white face on the
watch for her, and pale lips which could hardly form the syllables, "How
is he now? Oh! Annie, must he die?" At least Dora was on the spot to
hear each hour's report, as if she had been his nearest relative, and
without asking herself the reason why, that was a little bit of comfort
to her. In the same manner Tom Robinson derived a dim satisfaction from
the fact that he was lying there under the same roof with Dora Millar,
as he would have been supposing she had listened to his suit eighteen
months ago, and he had fallen ill in the early days of their marriage.
He was afraid it was pure selfishness which made him cease to resent her
presence in close proximity to the fever ward, as he had resented it
when he did not imagine he might be one of its patients. Sometimes he
had a dim fancy that he heard her soft voice through the closed doors,
and that it soothed him, though he might be only dreaming, or it was
possible that there were tones in Annie's clear voice which under
certain emotions of pity and tenderness answered to those of her sister.

Often Annie just shook her head sorrowfully as she warned Dora off till
the nurse's dress could be changed. Occasionally she cried out
petulantly, "If he would only be impatient, and fret and grumble like
other people; if he would not take things so quietly; if he would resist
and struggle, I believe he might fight the battle and win it yet. I
think he will get over the crisis, but what of that if there is no
rallying? He is letting life go because he will not grasp it hard, I
suppose for the reason that he has no strong ties to bind him to it. He
has either such a poor opinion of his deserts, or such a trust in
Providence, that he considers whatever is is best, and does not exert
himself to alter the course of events so far as it is in his power. It
is beautiful in theory, but it does not always answer in practice. I am
not certain whether it does not proceed, after all, from constitutional
indolence, or the want of ambition, of which I used to accuse him, or
whether he is really too good to live. Anyhow, skill and nursing are
wasted upon him."

Dr. Hewett came to see Tom Robinson, and took the seat which Harry
Ironside vacated for him, leaving the old friends together.

"Hallo, Rector! It is strange for me to meet you here," said Tom's
feeble voice, while the ghost of his old shy smile passed over his
haggard face.

"It is equally strange for me to meet you, Robinson," said the Rector,
with an inconvenient lump in his throat.

"What a deal of trouble I'm giving," said Tom regretfully.

"Tut, man, nobody grudges the trouble, if you will but pick up and get
well again," said the clergyman, almost roughly.

"I can see that Ironside thinks badly of me," said Tom in his quiet way,
"and as far as feelings go, it seems to me I have reason to think badly
of myself."

"We are all in good hands, Tom," said Dr. Hewett, seeing again the boy
who used to play in the Rectory garden with Ned, and speaking to him in
the old fashion.

"I know that," answered Tom. "I have known it all along, which has been
a blessing to me," he added, a little as if he were speaking of a third
person. Then he roused himself further. "I want to tell you where my
will is. I don't like to hurt a woman's feelings by speaking of it to my
kind, indefatigable nurse. Besides, the Millars will benefit by it."

"The old man," sighed the Rector, "always thinking of others before
yourself."

"'I know that my Redeemer liveth,'" was Tom's testimony; "speak to me of
Him, Rector, while I am able to hear," said the sick man, in the tone of
one whose ears were growing dull to earthly sounds.




CHAPTER XXI.

MISS FRANKLIN'S MISTAKE.


Tom Robinson went still deeper into the shadow of the valley, possibly
as far as man ever went and returned. He grew as weak and helpless as an
infant, until at last he lost consciousness, and lay prostrate and
still, with closed eyes and sealed ears--nothing alive in him save the
subtle principle which is compared to a vapour and a breath which no man
can see or handle, yet whose presence or absence makes all the
difference between an animated body still linked to both worlds and a
mass of soulless clay hastening to corruption. All that skill and
devotion could do--and Tom Robinson had them both--was to keep on
without despairing, maintaining warmth against the growing chillness,
and administering stimulants and nourishment by spoonfuls and drops.

On the night which it was feared would be Tom Robinson's last, Miss
Franklin would no longer be denied her place among the watchers. She
had been kept away in obedience to poor Tom's express orders, that in
the attempt to minimize the fever no communication should be kept up on
his account between the Corn Exchange where he lay and either his house
or "Robinson's," notwithstanding the proofs that the disease did not
spread by contagion or infection.

Miss Franklin did not desire to dispossess Annie of the post which, in
spite of every remonstrance, she was holding latterly almost night and
day. Miss Franklin had no faculty for nursing, and small experience to
guide her. She was rather a nervous woman in her impulsiveness, and
after one look at what was like the mask of Tom Robinson, utterly
incapable of recognizing her or communicating with her, she was so much
overcome that she was fain to retire to another room and submit to be
gently ministered to by Dora.

Miss Franklin was only too thankful to be suffered to stay there in the
background. It did not strike her as odd that nobody in the house except
the other patients should go to sleep that night when her cousin was
hovering between life and death--nearer death than life. Neither had the
outspoken, kind-hearted gentlewoman any particular application of her
speech in her mind when she said sorrowfully--"Dear! dear! how grieved
he would be if he knew how worn out you were, Miss Dora. He thought
that his coming to the hospital would not only serve as a precedent, it
would be the simplest, safest, least troublesome plan where he himself
was concerned, though if he would have let me, I should have been only
too glad to have turned my back on 'Robinson's' for a time, and done
what I could for him. There is enough difference in our ages, and I have
known him all his life, in addition to our being connections if not near
relations, so that nobody need have found fault. Not that I pretend for
a moment that I could have done what your sister is doing--that is
something quite wonderful in every respect" (and here Miss Franklin did
draw up her bountiful figure, and fix the rather small eyes, sunk a
little in her full cheeks, pointedly on Dora). "I dare say he liked to
have her about him to the last, so long as he was sensible of her
presence. Men are extraordinary creatures--that I should say that now,
oh! my poor dear cousin Tom."

After she had recovered from her outburst of grief, and was sipping the
tea which Dora had made for her, she turned again to her companion. "You
look like a ghost yourself, Miss Dora. Will you not lie down in your
bedroom and trust me? I shall sit here and bring you word the moment I
hear that a change has come;" and at the ill-omened phrase poor Miss
Franklin's well-bred, distinct enunciation got all blurred and
faltering. In fact she shrank a good deal from the ordeal she was
magnanimously proposing for herself. As it happened she had never
undergone anything like it before, though she had reached middle age. It
was not easy for her to contemplate sitting there all alone through the
dreary small hours, knowing that Tom Robinson's spirit--the spirit of
the best friend she had ever known--was passing away without word or
sign in the adjoining room. It was a relief to her when Dora Millar,
looking as if she had been sitting up in turn with every patient in the
ward, as pale as a moonbeam and as weak as water, yet shook her head
decisively against any suggestion of her retiring to rest.

There was a strong contrast between the couple who were to wait together
for death or the morning. Miss Franklin herself might be on the eve of
dying--but so long as she lived and went through the mundane process of
dressing, she must dress exceedingly well. She was a good, kind woman
all the same, and this night she bore a sore heart under her carefully
contrived and nicely put on garments.

Poor young Dora, on the contrary, looked all limp and forlorn. The
gingham morning-gown she had not changed was huddled on her, and
crumpled about her. Her neglected hair was pushed back from her little
white face. Annie in her nurse's spotless apron and cap looked a
hundred times trimmer, and was altogether a more cheerful object. It was
as if the whole world had come to an end for Dora, and she had ceased to
notice trifles. Almost the first words Miss Franklin had said to her
when the visitor began to recover from the shock she had undergone,
were--

"Excuse me, Miss Dora, the lace at your throat is coming undone--let me
put it right for you; and an end of your hair has fallen down. I may
fasten it up, may I not?"

A delicate, exhausted girl was no great support for a woman under the
circumstances, still she was better than nobody. She was company in
one form, like the domestic cat, when no more available associate is
to be found. Besides, in the middle of their dissimilarity, Miss
Franklin had a natural liking for Dora Millar, and had always excepted
her from the grudge which the elder woman was inclined to feel against
one member of the Millar family. "A nice, well-meaning, gentle girl,"
Miss Franklin mentally classed Dora. "The most quiet and ladylike of
them all." She was a great improvement, in Miss Franklin's estimation,
on that too bright and restless Annie, whom everybody cried up as a
beauty. She had found, Miss Franklin was creditably informed, a fine
vent for her dictatorial imperious temper as a nurse. Yet she, Miss
Franklin, ought not to find fault with Annie Millar at this time, when
Dr. Capes had said her treatment of the fever patients, with dear Tom
among them, was admirable; though, by one of the mysterious decrees of
Providence, she might not be permitted to succeed in his case. And she
was now ministering to his last wants as she, Barbara Franklin,
arrived at mature age, with all the will, had neither the skill nor
the courage to minister, much as she owed him, so long as he had other
service. She was a captious, vindictive wretch to pick holes in Miss
Millar's armour, when she was striving so hard to atone to him for any
injury she had ever done him by delivering him from the jaws of death,
or at least smoothing his path to the grave.

The seasons had gone on till the late summer was merging into the early
autumn. It was the beginning of August, when the days are already not so
long as they have been; but, to make up for it, the lengthening nights
are balmier than they ever were, and the soft dusk remains full of
summer scents and sounds.

It was on such a night that you might imagine a young man, dying long
before his time, and yet after he has reached full manhood, and touched
the crown of bodily and mental vigour, without ever feeling the tide on
its turn.

The night was so warm that the windows of the room in which Dora and
Miss Franklin sat were wide open. There was a lamp lit within, but it
did not render the darkness without so great as to hide the outlines of
trees in the nearest garden, and even the dim shape of a bed of late
flowering, tall white lilies. Their heavy fragrance was on the air; and
if ever there is a fragrance which is solemn and tender like the love of
the dying and the memory of the dead, it is the all-pervading scent of
lilies.

Annie Millar could never have been so good a listener as Dora was when
Miss Franklin, constitutionally loquacious, relieved her distress, and
got rid of the dragging hours, by indulging in a long and affectionate
oration on Tom Robinson, the man who, not so many yards from them, was
lying as indifferent to praise and blame as when he first entered this
wonderful world, with all its joys and sorrows, from which he was ready
to depart.

"You know, he is not really my cousin," the womanly confidence began;
"the tie between us hardly counts--it is only that Mr. Robinson's
first wife was my mother's sister. But I always called Mr. Charles
Robinson and his second wife uncle and aunt. I might well do it, for
they were a good uncle and aunt to me. I should have known few
pleasures when I was growing up, and long afterwards, if it had not
been for them. The Robinsons used to go away trips every summer to
Devonshire and Derbyshire, the Yorkshire moors, the Cumberland lakes,
Scotland, the Black Forest, Switzerland, and they always took me to
see the world, and spend my summer holidays with them. How generous
and kind they were in their friendliness! Tom was usually of the
party--first as a child, then as a growing boy; but child or boy, such
a nice manly little fellow, so much thought of, yet not at all spoilt.
He was fond of reading, yet full of quiet fun, and in either light
never in anybody's way. He was so considerate of his mother and me,
and so helpful to us. The cows he has driven away! the horses going at
large he has kept off! the bulls he has held at bay! I confess I am
not brave in proportion to my size. I am very timid in such matters,
and, strange to say, Aunt Robinson, though a country-woman born and
bred, was as great a coward as I where farm animals were in question;
but we always knew ourselves safe when Tom was at hand, and he never
laughed at us more than we could stand."

"I can understand," said Dora faintly. "He once helped us--May and
me--when a strange dog attacked Tray; and now Tray is running about with
May full of life and health, while his champion is----" She could not
say the words.

Miss Franklin looked at her approvingly, even went so far as to stroke
one of the cold trembling hands lying nerveless in Dora's lap. "You will
allow me to say that you are a dear, tender-hearted girl, Miss Dora. You
could have appreciated my cousin Tom. What a tower of strength he was to
me when I felt I was getting middle-aged, and my system of teaching was
becoming old-fashioned. I had been in so many homes belonging to other
people, with never a home of my own, for upwards of thirty years, since
my poor father and mother both died before I was twenty. I do not say
that I was not for the most part well enough treated, because I hope I
did my best, and I believe I generally gave satisfaction. I had my happy
hours like other people. But it was all getting so stale, flat, and
unprofitable--I suppose because I was growing weary of it all, and
longing for a change. You see I had not quite come to the age when we
cease to want changes, and are resigned just to go on as we are to the
end. In reality I could see no end, except the poorest of poor lodgings
and the most pinching straits, with the very little money I had saved.
(My dear, even finishing governesses can save so little now-a-days.) Or
perhaps there was the chance of my being taken into some charitable
institution. You will admit it was not a cheerful prospect."

"No, it was not," said Dora, in dreary abstraction.

"As I said," resumed Miss Franklin, "I had been in so many schoolrooms;
I had seen so many pupils grow up, go out into the world, and settle in
life, leaving me behind, so that when they came back on visits to their
old homes, they were prepared to pity and patronize me. I could not
continue cudgelling my poor brains until I had not an original thought
in my head, and all to keep up such acquirements as I had, and preserve
a place among younger, better equipped girls, certain to outstrip me
eventually."

"I suppose so," acquiesced Dora mechanically.

"Then poor dear Tom came to see me, and I told him what I was
thinking. He got me to pay a visit to Redcross, and made a new opening
for me. I may say without self-conceit that I was always considered to
have a good taste in dress. I know it was a question which had never
failed to interest me, to which I could not help giving a great deal
of attention--making a study of it, as it were. Tom insisted that I
could be of the greatest use to him, and was worth a liberal salary,
which I was not likely to lose. And there was a comfortable refined
nest, which I could line for myself, awaiting me in the pleasant rooms
he had looked out for me."

"I know, Miss Franklin," said Dora, with a faint smile; "you told
Phyllis Carey, and she told May, who repeated it to me. But I thought
it might be a relief to you to speak of it again."

"Yes," cried the eager woman; "and it has all answered so well--the
duties not too heavy, and really agreeable to me; the young women and
men, under Tom's influence, no doubt, perfectly nice and respectful; and
within the last six months, dear little Phyllis like a daughter or niece
to me. I thought always I should be able to do something in return for
him one day, yet with all the will in the world I have been able to do
nothing until it has come to this;" and poor Miss Franklin sobbed
bitterly under the burden of her unrequited obligations, and beneath the
dove's neck cluster of feathers in her bonnet.

It was for Dora in her turn to seek to soothe and compose her companion.
"I am sure you have been of the greatest service to him, and that he has
enjoyed the near neighbourhood of an old friend--his mother's friend.
Oh! think what a comfort it will be to you to have that to look back
upon," finished Dora, in a voice trembling as much as Miss Franklin's.

Miss Franklin sat up, instinctively put her bonnet straight, wiped her
eyes with her embroidered handkerchief, and gazed pensively into the
empty air.

"God's ways are not as our ways," she said; "and certainly we are told
that we are not to look for our reward in this world. Still one would
have expected--one would have liked that it had not been so hard all
through for Tom--not merely to have been denied the desire of his heart,
but to have had to endure in his last moments to be set aside, to lie
still and look on at what is going to happen."

Dora sat mystified; but she had not the spirit left to seek an
explanation.

Miss Franklin was not aware that an explanation was needed. "I know,"
she added, "how kind and attentive your sister has been to Tom, and I
understand nothing can exceed the interest Dr. Ironside has taken in my
cousin, while he has made the most unremitting efforts to save him;
still you will grant that so long as my poor Tom was conscious, it must
have been very, very trying for him to see the terms these two were on.
I don't listen much to gossip"--the speaker declared, in a parenthesis,
with a little air of dignity and reserve even at that moment--"but it is
the talk of the town that he has followed her down from London, and that
they are to be married as soon as the epidemic is past. Nobody can say
anything against it. They are well matched. They will be a fine-looking
couple," she struggled to acknowledge with becoming politeness and
impartiality.

"This is the first time I have heard of it, I can say with truth," said
Dora wearily, without so much as a smile at the characteristic report.
She thought the mention of it most unsuitable at such a season. The very
word marriage smote her. "And even if it were so, what could it have
signified to Mr. Tom Robinson?" she was about to add naïvely, when a
light flashed upon her. She had often wondered how much Miss Franklin,
"Robinson's," the whole town, knew of what had taken place eighteen
months ago. She saw now that however little the lady might care for
gossip, a distorted version of the truth in which she was interested had
reached her. Either there had been a very natural mistake on the part of
some of the local newsmongers, or Miss Franklin herself had fallen into
the error. The belle of the Millar family and not Dora had been believed
to be the object of Tom Robinson's pursuit. The blunder had been
perpetuated in Miss Franklin's case by the good feeling and good
breeding which would keep her from discussing Tom Robinson's affairs
with her neighbours more than she could help, and would prevent her
attempting such a cross-examination of the man himself as might have
elicited the truth.

"Oh! I know now what you mean," cried Dora, on the impulse of the
moment, "and you were altogether wrong. He has been spared such misery
--nobody could have been so barbarous as to inflict it on him, if it had
been as you suppose."

Miss Franklin was sensitive and imaginative on dress, but she was not
imaginative or even very observant with regard to anything else. She
understood Dora's protest to refer to an actual engagement between Dr.
Harry Ironside and Miss Millar.

"Well, well," she said a little dryly, "people do exaggerate. Matters
may not have gone quite so far, and I can only trust that he, Tom, has
not been sensible of what is in the air, though I have always understood
love, while it is said to be blind in one sense, is very sharp-sighted
in another. I believe every one else sees where the land lies. I saw it
myself so far as the gentleman was concerned--he could not keep his eyes
off her, though I was not five minutes in their company, and I was full
of my poor cousin Tom. I am sure I hope they may be happy," gulping down
the hope. "Tom would have wished it, quite apart from her having done
her duty by him, at the cost of some pain to herself, no doubt; while
Dr. Ironside has been more than kind, which nobody had any call to
expect. He must be a very fine young man, likely to win what he fancies.
Every woman is entitled to her choice, and most people would applaud
your sister's choice. The thing that puzzles me--you will forgive me for
mentioning it just this once, for where is the good of discussion
now?--is that as, I have been told, she did not meet Dr. Ironside till
she went to her London hospital, how, when she had got no opportunity of
contrasting the two men, when she had not even seen one of them, she
could yet be so set against Tom's proposal, knowing him to be the man he
is--was, alas! I should say. Why was she so very hard to poor Tom?"

"Oh, don't say that," besought Dora, in much agitation. "Don't bring
that forward at this moment."

But Miss Franklin, in the strength of her family affections, felt that
she owed it to the manes of Tom Robinson to express to the disdainful
damsel's sister a candid opinion that he had been summarily and severely
dealt with. "I was not in his confidence, but I could tell that
something was going to happen, and that he was very much cut up when it
all came to nothing."

"Oh, don't say that," repeated Dora, clasping her hands over her eyes,
and weeping behind them. "What good can it do except to inflict needless
torture?"

"I don't mean to reproach _you_," said Miss Franklin, a little
bewildered, but still very hot and sore. "You had nothing to do with it,
and I am sure you could not have been so heartless. Forgive me for the
reflection on your sister, who is so much thought of, whom everybody is
praising, with reason, for what she has done in nursing the sick and
poor. But young girls ought to be more careful. I don't mean to say that
she trifled with my cousin Tom--I have no right to say that--simply that
she never gave him a thought. Tom was surely deserving of a thought,"
cried Miss Franklin indignantly. "Dr. Ironside may be all very well--I
have nothing to say against him--quite the reverse. Tom is not to be
compared to him in personal appearance, and the one is a professional
man, while the other thought fit to continue a linen-draper like his
good father before him; but that is by no means to infer that Miss
Millar has chosen the better husband of the two. Girls are so
foolish--they play with fire, and never look or take it into account
where and whom it may burn. Tom Robinson deserved more respectful
treatment in Redcross. He has never been like himself since. I used to
hear him whistling and humming tunes to himself as he worked in the
office--there is no more of that, or of his hearty interest in
everything."

"Miss Franklin, it is you who are pitiless to say this to me to-night,"
panted Dora, rising against the inhumanity, and totally forgetting that
the speaker did not hold the clue which would have told her how her
words scourged her listener.

"I am not blaming _you_, Miss Dora," said the accuser again, more
bitterly than she had yet spoken. For she was in her heart accusing Dora
Millar of affectation in pretending not to be able to hear a word
against her sister, and in declining to listen to the pardonable
utterance of a reproach directed against what Miss Franklin called in
her heart Annie Millar's arrogance and callousness. Tom Robinson's
cousin was provoked, not pacified.

"I dare say Tom would never have had this wretched fever but for the
blow he got then," she was tempted to persist; "or if he had caught it,
he would have thrown it off without any harm done. I can bear witness to
his sound constitution to begin with. Everybody knows how disappointment
and mortification lower the system, and he was never over careful of
himself. I cannot quite understand why he took the cool rebuff he
received so much to heart; but he did so, and you see the consequence."

"Spare me! spare me!" cried Dora passionately. "Don't say I have killed
him, or I shall die myself, perhaps it is the best thing I can do."

Before Miss Franklin could do more than stare aghast, with a horrified
inkling of the real facts of the case, and the tremendous mess she had
got into, there was the sound of the soft opening of a door in the near
distance, and a step rapidly approaching.

The two women who had been upbraiding each other were mute in an
instant, first held their breaths, then sprang up and clung to each
other, partners in sorrow, with teeth beginning to chatter, and eyes to
grow large and wild. What had they been doing in the name of a gentle
and manly soul, in the face of the awful news on its way, the majesty of
Death investing the house?

It was only Annie, looking perfectly collected, nay, a trifle elated.
"He is the least shade better--we both think so; and the slightest
improvement means so much at this stage--the right crisis, I believe. He
has been really sleeping. He swallows with less difficulty. He has
roused himself ever so little, but he is fearfully faint and weak. We
cannot get him to take more stimulants than we have been giving him. I
am afraid there is no toilet-vinegar in the house. I came to see if
either of you had a smelling-bottle, which might revive him."

All that Miss Franklin could do was to shake her head. She was so
thankful, yet she felt so guilty, so ashamed of herself.

Dora fumbled nervously in her pocket and gave Annie something, which she
carried off in triumph. Miss Franklin sat down again and cried afresh
between trembling joy and lively vexation. "Oh, won't it be a mercy, for
which we can never praise our Maker too much, if dear Tom gets over his
illness after all?" she managed to say; but she could do no more--even
that lame speech was made awkwardly. To apologize for the heinous
offence she had committed would be a greater enormity than the offence
itself.

But when Miss Franklin had time to think it over afterwards, she was
under the impression that Dora Millar had forgotten all about their
altercation. She sat there with hands clasped, lips parted, and brimming
eyes half raised to Heaven, as if in instinctive acknowledgment of a
thousand piteous prayers in the act of being answered by Him who counts
the stars and calls them by name, and heals the broken in heart. Miss
Franklin's account of Dora's look was that, for a moment, she was
positively frightened at the dear girl, Dora seemed so near another
world at that moment, and as likely as not to be holding communication
with it. Even Tom Robinson could not have been nearer when he was more
than half way across the border-land.




CHAPTER XXII.

A SHRED OF HOPE.


Tom Robinson's recovery continued a matter of fear and trembling for a
week longer before it became merely a process of time. But no sooner was
it clearly established to the initiated, and only likely to be
endangered by some unforeseen accident, than Annie Millar, in her
delight, lost sight of her former tactics, and called on Dr. Harry
Ironside to rejoice with her on their success.

"We have been permitted to pull him through. Oh, isn't it glorious? I
know we ought, as we are miserable sinners, to go down on our knees and
give God the thanks, and I hope we do with all my heart; but I also want
to sing and dance--don't you, Dr. Ironside?"

Nobody could imagine that Dr. Harry Ironside was indifferent to the
wonderful recovery, which was such a credit to his skill, of the man
whom he had nursed as if Tom Robinson had been his brother; but Dr.
Harry forgot all about his patient at that moment when he saw his
opportunity and seized it.

He had never had a faint heart, young as he was, but he had been dealing
with an exceedingly coy and high-spirited mistress. However, even she
had not been able to defy the effect of the last month of incessant
intercourse, of being engrossed in common with one object of interest,
when both had hung, as it were, on a man's failing breath, and were
indissolubly linked while it lasted. In the light of its fitful rising
and falling, its feeble fluttering, the terrible moments when it
appeared to stop and die away, how small and vain was every other
consideration! But their joint work was done by God's help, as they had
hardly dared to hope for a time, and now it was Harry's innings.

"I have something to say to you, Miss Millar. I have wished to say it
for a long time. You will not refuse to hear me?"

They were alone together in the little side-room, empty but for its
hospital stores, where they had so often consulted, with and without Dr.
Capes, on the condition of the ward. There was no longer any fluster of
doubt and hesitation in his manner. He stood there in his young comely
manhood, prepared to put his fate to the test, claiming his right to do
so, and challenging her to deny his claim.

In a moment Annie saw what Rose had seen some time ago, but had not
taken it upon her to put in so many words for Annie's benefit. It was
of this moment she had, by an unerring instinct, stood in mortal
terror, from the first dawn of her acquaintance with Harry Ironside,
to the afternoon when he had succeeded in getting an introduction to
her in the matron's room at St. Ebbe's, soon after the scene in the
operating theatre. Then he had bowed low, muttered a few words in
confused greeting, and looked at her with all his man's heart in his
eyes; and she had felt by a sure, swift intuition, that, as she valued
her dearly held personal freedom and her allegiance to her family,
there must be war to the knife between her and this self-willed young
man. She must, as discretion is the better part of valour, flee from
him, while refusing to own, even to herself, any more humiliating
reason for the flight than her duty, the honour of St. Ebbe's, and the
folly of Rose in playing into his hands.

Now Annie was caught, and had to listen to him whether she would or not,
while she and not he quaked with fright and agitation. For he stood
before her, like a conqueror already, in the little room with its
shelves of phials, which they had all to themselves, where burly farmers
and iron-gray corn-factors would soon be thronging in the course of
transacting their every-day business.

But presently she forgot all about herself in the interest of the tale
he had to tell, and told well in his newly-found courage and coolness,
in his personal modesty and professional enthusiasm. He had just taken
his degree as she knew. He and his sister Kate had inherited a
competence from their parents. He might look about him till he found a
lucrative and agreeable country practice in a choice neighbourhood,
where he could command good society and a little hunting, shooting, and
fishing in their seasons. Or he might be on the watch for a West End
London practice, which, while affording him all the interests and
amusements of town, ought to bring him speedily into notice, and raise
him, step by step, to the height of his profession. He had begun his
medical career by thinking of both these eventualities as desirable,
each in its kind, and had gone on cherishing a leaning to the first,
till--he must say it--her example and influence had inspired him with
greater ardour in the cause of science and of humanity. He had made
inquiries and had heard of a post--in fact he had got the refusing of
it--in connection with a new settlement, a fresh attempt to plant a
colony where the climate was favourable on one of the great African
rivers. His income at first would be small, and he must take his share
of the hardships and labours of those who aimed at being more than
gold-diggers or miners in the diamond-fields--that is, pioneers of
civilization. The prospect, so far as it referred to scientific
investigations, and to a large increase to accredited stores of
knowledge, was simply splendid. Farther, he was assured of the sympathy
and support of the leading men among the colonists, since they had
already, to their credit, sought his co-operation. Those of them who
were in the van--on the spot--had gone so far as to lay the foundation
of an hospital, in addition to a church, to deal alike with black men
and white, to labour for their spiritual and physical healing in common.
He had almost made up his mind to take the post, but he wished to ask
her opinion and advice first.

She was tempted to say she was no authority, but her truthfulness
forbade the subterfuge. She could not meet his grave blue eyes and put
him off with an evasive answer. She spoke bravely and wisely.

"I think it would be most right and honourable for you to go. With your
ability and training you might furnish invaluable aid to a young colony;
while it would be like another college course for you, with nature for
your teacher. Any young man of spirit and philanthropy, with love for
his calling, might well covet the chance. If the colony flourish, you
and your profession, and the hospital you speak of, will flourish with
it, and have as fine a future before you as you can desire. If the
scheme fail, you can but return to England; and you will not have lost
the time which a young man can well spare. For you will bring back all
you have gained from a far wider sphere of usefulness, and from a
fresher experience than you could ever hope to secure by staying at
home. But if what you really want," Annie corrected herself, with a
twinkle in her eyes and a curl of her lips, in the midst of her
earnestness, "is the shortest and safest road to growing well-to-do
within the briefest space of time, you had better adopt the latter
alternative. If I had been a man and a doctor, I should have tried the
former."

"That is enough," he said with conviction.

"But what will your sister say?" she hastened to inquire, in order to
turn the conversation from ominous personalities.

"Oh! it will be a blow to poor little Kate," he owned regretfully,
"because she is too young to go out with me at once, and set about
keeping house for me as she has always proposed--a rough, primitive
style of housekeeping it will be out there for many a day. But she is
not without pluck, and she is as true as steel, though I say it. She
must learn some of your fearlessness and faith, and make the best of
things. She must go to one of our aunts in the meantime, and when
matters are smoother and easier, and the fate of the colony is decided,
perhaps she may join me. I do not believe that there is any danger to
speak of from the native tribes, only it will not be drawing-room work
for some time to come. You see it is not the same with a girl like Kate
as it would be with a woman like you," he had the boldness to insinuate.
"You would be a tower of strength in yourself from the beginning; you
might be the making of a newly-founded hospital."

"Poor Kate!" said Annie, hastily apostrophizing the girl she had been
said to ignore, and speaking in accents of far deeper pity than she had
any idea of.

"And what do you say?" he turned upon her.

"I?" she cried in much confusion. "I have said my say."

"No," he answered; "unless you mean to send me away to the ends of the
earth without a shred of hope. You cannot do that."

"I think you are taking advantage of me," she protested, but quite
meekly and diffidently for Annie. "I have never been even civil to you
till Tom Robinson was in danger, and then I had to put all my private
feelings aside on his account. Before that I was more than rude."

"And you are a little sorry now? Confess it, Annie, when I am going off
all alone, so far as old friends are concerned, to Central Africa, at
your bidding."

"Not at my bidding," she declared hastily; "it is too bad of you to say
so."

"And you are going to be far kinder in the end than in the beginning,"
he persisted. "You are going to say, 'Harry Ironside, if you ever come
back, whether it is to stay or to go out again to your colony, you will
find me waiting for you as your earthly reward.'"

"Of course you will come back," she exclaimed vehemently, thrown off her
guard; "but _you_ had much better wait and look out for some more
gracious person to welcome you."

"I don't care for gracious persons," said the foolish fellow scornfully;
"that is, for persons who are always gracious whether they like or
dislike their company. But I say," he went on, in an eager boyish way,
which was not unbecoming or inharmonious where his young manhood was
concerned, only natural and pleasant, "I should care for the best and
brightest and bonniest woman in the world being gracious to me; I would
give much to make her like me, though I know I am far behind her in
cleverness and goodness."

"Nonsense," cried Annie, quite testily. "I shall be used up in hospital
service by that time," she remonstrated, keeping to the far future. "A
faded woman with a sharp tongue would not be a great reward."

"I ask nothing better than a woman whom I could love, and who might love
me."

"But you deserve something better," she said, in a softer, lower tone.

"Never mind what I deserve, if I get what I have wished, longed, and
prayed for since the first moment I saw you--think of that, Annie."

"I can't," she said, almost piteously, while she suffered him to take
her hand. "I meant it all to be so different. I was so proud of my
independence; and I never, never will forfeit it, remember, Harry
Ironside, till all my sisters are started in the world, and father and
mother are made more comfortable. Oh! it would be doubly a shame in me
to fail them."

"I am content to wait for my prize," he said, daring to kiss her lovely
cheek, and he was content--for the moment.

"And you must not breathe a word of what has happened," she charged him.

But here he grew restive. "I must, dearest. Why, it would be doubly
dishonourable not to speak at once to Dr. Millar, confined as he is to
his chair; you cannot fail to see that."

"They will all laugh at me," sighed the subdued Annie, with comical
ruefulness. "Rose will laugh, and May. I believe even Dora and mother
will laugh."

"Let them." He gave the permission with cheerful insensibility to the
ordeal, even though Annie's feelings were so much involved in it. "It
may be a warning to some of them." Then he was so callous as to add,
"Who cares though the whole world, including Tom Robinson, were to join
in the guffaw."

"Oh!" she exclaimed, looking up with bright sweetness, "I think I could
bear it if I heard Tom's voice in the chorus. He used to have rather a
foolish, nervous laugh, for so sensible and brave a man. But I am sure I
should not think it foolish, or anything save delightful, if I heard it
again."




CHAPTER XXIII.

SECOND THOUGHTS AND LAST WORDS.


Dr. and Mrs. Millar could make no objection to Dr. Harry Ironside as a
suitor for their daughter. It was all the other way. They were highly
satisfied with the young man's antecedents and credentials, and yet Dr.
Millar was a good deal taken aback. He had grown to look on nursing as a
career for Annie, and to take pride in her excellence in it, as he would
have done had she been his son and a young doctor. He could not help
feeling as if marriage interfered a little with his views for her. He
had to recall that Ironside was a very fine young fellow, with a
commendable spirit of inquiry in medical matters. He would do credit to
his profession, and Annie, especially if she went with him to a new
colony, might work in his company, and be his right hand.

Mrs. Millar had too much good sense and womanly experience to approve of
long engagements, and she did not like the chance of Annie's going to
Africa--still she would fulfil what Mrs. Millar considered the highest
and happiest destiny for a woman, that of becoming the wife of a worthy
man. As to Africa, the little Doctor, a fixture in his chair, told her,
"My dear Maria, we shall simply be giving hostages to Providence, for
man was told to occupy the earth, and carry civilization and redemption
to its utmost bounds."

To spare Annie's feelings, her relations kept her engagement and their
laughter well in the background, while Dr. Harry Ironside, having probed
the Russian fever to the bottom, and seen nearly the last of it,
returned in triumph to London, to make arrangements for his medical
mission.

As for Annie, in her eagerness to escape from the rallying she had
provoked, she talked incessantly about going back to St. Ebbe's, where,
however, she was not yet due. A longer leave of absence had been granted
to her, in consideration of the fact that her holiday had been mainly
spent in hard work in the impromptu hospital at Redcross. She would not
have accepted the additional grant apart from the circumstance that
Harry Ironside was in London. Annie admitted to herself, in the secret
recesses of her heart, that now it had come to this, she would fain have
passed these last precious weeks near her young lover. But she would not
consent to give occasion to Rose, or any other person--not even to
Harry Ironside himself--to think or say that she, Annie Millar, was
already not able to live without him. Annie's wings might be clipped,
but she would be Annie proud and "plucky" to the last; and her lover,
instinctively knowing her to be true as steel, loved her the better
because of her regard for what she considered his credit as well as her
own. The pride was only skin deep; the pluck was part of the heroic
element in Annie.

Rose had been delayed in her work. She had not found it in her heart to
walk about taking sketches when the good friend who had so much to do
with the commission was little likely to see its completion. But when
Tom Robinson could sit up, walk into the next room, and go back to his
own house, she felt at liberty to set about her delightful business, in
which her father took so keen an interest. She lost no time in starting
every fine day in pursuit of the selected views, to put them on canvas
while their autumnal hues were still but tinges of red, russet, and
gold.

Rose was mostly waited on by May, who took much satisfaction in helping
to carry and set up the artist's apparatus, feeling, as she said, that
she was part of a painter when she did so.

Dora had been with Rose, May, and Tray at a pretty reach of the Dewes.
The elder sister was returning alone, along the path between the elms
by the river, near the place where Tom Robinson had come to Tray's
rescue, when she met him face to face. He was taking what
"constitutional" he was able for, and enjoying the light breeze which
was rippling the river, just as it rippled the ripe corn and fanned the
hot brows of the men who were working the corn machine in the field
beyond.

Dora had seen and spoken to him several times since his illness, but
there had been other people present, and now the old shy dread of a
_tête-à-tête_ again took possession of her. She would have contented
herself with a fluttered inquiry after his health, and a faltering
remark that she ought not to detain him. She would have hurried on,
as if the errand on which she was bound demanded the utmost speed,
supremely wretched while she did so, to notice how pale and worn he
still looked when she saw him in the broad sunshine. She would have
mourned over the circumstance that he wore no wrap, though there was
always some damp by the river, and speculated in despondency whether
it could be right for him, while he still looked so ill, to be walking
thus by himself? What would happen if faintness overtook him, and he
could not accomplish the distance between him and the town?

Tom Robinson, delicate though he looked, quiet as he was, would not let
Dora have her way. He turned and walked back with her, which ought to
have set one of her fears at rest. And his appearance must have belied
him, for he was clearly in excellent spirits, with not the most distant
intention of being overcome by faintness.

"This is very pleasant," he said, with a smile, and his smile was a
peculiarly agreeable one.

Dora could not tell whether he meant the day, or the road, or her
company, or even her summer dress, which was fresher and better cared
for than when he had encountered the family group "place-hunting" in
London. Dora had owned more leisure lately, and, absurd as it might
sound, her heart had been singing with joy, so that she could not
resist making her dress in keeping with the gladness of her spirit.
Her little fingers had been cleverer than they had ever shown
themselves before in the manufacture of a frock and the trimming of a
hat which would not have disgraced the taste and execution of Miss
Franklin. Yet the materials were simple and inexpensive to the last
degree--a brown holland and a shady brown hat, and about the frock and
the hat some old Indian silk which in its mellowed gorgeousness of red
and maize colours softly reflected the hues of Rose's parrot tulips.

Dora did not dare to ask her companion what he thought so pleasant. It
seemed right to take it for granted that it was the weather, so she
answered quickly, Yes, it was a fine day for the harvest, which she
believed was going to be a good one this year.

"Our present encounter is more tranquil than our last, near this very
spot," he went on, still smiling. "Perhaps it is as well that there are
no disturbing elements of collies and terriers on the scene, for though
I am getting on famously, I am not sure that I am up to the mark of
dragging Tray and a giant assailant to the edge of the bank, and
pitching them head-foremost into the water."

"I should think not," said Dora briefly.

"How 'little May' screamed, and you stood, as white as a sheet,
valorously aiming your stone."

"We were great cowards, both of us," admitted Dora, smiling too; "and I
am thankful to say Tray has been much better behaved since he was at the
veterinary surgeon's."

"There was room for improvement," Tom Robinson said, with the gravity of
a judge.

"I left him on in front, begging to May for a bit of chalk."

"It is as well that it was not for a bit of beef," he said. Then he
suddenly changed the subject. "Do you know that I have something of
yours which has come into my hands that I have been wishing to give
back to you ever since I was a responsible being again?"

As he spoke, he unfastened for the second time in their acquaintance the
tiny vinaigrette case from his watch-chain, and handed it to her.

Dora flushed scarlet, and took it without a word.

"I got it one night in the course of that fever, when I was at the
worst, and I know you will like to hear that I am sure it did me good.
The first thing that I recollect after a long blank, which lasted for
days, I believe, was feebly fingering and sniffing at the little box,
with a curious agreeable sense of old association. Then I was able to
look at it, and recognize it as my mother's vinaigrette. She had let me
play with it when I was a child; and when I was a boy, subject to
headache from staying too long in the hot sunshine in the cricket-field,
she used to lend me her vinaigrette for a cure. But I knew that I had
asked you to have it, and that you had done me the favour to accept it.
The fascinating puzzle was, how had it come back to me? At last I
questioned Barbara Franklin. She could not tell any more than myself at
first, and was equally puzzled, until she remembered your sister Annie's
running into the room on the night when you were listening for news of
my death, and asking for a smelling-bottle, and your fumbling for an
instant in your pocket, and giving her something. That made it perfectly
plain."

Too plain, Dora reflected in horror, for what might not Miss Franklin
have suspected and communicated in addition to her cousin?

"I was glad I had it in my pocket," said Dora, stammering. "I took it up
to London with me, and--and found it often refreshing in the middle of
the heat and fatigue. I am thankful to hear it was of use to you, who
have the best right to it."

"No," he said emphatically, "though it was of the greatest use. My
cousin Barbara said also that you were very sorry for me. Dora, was that
so?" Tom himself blushed a little in asking the question, as if he had a
guilty consciousness of having taken rather a mean advantage of Dora
Millar, first by coming so near to death without actually dying, and
then by listening to what his kinswoman had to say of Miss Dora Millar's
state of mind at the crisis.

On Dora's part there was no denying such a manifest truth; she could
only utter a tremulous "yes," and turn her head aside.

"That was good of you, though I do not know that I am repaying the
goodness properly," he said, with another smile, very wistful this time.
"For I must add, that hearing of it tempted me to wonder once again
whether you could ever learn to think of me? If you cannot, just say no,
and I'll cease from this moment to tease you" (as if he had been doing
nothing else save besiege and pester her for the last year and a half!).

Dora could not say "no" any more than she could say "yes" straight out,
though she was certain that to be kept any longer than was absolutely
necessary in a state of acute suspense was very bad for him in his
weakened health. By a great effort she brought herself to say in little
breaks and gasps, "I do not need to learn, Mr. Tom, because I have
thought of you for a long time now--long before you were so good and
generous to all of us--almost ever since you wished--you asked--what I
was so silly and so ungrateful as to refuse."

He drew her hand through his arm and held it tightly; he could not trust
himself to say or do more. He was almost as shy as she was in the
revulsion of his great happiness.

She struggled conscientiously to continue her confession. "I had thought
hardly at all of you before then. Girls are so full of themselves, and I
did not know that you wished me to think of you. I seem to see now that
if you had given me more time, and let me grow familiar with the idea,
even though we were 'donkeys,' as Annie and Rose say, and though we
were choke-full of youthful folly----" She stopped short without
finishing her sentence, or going farther into the nature of what she
seemed to see.

"But I besought you to take time, Dora, love," he remonstrated. "You
forget, I urged you to let me wait for the chance of your answer's being
different." He could not help, even in the hour of the attainment of the
dearest wish of his heart, being just to his old modest, reasonable
self.

"Yes," she said, with the prettiest, faintest, arch smile hovering about
the corners of her mouth. "But men ought to be wiser than to take simple
girls at their first word, which the girls can never, never unsay,
unless the men bid them. Now I'll tell you how malicious people will
view the present situation. They will say that I refused you point blank
when I thought we were well off, then got you to propose again, and
graciously accepted the proposal, when I knew we had not a penny in the
world. I own it looks very like it, and it is partly your fault; you
should not have let me go the first time. But I don't care what people
say, so long as there is not a word of truth in it."

"Nor I," said Tom undauntedly. "They may also say that I was able to
make myself useful to your family, and like a very tradesman, traded on
the usefulness, buying a reluctant bride with it. But what do we care
when we love each other, and God has given us to each other? 'They
say,'--what do they say? Let them say."

There was not the shadow of a cloud the size of a man's hand on Dr. and
Mrs. Millar's pleasure in their daughter Dora's marriage to Tom
Robinson. For instead of going with Annie to Africa, or starting on a
mission of her own to bring May's college fees from Jamaica, Dora
remained at Redcross to be Tom Robinson's dear wife and cherished
darling. Mrs. Millar had long seen, in her turn, that Dora could not do
better. The fine old shop, and the fantastic shade of poor Aunt Penny,
had both become of no account. The single thing which troubled Mrs.
Millar was that the instant Lady Mary Pemberton heard of the wedding in
prospect, she invited herself to come down to it.

Dora's sisters, with the charming inconsistency of young women, were not
only acquiescent in her undignified fate--they were jubilant over it.

It did not arrest, though it subdued the general congratulations, when
it was discovered that the event made Harry Ironside all at once both
envious and aggressive. He could not see why, if Dora Millar were
marrying a rich man, and he himself had a sufficient income not merely
to make a satisfactory settlement on his wife, but to do his part in
helping her relatives, who would also be his from the day he married
her, that his marriage should not take place as soon as Dora and Tom
Robinson's. In place of an indefinite engagement, with thousands of
miles of land and sea, and all the uncertainties of life into the
bargain, between him, Harry Ironside, and Annie Millar, would it not
be much better that he should carry away with him the brightest,
bravest woman who ever asked little from a new colony; who, in place
of asking, would give full measure and running over? For Annie was not
like poor dear little Kate--Annie would be a godsend, even though she
had to go the length of learning to fire a revolver as a defence
against lions and hostile natives. It would be nothing else than
savage pride in Dr. Millar, Harry continued to argue, to decline to
let Tom Robinson defray May's small expenses at St. Ambrose's, whether
she won a scholarship or not. He was a man with an ample fortune, as
well as the nicest fellow in the world, who was going to be not only
May's coach, but her brother-in-law. In like manner it would be
downright churlish and positively unkind to Dora if her parents
refused to occupy the pleasant small house with the large garden
belonging to Tom Robinson, and close to what would be their daughter's
house. It was conveniently vacant, and looked as if it had been made
for a couple of elderly gentle-folks, who were not rich, but were
comfortably provided for. In fact, it had been fitted up by the late
Mr. Charles Robinson for just such a pair, who had in the course of
nature left the house empty.

With regard to Rose, she would have to submit to be more or less Harry
Ironside's charge till she painted and sold such 'stunning' pictures
that she could afford to look down on his paltry aid. What, not allow
him to assist his own sister-in-law, when he was so thankful to think
that she might be like a sister in the meantime for his poor little Kate
to fall back upon? Why, the girls could go on making a home together at
his good friend Mrs. Jennings's, till it was right for Kate, after she
was old enough to choose, to cast in her lot with him and Annie,
supposing the colony prospered. His heart was already in that strange,
far-away region, which, with all its mysteries and wonders--ay, and its
terrors--has such an attraction for the young and high-spirited, the
typical pilgrims to a later New England.

And what did Annie think of this march stolen upon her, this attempt to
extort a yard where she had only granted an inch of favour? Perhaps she
was dazzled by what would have repelled many another woman, in the
primitive, precarious, exciting details of the life of a young colony.
Perhaps her heart and imagination were alike taken by storm when she
thought of the untenanted hospital wards and the patients calling for
her to go over and help them. Perhaps she was simply beginning so to
identify herself with Harry Ironside that what he did seemed her doing.
Anyhow Annie did not say no.

The Miss Dyers remarked oracularly, when the double marriage was
announced in Redcross, that it was just what they had expected. The
observation was somewhat vague, like other oracles' speeches. The
general public of Redcross, including the Careys and Hewetts, were less
indefinite and more cordial in their expression of satisfaction at the
suitable settlement in life of the little Doctor's elder daughters.

Miss Franklin could not be too thankful and pleased that, after all, she
had done no mischief to her cousin Tom by her blunder, and by what had
been her only too personal reproaches and revelations addressed to his
future wife on the night when he was believed to be lying dying. In
fact, if she, Barbara Franklin, had not been conscious of a huge
mistake, with all the deplorable consequences it might have carried in
its train, if she had not thus been kept shamefacedly humble and silent
as to her share in the business, she might have taken credit to herself,
with greater reason than Mrs. Jennings could boast, of having united a
supremely happy couple who were drifting apart. Even if Miss Franklin's
part in it had been played voluntarily and advisedly, she would never
have cause to regret that night's work. For Dora Robinson had no scruple
in being the fast friend and affectionate cousin of her husband's
forewoman. She had no more qualm than she would have felt if Miss
Franklin had never condescended to trade, but had remained within the
bounds of poor gentility by laboriously keeping up her halting classical
music and waning foreign languages, and by continuing a finishing
governess to the day of her death--or rather till she was superannuated,
and had to retire to a too literal garret.

"Oh! Jonathan"--Mrs. Millar could not resist a long-drawn sob on the
great day of the double marriage--"it is all very well to say Annie has
got a good husband--a fine disinterested young man, certain to be
distinguished in his profession, you tell me. I believe that, and am
very thankful for it. How could I bear the parting otherwise? But to let
our eldest, our prettiest, and wittiest, with her warm heart and
untiring energy--'the flower of the flock,' as people used to call her
when the children were young--go out to Africa, it may be to meet
unheard-of trials, like your poor Aunt Penny, it may be never to see our
faces again----" Mrs. Millar could say no more.

"Hush! hush! Maria; you must be reasonable--you must take the bad with
the good," enjoined the little Doctor from his arm-chair. "Why, you are
making as much commotion as you did when Annie said she would be a
nurse. Is an hospital ward at home so preferable to an hospital ward in
the dark continent, which is ceasing to be dark? Its sun is only too
blazingly bright, its river plains too teemingly fertile, its mountains
too grand even in the grander monotony of its deserts. There is gold in
its dust, and its rocks are glittering with diamonds. But, thank God,
that is not all. It is the great country for which Livingstone was
content to spend his life, where the Moffats made the wilderness blossom
like the rose, and Colenso won the wild heart of the Zulu to trust him
as a brother. You will have Dora and Tom next door to you, and Rose and
'little May' will be constantly coming and going. As for Annie and
Harry, how can you tell that their special gifts would not be wasted
here, as I have often thought hers would have been if she had continued
only a pretty, sprightly young lady, and not grown up into an hospital
nurse!"

"Perhaps you are right, Jonathan," answered his wife meekly, coming
round, as she did now more than ever, to his side of the question.

"Do you think Sir John Richardson's daughter, Bishop Selwyn's wife,
missed the highest calling she was capable of when, instead of
presiding over a pleasant country-house or a fine London drawing-room,
she consented with all her heart to be landed on an island in Melanesia,
and left among the native converts to help to prepare the Malay girls
for confirmation? Her husband was away in the meantime in his missionary
yacht on his noble enterprise, ready to take her off the island on his
return, and not fearing to trust her in the interval to their God whose
work she was doing," argued the old man, with a note of something like
exultation in his voice. "Annie and Harry are not going out to Africa,
as my Aunt Penny and poor Beauchamp of Waylands went to Australia in the
days of the earlier squatters, entirely for their own hand, and because
they cannot help themselves, since there is nothing left for them to do
here. Our children are going to render gallant service on which their
talents are well bestowed, of which we shall always be proud to hear.
They are, as I told you before, our hostages in the carrying out of the
great purpose of the Almighty Ruler of the universe, by which light is
to take the place of darkness, and good of evil, from the rivers even to
the ends of the earth."


THE END.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Houseful of Girls, by Sarah Tytler

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HOUSEFUL OF GIRLS ***

***** This file should be named 20081-8.txt or 20081-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/0/8/20081/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Jacqueline Jeremy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
