Project Gutenberg's The Bibliography of Walt Whitman, by Frank Shay

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Bibliography of Walt Whitman

Author: Frank Shay

Release Date: March 25, 2010 [EBook #31781]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BIBLIOGRAPHY OF WALT WHITMAN ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Tamise Totterdell and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









The Whitman Bibliography




_This edition of the WHITMAN BIBLIOGRAPHY is limited to five hundred
numbered copies, of which this is No. 288_




[Illustration: Walt Whitman]




    THE BIBLIOGRAPHY
    OF WALT WHITMAN

    BY FRANK SHAY


    NEW YORK
    FRIEDMANS'
    1920




Copyright, 1920, by Friedmans'.




    To the memory of
    HORACE TRAUBEL
    1856-1919
    Poet, Philosopher, Comrade




FOREWORD


    "_Camerado, this is no book;
    Who touches this touches a man._"


Walt Whitman's relation to his work was more personal than that of most
poets. He was, in a larger sense, a man of one book, and this book,
issued and reissued at various periods of the poet's life, was, at each
issuance, the latest expression of his development. The infinite care he
gave to his work; the continual study of each poem resulted in changes
in each edition. The book literally grew with the man and in the present
authorized edition of today we have his final and complete utterance.

Whitman's early fugitive work presents to the student a curious anomaly.
It gives no intimation of the great nature that later produced Leaves of
Grass and Democratic Vistas. In quality it was beneath the standards of
the nickle-dreadfuls of yesterday. Bearing such titles as "One Wicked
Impulse"; "Revenge and Requital, Tale of a Murderer Escaped"; "The
Angel of Tears"; (many of them are in the Prose Works) they appealed to
a class to whom thought was anathema and reading solely a pastime. They
are didactic to the extreme, presenting the horrible results of sin and
the corresponding rewards of virtue. Their value as literature, however,
does not come within the province of the bibliographer.

The care Whitman bestowed upon his writings was carried to the
mechanical production of his books. Each edition was manufactured under
his supervision and when completed represented the latest and highest
achievements in commercial bookmaking. Further, he took such an intense
personal interest in the sale of his books that he invariably knew at
all times the number of copies sold and the number on hand.

The first edition comprised three distinct variations. The first of
these, in paper wrappers, are undoubtedly the result of Whitman's
impatience at the delays of the binder. Considering that he had a press
at his disposal, it is not assuming too much to suggest that while
awaiting deliveries from the binder he printed the jackets himself for
immediate use. This is the only way to account for the existence of the
paper copies. Further proof that this contention is correct is that each
copy bears an inscription in Whitman's holograph.

Though Whitman insisted that "the entire edition sold readily" there is
little doubt he meant circulated. In fact, they were circulated so
rapidly a new edition was required within ten months. This second
edition was a dumpy sexto-decimo of nearly four hundred pages. Twenty
new poems were added, one of the earlier poems was dropped and all were
retouched. This edition did sell rapidly and only fear of public
criticism prevented the publishers from reissuing the book. The failure
to find a firm to stand sponsor for his book discouraged Whitman to the
extent of planning to go West and pioneer. His plans for this venture
were completed when Thayer and Eldridge opened negotiations for the
book's republication with any new material available. This offer took
the poet to Boston to oversee the work and in May, 1860, a substantial
volume, with many new poems came from the press. The book went through
two editions, a total of between thirty-five hundred and four thousand
copies when the publishers failed. The plates were sold at auction and
went to a notorious pirate, who, within the next ten years, published
and sold over ten thousand copies. Whitman had no control over these
crimped editions and forever after they were a torment to him.

It was not until after the Civil War that a new authentic edition was
published--again without a publisher. In later issues of this edition
Whitman bound in the sheets of "Drum-Taps" and "When Lilacs Last in the
Dooryard Bloom'd," and in still later issues, "Songs Before Parting."
The total number of copies issued is not known but must have been quite
small owing to the effect of the lower priced pirated edition.

The fifth edition was published in Washington and attracted little or no
attention save in England where the demand for complete and unabridged
copies was fostered by Rossetti's emasculated edition. The English
demand was so great that Whitman was compelled to reprint one or two
new editions. He got around the expense of new plates by inserting
"intercallations"--poems printed on separate slips of paper and tipped
in.

In 1881, the next Boston edition was issued. With a recognized publisher
of Osgood's standing there should have been no question of the final
success of "Leaves of Grass." Osgood published all the work of the New
Englanders; Longfellow, Lowell, Emerson and Whittier. Whitman was in
good company save that the Society for the Suppression of Vice
considered "Leaves of Grass" to be bad company and through District
Attorney Stevens secured its suppression. Osgood promptly withdrew the
book and gladly turned over to the author all unsold and unbound copies
and the plates. The plates went to Rees, Welsh and Company, of
Philadelphia, who brought out an edition and then dropped from sight.
David McKay published an edition from the same plates. During this time
certain "special" and "author's" editions were published by Whitman as
his own publisher.

After Whitman's death Small, Maynard & Company, of Boston, became the
authorized publishers. They were followed in turn by D. Appleton and
Company, and Mitchell Kennerley. At this writing Messrs. Doubleday, Page
& Co. are the authorized publishers of "Leaves of Grass," and the
"Prose Works."

Any bibliography of Whitman's Works can be called but an attempt. His
temperamental handling of the plates of the various editions of "Leaves
of Grass" resulted in many curious imprints. There may be omissions, I
grant, but not serious ones. The work I undertook was a clearing up of
the fog which hung about the various Boston editions and setting
cataloguers right on the first edition.

I must, at this point, thank Anne Montgomerie Traubel, of Camden, Mr.
Walter Bartley Quinlan and Mr. Alfred F. Goldsmith, of New York, and Mr.
Henry S. Saunders, of Toronto, Canada, for valuable suggestions and
comparison of notes, and Mr. M. M. Breslow for permission to use his
very excellent collection of Whitmaniana as a basis for this
bibliography.

                                                 FRANK SHAY.

New York City

July, 1920.




NOTE


The arrangement is chronological, the only practicable method.

In listing titles and imprints I have sought to follow the typography
and punctuation of the originals. Where this was not practicable I have
inserted punctuation marks to give the matter coherence. Where I have
interpolated remarks or descriptions within the titles I have enclosed
them in brackets to distinguish them from Whitman's parenthesis.




1842


The New World. Extra Series. Number 34. New York, November, 1842.
Original Temperance Novel. Franklin Evans; or The Inebriate. A Tale of
the Times. By Walter Whitman.

    Royal octavo, pp. 31, uncut.

    Published as an extra to "_The New World_."

    The last page (32) contains advertisement: "New Works in Press."

    Written during Whitman's Bohemian days it was advertised as a
    thrilling romance by one of the best novelists in this country
    and had a sale of between 20,000 and 25,000 copies, which netted
    the author about $200. References to the work in later years
    irritated Whitman and he refused to discuss it. The work is
    extremely scarce considering the great number that were
    published.




1855


Leaves of Grass. Brooklyn, New York. 1855.

    First edition. Twelve poems.

    Imperial octavo, pink paper wrappers.

    "Leaves of Grass" printed in block letters across front wrapper,
    end wrapper blank. Steel engraved portrait, title, uncaptioned
    preface, xii, Leaves of Grass, pp. 95, end blank.

    The author's name appears only in the copyright notice, and in
    the first poem: "Walt Whitman, an American, one of the roughs, a
    kosmos."

    The poems, twelve in number, are without titles. In the present
    authorized edition they appear under the following titles:

        Song of Myself.
        A Song for Occupations.
        To Think of Time.
        The Sleepers.
        I Sing the Body Electric.
        Faces.
        Song of the Answer (part one).
        Europe.
        A Boston Ballad.
        There Was a Child Went Forth.
        Who Learns My Lesson Complete.
        Great Are the Myths.

    The preface was later worked into three poems:

        By Blue Ontario's Shore.
        Song of Prudence.
        To a Foil'd European Revolutionaire.

    There are three variations of the first edition. The one noted
    above in pink wrappers is unquestionably the first issue. The
    second issue is bound in green cloth, gilt edges, and with the
    title stamped in rustic letters in gilt on the front cover. The
    last issue of this edition has all the points of the second
    issue with eight pages of press notices bound in at the front.

    Less than nine hundred copies were printed in July, 1855, in the
    printshop of Andrew H. Rome, 98 Cranberry Street, Brooklyn, the
    author assisting in the type composition and presswork. The
    volume was placed on sale at Fowler & Wells, Broadway, New York,
    and at Swaynes, in Fulton Street, Brooklyn, at two dollars, but
    was later reduced to one dollar. Very few copies were sold;
    Whitman giving almost the entire edition to critics and friends.

    Catalogued from the Maier copy.




    A reprint of this edition was issued in January, 1920, by Mr.
    Thomas B. Mosher, Portland, Maine.




1856


Leaves of Grass. Brooklyn, New York. 1856.

    Second edition. Thirty-two poems.

    Thick 16mo, green drab cloth, sprinkled edges. Title stamped in
    gilt on face of binding; on back title and quotation from
    Emerson's letter "I Greet You at the Beginning of a Great
    Career, R. W. Emerson," portrait, same as in the first edition,
    title, contents, iv, Leaves of Grass, pp. (5)-342, Leaves
    Droppings (reprint of Emerson's letter; Whitman's letter to
    Emerson and press notices), pp. 345-384, advertisement. Owing to
    the storm of criticism which arose against the book, Fowler &
    Wells, the New York publishers, refused to put their name on the
    title page, and though they attended to all the details of
    presswork and distribution, the volume was issued from Brooklyn,
    without imprint. It is said that there are copies in existence
    bearing Fowler & Wells imprint, but this is doubtful as such
    copies are unknown to Whitman collectors. In this edition the
    prose preface of the first edition is worked into four poems: By
    Blue Ontario's Shore; Song of the Answerer, part two; To a
    Foil'd European Revolutionaire, and Song of Prudence; the
    balance being reprinted in Specimen Days and Collect, 1881.

    Owing to the refusal of Fowler & Wells to stand sponsor to the
    volume, only 1,000 copies were printed and the book was out of
    print 1858-1860.




1860


Leaves of Grass Imprints. American and European Criticisms of "Leaves of
Grass." Boston: Thayer and Eldridge, 1860.

    18mo, printed wrappers, pp. 64.

    A reprint of current criticisms of the first and second
    editions. Pp. 7, 30, 38, contain articles written and
    contributed anonymously by Whitman to various New York papers.
    They were later reprinted in the Fellowship papers and in In Re
    Walt Whitman, 1893.

    It is exceedingly rare.




1860


Leaves of Grass. Boston: Thayer and Eldridge, Year '85 of The States.
(1860-61.)

    Third edition. 154 poems.

    Duodecimo, brown cloth, heavily blind embossed. Portrait, at the
    age of forty, engraved by Schoff, after the painting by Charles
    Hine, in 1859, on an irregular tinted background, title,
    contents, pp. iv-456.

    Issued May, 1860. The author went to Boston to superintend
    the printing and binding. The publishers failed during the
    period of financial depression at the beginning of the Civil War
    and the plates were sold at auction to R. Worthington, who
    surreptitiously used them with the original imprint. There are,
    for this reason, four or more editions bearing the original
    Thayer and Eldridge imprint. The first issue is distinguished by
    the engraved portrait which is on an irregular tinted background
    and by the gilt embossed butterfly on the backbone of the
    binding. On the verso of the title is the inscription
    "Electrotyped at the Boston Stereotype Foundry. Printed by
    George C. Rand & Avery." The second issue has the portrait on
    white paper and lacks the gilt butterfly. The third issue, or
    the first pirated issue, lacks the printer's inscription and is
    bound in cheap cloth. Early issues, all spurious, contain
    catalogues of Worthington's publications bound in at the end.
    The plates were purchased by Whitman's literary executors after
    his death.

    In this edition the author abandons calling the months by their
    common names and adopts the Quaker style: that of calling
    September the Ninthmonth, etc.

    Copies of the first issue with the tinted portrait are extremely
    scarce. The various editions have heretofore remained
    undistinguished.




1865


Walt Whitman's Drum-Taps. New York, 1865.

    Duodecimo, brown cloth, title (Drum-Taps) stamped on gold ground
    on front cover, title, contents, iv, pp. 5-72.

    But few copies had been issued when the death of President
    Lincoln occurred and the author withheld the balance until a few
    weeks later when he added "When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard
    Bloom'd and other Pieces," with pagination distinct from that of
    Drum-Taps, as a sequel. This and the "Sequel" formed the first
    and second annexes to the fourth edition, 1867, of Leaves of
    Grass, and were later incorporated in the Washington, 1871
    edition under the title of Drum-Taps. Copies without the
    "sequel" are exceedingly scarce.




1865


Sequel to Drum-Taps (since the preceding came from the press). When
Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd. And Other Pieces. Washington, D. C.,
1865-6.

    Duodecimo, pp. 24.

    It is doubtful if any copies reached the market other than those
    issued as a part of Drum-Taps. The remaining copies were bound
    up with second issue of the 1867 edition.




1867


Leaves of Grass. New York, 1867.

    Fourth edition.

    Duodecimo, walnut half-morocco, title, contents, iv, pp. (7)-338.
    There is also a cloth bound issue that differs in no manner from
    the above. Both have "Ed'n 1867" stamped in gilt on back.

    Later issues of this edition have added, under separate
    pagination, Drum-Taps, pp. iv-72; Sequel to Drum-Taps, pp. 24;
    Songs Before Parting, pp. 36. A blank leaf separates each
    section.

    In this edition the author changes the writing of the past
    participle to 'd. The verses and sections are numbered.




1868


Poems by Walt Whitman. Selected and Edited by William Michael Rossetti
[quotation from Michelangelo]. London: John Camden Hotten, Piccadilly,
1868.

    "Rossetti" Edition.

    Duodecimo, blue cloth, uncut; half-title, portrait with
    facsimile signature, title, page of quotations from Swedenborg,
    Carlyle, and Robespierre, note on portrait, dedication (by W. M. R.)
    to William Bell Scott, contents, prefatory notices, preface to
    Leaves of Grass, pp. 64; half-title, pp. 401, postscript. Eight
    pages of advertisements in front, and sixteen pages in back.

    The first English, or "Rossetti's Edition." W. D. O'Connor
    writing to an European friend called it "A fairly
    representative, but nevertheless, castrated edition."

    A second edition from new type was issued in 1886 by Chatto &
    Windus, London. Third edition, 1910.




1871


Leaves of Grass. Washington, D. C., 1871. [Pointing Hand] See Advertisement
at end of this Volume.

    Fifth edition.

    Duodecimo, light green paper wrappers, uncut; title, contents,
    pp. vi-384.

    Copyright notice dated 1870; Later issues were bound in cloth.




1871


Memoranda. Democratic Vistas. Washington, D. C., 1871. [Pointing Hand]
See Advertisement at end of this Volume.

    Duodecimo, light green paper wrappers, uncut; title, contents,
    pp. 84.

    Copyright notice dated 1870.




1871


Leaves of Grass. Passage to India. (Five line poem beginning, "Gliding
o'er all.") Washington, D. C., 1871. [Pointing Hand] See Advertisement
at end of this Volume.

    Duodecimo, light green paper wrappers, uncut; title, contents,
    pp. iv-120.

    Copyright notice dated 1870.




1871


After All, Not to Create Only. Recited by Walt Whitman on Invitation of
Managers American Institute, on Opening their 40th Annual Exhibition,
New York, noon, September 7, 1871 (device). Boston: Roberts Brothers,
1871.

    Duodecimo, beveled cloth boards, half-title, title, note, vii;
    pp. 24, notes.

    There is also a limp cloth issue which is quite common, that was
    issued to be sold at the exhibition.

    The poem was later published in the Transactions of the American
    Institute, 1871-72. Albany, 1872.




1872


Leaves of Grass. Washington, D. C., 1872.

    Second issue of the fifth edition.

    Duodecimo, green cloth, uncut; title, contents, vi, pp. 384.
    Passage to India, pp. 120. Printed from the plates of the
    Washington, 1871 editions of Leaves of Grass and Passage to
    India.

    Later issues have After All, Not to Create Only, pp. 14 bound
    in.




1872


Leaves of Grass. As a Strong Bird on Pinions Free. And Other Poems.
Washington, D. C., 1872.

    Duodecimo, green cloth, uncut; title, contents, preface, x; One
    Song, America, Before I Go, one page; Souvenirs of Democracy,
    facsimile signature, one page; pp. 14; Virginia--The West; By
    Broad Potomac's Shore, one page, unnumbered; eight pages
    advertisements.




1875


Memoranda During the War. By Walt Whitman. Author's Publication. Camden,
New Jersey, 1875-76.

    Octavo, maroon cloth, title stamped in gold on cover; page,
    "Remembrance Copy;" portrait, title, pp. 68, advertisement.




1876


Leaves of Grass. [Nine-line poem beginning "Come, said my soul," signed
Walt Whitman in the Author's autograph.] Author's Edition, with
Portraits from Life. Camden, New Jersey, 1876.

    Sixth edition.

    Octavo, half-calf, leather label, title, contents, vi; pp. 384,
    advertisement. Portrait same as in the first edition facing page
    29; woodcut portrait by W. J. Linton facing page 285.




1876


Leaves of Grass. [Nine-line poem in author's holograph, signed Walt
Whitman.] Author's Edition. With Portraits and Intercallations. Camden,
New Jersey, 1876.

    Octavo, half calf, leather label, uncut. The same in every
    detail except for a new title. At the end of the table of
    contents a slip is tipped in:

        Intercallations                  Page

        As in a Swoon                     207
        The Beauty of the Ship            247
        When the Full-Grown Poet Came     359
        After an Interval                 369

    On each page indicated will be found a poem, tipped in.

    There is a variation in the intercallations: a few contain "A
    Death Sonnet for Custer."




1876


Two Rivulets including Democratic Vistas, Centennial Songs, and Passage
to India. Author's Edition. Camden, New Jersey, 1876.

    Octavo, half-calf, leather label; portrait, "Photo'd from life,
    Sept., '72, Brooklyn, N. Y., by G. F. Pearsall, Fulton St."
    signed "Walt Whitman, born May 31, 1819"; title, pp. 32, blank
    leaf; Democratic Vistas, pp. 84; blank page; Centennial Songs,
    1876, pp. 1-18; blank page; As a Strong Bird on Pinions Free,
    preface, pp. x, pp. 14, blank page; Passage to India, pp. 120;
    blank page, advertisement.

    The above and Leaves of Grass, 1876, were uniform in binding and
    comprised Whitman's complete works to date.




1881


Leaves of Grass [device]. Boston: James R. Osgood & Company, 1881-82.

    Seventh edition.

    Duodecimo, yellow cloth, facsimile signature stamped in gilt on
    front cover; title, contents, pp. 382. This edition was
    suppressed by District Attorney Stevens on complaint of the
    Society for the Suppression of Vice. The unbound copies were
    claimed by the author who inserted a new title-page. The plates
    were turned over to Rees, Welsh and Company. Later they were
    given to David McKay, who issued several editions bearing the
    dates of 1884, 1885, 1886. There is also an edition from these
    plates with McKay's imprint and Putnam's name on the binding.




1881


Leaves of Grass. By Walt Whitman, Author's Copyright Edition [device].
London: David Bogue, 3 St. Martin's Place, Trafalgar Square, W. C.,
1881. (All rights reserved.)

    Octavo, olive cloth, uncut; title, contents, pp. 382. The
    collation being the same as that of the Boston, 1881 edition it
    is possible that Bogue purchased the sheets from Osgood or
    Whitman and bound the book to his own tastes.

    There was another issue, same collation, in 1884.




1881


Leaves of Grass by Walt Whitman: Preface to the Original Edition, 1855
[device]. London: Trübner & Co., 1881.

    Octavo, blue wrappers, uncut, title, pp. 31, advertisements.

    Only 500 copies were printed.

    An edition on large paper, bound in light blue wrappers and
    limited to twenty-five copies was issued at the same time.




1882


Specimen Days and Collect. By Walt Whitman, author of "Leaves of Grass."
Philadelphia: Rees, Welsh & Co., No. 23 South Ninth Street, 1882-83.

    Duodecimo, paper wrappers, uncut; portrait, title, contents, pp.
    374; advertisement. Very few copies were issued in wrappers, the
    larger number being bound in yellow cloth and with the imprint
    of David McKay. The edition with the imprint of Wilson and
    McCormick, Glasgow, 1883, was printed from the same plates.




1886


Leaves of Grass. The Poems of Walt Whitman (selected), with Introduction
by Ernest Rhys.

    18 mo, blue cloth, paper label, uncut; portrait, title,
    contents, introduction, xxxix, pp. 318; advertisements.

    The Canterbury Poet Series.




1887


Specimen Days in America. By Walt Whitman. Newly revised by the author,
with fresh preface and additional note. London: Walter Scott, 24 Warwick
Lane, Paternoster Row, 1887.

    16 mo, blue cloth, paper label, uncut; half-title, title,
    contents, preface, pp. 312; advertisements.

    The Camelot Series.

    Later Published by Routledge in the New Universal Library.




1888


November Boughs. By Walt Whitman. Philadelphia: David McKay, 23 South
Ninth Street, 1888.

    Octavo maroon cloth, uncut; title stamped in gilt on front
    cover; portrait, the 70th year, title, contents, (5)-140;
    advertisement.




1888


Complete (portrait) Poems and Prose of Walt Whitman, 1855-1888.
Authenticated and Personal Book (handled by W. W.). Portraits from Life.
Autograph.

    Eighth edition, Leaves of Grass; third edition of Prose Works.

    Octavo, half cloth, uncut. Leaves of Grass, pp. 382; Specimen
    Days, pp. 374; November Boughs, pp. 140. Portraits face pp. 29
    and 206.

    600 copies.




1888


Democratic Vistas, and other Papers. By Walt Whitman. Published by
arrangement with the author. London: Walter Scott, 24 Warwick Lane,
Paternoster Row, 1888.

    12 mo, cloth, paper label, uncut; title, contents, preface, pp.
    175; advertisements.




1889


Leaves of Grass with Sands at Seventy and A Backward Glance o'er
Travel'd Roads.

    To-day, after finishing my 70th year, the fancy comes for
    celebrating it by a special, complete, final utterance, in one
    handy volume, of L. of G., with their Annex, and Backward
    Glance--and for stamping and sprinkling all with portraits and
    facial photos, such as they actually were, taken from life,
    different stages. Doubtless, anyhow, the volume is more a
    _Person_ than a book. And for testimony to all (and for good
    measure) I here with pen and ink append my name: Walt Whitman.
    Portraits from Life; autograph; special edition. (300 copies
    only printed--$5 each.)

    The "Pocketbook" Leaves of Grass.

    Duodecimo, black morocco, with and without flaps, gilt edges.

    Portrait, title, contents, pp. 9-382; Sands at Seventy, pp.
    383-404; A Backward Glance o'er Travel'd Roads, separate
    pagination, pp. 1-18. Portraits face pp. 29, 132, 214, 296, 383.




1889


Gems from Walt Whitman. Selected by Elizabeth Porter Gould.
Philadelphia: David McKay, Publisher, 23 South Ninth Street, 1889.

    Oblong duodecimo, maroon cloth; title, contents, poem to W. W.,
    pp. 58.




1891


Good-Bye My Fancy, 2d Annex to Leaves of Grass. Philadelphia: David
McKay, Publisher, 23 South Ninth Street, 1891.

    Octavo, green or maroon cloth, uncut, gilt top; title stamped in
    gilt on front cover; portrait, title, contents, pp. (5)-66.




1891


Leaves of Grass. Including Sands at Seventy. 1st Annex, Good-Bye my
Fancy; 2d Annex, A Backward Glance o'er Travel'd Roads, and Portrait
from Life. [Nine-line poem, facsimile signature of the author.]
Philadelphia: David McKay, Publisher, 23 South Ninth Street, 1891-2.

    Ninth edition.

    Octavo, paper wrappers, paper label, uncut; title, contents, pp.
    438.

    Later issues were bound in cloth and have the publisher's
    address at 1022 Market Street.




1892


Complete Prose Works. Walt Whitman. Philadelphia: David McKay,
Publisher, 23 South Ninth Street, 1892.

    Octavo, green cloth, uncut, gilt top; title, contents, viii, pp.
    522.




1892


Selected Poems. By Walt Whitman. New York: Charles L. Webster & Co.,
1892.

    16 mo, grey cloth; half-title, portrait, editor's note, pp. 179;
    advertisements.

    In the Fiction, Fact, and Fancy Series.

    Edited by Arthur Stedman.




1892


Autobiographia, or the Story of a Life. By Walt Whitman. Selected from
his Writings. New York: Charles L. Webster & Co., 1892.

    16 mo, grey cloth; half-title, photo of Mickle Street, Camden
    house, title, editor's note, W. W. by E. C. S., pp. 205;
    advertisements.

    The publisher failed and very few copies reached the market.

    In the Fiction, Fact, and Fancy Series edited by Arthur Stedman.

    There is an issue in blue cloth from the same plates, uncut,
    bearing the imprint of G. P. Putnam's Sons, London, 1892, and
    some bearing the McKay imprint.




1893


_In Re_ Walt Whitman. Edited by his Literary Executors, Horace L.
Traubel, Richard Maurice Bucke, Thomas B. Harned [quotation from
Lucretius]. Published by the Editors through David McKay, 23 South Ninth
Street, Philadelphia, 1893.

    Octavo, cloth, uncut; half-title, title, a First and Last Word,
    contents, x, pp. 452; advertisements. But 1,000 copies were
    published. Each copy was to be numbered consecutively, though
    many are found without the number. Most copies have the
    signatures of one or all the executors.

    The volume contains the following by Walt Whitman:

        Walt Whitman and his Poems, pp. 13-21.
        Leaves of Grass: a volume of poems just published, pp. 23-26.
        An English and an American Poet, pp. 27-32.
        Letters in Sickness: Washington, 1873, pp. 73-92.

    The first three articles were written by Whitman during 1855-56
    and sent to the newspapers anonymously. He insisted that
    considering the misunderstanding and abuse accorded to Leaves of
    Grass, he was compelled to resort to these methods to defend his
    work in columns that would have been otherwise closed to him.
    The latter was a series of letters to his mother.




[*]1895


The Masterpiece Library. XXVII. Poems by Walt Whitman [quotation].
London: "Review of Reviews," Office Price One Penny.

    Duodecimo, orange wrappers, pp. 60; advertisements. No. 27 of
    the Penny Poets.

    Quite scarce.

    [*Date registered British Copyright Office.]




1897


Leaves of Grass including Sands at Seventy, Good-Bye My Fancy, Old Age
Echoes, and A Backward Glance O'er Traveled Roads. By Walt Whitman
[device]. Boston: Small, Maynard & Company, 1897.

    Octavo, green cloth, uncut; portrait, title, poem, author's
    note, no pagination, pp. 455.

    Later editions from the same plates:

        D. Appleton & Company.
        Mitchell Kennerley.
        Doubleday, Page & Company.




1897


Calamus. A Series of Letters Written during the Years 1868-1880. By Walt
Whitman to a Young Friend [Peter Doyle]. Edited with an introduction by
Richard Maurice Bucke, M. D., one of Whitman's literary executors.
[Quotation from p. 102, "Leaves of Grass," edition of 1892.] Published
by Laurens Maynard at 287 Congress Street in Boston, MDCCCXCVII.

    Duodecimo, boards, cloth back, paper label; zinc etching of
    Whitman and Peter Doyle reproduced from a photograph by Rice,
    Washington, D. C., 1869; title, 4 pp. quotations, chronological
    notes of Walt Whitman's life, introduction, pp. 173.

    The first issue was limited to 35 numbered copies. A regular
    edition was published at the same time.




1898


Complete Prose Works. Specimen Days and Collect, November Boughs and
Good-Bye My Fancy. By Walt Whitman [device]. Boston: Small, Maynard &
Company, 1898.

    Octavo, cloth, uncut; half-title, portrait, title, contents,
    list of illustrations, pp. 527.

    Later editions from the same plates:

        A. Appleton & Company.
        Mitchell Kennerley.
        Doubleday, Page & Company.




1898


The Wound Dresser. A Series of Letters Written from the Hospitals in
Washington during the War of the Rebellion. By Walt Whitman. Edited by
Richard Maurice Bucke, M. D., one of Whitman's literary executors
[device]. Boston: Small, Maynard & Company, 1898.

    Octavo, red buckram, uncut; title, portrait, contents, pp. 201.

    The edition was limited to 10 copies signed by the editor; the
    earliest of these copies have the publisher's device slightly
    out of the center.




1898


Selections from the Prose and Poetry of Walt Whitman. Edited with an
Introduction by Oscar Lovell Triggs, Ph.D. (The University of Chicago)
[device]. Boston: Small, Maynard & Company, 1898.

    Octavo, buckram, uncut; half-title, portrait, title, dedication,
    preface, contents, introduction xliii, half-title, pp. 248.
    Selected bibliography (251)-257.




1898


"Walt Whitman at Home." By Himself. Critic Pamphlet No. 2. New York: The
Critic Co., 1898.

    Duodecimo, sewn, uncut; title, portrait, pp. 21. Facsimiles of
    Walt Whitman's manuscript on pp. 15 and 21.




1899


Notes and Fragments. Left by Walt Whitman and now Edited by Dr. Richard
Maurice Bucke, one of his literary executors. "Waifs from the Deep Cast
High and Dry," Leaves of Grass, pp. 278. Printed for Private
Distribution only, 1899.

    Small quarto, pebbled cloth, uncut; half-title, title, preface,
    pp. 211.

    250 copies.




1900


Leaves of Grass. By Walt Whitman. Including a Facsimile Autobiography,
variorum readings of the poems and a department of Gathered Leaves
[device]. Philadelphia: David McKay, 1022 Market St.

    8vo, green cloth; g.t., uncut; portrait, title, preface by David
    McKay, contents, x, facsimile of Whitman's autobiography, pp.
    510, alphabetical index of titles, (511)-516. There are
    portraits facing pp. 31, 117, 395 of the text.




1900


Leaves of Grass [device]. Walt Whitman. New York and Boston: H. M.
Caldwell Co.

    18mo, pictorial board on cloths, uncut, portrait, title, pp. 88;
    advertisements.




1900


When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd. Essex House Press, London:
1900.

    12mo. vellum, uncut.

    135 copies on vellum.




1902


The Complete Writings of Walt Whitman. Issued under the editorial
supervision of his Literary Executors, Richard Maurice Bucke, Thomas B.
Harned, and Horace L. Traubel. With additional bibliographical and
critical material by Oscar Lovell Triggs, Ph.D. G. P. Putnam's Sons. New
York and London: The Knickerbocker Press.

    Ten volumes, various bindings, uncut.

    Every scrap of paper and memoranda of Whitman's is here
    collected and edited by his literary executors. Leaves of Grass
    takes up three volumes; the Prose works seven.

        Vol. 1. Introduction. Leaves of Grass.
        Vol. 2. Leaves of Grass.
        Vol. 3. Leaves of Grass, variorum readings, index.
        Vol. 1. Specimen Days.
        Vol. 2. Specimen Days; Collect.
        Vol. 3. Collect,  November Boughs, Good-Bye My Fancy.
        Vol. 4. Good-Bye My Fancy, The Wound Dresser.
        Vol. 5. Calamus, chapters by T. B. Harned.
        Vol. 6. Notes and Fragments.
        Vol. 7. Notes and Fragments, The Growth of Leaves of Grass,
                Bibliography, by O. L. Triggs.

    There are several editions; three of which were published
    simultaneously.

        Autograph edition, with ms. inserted        32 sets.
        Paumanok edition, coloured plates          300 sets.
        Camden edition                             300 sets.

    The Lamb Publishing Company later published from the same
    plates:

        National edition                       1,000 copies.




1904


Walt Whitman's Diary in Canada with Extracts from other of his Diaries
and Literary Note-Books. Edited by William Sloane Kennedy [device].
Boston: Small, Maynard & Company, MCMIV.

    Octavo, grey boards, parchment back and corners, uncut;
    half-title, portrait, title, editor's preface, pp. 73.

    The edition was limited to 500 copies of which few were sold,
    the balance being bound up in light blue cloth, some without
    portrait.




1904


An American Primer. By Walt Whitman, with Facsimiles of the Original
Manuscript. Edited by Horace Traubel [device]. Boston: Small, Maynard &
Company, MCMIV.

    8vo, grey boards, vellum back and corners, uncut; half-title,
    portrait, title, foreword, half-title, 3 pp. facsimiles, pp. 35.

    The edition was limited to 500 copies of which few were sold,
    the balance being bound up in light blue cloth, some without
    portrait.




1904


Leaves of Grass [selected]. With a prefactory note by Harry Roberts.
London: Anthony Treherne & Co., Ltd., 1904.

    Duodecimo, cloth, title, preface, pp. 272.

    Vol. I of the Vagabonds Library.




1904


Selected Poems of Walt Whitman. Edited with Introduction and Notes by
Julian W. Abernethy, Ph.D. [device]. New York: Charles E. Merrill Co.

    16 mo, brown wrappers, title, introduction, critical opinions,
    bibliography, pp. 63.

    In Maynard's English Classic Series, No. 242.




1904


Song of Myself. I, Walt Whitman, now thirty-seven years old, in perfect
health, begin, hoping to cease not till death. I will make the poems of
materials, for I think they are the most spiritual poems, and I will
make the poems of my body and mortality. Done into print by the
Roycrofters at their shop which is in East Aurora, New York, A.D.
MDCCCCIV.

    Small quarto, various bindings, uncut; half title, portrait,
    title, pp. 70.




1905


Lafayette in Brooklyn. By Walt Whitman, with an Introduction by John
Burroughs. New York: George D. Smith, 1905.

    Octavo, grey boards, paper labels, uncut; half-title,
    publisher's note and autograph signature portrait on Japan
    paper, title, contents, list of plates, note, half-title,
    facsimile of manuscript on Japan paper, note, Lafayette in
    Brooklyn, notes. No pagination. There is a portrait of Lafayette
    in the text. The issue was limited to 250 copies, 15 of which
    were on Imperial Japanese vellum, the balance on hand-made
    paper.




1905


The Book of Heavenly Death by Walt Whitman, compiled from Leaves of
Grass by Horace Traubel [device]. Portland, Maine: Thomas B. Mosher,
MDCCCCV.

    Duodecimo, light blue boards, paper label, uncut; note,
    facsimile, note, portrait (Lear) title, contents, preface, pp.
    103 including index.

    500 copies from type.

    Collated from late edition.




1906


Memories of President Lincoln and other Lyrics of the War. By Walt
Whitman [device]. Portland, Maine: Thomas B. Mosher, MDCCCCVI.

    16mo, grey boards, paper labels, uncut; half-title, title,
    contents, foreword, pp. (43).

    950 copies from type.




1906


Memories of President Lincoln, and other Lyrics of the War. By Walt
Whitman [device]. Portland, Maine: Thomas B. Mosher, MDCCCCVI.

    Duodecimo, boards, paper label, uncut; half-title, title,
    contents, foreword by Horace Traubel and T. B. M., note by John
    Burroughs, pp. 45.




1906


Walt Whitman. A Little Book of Nature Thoughts. Selected by Anne
Montgomerie Traubel [device]. Portland, Maine: Thomas B. Mosher,
MDCCCCVI.

    Narrow 16mo, blue wrappers, uncut; half-title, title, preface,
    pp. 82, index.




1907


The Wisdom of Walt Whitman. Selected and Edited, with Introduction by
Laurens Maynard. New York: Brentano's Fifth Avenue, MCMVII.

    24mo, limp morocco; half-title, title, contents, introduction,
    pp. 154; index, pp. 155-165.




1909


Leaves of Grass. By Walt Whitman. London, New York, Toronto and
Melbourne: Cassell and Company, Ltd. MCMIX.

    Duodecimo, cloth or leather, pp. 468.

    The Peoples Library.




1912


Memories of President Lincoln. When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd;
O Captain! My Captain; Hush'd be the Camps To-Day; This Dust was once
the Man [device]. Portland, Maine: Published by Thomas B. Mosher at XLV
Exchange Street, MDCCCCXII.

    Imperial octavo, grey boards, uncut; part of Lincoln, title,
    Lincoln's Gettysburg address, note by William Marion Reedy,
    contents, half-title, foreword by Horace Traubel and T. B. M.,
    half-title, pp. 13, printed on front of each page,
    bibliographical notes, (16) note.

    300 copies on hand made paper.

    50 copies of Japanese vellum.




1912


Leaves of Grass (1), and Democratic Vistas. By Walt Whitman. London:
Published by J. M. Dent & Sons, Ltd., and in New York by E. P. Dutton &
Co.

    Duodecimo, cloth and leather, pp. 359.

    Everyman's Library; introduction by Horace Traubel.




1912


The Rolling Earth. Outdoor Scenes and Thoughts from the writings of Walt
Whitman. Compiled by Waldo R. Browne, with an Introduction by John
Burroughs [quotation]. Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company.
The Riverside Press, Cambridge, 1912.

    16 mo, cloth; half-title, portrait, title, dedication, pp. (223).




1913


Poems from Leaves of Grass. By Walt Whitman. The colored illustrations
by Margaret C. Cook. London: J. M. Dent & Sons, Ltd. New York: E. P.
Dutton & Co., 1913.

    Octavo, cloth, gilt, uncut; half-title, title, contents, list of
    illustrations, pp. 260.

    Twenty-four colored plates mounted on oxford brown paper.

    From the text of the 1861 edition.




1913


Criticism, An Essay. By Walt Whitman For Members. Newark: Carteret Book
Club: 1913.

    Duodecimo, boards, uncut.

    Edition limited to one hundred copies.




1914


Leaves of Grass (Selected). By Walt Whitman [quotation from DuBury].
London: Charles H. Kelly.

    Duodecimo, crimson cloth; decorated title and frontispiece, pp.
    300.

    Edited by John Telford. "Special care has been taken in this
    edition to omit everything that would offend the reader's
    taste." From the editor's preface.




1915


Memories of President Lincoln. By Walt Whitman [device]. Little Leather
Library Corporation, 1915.

    Sexto-decimo, limp calf, pp. 127.




n. d.


Sea Drift. By Walt Whitman [device]. London: Jarrold & Sons.

    Sexto-decimo, polished levant, uncut. Printed on one side of the
    page, pp. 52 (104).



    +------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note: The advertisement pages at the   |
    | end of the book were not available for inclusion     |
    | in this e-book.                                      |
    +------------------------------------------------------+





End of Project Gutenberg's The Bibliography of Walt Whitman, by Frank Shay

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BIBLIOGRAPHY OF WALT WHITMAN ***

***** This file should be named 31781-8.txt or 31781-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/7/8/31781/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Tamise Totterdell and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
