The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Forfeiture, by Riviere Dufresny

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: The Forfeiture

Author: Riviere Dufresny

Translator: Frank J. Morlock

Posting Date: August 4, 2012 [EBook #4753]
Release Date: September, 2003
First Posted: March 12, 2002

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FORFEITURE ***




Produced by Dagny and Frank J. Morlock









This Etext is for private use only. No republication for profit in
print or other media may be made without the express consent of the
Copyright Holder. The Copyright Holder is especially concerned about
performance rights in any media on stage, cinema, or television, or
audio or any other media, including readings for which an entrance fee
or the like is charge. Permissions should be addressed to: Frank
Morlock, 6006 Greenbelt Rd, #312, Greenbelt, MD 20770, USA or
frankmorlock@msn.com. Other works by this author may be found at
http://www.cadytech.com/dumas/personnage.asp?key=130




                           THE FORFEITURE

                            by Dufresny

                     translated and adapted by

                          Frank J. Morlock



CHARACTERS:

GERONTE, father of Isabelle
ISABELLE, lover of Valere
BELISE, Valere's older aunt
ARAMINTE, her younger sister
VALERE, nephew of Belise and Araminte
FRONTIN, Valere's valet
A Lackey
4 men, 3 women



(Enter Isabelle and Valere from opposite directions without seeing
each other)

VALERE: What! Unable to reason with my two aunts!

ISABELLE: I can never return. What extravagants!

VALERE: Yes, the more I think of it the less I see of a way out.

ISABELLE: To have such revolting procedures for a nephew.

VALERE: We shall get nothing out of it.

ISABELLE: Oh Gods!

VALERE: Cruel Aunts. For more than ten years always new injustices.

ISABELLE: (seeing each other) What unpleasantness-- But--

VALERE: What cruelty! To be desolated side by side without finding any
way to placate these crazies.

ISABELLE: My father has spoken sharply to them and is going to
threaten them again, separately. For each stays in her own apartment.

VALERE: Yes, from the little I see the two avoid each other, speak
only a few words in passing and leave each other. As for me, when I am
speaking to them they turn their backs. Their hardness towards me
appears on every occasion.

ISABELLE: Their hardness towards you condemns them. Ah, Valere, they
push their ill natures too far. To not love you!

VALERE: I hoped that through you, my two aunts would do something for
us, and that having seen you, adorable Isabelle, they could be counted
on.

ISABELLE: Their barbarity is such that they speak of you with
aversion.

VALERE: What unpleasant spirits not to approve my tender passion.

ISABELLE: To be capable of hating Valere. Their evil hearts make me
tremble. I despair over it.

VALERE: Your father is still going to press them. Thus we may still
hope. He's going to meet us here.

ISABELLE: Yes, give us at least a moment of hope. But I am indignant
when I think of their latest remarks.

VALERE: You should count on them for they showed you a hundred signs
of friendship yesterday.

ISABELLE: It's from that that I see they have scorned me. For only in
embracing did they refuse me. The Prude scorned me with her haughty
airs, took a soft tone mixed with disdain, affected caresses and vapid
joking. You die in flattery.

"My tenderness for you," she told me very loudly, "makes me not want
you to marry so soon. That is to say to give to a nephew who presses
me some wealth to satisfy a mad passion; no I would become your
accomplice in authorizing it." And a hundred like remarks, in a
somewhat pleasant tone, made against marriage. "Be like us, a
forfeiture makes you wise. Imitate our strength of character. One
refusal will keep you at least from any forfeiture."

VALERE: What stupid remarks. Always the same rubric. But nothing comes
from their gothic spirit. Without worldliness, visiting no one except
her sister who is less hard than she is, but crazier from misfortune.

ISABELLE: I am a little less furious with Araminte. For a few moments
I thought I'd won her over. But her character is subject to change.
Agitating itself with several passions at the same time, in her
burning and turbulent vivacity. Here's what was told me by this aunt.
"I rave from time to time but I have some sentiments. I love love but
I hate lovers. Abhor them, too. I intend it, I order it. Without cease
I promise but I never give, I hate my nephew a lot but I love you a
great deal." From this balderdash I still conclude that she will do
more for you than her sister.-- My father's coming.

VALERE: I am going to learn my fate.

ISABELLE: I tremble. Oh, I see him overwhelmed with chagrin.

VALERE: His approach seizes me. My misfortune is certain.

(Enter Geronte)

GERONTE: You perceive by observing my sadness that I have received
only a refusal. My goodness, my fondness spoke loudly for you on this
occasion. Take your leave daughter.

ISABELLE: Must we part?

GERONTE: Yes, daughter.

VALERE: What can I think?

ISABELLE: Oh. What blow to Valere.

GERONTE: Your aunts have made this separation imperative.

VALERE: What, charming Isabelle, I mustn't see you any more? What,
sir, do you wish to put me in despair? You are going to tear me from
Isabelle!

GERONTE: Yes, Valere.

VALERE: Ah, at least beg your father to stay in Paris several more
days.

ISABELLE: No, Valere.

VALERE: Oh, sir.

GERONTE: Useless words.

VALERE: Oh, if it is your wish, adorable Isabelle.

GERONTE: I don't wish it, but through care of her. She wishes that
which it is her duty to wish. To return to the country immediately
without seeing you any further.

VALERE: And you consent to this?

ISABELLE: It's better so, Valere. I gave you my heart by order of my
father. I obeyed him. He now intends, wisely, that I separate from
you. It must be admitted frankly that I am not sure of a like
obedience. But I am going.

VALERE: What, sir, deny me all hope?

GERONTE: Better to give you no hope when I have none. You hoped to get
40,000 ecus restitution from your aunts. I tell you again, these two
extravagants intend to keep that forfeiture, saying you cannot get it
from us unless one of us marries. They're both over fifty. It's a joke
to believe that will happen. I need money. My wealth is perishing.
Expenses are ruining me. So, as a wise man, I ought to go back to the
country and contract a marriage that will get me out of this financial
trouble.

VALERE: True, but--

GERONTE: Let's break it off, then. It's with great shame, but tomorrow
we part, that's certain.

ISABELLE: Oh, Valere; if I'm under orders from my father, be sure that
in parting--

GERONTE: (taking Isabelle by the arm) Let's shorten the goodbyes. When
one must leave, the shortest is the best.

(Exit Isabelle and Geronte)

VALERE: I am in despair. This parting kills me.

(Enter Frontin dressed as a cavalier, passing before Valere who is in
despair)

FRONTIN: Sir.

VALERE: What is it then?

FRONTIN: It's Fortune greeting you.

VALERE: What do I see?

FRONTIN: You see Frontin who was wearing livery this morning.

VALERE: What are you talking about? Why are you dressed this way?

FRONTIN: You will never guess, I bet.

VALERE: Whose clothes are you wearing? It's one of mine, I believe.

FRONTIN: Could well be, cause it's none of mine.

VALERE: And my wig.

FRONTIN: Good. Have I bought it. I found this under my hand, quite
ready. And your most handsome lace, and largest jewel.

VALERE: I've seen you do crazy things before, but nothing touching
such insolence.

FRONTIN: It's come right on time, sir, this opulence.

VALERE: Scoundrel, you've picked a bad time to joke.

FRONTIN: I picked my time just right, I dare to boast. To know how to
manage times for a master.

VALERE: To dare appear like this!

FRONTIN: Sir, till now, I've been careful to conceal my scoundrel like
and insolent traits. That's why you hired me! Only working first on my
own affairs, I have taken care to hide my traits with all necessary
skill. You would have prevented me from acting as I have done. To
deceive cleverly is virtue in a valet. You will have it that it's a
vice in a master. I must tell you you are scrupulous to a fault. What
I have done for you was done unknown to you.

VALERE: What have you done for me?

FRONTIN: It's a mere nothing. I'm working on marrying you to Isabelle.

VALERE: Frontin, my dear Frontin. You are working for me. In what way?
How? Explain quickly!

FRONTIN: Let me explain first how I am to be rewarded. That's how I
get to be zealous. If I get your Isabelle for you--

VALERE: Well?

FRONTIN: Lace, clothes, diamond. I won't return them. If the outfit is
too short, too long, for better or for worse--I get it. As for the
diamond. It's made for me.

VALERE: I will give you all.

FRONTIN: Listen to my story. With a little money, this brilliant
outfit and finding a place at a card table and some winning cards, and
ogling some of the old girls playing, with one especially, I got in
deep. She has a sterile wit but babbles constantly. Always joking she
is more crazy than funny. Do you recognize her, sir? She's your aunt.

VALERE: It's herself. Well, you are telling me you won money from my
aunt at cards?

FRONTIN: A little. But I won more of her heart. She adores me.

VALERE: She loves you!

FRONTIN: Yes, sir. And better yet. She wants to marry me.

VALERE: Great.

FRONTIN: Your valet Frontin could become your uncle or uncle in law
tomorrow.

VALERE: What! Seriously?

FRONTIN: The lady is serious. I have the looks to make an old woman
amorous.

FRONTIN: Without doubt. But still, to marry you must know the man.

FRONTIN: She knows me extremely well. A month of card playing causes
you to know a chap extremely well. Saying I'm from a land between
Paris and Rome, I took a name; a name half-known there. As in taking
those that have never been.

VALERE: What name?

FRONTIN: The Chevalier de Cique. Noble name She believes I'm from an
ancient family.

VALERE: I cannot get over my astonishment.

FRONTIN: Good! But that's nothing yet; I have done even more.

VALERE: What?

FRONTIN: Seeing that fortune gave me one aunt, still there remained
another--

VALERE: Well?

FRONTIN: A difficult, astonishing, a hazardous plan. In the same house
I see them both. It's true, I know that since she became amorous,
Araminte is ashamed, fearful of her sister. For more security against
the other, I take a different name, character, arms, clothes. From a
grave Senechal, I adopt the character, a composed air, grave tone,
cold face, saying nothing like she does in a sententious tone, and
like her a fastidious censor of marriage. My name as Senechal is
Groux. I present myself. Similarity of character charms the prudish
aunt. And in a word, sir, I succeeded.

VALERE: What's this? My other aunt?

FRONTIN: She's going to marry me, also.

VALERE: Singular fact. But from their benevolence how do you propose
to extract--?

FRONTIN: From their extravagance I believe we will get some money for
a forfeiture. But tell me how was their double forfeiture written?

VALERE: Here's how. You know their cruel tricks. I have been unable to
get any restitution from them. The only thing they would agree to was
that if they should marry, in order that I would not lose my claim to
the inheritance, they would each give me 100,000 francs. However, they
have sworn never to marry and they've kept their oath constantly so
far. These forfeitures are under seal.

FRONTIN: Then that is how I'll get the money. But I intend-- Ah good,
it's a lackey of mine.

(Enter Lackey)

LACKEY: Time passes, sir. To the notary and explain. Disguise
yourself. All will be lost. (Frontin puts on a brown coat and a black
wig)

FRONTIN: It's necessary that I first be Senechal Groux. Wait for me
upstairs at Aunt Araminte's. She's getting ready to leave. There I can
go without fear and instruct you in everything.

VALERE: I am going there.

FRONTIN: I will rejoin you.

(Exit Valere)

FRONTIN: (to Lackey) I thought I'd have two days time at least. But
both of them taking the money to the notary are going to discover the
trick. We'll have to speed up the affair.

(Exit Lackey, enter Belise)

FRONTIN: Good. The prude is leaving. By having imitated trait for
trait her insipidity, her cold gravity, I pleased her. There's no
other way to please this foolish woman except by echoing her vapid
whims.------- Madame

BELISE: Ah, Senechal. What! You are here. I see you again.

FRONTIN: You see? As for me, I see you again, too.

BELISE: Once more I see the happiness of an unfeeling woman.

FRONTIN: I see again the happiness of a fire-proof man.

BELISE: Who looks with frigidity on the most charming of men.

FRONTIN: Who views with disdain the most loveable object.

BELISE: Preceded by terror, considering my love. I am astonished to
see this extreme change you've wrought in me in less than two weeks.

FRONTIN: I see with a kind of horror that you have effected a
metamorphosis in me.

BELISE: Both of us, at the same time, think the same thing?

FRONTIN: The same thing, and always sympathy between us.

BELISE: What a coincidence! Oh, heaven! To take you for a spouse. That
makes me tremble.

FRONTIN: I quiver, Madame, on account of the step I am going to take,
by taking you for my wife.

BELISE: I, who by my example have kept my sister in the vow she made
to guard her heart. She respected me as the most perfect. I must blush
before my little sister.

FRONTIN: I who to my elders reprimanded passions, forcing even my
sisters to celibacy, I who in history to distinguish my name would
have gloried in the title of extinguisher of my race--

BELISE: I who abhorred even the name of marriage and would have
become famous for it.

FRONTIN: I, Senechal Groux, caustic philosopher who jested at suitors,
insulted them, apostrophized them.

BELISE: I called marriage a myth, a stumbling block.

FRONTIN: The prison of desires, the coffin of the living.

BELISE: (tenderly) The abyss. Now see what an unfeeling fondness--

FRONTIN: Towards the abyss, a slope--

BELISE: Yes, sweet--

FRONTIN: Imperceptible--

BELISE: Leads me to the brink--

FRONTIN: The foot slips and here I am.

BELISE: Here I am. But at least the world agrees I have chosen you
from taste, from wisdom.

FRONTIN: Our marriage is the wisest type.

BELISE: But all my embarrassment is, that by marrying, I must--here's
the trouble--, I must pay this forfeiture. What to do? This forfeiture
note that I gave to Valere. That crazy sister of mine invented the
forfeiture. We made two promissory notes to this cursed nephew. All
falls on me, since I am marrying, so I will have to pay up all by
myself, and I'm going to have to put up with all kinds of jesting from
her. Blush to death.

FRONTIN: While our love remains secret, compose yourself and retrieve
your promissory notes from Valere.

BELISE: That's my intention. I am going to my notary to take some
money to my nephew. Without a doubt he will instantly return my
promissory note to me. But if my sister should learn of it, oh, my
heart palpitates. From reason and from shame, I avoid her carefully.
After seeing you, I dare not see her.

(Exit Belise)

FRONTIN: We shall get to tap that money she's going to receive.

(Enter Lackey)

LACKEY: Sir, change clothes or hide yourself quickly. Araminte has
returned.

FRONTIN: I ought to avoid her. But no. Let's pull it off! I am going
to wait for her here. Time presses. Wait, take this wig. By knotting
it this way, I will have the most comic look. Playful, negligent. It's
the Chevalier Cique. To charm a madwoman you have to rave.

(Exit Lackey, enter Araminte)

ARAMINTE (assuming all passions, one after another) I run in
thoughtless. They've just been plotting against me. I tremble; I still
have a hundred things to say to you. And jests. First, I am going to
make you laugh. But no. The serious is more pressing. My sister,
seeing me there, passed by proudly. I was trembling. It's of this we
will speak first. Let's begin by you admiring my conduct, the softness
and complacency with which I hide my shame. Now, in secret, I hoped,
but I fear. At the same time I sense an infinite joy. You are going to
deliver me from the tyranny of my sister. And the more I hate that
nephew, the more I going to settle everything for you on that score.
But tell me first: what part should I take? Speak slowly, for I love
to hear you. When you breathe I listen. Speak of your love and let me
reply. Speak.

FRONTIN: If I am silent it's because the crowd of my passions is
rolling in me, as in you, and are preventing me from speaking. For in
vivacity, I dare equal you. But my love has reduced me to silence. I
was unable to say a word, 'cause you were speaking.

ARAMINTE: You are all wit, although you are quiet. For you, your
manners, your looks, all speak loudly. All speak your heart, my dear
Chevalier de Cique!

FRONTIN: Everything in you is beautiful. All of me loves you.
Everything in me, everything in you, a charming agreement that demands
marriage.

ARAMINTE: It's true. But I fear this forfeiture which preoccupies me.
And I fear still more this severe sister who believes that, alas, it
is a crime to have a heart; she made me take a vow of indifference
when I would have broken it in my childhood. That is to say from the
age when my discernment had been able to distinguish you, to choose
you for my lover. Yes, my dear Chevalier, yes, I repeat it to you, I
love you, I love you too late. I regret without cease the years I have
spent without knowing you.

FRONTIN: I'm only twenty five but I would have come into the world
twenty years sooner to know you. Yes, time is dear to us, as it ought
to be. Let us see quickly. Let's decide. Have you resolved?

ARAMINTE: I've looked, looked again, decided, determined, concluded.
Ought I to be in fear of this savage sister who hates marriage for
herself and for me? You will be my husband from tomorrow, from this
evening.

FRONTIN: But to the essential. You must be able, before declaring our
business to your sister, to get rid of those promissory notes to
Valere. Reach an agreement with him. Is your money ready?

ARAMINTE: Yes, I've withdrawn everything. It is in my interest this
forfeiture be taken care of, alas, before my sister learns of my
marriage. I am prudent and wise.

FRONTIN: Haste! I am going to see my illustrious relatives to tell
them the role I am taking.

(Exit Frontin)

ARAMINTE: Let's quickly send a lackey to Valere. But what do I see! My
sister returning from the notary. She's going to be irritated about
the money I've taken out. He's just informed her.

(Enter Belise. They don't speak to each other at first.)

BELISE: Yes, my sister is going to see the Notary. She's going to
guess the mystery.

ARAMINTE: I see she's upset. Oh, I hear her rage. Where shall I tell
her I intend to place the money?

BELISE: Ah, I see that she knows it. What it will cost me to say that
this money is for my marriage?

ARAMINTE: Sooner or later my sister must confide in me.

BELISE: I tremble. Dare I make her my full confidante? Let's try.
Let's talk to her.

ARAMINTE: (aloud) Sister.

BELISE: (aloud) Sister, I think-- (aside) Oh, fear seizes me!

ARAMINTE: (aside) Shame smothers my voice.

BELISE:(aloud) To put money when the law--

ARAMINTE: When one disposes of joint funds by oneself--

BELISE: One ought to warn of taking it, but one dares not--

ARAMINTE: One ought to confide in her sister.

BELISE: Yes, of course--

ARAMINTE: One ought--

BELISE: One is afraid--

ARAMINTE: It's I.--

BELISE: I admit it--

ARAMINTE: I was wrong.

BELISE: One ought to ask pardon--

ARAMINTE: A fault so huge--

BELISE: Yes, when one is promised--

ARAMINTE: Sister, I ask your pardon--

BELISE: Pardon, sister--

ARAMINTE: Pardon.

BELISE: Pardon.

ARAMINTE: What? We are asking each other for pardon?

BELISE: But truly, you ask me. What is your offense then?

ARAMINTE: I believe it was you who asked first. What have you done to
me?

BELISE: But you, too, sister?

ARAMINTE: Tell me your secrets.

BELISE: Open your heart to me.

ARAMINTE: Oh, well. You will doubtless have learned from the notary
that I have taken this money.

BELISE: Your business. You are right to take your wealth. For each can
dispose of hers as she pleases.

ARAMINTE: To place it elsewhere, I thought I had the right to take it.

BELISE: You don't owe me any accounting. I have taken mine as well.

ARAMINTE: So much the better, sister, so much the better. On that
account I calm my curiosity.

BELISE: You have good sense. You are not being irritating.

ARAMINTE: One is liberal with you because you are charming.

BELISE: Alas, I never irritated you about anything. Except about
marriage and that was for your good. If boredom at being a maiden made
you do it, I would be compassionate, like a tender sister--for a
weakness.

ARAMINTE: You will never have such a weakness. If you come to that--
and the wisest have--far from condemning you I would be complaisant
about it.

BELISE: Ah, be sure of my condescension.

ARAMINTE: Sometimes, we must be humane to each other.

BELISE: Alas, I, in getting married would authorize you to do so,
without wishing you ill for it.

ARAMINTE: Yes, marry quickly, yes. I would be ravished, for then I
could--

BELISE: What? Why?

ARAMINTE: But, sister--

BELISE: Could you have been capable of letting your heart be
surprised?

ARAMINTE: And you?

BELISE: But you--

ARAMINTE: But you--

BELISE: Eh!

ARAMINTE: But yes.

BELISE: Me, too.

ARAMINTE: Embrace me, sis.

BELISE: Sis, how I love you. Yes, we are truly sisters today.

ARAMINTE: You know, good hearts are always made for love. You would
have stayed a maid. What folly!

BELISE: Like you, I wonder how we made that imprudent vow thirty years
ago.

ARAMINTE: The one you love, you have freely. Without doubt, dear
sister, wise as you are, you have meditated over the choice that
you've made.

BELISE: You whose taste is so fine, so exquisite, undoubtedly you made
your choice with discernment.

ARAMINTE: Lively, playful, humorous. He's an amiable young man.

BELISE: The one that I love is young and yet respectable; wise, grave,
self possessed.

ARAMINTE: Mine always has the air--

BELISE: A solidity--

ARAMINTE: Brilliant like a flash of lightning.

BELISE: Who rarely speaks but with weight and measure.

ARAMINTE: Mine talks ceaselessly and about everything. But always
well.

BELISE: Like you, I see you and I have chosen our spouses according to
our characters.

ARAMINTE: It's prudent.

BELISE: It's wisdom. Mine has wealth, birth, esteem. He's the Senechal
Groux.

ARAMINTE: That's a man who is known. Like you, I have found a noble
spouse. But of ancient nobility. A distinguished man. He's the
Chevalier Cique.

BELISE: They speak well of him. Your vote, sister, and the voice of
the people honor him.

ARAMINTE: The public ought to praise us for our choices, But, in other
respects, we've had strange obstacles. This forfeiture, for example--

BELISE: Yes, this forfeit, right.

ARAMINTE: Our promissory notes.

BELISE: Our promissory notes.

ARAMINTE: We've suffered a great wrong. To promise this nephew a
hundred thousand francs each.

BELISE: I have just refused this importunate demand and I believe he's
unaware of our plans. For a little money he will return our notes to
us.

ARAMINTE: But to discharge them, what trick can we employ?

(Enter Geronte, Valere, Isabelle)

VALERE: (to Geronte) Take advantage of the opportunity. Better not
wait. They are pushing their explanation a long way. (aloud) Isabelle
didn't leave my aunts happily. And I've learned some good news.

GERONTE: I come to rejoice for the sake of Isabelle's love.

ISABELLE: I come with all my heart to congratulate you and I saw
immediately it was in joking that you always declaimed against
marriage, for you yourselves--

ARAMINTE: We ourselves--

BELISE: Ah, sis, what language--

VALERE: You are both going to get married.

ARAMINTE: (low) So as not to pay out, sister, we must deny it.

BELISE: The rumor is false.

ARAMINTE: Very false.

VALERE: Aunties, I believe it's true.

BELISE: What? You takes us for some extravagants? Us, marry! Us!

ARAMINTE: We, no, no. It's no longer time.

BELISE: No, don't think it. I am past forty.

VALERE: You're not.

ARAMINTE: And I am more than fifty.

VALERE: No.

BELISE: We are--

ISABELLE: No.

ARAMINTE: The dispute is funny. I believe we know our age better than
you. He's joking. And, sister, the notes he has from us are worthless.
Worth nothing. It's a vain hope.

BELISE: They are worth nothing. But, sister, Isabelle and Valere have
a tender feeling for each other. Their legitimate flames make me pity
them. Can they, like we, hate marriage? No. We must do something to
their advantage. They move me.

ARAMINTE: Yes, we are moved.

VALERE: You will be moved. Your notes will be fine.

BELISE: Let's not joke further. We will give Valere 10,000 ecus in
all.

ARAMINTE: Yes. That's what we must do.

VALERE: No, no. We will wait for it all.

BELISE: Huh?

ISABELLE: Nothing presses us.

ARAMINTE: Take advantage of the opportunity.

VALERE: We will wait for you.

ARAMINTE: Because I am generous: Fifty thousand franks.

BELISE: That's too much. But I will equal it from generosity.

VALERE: Fifty thousand ecus. We shall wait.

BELISE: Oh, I won't keep more for you.

ARAMINTE: My nephew, my nephew,

ISABELLE: Manage them Valere, because fifty thousand francs is enough
for my father.

GERONTE: Yes, that's enough.

ARAMINTE: So as not to dispute further, give them.

BELISE: Come then, we will execute--

ARAMINTE: I have on me what I got from the notary.

BELISE: He has given me some to end this business.

VALERE: Let's see if by chance I don't have your promissory notes.
Yes, truly, I believe they are here.

GERONTE: The business seems to me easy to finish.

VALERE: Let's see.

BELISE: This is my note.

ARAMINTE: Here's my signature.

BELISE: Forty thousand francs on my banker and ten.

ARAMINTE: Thirty thousand in bills of exchange plus fourteen and six.

VALERE: What happiness.

ISABELLE: I breathe.

VALERE: With great pleasure I tear up your forfeitures.

(Enter Frontin with a cape, a short wig and a cap like Pasquin)

FRONTIN: Our lovers are satisfied. We must amuse them.

ARAMINTE: Oh, it's you Chevalier. Why are you dressed like that?

BELISE: Oh. It's the Senechal. What is this mystery? Why aren't you
wearing your usual clothes?

FRONTIN: Here I am only a servant-chevalier.

ARAMINTE: He's playful.

BELISE: But Senechal--

FRONTIN: Although Senechal, I often wear livery.

BELISE: Have you gone mad?

ARAMINTE: Drunk on pleasures, my sister sees in you her lover, the
Senechal, dear Chevalier.

BELISE: Sister we are misunderstanding each other. He's the Senechal
Groux.

ARAMINTE: But I think you are dreaming. He's my Chevalier Cique.

FRONTIN: Yes, from complacency to please the younger, I am playful,
lively and to please the elder, stern. But unable to be two except in
appearance I must admit that Frontin is neither Cique nor Groux.

BELISE: What?

ARAMINTE: How's that?

VALERE: It's Frontin himself.

BELISE: Where are we?

VALERE: A scoundrel of a valet to pretend to be such a person.

ARAMINTE: A valet?

BELISE: A valet.

GERONTE: The wisest thing would be to ask us about this matter in
private.

ISABELLE: Pardon the nephew for the valet's sake.

BELISE: Oh, sister.

ARAMINTE: Oh, sis, let's hide our shame from them.

(Exit Araminte and Belise)

VALERE: The fear they have of making the subject of a fine story
perhaps may make them less unjust to me.

FRONTIN: In comic moral, it is, I believe, permitted, for Frontin to
punish the aunts' avarice and to make fun of these broken down lovers.

CURTAIN









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Forfeiture, by Riviere Dufresny

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FORFEITURE ***

***** This file should be named 4753.txt or 4753.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/5/4753/

Produced by Dagny and Frank J. Morlock

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
