The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tartuffe, by Jean-Baptiste Poquelin Moliere

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Tartuffe

Author: Jean-Baptiste Poquelin Moliere

Posting Date: October 26, 2008 [EBook #2027]
Release Date: January, 2000

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TARTUFFE ***




Produced by Dagny and John Vickers.









TARTUFFE OR THE HYPOCRITE


by

JEAN BAPTISTE POQUELIN MOLIERE




Translated By

Curtis Hidden Page




INTRODUCTORY NOTE

Jean Baptiste Poquelin, better known by his stage name of Moliere,
stands without a rival at the head of French comedy. Born at Paris in
January, 1622, where his father held a position in the royal
household, he was educated at the Jesuit College de Clermont, and for
some time studied law, which he soon abandoned for the stage. His life
was spent in Paris and in the provinces, acting, directing
performances, managing theaters, and writing plays. He had his share
of applause from the king and from the public; but the satire in his
comedies made him many enemies, and he was the object of the most
venomous attacks and the most impossible slanders. Nor did he find
much solace at home; for he married unfortunately, and the unhappiness
that followed increased the bitterness that public hostility had
brought into his life. On February 17, 1673, while acting in "La
Malade Imaginaire," the last of his masterpieces, he was seized with
illness and died a few hours later.

The first of the greater works of Moliere was "Les Precieuses
Ridicules," produced in 1659. In this brilliant piece Moliere lifted
French comedy to a new level and gave it a new purpose--the satirizing
of contemporary manners and affectations by frank portrayal and
criticism. In the great plays that followed, "The School for Husbands"
and "The School for Wives," "The Misanthrope" and "The Hypocrite"
(Tartuffe), "The Miser" and "The Hypochondriac," "The Learned Ladies,"
"The Doctor in Spite of Himself," "The Citizen Turned Gentleman," and
many others, he exposed mercilessly one after another the vices and
foibles of the day.

His characteristic qualities are nowhere better exhibited than in
"Tartuffe." Compared with such characterization as Shakespeare's,
Moliere's method of portraying life may seem to be lacking in
complexity; but it is precisely the simplicity with which creations
like Tartuffe embody the weakness or vice they represent that has
given them their place as universally recognized types of human
nature.




  TARTUFFE

  A COMEDY



  CHARACTERS

  MADAME PERNELLE, mother of Orgon
  ORGON, husband of Elmire
  ELMIRE, wife of Orgon
  DAMIS, son of Orgon
  MARIANE, daughter of Orgon, in love with Valere
  CLEANTE, brother-in-law of Orgon
  TARTUFFE, a hypocrite
  DORINE, Mariane's maid
  M. LOYAL, a bailiff
  A Police Officer
  FLIPOTTE, Madame Pernelle's servant



  The Scene is at Paris




  ACT I



  SCENE I

  MADAME PERNELLE and FLIPOTTE, her servant; ELMIRE, MARIANE, CLEANTE,
  DAMIS, DORINE


  MADAME PERNELLE
  Come, come, Flipotte, and let me get away.

  ELMIRE
  You hurry so, I hardly can attend you.

  MADAME PERNELLE
  Then don't, my daughter-in law. Stay where you are.
  I can dispense with your polite attentions.

  ELMIRE
  We're only paying what is due you, mother.
  Why must you go away in such a hurry?

  MADAME PERNELLE
  Because I can't endure your carryings-on,
  And no one takes the slightest pains to please me.
  I leave your house, I tell you, quite disgusted;
  You do the opposite of my instructions;
  You've no respect for anything; each one
  Must have his say; it's perfect pandemonium.

  DORINE
  If ...

  MADAME PERNELLE
  You're a servant wench, my girl, and much
  Too full of gab, and too impertinent
  And free with your advice on all occasions.

  DAMIS
  But ...

  MADAME PERNELLE
  You're a fool, my boy--f, o, o, l
  Just spells your name. Let grandma tell you that
  I've said a hundred times to my poor son,
  Your father, that you'd never come to good
  Or give him anything but plague and torment.

  MARIANE
  I think ...

  MADAME PERNELLE
  O dearie me, his little sister!
  You're all demureness, butter wouldn't melt
  In your mouth, one would think to look at you.
  Still waters, though, they say ... you know the proverb;
  And I don't like your doings on the sly.

  ELMIRE
  But, mother ...

  MADAME PERNELLE
  Daughter, by your leave, your conduct
  In everything is altogether wrong;
  You ought to set a good example for 'em;
  Their dear departed mother did much better.
  You are extravagant; and it offends me,
  To see you always decked out like a princess.
  A woman who would please her husband's eyes
  Alone, wants no such wealth of fineries.

  CLEANTE
  But, madam, after all ...

  MADAME PERNELLE
  Sir, as for you,
  The lady's brother, I esteem you highly,
  Love and respect you. But, sir, all the same,
  If I were in my son's, her husband's, place,
  I'd urgently entreat you not to come
  Within our doors. You preach a way of living
  That decent people cannot tolerate.
  I'm rather frank with you; but that's my way--
  I don't mince matters, when I mean a thing.

  DAMIS
  Mr. Tartuffe, your friend, is mighty lucky ...

  MADAME PERNELLE
  He is a holy man, and must be heeded;
  I can't endure, with any show of patience,
  To hear a scatterbrains like you attack him.

  DAMIS
  What! Shall I let a bigot criticaster
  Come and usurp a tyrant's power here?
  And shall we never dare amuse ourselves
  Till this fine gentleman deigns to consent?

  DORINE
  If we must hark to him, and heed his maxims,
  There's not a thing we do but what's a crime;
  He censures everything, this zealous carper.

  MADAME PERNELLE
  And all he censures is well censured, too.
  He wants to guide you on the way to heaven;
  My son should train you all to love him well.

  DAMIS
  No, madam, look you, nothing--not my father
  Nor anything--can make me tolerate him.
  I should belie my feelings not to say so.
  His actions rouse my wrath at every turn;
  And I foresee that there must come of it
  An open rupture with this sneaking scoundrel.

  DORINE
  Besides, 'tis downright scandalous to see
  This unknown upstart master of the house--
  This vagabond, who hadn't, when he came,
  Shoes to his feet, or clothing worth six farthings,
  And who so far forgets his place, as now
  To censure everything, and rule the roost!

  MADAME PERNELLE
  Eh! Mercy sakes alive! Things would go better
  If all were governed by his pious orders.

  DORINE
  He passes for a saint in your opinion.
  In fact, he's nothing but a hypocrite.

  MADAME PERNELLE
  Just listen to her tongue!

  DORINE
  I wouldn't trust him,
  Nor yet his Lawrence, without bonds and surety.

  MADAME PERNELLE
  I don't know what the servant's character
  May be; but I can guarantee the master
  A holy man. You hate him and reject him
  Because he tells home truths to all of you.
  'Tis sin alone that moves his heart to anger,
  And heaven's interest is his only motive.

  DORINE
  Of course. But why, especially of late,
  Can he let nobody come near the house?
  Is heaven offended at a civil call
  That he should make so great a fuss about it?
  I'll tell you, if you like, just what I think;
  (Pointing to Elmire)
  Upon my word, he's jealous of our mistress.

  MADAME PERNELLE
  You hold your tongue, and think what you are saying.
  He's not alone in censuring these visits;
  The turmoil that attends your sort of people,
  Their carriages forever at the door,
  And all their noisy footmen, flocked together,
  Annoy the neighbourhood, and raise a scandal.
  I'd gladly think there's nothing really wrong;
  But it makes talk; and that's not as it should be.

  CLEANTE
  Eh! madam, can you hope to keep folk's tongues
  From wagging? It would be a grievous thing
  If, for the fear of idle talk about us,
  We had to sacrifice our friends. No, no;
  Even if we could bring ourselves to do it,
  Think you that everyone would then be silenced?
  Against backbiting there is no defence
  So let us try to live in innocence,
  To silly tattle pay no heed at all,
  And leave the gossips free to vent their gall.

  DORINE
  Our neighbour Daphne, and her little husband,
  Must be the ones who slander us, I'm thinking.
  Those whose own conduct's most ridiculous,
  Are always quickest to speak ill of others;
  They never fail to seize at once upon
  The slightest hint of any love affair,
  And spread the news of it with glee, and give it
  The character they'd have the world believe in.
  By others' actions, painted in their colours,
  They hope to justify their own; they think,
  In the false hope of some resemblance, either
  To make their own intrigues seem innocent,
  Or else to make their neighbours share the blame
  Which they are loaded with by everybody.

  MADAME PERNELLE
  These arguments are nothing to the purpose.
  Orante, we all know, lives a perfect life;
  Her thoughts are all of heaven; and I have heard
  That she condemns the company you keep.

  DORINE
  O admirable pattern! Virtuous dame!
  She lives the model of austerity;
  But age has brought this piety upon her,
  And she's a prude, now she can't help herself.
  As long as she could capture men's attentions
  She made the most of her advantages;
  But, now she sees her beauty vanishing,
  She wants to leave the world, that's leaving her,
  And in the specious veil of haughty virtue
  She'd hide the weakness of her worn-out charms.
  That is the way with all your old coquettes;
  They find it hard to see their lovers leave 'em;
  And thus abandoned, their forlorn estate
  Can find no occupation but a prude's.
  These pious dames, in their austerity,
  Must carp at everything, and pardon nothing.
  They loudly blame their neighbours' way of living,
  Not for religion's sake, but out of envy,
  Because they can't endure to see another
  Enjoy the pleasures age has weaned them from.

  MADAME PERNELLE (to Elmire)
  There! That's the kind of rigmarole to please you,
  Daughter-in-law. One never has a chance
  To get a word in edgewise, at your house,
  Because this lady holds the floor all day;
  But none the less, I mean to have my say, too.
  I tell you that my son did nothing wiser
  In all his life, than take this godly man
  Into his household; heaven sent him here,
  In your great need, to make you all repent;
  For your salvation, you must hearken to him;
  He censures nothing but deserves his censure.
  These visits, these assemblies, and these balls,
  Are all inventions of the evil spirit.
  You never hear a word of godliness
  At them--but idle cackle, nonsense, flimflam.
  Our neighbour often comes in for a share,
  The talk flies fast, and scandal fills the air;
  It makes a sober person's head go round,
  At these assemblies, just to hear the sound
  Of so much gab, with not a word to say;
  And as a learned man remarked one day
  Most aptly, 'tis the Tower of Babylon,
  Where all, beyond all limit, babble on.
  And just to tell you how this point came in ...

  (To Cleante)
  So! Now the gentlemen must snicker, must he?
  Go find fools like yourself to make you laugh
  And don't ...

  (To Elmire)
  Daughter, good-bye; not one word more.
  As for this house, I leave the half unsaid;
  But I shan't soon set foot in it again,

  (Cuffing Flipotte)
  Come, you! What makes you dream and stand agape,
  Hussy! I'll warm your ears in proper shape!
  March, trollop, march!



  SCENE II

  CLEANTE, DORINE


  CLEANTE
  I won't escort her down,
  For fear she might fall foul of me again;
  The good old lady ...

  DORINE
  Bless us! What a pity
  She shouldn't hear the way you speak of her!
  She'd surely tell you you're too "good" by half,
  And that she's not so "old" as all that, neither!

  CLEANTE
  How she got angry with us all for nothing!
  And how she seems possessed with her Tartuffe!

  DORINE
  Her case is nothing, though, beside her son's!
  To see him, you would say he's ten times worse!
  His conduct in our late unpleasantness [1]
  Had won him much esteem, and proved his courage
  In service of his king; but now he's like
  A man besotted, since he's been so taken
  With this Tartuffe. He calls him brother, loves him
  A hundred times as much as mother, son,
  Daughter, and wife. He tells him all his secrets
  And lets him guide his acts, and rule his conscience.
  He fondles and embraces him; a sweetheart
  Could not, I think, be loved more tenderly;
  At table he must have the seat of honour,
  While with delight our master sees him eat
  As much as six men could; we must give up
  The choicest tidbits to him; if he belches,
  ('tis a servant speaking) [2]
  Master exclaims: "God bless you!"--Oh, he dotes
  Upon him! he's his universe, his hero;
  He's lost in constant admiration, quotes him
  On all occasions, takes his trifling acts
  For wonders, and his words for oracles.
  The fellow knows his dupe, and makes the most on't,
  He fools him with a hundred masks of virtue,
  Gets money from him all the time by canting,
  And takes upon himself to carp at us.
  Even his silly coxcomb of a lackey
  Makes it his business to instruct us too;
  He comes with rolling eyes to preach at us,
  And throws away our ribbons, rouge, and patches.
  The wretch, the other day, tore up a kerchief
  That he had found, pressed in the _Golden Legend_,
  Calling it a horrid crime for us to mingle
  The devil's finery with holy things.

  [Footnote 1: Referring to the rebellion called La Fronde, during the
  minority of Louis XIV.]

  [Footnote 2: Moliere's note, inserted in the text of all the old
  editions. It is a curious illustration of the desire for uniformity
  and dignity of style in dramatic verse of the seventeenth century,
  that Moliere feels called on to apologize for a touch of realism like
  this. Indeed, these lines were even omitted when the play was given.]



  SCENE III

  ELMIRE, MARIANE, DAMIS, CLEANTE, DORINE


  ELMIRE (to Cleante)
  You're very lucky to have missed the speech
  She gave us at the door. I see my husband
  Is home again. He hasn't seen me yet,
  So I'll go up and wait till he comes in.

  CLEANTE
  And I, to save time, will await him here;
  I'll merely say good-morning, and be gone.



  SCENE IV

  CLEANTE, DAMIS, DORINE

  DAMIS
  I wish you'd say a word to him about
  My sister's marriage; I suspect Tartuffe
  Opposes it, and puts my father up
  To all these wretched shifts. You know, besides,
  How nearly I'm concerned in it myself;
  If love unites my sister and Valere,
  I love his sister too; and if this marriage
  Were to ...

  DORINE
  He's coming.



  SCENE V

  ORGON, CLEANTE, DORINE


  ORGON
  Ah! Good morning, brother.

  CLEANTE
  I was just going, but am glad to greet you.
  Things are not far advanced yet, in the country?

  ORGON
  Dorine ...

  (To Cleante)
  Just wait a bit, please, brother-in-law.
  Let me allay my first anxiety
  By asking news about the family.

  (To Dorine)
  Has everything gone well these last two days?
  What's happening? And how is everybody?

  DORINE
  Madam had fever, and a splitting headache
  Day before yesterday, all day and evening.

  ORGON
  And how about Tartuffe?

  DORINE
  Tartuffe? He's well;
  He's mighty well; stout, fat, fair, rosy-lipped.

  ORGON
  Poor man!

  DORINE
  At evening she had nausea
  And couldn't touch a single thing for supper,
  Her headache still was so severe.

  ORGON
  And how
  About Tartuffe?

  DORINE
  He supped alone, before her,
  And unctuously ate up two partridges,
  As well as half a leg o' mutton, deviled.

  ORGON
  Poor man!

  DORINE
  All night she couldn't get a wink
  Of sleep, the fever racked her so; and we
  Had to sit up with her till daylight.

  ORGON
  How
  About Tartuffe?

  DORINE
  Gently inclined to slumber,
  He left the table, went into his room,
  Got himself straight into a good warm bed,
  And slept quite undisturbed until next morning.

  ORGON
  Poor man!

  DORINE
  At last she let us all persuade her,
  And got up courage to be bled; and then
  She was relieved at once.

  ORGON
  And how about
  Tartuffe?

  DORINE
  He plucked up courage properly,
  Bravely entrenched his soul against all evils,
  And to replace the blood that she had lost,
  He drank at breakfast four huge draughts of wine.

  ORGON
  Poor man!

  DORINE
  So now they both are doing well;
  And I'll go straightway and inform my mistress
  How pleased you are at her recovery.



  SCENE VI

  ORGON, CLEANTE


  CLEANTE
  Brother, she ridicules you to your face;
  And I, though I don't want to make you angry,
  Must tell you candidly that she's quite right.
  Was such infatuation ever heard of?
  And can a man to-day have charms to make you
  Forget all else, relieve his poverty,
  Give him a home, and then ... ?

  ORGON
  Stop there, good brother,
  You do not know the man you're speaking of.

  CLEANTE
  Since you will have it so, I do not know him;
  But after all, to tell what sort of man
  He is ...

  ORGON
  Dear brother, you'd be charmed to know him;
  Your raptures over him would have no end.
  He is a man ... who ... ah! ... in fact ...a man
  Whoever does his will, knows perfect peace,
  And counts the whole world else, as so much dung.
  His converse has transformed me quite; he weans
  My heart from every friendship, teaches me
  To have no love for anything on earth;
  And I could see my brother, children, mother,
  And wife, all die, and never care--a snap.

  CLEANTE
  Your feelings are humane, I must say, brother!

  ORGON
  Ah! If you'd seen him, as I saw him first,
  You would have loved him just as much as I.
  He came to church each day, with contrite mien,
  Kneeled, on both knees, right opposite my place,
  And drew the eyes of all the congregation,
  To watch the fervour of his prayers to heaven;
  With deep-drawn sighs and great ejaculations,
  He humbly kissed the earth at every moment;
  And when I left the church, he ran before me
  To give me holy water at the door.
  I learned his poverty, and who he was,
  By questioning his servant, who is like him,
  And gave him gifts; but in his modesty
  He always wanted to return a part.
  "It is too much," he'd say, "too much by half;
  I am not worthy of your pity." Then,
  When I refused to take it back, he'd go,
  Before my eyes, and give it to the poor.
  At length heaven bade me take him to my home,
  And since that day, all seems to prosper here.
  He censures everything, and for my sake
  He even takes great interest in my wife;
  He lets me know who ogles her, and seems
  Six times as jealous as I am myself.
  You'd not believe how far his zeal can go:
  He calls himself a sinner just for trifles;
  The merest nothing is enough to shock him;
  So much so, that the other day I heard him
  Accuse himself for having, while at prayer,
  In too much anger caught and killed a flea.

  CLEANTE
  Zounds, brother, you are mad, I think! Or else
  You're making sport of me, with such a speech.
  What are you driving at with all this nonsense ... ?

  ORGON
  Brother, your language smacks of atheism;
  And I suspect your soul's a little tainted
  Therewith. I've preached to you a score of times
  That you'll draw down some judgment on your head.

  CLEANTE
  That is the usual strain of all your kind;
  They must have every one as blind as they.
  They call you atheist if you have good eyes;
  And if you don't adore their vain grimaces,
  You've neither faith nor care for sacred things.
  No, no; such talk can't frighten me; I know
  What I am saying; heaven sees my heart.
  We're not the dupes of all your canting mummers;
  There are false heroes--and false devotees;
  And as true heroes never are the ones
  Who make much noise about their deeds of honour,
  Just so true devotees, whom we should follow,
  Are not the ones who make so much vain show.
  What! Will you find no difference between
  Hypocrisy and genuine devoutness?
  And will you treat them both alike, and pay
  The self-same honour both to masks and faces
  Set artifice beside sincerity,
  Confuse the semblance with reality,
  Esteem a phantom like a living person,
  And counterfeit as good as honest coin?
  Men, for the most part, are strange creatures, truly!
  You never find them keep the golden mean;
  The limits of good sense, too narrow for them,
  Must always be passed by, in each direction;
  They often spoil the noblest things, because
  They go too far, and push them to extremes.
  I merely say this by the way, good brother.

  ORGON
  You are the sole expounder of the doctrine;
  Wisdom shall die with you, no doubt, good brother,
  You are the only wise, the sole enlightened,
  The oracle, the Cato, of our age.
  All men, compared to you, are downright fools.

  CLEANTE
  I'm not the sole expounder of the doctrine,
  And wisdom shall not die with me, good brother.
  But this I know, though it be all my knowledge,
  That there's a difference 'twixt false and true.
  And as I find no kind of hero more
  To be admired than men of true religion,
  Nothing more noble or more beautiful
  Than is the holy zeal of true devoutness;
  Just so I think there's naught more odious
  Than whited sepulchres of outward unction,
  Those barefaced charlatans, those hireling zealots,
  Whose sacrilegious, treacherous pretence
  Deceives at will, and with impunity
  Makes mockery of all that men hold sacred;
  Men who, enslaved to selfish interests,
  Make trade and merchandise of godliness,
  And try to purchase influence and office
  With false eye-rollings and affected raptures;
  Those men, I say, who with uncommon zeal
  Seek their own fortunes on the road to heaven;
  Who, skilled in prayer, have always much to ask,
  And live at court to preach retirement;
  Who reconcile religion with their vices,
  Are quick to anger, vengeful, faithless, tricky,
  And, to destroy a man, will have the boldness
  To call their private grudge the cause of heaven;
  All the more dangerous, since in their anger
  They use against us weapons men revere,
  And since they make the world applaud their passion,
  And seek to stab us with a sacred sword.
  There are too many of this canting kind.
  Still, the sincere are easy to distinguish;
  And many splendid patterns may be found,
  In our own time, before our very eyes
  Look at Ariston, Periandre, Oronte,
  Alcidamas, Clitandre, and Polydore;
  No one denies their claim to true religion;
  Yet they're no braggadocios of virtue,
  They do not make insufferable display,
  And their religion's human, tractable;
  They are not always judging all our actions,
  They'd think such judgment savoured of presumption;
  And, leaving pride of words to other men,
  'Tis by their deeds alone they censure ours.
  Evil appearances find little credit
  With them; they even incline to think the best
  Of others. No caballers, no intriguers,
  They mind the business of their own right living.
  They don't attack a sinner tooth and nail,
  For sin's the only object of their hatred;
  Nor are they over-zealous to attempt
  Far more in heaven's behalf than heaven would have 'em.
  That is my kind of man, that is true living,
  That is the pattern we should set ourselves.
  Your fellow was not fashioned on this model;
  You're quite sincere in boasting of his zeal;
  But you're deceived, I think, by false pretences.

  ORGON
  My dear good brother-in-law, have you quite done?

  CLEANTE
  Yes.

  ORGON
  I'm your humble servant.

  (Starts to go.)

  CLEANTE
  Just a word.
  We'll drop that other subject. But you know
  Valere has had the promise of your daughter.

  ORGON
  Yes.

  CLEANTE
  You had named the happy day.

  ORGON
  'Tis true.

  CLEANTE
  Then why put off the celebration of it?

  ORGON
  I can't say.

  CLEANTE
  Can you have some other plan
  In mind?

  ORGON
  Perhaps.

  CLEANTE
  You mean to break your word?

  ORGON
  I don't say that.

  CLEANTE
  I hope no obstacle
  Can keep you from performing what you've promised.

  ORGON
  Well, that depends.

  CLEANTE
  Why must you beat about?
  Valere has sent me here to settle matters.

  ORGON
  Heaven be praised!

  CLEANTE
  What answer shall I take him?

  ORGON
  Why, anything you please.

  CLEANTE
  But we must know
  Your plans. What are they?

  ORGON
  I shall do the will
  Of Heaven.

  CLEANTE
  Come, be serious. You've given
  Your promise to Valere. Now will you keep it?

  ORGON
  Good-bye.

  CLEANTE (alone)
  His love, methinks, has much to fear;
  I must go let him know what's happening here.




  ACT II



  SCENE I

  ORGON, MARIANE


  ORGON
  Now, Mariane.

  MARIANE
  Yes, father?

  ORGON
  Come; I'll tell you
  A secret.

  MARIANE
  Yes ... What are you looking for?

  ORGON (looking into a small closet-room)
  To see there's no one there to spy upon us;
  That little closet's mighty fit to hide in.
  There! We're all right now. Mariane, in you
  I've always found a daughter dutiful
  And gentle. So I've always love you dearly.

  MARIANE
  I'm grateful for your fatherly affection.

  ORGON
  Well spoken, daughter. Now, prove you deserve it
  By doing as I wish in all respects.

  MARIANE
  To do so is the height of my ambition.

  ORGON
  Excellent well. What say you of--Tartuffe?

  MARIANE
  Who? I?

  ORGON
  Yes, you. Look to it how you answer.

  MARIANE
  Why! I'll say of him--anything you please.



  SCENE II

  ORGON, MARIANE, DORINE (coming in quietly and standing behind
  Orgon, so that he does not see her)


  ORGON
  Well spoken. A good girl. Say then, my daughter,
  That all his person shines with noble merit,
  That he has won your heart, and you would like
  To have him, by my choice, become your husband.
  Eh?

  MARIANE
  Eh?

  ORGON
  What say you?

  MARIANE
  Please, what did you say?

  ORGON
  What?

  MARIANE
  Surely I mistook you, sir?

  ORGON
  How now?

  MARIANE
  Who is it, father, you would have me say
  Has won my heart, and I would like to have
  Become my husband, by your choice?

  ORGON
  Tartuffe.

  MARIANE
  But, father, I protest it isn't true!
  Why should you make me tell this dreadful lie?

  ORGON
  Because I mean to have it be the truth.
  Let this suffice for you: I've settled it.

  MARIANE
  What, father, you would ... ?

  ORGON
  Yes, child, I'm resolved
  To graft Tartuffe into my family.
  So he must be your husband. That I've settled.
  And since your duty ..

  (Seeing Dorine)
  What are you doing there?
  Your curiosity is keen, my girl,
  To make you come eavesdropping on us so.

  DORINE
  Upon my word, I don't know how the rumour
  Got started--if 'twas guess-work or mere chance
  But I had heard already of this match,
  And treated it as utter stuff and nonsense.

  ORGON
  What! Is the thing incredible?

  DORINE
  So much so
  I don't believe it even from yourself, sir.

  ORGON
  I know a way to make you credit it.

  DORINE
  No, no, you're telling us a fairly tale!

  ORGON
  I'm telling you just what will happen shortly.

  DORINE
  Stuff!

  ORGON
  Daughter, what I say is in good earnest.

  DORINE
  There, there, don't take your father seriously;
  He's fooling.

  ORGON
  But I tell you ...

  DORINE
  No. No use.
  They won't believe you.

  ORGON
  If I let my anger ...

  DORINE
  Well, then, we do believe you; and the worse
  For you it is. What! Can a grown-up man
  With that expanse of beard across his face
  Be mad enough to want ...?

  ORGON
  You hark me:
  You've taken on yourself here in this house
  A sort of free familiarity
  That I don't like, I tell you frankly, girl.

  DORINE
  There, there, let's not get angry, sir, I beg you.
  But are you making game of everybody?
  Your daughter's not cut out for bigot's meat;
  And he has more important things to think of.
  Besides, what can you gain by such a match?
  How can a man of wealth, like you, go choose
  A wretched vagabond for son-in-law?

  ORGON
  You hold your tongue. And know, the less he has,
  The better cause have we to honour him.
  His poverty is honest poverty;
  It should exalt him more than worldly grandeur,
  For he has let himself be robbed of all,
  Through careless disregard of temporal things
  And fixed attachment to the things eternal.
  My help may set him on his feet again,
  Win back his property--a fair estate
  He has at home, so I'm informed--and prove him
  For what he is, a true-born gentleman.

  DORINE
  Yes, so he says himself. Such vanity
  But ill accords with pious living, sir.
  The man who cares for holiness alone
  Should not so loudly boast his name and birth;
  The humble ways of genuine devoutness
  Brook not so much display of earthly pride.
  Why should he be so vain? ... But I offend you:
  Let's leave his rank, then,--take the man himself:
  Can you without compunction give a man
  Like him possession of a girl like her?
  Think what a scandal's sure to come of it!
  Virtue is at the mercy of the fates,
  When a girl's married to a man she hates;
  The best intent to live an honest woman
  Depends upon the husband's being human,
  And men whose brows are pointed at afar
  May thank themselves their wives are what they are.
  For to be true is more than woman can,
  With husbands built upon a certain plan;
  And he who weds his child against her will
  Owes heaven account for it, if she do ill.
  Think then what perils wait on your design.

  ORGON (to Mariane)
  So! I must learn what's what from her, you see!

  DORINE
  You might do worse than follow my advice.

  ORGON
  Daughter, we can't waste time upon this nonsense;
  I know what's good for you, and I'm your father.
  True, I had promised you to young Valere;
  But, first, they tell me he's inclined to gamble,
  And then, I fear his faith is not quite sound.
  I haven't noticed that he's regular
  At church.

  DORINE
  You'd have him run there just when you do.
  Like those who go on purpose to be seen?

  ORGON
  I don't ask your opinion on the matter.
  In short, the other is in Heaven's best graces,
  And that is riches quite beyond compare.
  This match will bring you every joy you long for;
  'Twill be all steeped in sweetness and delight.
  You'll live together, in your faithful loves,
  Like two sweet children, like two turtle-doves;
  You'll never fail to quarrel, scold, or tease,
  And you may do with him whate'er you please.

  DORINE
  With him? Do naught but give him horns, I'll warrant.

  ORGON
  Out on thee, wench!

  DORINE
  I tell you he's cut out for't;
  However great your daughter's virtue, sir,
  His destiny is sure to prove the stronger.

  ORGON
  Have done with interrupting. Hold your tongue.
  Don't poke your nose in other people's business.

  DORINE (She keeps interrupting him, just as he turns and starts
  to speak to his daughter).
  If I make bold, sir, 'tis for your own good.

  ORGON
  You're too officious; pray you, hold your tongue.

  DORINE
  'Tis love of you ...

  ORGON
  I want none of your love.

  DORINE
  Then I will love you in your own despite.

  ORGON
  You will, eh?

  DORINE
  Yes, your honour's dear to me;
  I can't endure to see you made the butt
  Of all men's ridicule.

  ORGON
  Won't you be still?

  DORINE
  'Twould be a sin to let you make this match.

  ORGON
  Won't you be still, I say, you impudent viper!

  DORINE
  What! you are pious, and you lose your temper?

  ORGON
  I'm all wrought up, with your confounded nonsense;
  Now, once for all, I tell you hold your tongue.

  DORINE
  Then mum's the word; I'll take it out in thinking.

  ORGON
  Think all you please; but not a syllable
  To me about it, or ... you understand!

  (Turning to his daughter.)
  As a wise father, I've considered all
  With due deliberation.

  DORINE
  I'll go mad
  If I can't speak.
  (She stops the instant he turns his head.)

  ORGON
  Though he's no lady's man,
  Tartuffe is well enough ...

  DORINE
  A pretty phiz!

  ORGON
  So that, although you may not care at all
  For his best qualities ...

  DORINE
  A handsome dowry!

  (Orgon turns and stands in front of her, with arms folded, eyeing
  her.)
  Were I in her place, any man should rue it
  Who married me by force, that's mighty certain;
  I'd let him know, and that within a week,
  A woman's vengeance isn't far to seek.

  ORGON (to Dorine)
  So--nothing that I say has any weight?

  DORINE
  Eh? What's wrong now? I didn't speak to you.

  ORGON
  What were you doing?

  DORINE
  Talking to myself.

  ORGON
  Oh! Very well. (Aside.) Her monstrous impudence
  Must be chastised with one good slap in the face.

  (He stands ready to strike her, and, each time he speaks to his
  daughter, he glances toward her; but she stands still and says not a
  word.) [3]

  [Footnote 3: As given at the Comedie francaise, the action is as
  follows: While Orgon says, "You must approve of my design," Dorine is
  making signs to Mariane to resist his orders; Orgon turns around
  suddenly; but Dorine quickly changes her gesture and with the hand
  which she had lifted calmly arranges her hair and her cap. Orgon goes
  on, "Think of the husband ..." and stops before the middle of his
  sentence to turn and catch the beginning of Dorine's gesture; but he
  is too quick this time, and Dorine stands looking at his furious
  countenance with a sweet and gentle expression. He turns and goes on,
  and the obstinate Dorine again lifts her hand behind his shoulder to
  urge Mariane to resistance: this time he catches her; but just as he
  swings his shoulder to give her the promised blow, she stops him by
  changing the intent of her gesture, and carefully picking from the top
  of his sleeve a bit of fluff which she holds carefully between her
  fingers, then blows into the air, and watches intently as it floats
  away. Orgon is paralysed by her innocence of expression, and compelled
  to hide his rage.--Regnier, _Le Tartuffe des Comediens_.]

  ORGON
  Daughter, you must approve of my design....
  Think of this husband ... I have chosen for you...

  (To Dorine)
  Why don't you talk to yourself?

  DORINE
  Nothing to say.

  ORGON
  One little word more.

  DORINE
  Oh, no, thanks. Not now.

  ORGON
  Sure, I'd have caught you.

  DORINE
  Faith, I'm no such fool.

  ORGON
  So, daughter, now obedience is the word;
  You must accept my choice with reverence.

  DORINE (running away)
  You'd never catch me marrying such a creature.

  ORGON (swinging his hand at her and missing her)
  Daughter, you've such a pestilent hussy there
  I can't live with her longer, without sin.
  I can't discuss things in the state I'm in.
  My mind's so flustered by her insolent talk,
  To calm myself, I must go take a walk.



  SCENE III

  MARIANE, DORINE


  DORINE
  Say, have you lost the tongue from out your head?
  And must I speak your role from A to Zed?
  You let them broach a project that's absurd,
  And don't oppose it with a single word!

  MARIANE
  What can I do? My father is the master.

  DORINE
  Do? Everything, to ward off such disaster.

  MARIANE
  But what?

  DORINE
  Tell him one doesn't love by proxy;
  Tell him you'll marry for yourself, not him;
  Since you're the one for whom the thing is done,
  You are the one, not he, the man must please;
  If his Tartuffe has charmed him so, why let him
  Just marry him himself--no one will hinder.

  MARIANE
  A father's rights are such, it seems to me,
  That I could never dare to say a word.

  DORINE
  Came, talk it out. Valere has asked your hand:
  Now do you love him, pray, or do you not?

  MARIANE
  Dorine! How can you wrong my love so much,
  And ask me such a question? Have I not
  A hundred times laid bare my heart to you?
  Do you know how ardently I love him?

  DORINE
  How do I know if heart and words agree,
  And if in honest truth you really love him?

  MARIANE
  Dorine, you wrong me greatly if you doubt it;
  I've shown my inmost feelings, all too plainly.

  DORINE
  So then, you love him?

  MARIANE
  Yes, devotedly.

  DORINE
  And he returns your love, apparently?

  MARIANE
  I think so.

  DORINE
  And you both alike are eager
  To be well married to each other?

  MARIANE
  Surely.

  DORINE
  Then what's your plan about this other match?

  MARIANE
  To kill myself, if it is forced upon me.

  DORINE
  Good! That's a remedy I hadn't thought of.
  Just die, and everything will be all right.
  This medicine is marvellous, indeed!
  It drives me mad to hear folk talk such nonsense.

  MARIANE
  Oh dear, Dorine you get in such a temper!
  You have no sympathy for people's troubles.

  DORINE
  I have no sympathy when folk talk nonsense,
  And flatten out as you do, at a pinch.

  MARIANE
  But what can you expect?--if one is timid?--

  DORINE
  But what is love worth, if it has no courage?

  MARIANE
  Am I not constant in my love for him?
  Is't not his place to win me from my father?

  DORINE
  But if your father is a crazy fool,
  And quite bewitched with his Tartuffe? And breaks
  His bounden word? Is that your lover's fault?

  MARIANE
  But shall I publicly refuse and scorn
  This match, and make it plain that I'm in love?
  Shall I cast off for him, whate'er he be,
  Womanly modesty and filial duty?
  You ask me to display my love in public ... ?

  DORINE
  No, no, I ask you nothing. You shall be
  Mister Tartuffe's; why, now I think of it,
  I should be wrong to turn you from this marriage.
  What cause can I have to oppose your wishes?
  So fine a match! An excellent good match!
  Mister Tartuffe! Oh ho! No mean proposal!
  Mister Tartuffe, sure, take it all in all,
  Is not a man to sneeze at--oh, by no means!
  'Tis no small luck to be his happy spouse.
  The whole world joins to sing his praise already;
  He's noble--in his parish; handsome too;
  Red ears and high complexion--oh, my lud!
  You'll be too happy, sure, with him for husband.

  MARIANE
  Oh dear! ...

  DORINE
  What joy and pride will fill your heart
  To be the bride of such a handsome fellow!

  MARIANE
  Oh, stop, I beg you; try to find some way
  To help break off the match. I quite give in,
  I'm ready to do anything you say.

  DORINE
  No, no, a daughter must obey her father,
  Though he should want to make her wed a monkey.
  Besides, your fate is fine. What could be better!
  You'll take the stage-coach to his little village,
  And find it full of uncles and of cousins,
  Whose conversation will delight you. Then
  You'll be presented in their best society.
  You'll even go to call, by way of welcome,
  On Mrs. Bailiff, Mrs. Tax-Collector,
  Who'll patronise you with a folding-stool.
  There, once a year, at carnival, you'll have
  Perhaps--a ball; with orchestra--two bag-pipes;
  And sometimes a trained ape, and Punch and Judy;
  Though if your husband ...

  MARIANE
  Oh, you'll kill me. Please
  Contrive to help me out with your advice.

  DORINE
  I thank you kindly.

  MARIANE
  Oh! Dorine, I beg you ...

  DORINE
  To serve you right, this marriage must go through.

  MARIANE
  Dear girl!

  DORINE
  No.

  MARIANE
  If I say I love Valere ...

  DORINE
  No, no. Tartuffe's your man, and you shall taste him.

  MARIANE
  You know I've always trusted you; now help me ...

  DORINE
  No, you shall be, my faith! Tartuffified.

  MARIANE
  Well, then, since you've no pity for my fate
  Let me take counsel only of despair;
  It will advise and help and give me courage;
  There's one sure cure, I know, for all my troubles.

  (She starts to go.)

  DORINE
  There, there! Come back. I can't be angry long.
  I must take pity on you, after all.

  MARIANE
  Oh, don't you see, Dorine, if I must bear
  This martyrdom, I certainly shall die.

  DORINE
  Now don't you fret. We'll surely find some way.
  To hinder this ... But here's Valere, your lover.



  SCENE IV

  VALERE, MARIANE, DORINE


  VALERE
  Madam, a piece of news--quite new to me--
  Has just come out, and very fine it is.

  MARIANE
  What piece of news?

  VALERE
  Your marriage with Tartuffe.

  MARIANE
  'Tis true my father has this plan in mind.

  VALERE
  Your father, madam ...

  MARIANE
  Yes, he's changed his plans,
  And did but now propose it to me.

  VALERE
  What!
  Seriously?

  MARIANE
  Yes, he was serious,
  And openly insisted on the match.

  VALERE
  And what's your resolution in the matter,
  Madam?

  MARIANE
  I don't know.

  VALERE
  That's a pretty answer.
  You don't know?

  MARIANE
  No.

  VALERE
  No?

  MARIANE
  What do you advise?

  VALERE
  I? My advice is, marry him, by all means.

  MARIANE
  That's your advice?

  VALERE
  Yes.

  MARIANE
  Do you mean it?

  VALERE
  Surely.
  A splendid choice, and worthy of your acceptance.

  MARIANE
  Oh, very well, sir! I shall take your counsel.

  VALERE
  You'll find no trouble taking it, I warrant.

  MARIANE
  No more than you did giving it, be sure.

  VALERE
  I gave it, truly, to oblige you, madam.

  MARIANE
  And I shall take it to oblige you, sir.

  Dorine (withdrawing to the back of the stage)
  Let's see what this affair will come to.

  VALERE
  So,
  That is your love? And it was all deceit
  When you ...

  MARIANE
  I beg you, say no more of that.
  You told me, squarely, sir, I should accept
  The husband that is offered me; and I
  Will tell you squarely that I mean to do so,
  Since you have given me this good advice.

  VALERE
  Don't shield yourself with talk of my advice.
  You had your mind made up, that's evident;
  And now you're snatching at a trifling pretext
  To justify the breaking of your word.

  MARIANE
  Exactly so.

  VALERE
  Of course it is; your heart
  Has never known true love for me.

  MARIANE
  Alas!
  You're free to think so, if you please.

  VALERE
  Yes, yes,
  I'm free to think so; and my outraged love
  May yet forestall you in your perfidy,
  And offer elsewhere both my heart and hand.

  MARIANE
  No doubt of it; the love your high deserts
  May win ...

  VALERE
  Good Lord, have done with my deserts!
  I know I have but few, and you have proved it.
  But I may find more kindness in another;
  I know of someone, who'll not be ashamed
  To take your leavings, and make up my loss.

  MARIANE
  The loss is not so great; you'll easily
  Console yourself completely for this change.

  VALERE
  I'll try my best, that you may well believe.
  When we're forgotten by a woman's heart,
  Our pride is challenged; we, too, must forget;
  Or if we cannot, must at least pretend to.
  No other way can man such baseness prove,
  As be a lover scorned, and still in love.

  MARIANE
  In faith, a high and noble sentiment.

  VALERE
  Yes; and it's one that all men must approve.
  What! Would you have me keep my love alive,
  And see you fly into another's arms
  Before my very eyes; and never offer
  To someone else the heart that you had scorned?

  MARIANE
  Oh, no, indeed! For my part, I could wish
  That it were done already.

  VALERE
  What! You wish it?

  MARIANE
  Yes.

  VALERE
  This is insult heaped on injury;
  I'll go at once and do as you desire.

  (He takes a step or two as if to go away.)

  MARIANE
  Oh, very well then.

  VALERE (turning back)
  But remember this.
  'Twas you that drove me to this desperate pass.

  MARIANE
  Of course.

  VALERE (turning back again)
  And in the plan that I have formed
  I only follow your example.

  MARIANE
  Yes.

  VALERE (at the door)
  Enough; you shall be punctually obeyed.

  MARIANE
  So much the better.

  VALERE (coming back again)
  This is once for all.

  MARIANE
  So be it, then.

  VALERE (He goes toward the door, but just as he reaches it, turns
  around)
  Eh?

  MARIANE
  What?

  VALERE
  You didn't call me?

  MARIANE
  I? You are dreaming.

  VALERE
  Very well, I'm gone. Madam, farewell.

  (He walks slowly away.)

  MARIANE
  Farewell, sir.

  DORINE
  I must say
  You've lost your senses and both gone clean daft!
  I've let you fight it out to the end o' the chapter
  To see how far the thing could go. Oho, there,
  Mister Valere!

  (She goes and seizes him by the arm, to stop him. He makes a great
  show of resistance.)

  VALERE
  What do you want, Dorine?

  DORINE
  Come here.

  VALERE
  No, no, I'm quite beside myself.
  Don't hinder me from doing as she wishes.

  DORINE
  Stop!

  VALERE
  No. You see, I'm fixed, resolved, determined.

  DORINE
  So!

  MARIANE (aside)
  Since my presence pains him, makes him go,
  I'd better go myself, and leave him free.

  DORINE (leaving Valere, and running after Mariane)
  Now t'other! Where are you going?

  MARIANE
  Let me be.

  DORINE.
  Come back.

  MARIANE
  No, no, it isn't any use.

  VALERE (aside)
  'Tis clear the sight of me is torture to her;
  No doubt, t'were better I should free her from it.

  DORINE (leaving Mariane and running after Valere)
  Same thing again! Deuce take you both, I say.
  Now stop your fooling; come here, you; and you.

  (She pulls first one, then the other, toward the middle of the stage.)

  VALERE (to Dorine)
  What's your idea?

  MARIANE (to Dorine)
  What can you mean to do?

  DORINE
  Set you to rights, and pull you out o' the scrape.

  (To Valere)
  Are you quite mad, to quarrel with her now?

  VALERE
  Didn't you hear the things she said to me?

  DORINE (to Mariane)
  Are you quite mad, to get in such a passion?

  MARIANE
  Didn't you see the way he treated me?

  DORINE
  Fools, both of you.

  (To Valere)
  She thinks of nothing else
  But to keep faith with you, I vouch for it.

  (To Mariane)
  And he loves none but you, and longs for nothing
  But just to marry you, I stake my life on't.

  MARIANE (to Valere)
  Why did you give me such advice then, pray?

  VALERE (to Mariane)
  Why ask for my advice on such a matter?

  DORINE
  You both are daft, I tell you. Here, your hands.

  (To Valere)
  Come, yours.

  VALERE (giving Dorine his hand)
  What for?

  DORINE (to Mariane)
  Now, yours.

  MARIANE (giving Dorine her hand)
  But what's the use?

  DORINE
  Oh, quick now, come along. There, both of you--
  You love each other better than you think.

  (Valere and Mariane hold each other's hands some time without looking
  at each other.)

  VALERE (at last turning toward Mariane)
  Come, don't be so ungracious now about it;
  Look at a man as if you didn't hate him.

  (Mariane looks sideways toward Valere, with just a bit of a smile.)

  DORINE
  My faith and troth, what fools these lovers be!

  VALERE (to Mariane)
  But come now, have I not a just complaint?
  And truly, are you not a wicked creature
  To take delight in saying what would pain me?

  MARIANE
  And are you not yourself the most ungrateful ... ?

  DORINE
  Leave this discussion till another time;
  Now, think how you'll stave off this plaguy marriage.

  MARIANE
  Then tell us how to go about it.

  DORINE
  Well,
  We'll try all sorts of ways.

  (To Mariane)
  Your father's daft;

  (To Valere)
  This plan is nonsense.

  (To Mariane)
  You had better humour
  His notions by a semblance of consent,
  So that in case of danger, you can still
  Find means to block the marriage by delay.
  If you gain time, the rest is easy, trust me.
  One day you'll fool them with a sudden illness,
  Causing delay; another day, ill omens:
  You've met a funeral, or broke a mirror,
  Or dreamed of muddy water. Best of all,
  They cannot marry you to anyone
  Without your saying yes. But now, methinks,
  They mustn't find you chattering together.

  (To Valere)
  You, go at once and set your friends at work
  To make him keep his word to you; while we
  Will bring the brother's influence to bear,
  And get the step-mother on our side, too.
  Good-bye.

  VALERE (to Mariane)
  Whatever efforts we may make,
  My greatest hope, be sure, must rest on you.

  MARIANE (to Valere)
  I cannot answer for my father's whims;
  But no one save Valere shall ever have me.

  VALERE
  You thrill me through with joy! Whatever comes ...

  DORINE
  Oho! These lovers! Never done with prattling!
  Now go.

  VALERE (starting to go, and coming back again)
  One last word ...

  DORINE
  What a gabble and pother!
  Be off! By this door, you. And you, by t'other.

  (She pushes them off, by the shoulders, in opposite directions.)




  ACT III



  SCENE I

  DAMIS, DORINE


  DAMIS
  May lightning strike me dead this very instant,
  May I be everywhere proclaimed a scoundrel,
  If any reverence or power shall stop me,
  And if I don't do straightway something desperate!

  DORINE
  I beg you, moderate this towering passion;
  Your father did but merely mention it.
  Not all things that are talked of turn to facts;
  The road is long, sometimes, from plans to acts.

  DAMIS
  No, I must end this paltry fellow's plots,
  And he shall hear from me a truth or two.

  DORINE
  So ho! Go slow now. Just you leave the fellow--
  Your father too--in your step-mother's hands.
  She has some influence with this Tartuffe,
  He makes a point of heeding all she says,
  And I suspect that he is fond of her.
  Would God 'twere true!--'Twould be the height of humour
  Now, she has sent for him, in your behalf,
  To sound him on this marriage, to find out
  What his ideas are, and to show him plainly
  What troubles he may cause, if he persists
  In giving countenance to this design.
  His man says, he's at prayers, I mustn't see him,
  But likewise says, he'll presently be down.
  So off with you, and let me wait for him.

  DAMIS
  I may be present at this interview.

  DORINE
  No, no! They must be left alone.

  DAMIS
  I won't
  So much as speak to him.

  DORINE
  Go on! We know you
  And your high tantrums. Just the way to spoil things!
  Be off.

  DAMIS
  No, I must see--I'll keep my temper.

  DORINE
  Out on you, what a plague! He's coming. Hide!

  (Damis goes and hides in the closet at the back of the stage.)



  SCENE II

  TARTUFFE, DORINE


  TARTUFFE (speaking to his valet, off the stage, as soon as he sees
  Dorine is there)
  Lawrence, put up my hair-cloth shirt and scourge,
  And pray that Heaven may shed its light upon you.
  If any come to see me, say I'm gone
  To share my alms among the prisoners.

  DORINE (aside)
  What affectation and what showing off!

  TARTUFFE
  What do you want with me?

  DORINE
  To tell you ...

  TARTUFFE (taking a handkerchief from his pocket)
  Ah!
  Before you speak, pray take this handkerchief.

  DORINE
  What?

  TARTUFFE
  Cover up that bosom, which I can't
  Endure to look on. Things like that offend
  Our souls, and fill our minds with sinful thoughts.

  DORINE
  Are you so tender to temptation, then,
  And has the flesh such power upon your senses?
  I don't know how you get in such a heat;
  For my part, I am not so prone to lust,
  And I could see you stripped from head to foot,
  And all your hide not tempt me in the least.

  TARTUFFE
  Show in your speech some little modesty,
  Or I must instantly take leave of you.

  DORINE
  No, no, I'll leave you to yourself; I've only
  One thing to say: Madam will soon be down,
  And begs the favour of a word with you.

  TARTUFFE
  Ah! Willingly.

  DORINE (aside)
  How gentle all at once!
  My faith, I still believe I've hit upon it.

  TARTUFFE
  Will she come soon?

  DORINE
  I think I hear her now.
  Yes, here she is herself; I'll leave you with her.



  SCENE III

  ELMIRE, TARTUFFE


  TARTUFFE
  May Heaven's overflowing kindness ever
  Give you good health of body and of soul,
  And bless your days according to the wishes
  And prayers of its most humble votary!

  ELMIRE
  I'm very grateful for your pious wishes.
  But let's sit down, so we may talk at ease.

  TARTUFFE (after sitting down)
  And how are you recovered from your illness?

  ELMIRE (sitting down also)
  Quite well; the fever soon let go its hold.

  TARTUFFE
  My prayers, I fear, have not sufficient merit
  To have drawn down this favour from on high;
  But each entreaty that I made to Heaven
  Had for its object your recovery.

  ELMIRE
  You're too solicitous on my behalf.

  TARTUFFE
  We could not cherish your dear health too much;
  I would have given mine, to help restore it.

  ELMIRE
  That's pushing Christian charity too far;
  I owe you many thanks for so much kindness.

  TARTUFFE
  I do far less for you than you deserve.

  ELMIRE
  There is a matter that I wished to speak of
  In private; I am glad there's no one here
  To listen.

  TARTUFFE
  Madam, I am overjoyed.
  'Tis sweet to find myself alone with you.
  This is an opportunity I've asked
  Of Heaven, many a time; till now, in vain.

  ELMIRE
  All that I wish, is just a word from you,
  Quite frank and open, hiding nothing from me.

  (DAMIS, without their seeing him, opens the closet door halfway.)

  TARTUFFE
  I too could wish, as Heaven's especial favour,
  To lay my soul quite open to your eyes,
  And swear to you, the trouble that I made
  About those visits which your charms attract,
  Does not result from any hatred toward you,
  But rather from a passionate devotion,
  And purest motives ...

  ELMIRE
  That is how I take it,
  I think 'tis my salvation that concerns you.

  TARTUFFE (pressing her finger tips)
  Madam, 'tis so; and such is my devotion ...

  ELMIRE
  Ouch! but you squeeze too hard.

  TARTUFFE
  Excess of zeal.
  In no way could I ever mean to hurt you,
  And I'd as soon ...

  (He puts his hand on her knee.)

  ELMIRE
  What's your hand doing there?

  TARTUFFE
  Feeling your gown; the stuff is very soft.

  ELMIRE
  Let be, I beg you; I am very ticklish.

  (She moves her chair away, and Tartuffe brings his nearer.)

  TARTUFFE (handling the lace yoke of Elmire's dress)
  Dear me how wonderful in workmanship
  This lace is! They do marvels, nowadays;
  Things of all kinds were never better made.

  ELMIRE
  Yes, very true. But let us come to business.
  They say my husband means to break his word.
  And marry Mariane to you. Is't so?

  TARTUFFE
  He did hint some such thing; but truly, madam,
  That's not the happiness I'm yearning after;
  I see elsewhere the sweet compelling charms
  Of such a joy as fills my every wish.

  ELMIRE
  You mean you cannot love terrestrial things.

  TARTUFFE
  The heart within my bosom is not stone.

  ELMIRE
  I well believe your sighs all tend to Heaven,
  And nothing here below can stay your thoughts.

  TARTUFFE
  Love for the beauty of eternal things
  Cannot destroy our love for earthly beauty;
  Our mortal senses well may be entranced
  By perfect works that Heaven has fashioned here.
  Its charms reflected shine in such as you,
  And in yourself, its rarest miracles;
  It has displayed such marvels in your face,
  That eyes are dazed, and hearts are rapt away;
  I could not look on you, the perfect creature,
  Without admiring Nature's great Creator,
  And feeling all my heart inflamed with love
  For you, His fairest image of Himself.
  At first I trembled lest this secret love
  Might be the Evil Spirit's artful snare;
  I even schooled my heart to flee your beauty,
  Thinking it was a bar to my salvation.
  But soon, enlightened, O all lovely one,
  I saw how this my passion may be blameless,
  How I may make it fit with modesty,
  And thus completely yield my heart to it.
  'Tis I must own, a great presumption in me
  To dare make you the offer of my heart;
  My love hopes all things from your perfect goodness,
  And nothing from my own poor weak endeavour.
  You are my hope, my stay, my peace of heart;
  On you depends my torment or my bliss;
  And by your doom of judgment, I shall be
  Blest, if you will; or damned, by your decree.

  ELMIRE
  Your declaration's turned most gallantly;
  But truly, it is just a bit surprising.
  You should have better armed your heart, methinks,
  And taken thought somewhat on such a matter.
  A pious man like you, known everywhere ...

  TARTUFFE
  Though pious, I am none the less a man;
  And when a man beholds your heavenly charms,
  The heart surrenders, and can think no more.
  I know such words seem strange, coming from me;
  But, madam, I'm no angel, after all;
  If you condemn my frankly made avowal
  You only have your charming self to blame.
  Soon as I saw your more than human beauty,
  You were thenceforth the sovereign of my soul;
  Sweetness ineffable was in your eyes,
  That took by storm my still resisting heart,
  And conquered everything, fasts, prayers, and tears,
  And turned my worship wholly to yourself.
  My looks, my sighs, have spoke a thousand times;
  Now, to express it all, my voice must speak.
  If but you will look down with gracious favour
  Upon the sorrows of your worthless slave,
  If in your goodness you will give me comfort
  And condescend unto my nothingness,
  I'll ever pay you, O sweet miracle,
  An unexampled worship and devotion.
  Then too, with me your honour runs no risk;
  With me you need not fear a public scandal.
  These court gallants, that women are so fond of,
  Are boastful of their acts, and vain in speech;
  They always brag in public of their progress;
  Soon as a favour's granted, they'll divulge it;
  Their tattling tongues, if you but trust to them,
  Will foul the altar where their hearts have worshipped.
  But men like me are so discreet in love,
  That you may trust their lasting secrecy.
  The care we take to guard our own good name
  May fully guarantee the one we love;
  So you may find, with hearts like ours sincere,
  Love without scandal, pleasure without fear.

  ELMIRE
  I've heard you through--your speech is clear, at least.
  But don't you fear that I may take a fancy
  To tell my husband of your gallant passion,
  And that a prompt report of this affair
  May somewhat change the friendship which he bears you?

  TARTUFFE
  I know that you're too good and generous,
  That you will pardon my temerity,
  Excuse, upon the score of human frailty,
  The violence of passion that offends you,
  And not forget, when you consult your mirror,
  That I'm not blind, and man is made of flesh.

  ELMIRE
  Some women might do otherwise, perhaps,
  But I am willing to employ discretion,
  And not repeat the matter to my husband;
  But in return, I'll ask one thing of you:
  That you urge forward, frankly and sincerely,
  The marriage of Valere to Mariane;
  That you give up the unjust influence
  By which you hope to win another's rights;
  And ...



  SCENE IV

  ELMIRE, DAMIS, TARTUFFE


  DAMIS (coming out of the closet-room where he had been hiding)
  No, I say! This thing must be made public.
  I was just there, and overheard it all;
  And Heaven's goodness must have brought me there
  On purpose to confound this scoundrel's pride
  And grant me means to take a signal vengeance
  On his hypocrisy and arrogance,
  And undeceive my father, showing up
  The rascal caught at making love to you.

  ELMIRE
  No, no; it is enough if he reforms,
  Endeavouring to deserve the favour shown him.
  And since I've promised, do not you belie me.
  'Tis not my way to make a public scandal;
  An honest wife will scorn to heed such follies,
  And never fret her husband's ears with them.

  DAMIS
  You've reasons of your own for acting thus;
  And I have mine for doing otherwise.
  To spare him now would be a mockery;
  His bigot's pride has triumphed all too long
  Over my righteous anger, and has caused
  Far too much trouble in our family.
  The rascal all too long has ruled my father,
  And crossed my sister's love, and mine as well.
  The traitor now must be unmasked before him:
  And Providence has given me means to do it.
  To Heaven I owe the opportunity,
  And if I did not use it now I have it,
  I should deserve to lose it once for all.

  ELMIRE
  Damis ...

  DAMIS
  No, by your leave; I'll not be counselled.
  I'm overjoyed. You needn't try to tell me
  I must give up the pleasure of revenge.
  I'll make an end of this affair at once;
  And, to content me, here's my father now.



  SCENE V

  ORGON, ELMIRE, DAMIS, TARTUFFE


  DAMIS
  Father, we've news to welcome your arrival,
  That's altogether novel, and surprising.
  You are well paid for your caressing care,
  And this fine gentleman rewards your love
  Most handsomely, with zeal that seeks no less
  Than your dishonour, as has now been proven.
  I've just surprised him making to your wife
  The shameful offer of a guilty love.
  She, somewhat over gentle and discreet,
  Insisted that the thing should be concealed;
  But I will not condone such shamelessness,
  Nor so far wrong you as to keep it secret.

  ELMIRE
  Yes, I believe a wife should never trouble
  Her husband's peace of mind with such vain gossip;
  A woman's honour does not hang on telling;
  It is enough if she defend herself;
  Or so I think; Damis, you'd not have spoken,
  If you would but have heeded my advice.



  SCENE VI

  ORGON, DAMIS, TARTUFFE


  ORGON
  Just Heaven! Can what I hear be credited?

  TARTUFFE
  Yes, brother, I am wicked, I am guilty,
  A miserable sinner, steeped in evil,
  The greatest criminal that ever lived.
  Each moment of my life is stained with soilures;
  And all is but a mass of crime and filth;
  Heaven, for my punishment, I see it plainly,
  Would mortify me now. Whatever wrong
  They find to charge me with, I'll not deny it
  But guard against the pride of self-defence.
  Believe their stories, arm your wrath against me,
  And drive me like a villain from your house;
  I cannot have so great a share of shame
  But what I have deserved a greater still.

  ORGON (to his son)
  You miscreant, can you dare, with such a falsehood,
  To try to stain the whiteness of his virtue?

  DAMIS
  What! The feigned meekness of this hypocrite
  Makes you discredit ...

  ORGON
  Silence, cursed plague!

  TARTUFFE
  Ah! Let him speak; you chide him wrongfully;
  You'd do far better to believe his tales.
  Why favour me so much in such a matter?
  How can you know of what I'm capable?
  And should you trust my outward semblance, brother,
  Or judge therefrom that I'm the better man?
  No, no; you let appearances deceive you;
  I'm anything but what I'm thought to be,
  Alas! and though all men believe me godly,
  The simple truth is, I'm a worthless creature.

  (To Damis)
  Yes, my dear son, say on, and call me traitor,
  Abandoned scoundrel, thief, and murderer;
  Heap on me names yet more detestable,
  And I shall not gainsay you; I've deserved them;
  I'll bear this ignominy on my knees,
  To expiate in shame the crimes I've done.

  ORGON (to Tartuffe)
  Ah, brother, 'tis too much!

  (To his son)
  You'll not relent,
  You blackguard?

  DAMIS
  What! His talk can so deceive you ...

  ORGON
  Silence, you scoundrel!

  (To Tartuffe)
  Brother, rise, I beg you.

  (To his son)
  Infamous villain!

  DAMIS
  Can he ...

  ORGON
  Silence!

  DAMIS
  What ...

  ORGON
  Another word, I'll break your every bone.

  TARTUFFE
  Brother, in God's name, don't be angry with him!
  I'd rather bear myself the bitterest torture
  Than have him get a scratch on my account.

  ORGON (to his son)
  Ungrateful monster!

  TARTUFFE
  Stop. Upon my knees
  I beg you pardon him ...

  ORGON (throwing himself on his knees too, and embracing Tartuffe)
  Alas! How can you?

  (To his son)
  Villain! Behold his goodness!

  DAMIS
  So ...

  ORGON
  Be still.

  DAMIS
  What! I ...

  ORGON
  Be still, I say. I know your motives
  For this attack. You hate him, all of you;
  Wife, children, servants, all let loose upon him,
  You have recourse to every shameful trick
  To drive this godly man out of my house;
  The more you strive to rid yourselves of him,
  The more I'll strive to make him stay with me;
  I'll have him straightway married to my daughter,
  Just to confound the pride of all of you.

  DAMIS
  What! Will you force her to accept his hand?

  ORGON
  Yes, and this very evening, to enrage you,
  Young rascal! Ah! I'll brave you all, and show you
  That I'm the master, and must be obeyed.
  Now, down upon your knees this instant, rogue,
  And take back what you said, and ask his pardon.

  DAMIS
  Who? I? Ask pardon of that cheating scoundrel ... ?

  ORGON
  Do you resist, you beggar, and insult him?
  A cudgel, here! a cudgel!

  (To Tartuffe)
  Don't restrain me.

  (To his son)
  Off with you! Leave my house this instant, sirrah,
  And never dare set foot in it again.

  DAMIS
  Yes, I will leave your house, but ...

  ORGON
  Leave it quickly.
  You reprobate, I disinherit you,
  And give you, too, my curse into the bargain.



  SCENE VII

  ORGON, TARTUFFE


  ORGON
  What! So insult a saintly man of God!

  TARTUFFE
  Heaven, forgive him all the pain he gives me! [4]

  [Footnote 4: Some modern editions have adopted the reading, preserved
  by tradition as that of the earliest stage version: Heaven, forgive
  him even as I forgive him! Voltaire gives still another reading:
  Heaven, forgive me even as I forgive him! Whichever was the original
  version, it appears in none of the early editions, and Moliere
  probably felt forced to change it on account of its too close
  resemblance to the Biblical phrase.]

  (To Orgon)
  Could you but know with what distress I see
  Them try to vilify me to my brother!

  ORGON
  Ah!

  TARTUFFE
  The mere thought of such ingratitude
  Makes my soul suffer torture, bitterly ...
  My horror at it ... Ah! my heart's so full
  I cannot speak ... I think I'll die of it.

  ORGON (in tears, running to the door through which he drove away his
  son)
  Scoundrel! I wish I'd never let you go,
  But slain you on the spot with my own hand.

  (To Tartuffe)
  Brother, compose yourself, and don't be angry.

  TARTUFFE
  Nay, brother, let us end these painful quarrels.
  I see what troublous times I bring upon you,
  And think 'tis needful that I leave this house.

  ORGON
  What! You can't mean it?

  TARTUFFE
  Yes, they hate me here,
  And try, I find, to make you doubt my faith.

  ORGON
  What of it? Do you find I listen to them?

  TARTUFFE
  No doubt they won't stop there. These same reports
  You now reject, may some day win a hearing.

  ORGON
  No, brother, never.

  TARTUFFE
  Ah! my friend, a woman
  May easily mislead her husband's mind.

  ORGON
  No, no.

  TARTUFFE
  So let me quickly go away
  And thus remove all cause for such attacks.

  ORGON
  No, you shall stay; my life depends upon it.

  TARTUFFE
  Then I must mortify myself. And yet,
  If you should wish ...

  ORGON
  No, never!

  TARTUFFE
  Very well, then;
  No more of that. But I shall rule my conduct
  To fit the case. Honour is delicate,
  And friendship binds me to forestall suspicion,
  Prevent all scandal, and avoid your wife.

  ORGON
  No, you shall haunt her, just to spite them all.
  'Tis my delight to set them in a rage;
  You shall be seen together at all hours
  And what is more, the better to defy them,
  I'll have no other heir but you; and straightway
  I'll go and make a deed of gift to you,
  Drawn in due form, of all my property.
  A good true friend, my son-in-law to be,
  Is more to me than son, and wife, and kindred.
  You will accept my offer, will you not?

  TARTUFFE
  Heaven's will be done in everything!

  ORGON
  Poor man!
  We'll go make haste to draw the deed aright,
  And then let envy burst itself with spite!




  ACT IV



  SCENE I

  CLEANTE, TARTUFFE


  CLEANTE
  Yes, it's become the talk of all the town,
  And make a stir that's scarcely to your credit;
  And I have met you, sir, most opportunely,
  To tell you in a word my frank opinion.
  Not to sift out this scandal to the bottom,
  Suppose the worst for us--suppose Damis
  Acted the traitor, and accused you falsely;
  Should not a Christian pardon this offence,
  And stifle in his heart all wish for vengeance?
  Should you permit that, for your petty quarrel,
  A son be driven from his father's house?
  I tell you yet again, and tell you frankly,
  Everyone, high or low, is scandalised;
  If you'll take my advice, you'll make it up,
  And not push matters to extremities.
  Make sacrifice to God of your resentment;
  Restore the son to favour with his father.

  TARTUFFE
  Alas! So far as I'm concerned, how gladly
  Would I do so! I bear him no ill will;
  I pardon all, lay nothing to his charge,
  And wish with all my heart that I might serve him;
  But Heaven's interests cannot allow it;
  If he returns, then I must leave the house.
  After his conduct, quite unparalleled,
  All intercourse between us would bring scandal;
  God knows what everyone's first thought would be!
  They would attribute it to merest scheming
  On my part--say that conscious of my guilt
  I feigned a Christian love for my accuser,
  But feared him in my heart, and hoped to win him
  And underhandedly secure his silence.

  CLEANTE
  You try to put us off with specious phrases;
  But all your arguments are too far-fetched.
  Why take upon yourself the cause of Heaven?
  Does Heaven need our help to punish sinners?
  Leave to itself the care of its own vengeance,
  And keep in mind the pardon it commands us;
  Besides, think somewhat less of men's opinions,
  When you are following the will of Heaven.
  Shall petty fear of what the world may think
  Prevent the doing of a noble deed?
  No!--let us always do as Heaven commands,
  And not perplex our brains with further questions.

  TARTUFFE
  Already I have told you I forgive him;
  And that is doing, sir, as Heaven commands.
  But after this day's scandal and affront
  Heaven does not order me to live with him.

  CLEANTE
  And does it order you to lend your ear
  To what mere whim suggested to his father,
  And to accept gift of his estates,
  On which, in justice, you can make no claim?

  TARTUFFE
  No one who knows me, sir, can have the thought
  That I am acting from a selfish motive.
  The goods of this world have no charms for me;
  I am not dazzled by their treacherous glamour;
  And if I bring myself to take the gift
  Which he insists on giving me, I do so,
  To tell the truth, only because I fear
  This whole estate may fall into bad hands,
  And those to whom it comes may use it ill
  And not employ it, as is my design,
  For Heaven's glory and my neighbours' good.

  CLEANTE
  Eh, sir, give up these conscientious scruples
  That well may cause a rightful heir's complaints.
  Don't take so much upon yourself, but let him
  Possess what's his, at his own risk and peril;
  Consider, it were better he misused it,
  Than you should be accused of robbing him.
  I am astounded that unblushingly
  You could allow such offers to be made!
  Tell me--has true religion any maxim
  That teaches us to rob the lawful heir?
  If Heaven has made it quite impossible
  Damis and you should live together here,
  Were it not better you should quietly
  And honourably withdraw, than let the son
  Be driven out for your sake, dead against
  All reason? 'Twould be giving, sir, believe me,
  Such an example of your probity ...

  TARTUFFE
  Sir, it is half-past three; certain devotions
  Recall me to my closet; you'll forgive me
  For leaving you so soon.

  CLEANTE (alone)
  Ah!



  SCENE II

  ELMIRE, MARIANE, CLEANTE, DORINE


  DORINE (to Cleante)
  Sir, we beg you
  To help us all you can in her behalf;
  She's suffering almost more than heart can bear;
  This match her father means to make to-night
  Drives her each moment to despair. He's coming.
  Let us unite our efforts now, we beg you,
  And try by strength or skill to change his purpose.



  SCENE III

  ORGON, ELMIRE, MARIANE, CLEANTE, DORINE


  ORGON
  So ho! I'm glad to find you all together.

  (To Mariane)
  Here is the contract that shall make you happy,
  My dear. You know already what it means.

  MARIANE (on her knees before Orgon)
  Father, I beg you, in the name of Heaven
  That knows my grief, and by whate'er can move you,
  Relax a little your paternal rights,
  And free my love from this obedience!
  Oh, do not make me, by your harsh command,
  Complain to Heaven you ever were my father;
  Do not make wretched this poor life you gave me.
  If, crossing that fond hope which I had formed,
  You'll not permit me to belong to one
  Whom I have dared to love, at least, I beg you
  Upon my knees, oh, save me from the torment
  Of being possessed by one whom I abhor!
  And do not drive me to some desperate act
  By exercising all your rights upon me.

  ORGON (a little touched)
  Come, come, my heart, be firm! no human weakness!

  MARIANE
  I am not jealous of your love for him;
  Display it freely; give him your estate,
  And if that's not enough, add all of mine;
  I willingly agree, and give it up,
  If only you'll not give him me, your daughter;
  Oh, rather let a convent's rigid rule
  Wear out the wretched days that Heaven allots me.

  ORGON
  These girls are ninnies!--always turning nuns
  When fathers thwart their silly love-affairs.
  Get on your feet! The more you hate to have him,
  The more 'twill help you earn your soul's salvation.
  So, mortify your senses by this marriage,
  And don't vex me about it any more.

  DORINE
  But what ... ?

  ORGON
  You hold your tongue, before your betters.
  Don't dare to say a single word, I tell you.

  CLEANTE
  If you will let me answer, and advise ...

  ORGON
  Brother, I value your advice most highly;
  'Tis well thought out; no better can be had;
  But you'll allow me--not to follow it.

  ELMIRE (to her husband)
  I can't find words to cope with such a case;
  Your blindness makes me quite astounded at you.
  You are bewitched with him, to disbelieve
  The things we tell you happened here to-day.

  ORGON
  I am your humble servant, and can see
  Things, when they're plain as noses on folks' faces,
  I know you're partial to my rascal son,
  And didn't dare to disavow the trick
  He tried to play on this poor man; besides,
  You were too calm, to be believed; if that
  Had happened, you'd have been far more disturbed.

  ELMIRE
  And must our honour always rush to arms
  At the mere mention of illicit love?
  Or can we answer no attack upon it
  Except with blazing eyes and lips of scorn?
  For my part, I just laugh away such nonsense;
  I've no desire to make a loud to-do.
  Our virtue should, I think, be gentle-natured;
  Nor can I quite approve those savage prudes
  Whose honour arms itself with teeth and claws
  To tear men's eyes out at the slightest word.
  Heaven preserve me from that kind of honour!
  I like my virtue not to be a vixen,
  And I believe a quiet cold rebuff
  No less effective to repulse a lover.

  ORGON
  I know ... and you can't throw me off the scent.

  ELMIRE
  Once more, I am astounded at your weakness;
  I wonder what your unbelief would answer,
  If I should let you see we've told the truth?

  ORGON
  See it?

  ELMIRE
  Yes.

  ORGON
  Nonsense.

  ELMIRE
  Come! If I should find
  A way to make you see it clear as day?

  ORGON
  All rubbish.

  ELMIRE
  What a man! But answer me.
  I'm not proposing now that you believe us;
  But let's suppose that here, from proper hiding,
  You should be made to see and hear all plainly;
  What would you say then, to your man of virtue?

  ORGON
  Why, then, I'd say ... say nothing. It can't be.

  ELMIRE
  Your error has endured too long already,
  And quite too long you've branded me a liar.
  I must at once, for my own satisfaction,
  Make you a witness of the things we've told you.

  ORGON
  Amen! I take you at your word. We'll see
  What tricks you have, and how you'll keep your promise.

  ELMIRE (to Dorine)
  Send him to me.

  DORINE (to Elmire)
  The man's a crafty codger,
  Perhaps you'll find it difficult to catch him.

  ELMIRE (to Dorine)
  Oh no! A lover's never hard to cheat,
  And self-conceit leads straight to self-deceit.
  Bid him come down to me.

  (To Cleante and Mariane)
  And you, withdraw.



  SCENE IV

  ELMIRE, ORGON


  ELMIRE
  Bring up this table, and get under it.

  ORGON
  What?

  ELMIRE
  One essential is to hide you well.

  ORGON
  Why under there?

  ELMIRE
  Oh, dear! Do as I say;
  I know what I'm about, as you shall see.
  Get under, now, I tell you; and once there
  Be careful no one either sees or hears you.

  ORGON
  I'm going a long way to humour you,
  I must say; but I'll see you through your scheme.

  ELMIRE
  And then you'll have, I think, no more to say.

  (To her husband, who is now under the table.)
  But mind, I'm going to meddle with strange matters;
  Prepare yourself to be in no wise shocked.
  Whatever I may say must pass, because
  'Tis only to convince you, as I promised.
  By wheedling speeches, since I'm forced to do it,
  I'll make this hypocrite put off his mask,
  Flatter the longings of his shameless passion,
  And give free play to all his impudence.
  But, since 'tis for your sake, to prove to you
  His guilt, that I shall feign to share his love,
  I can leave off as soon as you're convinced,
  And things shall go no farther than you choose.
  So, when you think they've gone quite far enough,
  It is for you to stop his mad pursuit,
  To spare your wife, and not expose me farther
  Than you shall need, yourself, to undeceive you.
  It is your own affair, and you must end it
  When ... Here he comes. Keep still, don't show yourself.



  SCENE V

  TARTUFFE, ELMIRE; ORGON (under the table)


  TARTUFFE
  They told me that you wished to see me here.

  ELMIRE
  Yes. I have secrets for your ear alone.
  But shut the door first, and look everywhere
  For fear of spies.

  (Tartuffe goes and closes the door, and comes back.)
  We surely can't afford
  Another scene like that we had just now;
  Was ever anyone so caught before!
  Damis did frighten me most terribly
  On your account; you saw I did my best
  To baffle his design, and calm his anger.
  But I was so confused, I never thought
  To contradict his story; still, thank Heaven,
  Things turned out all the better, as it happened,
  And now we're on an even safer footing.
  The high esteem you're held in, laid the storm;
  My husband can have no suspicion of you,
  And even insists, to spite the scandal-mongers,
  That we shall be together constantly;
  So that is how, without the risk of blame,
  I can be here locked up with you alone,
  And can reveal to you my heart, perhaps
  Only too ready to allow your passion.

  TARTUFFE
  Your words are somewhat hard to understand,
  Madam; just now you used a different style.

  ELMIRE
  If that refusal has offended you,
  How little do you know a woman's heart!
  How ill you guess what it would have you know,
  When it presents so feeble a defence!
  Always, at first, our modesty resists
  The tender feelings you inspire us with.
  Whatever cause we find to justify
  The love that masters us, we still must feel
  Some little shame in owning it; and strive
  To make as though we would not, when we would.
  But from the very way we go about it
  We let a lover know our heart surrenders,
  The while our lips, for honour's sake, oppose
  Our heart's desire, and in refusing promise.
  I'm telling you my secret all too freely
  And with too little heed to modesty.
  But--now that I've made bold to speak--pray tell me.
  Should I have tried to keep Damis from speaking,
  Should I have heard the offer of your heart
  So quietly, and suffered all your pleading,
  And taken it just as I did--remember--
  If such a declaration had not pleased me,
  And, when I tried my utmost to persuade you
  Not to accept the marriage that was talked of,
  What should my earnestness have hinted to you
  If not the interest that you've inspired,
  And my chagrin, should such a match compel me
  To share a heart I want all to myself?

  TARTUFFE
  'Tis, past a doubt, the height of happiness,
  To hear such words from lips we dote upon;
  Their honeyed sweetness pours through all my senses
  Long draughts of suavity ineffable.
  My heart employs its utmost zeal to please you,
  And counts your love its one beatitude;
  And yet that heart must beg that you allow it
  To doubt a little its felicity.
  I well might think these words an honest trick
  To make me break off this approaching marriage;
  And if I may express myself quite plainly,
  I cannot trust these too enchanting words
  Until the granting of some little favour
  I sigh for, shall assure me of their truth
  And build within my soul, on firm foundations,
  A lasting faith in your sweet charity.

  ELMIRE (coughing to draw her husband's attention)
  What! Must you go so fast?--and all at once
  Exhaust the whole love of a woman's heart?
  She does herself the violence to make
  This dear confession of her love, and you
  Are not yet satisfied, and will not be
  Without the granting of her utmost favours?

  TARTUFFE
  The less a blessing is deserved, the less
  We dare to hope for it; and words alone
  Can ill assuage our love's desires. A fate
  Too full of happiness, seems doubtful still;
  We must enjoy it ere we can believe it.
  And I, who know how little I deserve
  Your goodness, doubt the fortunes of my daring;
  So I shall trust to nothing, madam, till
  You have convinced my love by something real.

  ELMIRE
  Ah! How your love enacts the tyrant's role,
  And throws my mind into a strange confusion!
  With what fierce sway it rules a conquered heart,
  And violently will have its wishes granted!
  What! Is there no escape from your pursuit?
  No respite even?--not a breathing space?
  Nay, is it decent to be so exacting,
  And so abuse by urgency the weakness
  You may discover in a woman's heart?

  TARTUFFE
  But if my worship wins your gracious favour,
  Then why refuse me some sure proof thereof?

  ELMIRE
  But how can I consent to what you wish,
  Without offending Heaven you talk so much of?

  TARTUFFE
  If Heaven is all that stands now in my way,
  I'll easily remove that little hindrance;
  Your heart need not hold back for such a trifle.

  ELMIRE
  But they affright us so with Heaven's commands!

  TARTUFFE
  I can dispel these foolish fears, dear madam;
  I know the art of pacifying scruples
  Heaven forbids, 'tis true, some satisfactions;
  But we find means to make things right with Heaven.

  ('Tis a scoundrel speaking.) [5]

  [Footnote 5: Moliere's note, in the original edition.]

  There is a science, madam, that instructs us
  How to enlarge the limits of our conscience
  According to our various occasions,
  And rectify the evil of the deed
  According to our purity of motive.
  I'll duly teach you all these secrets, madam;
  You only need to let yourself be guided.
  Content my wishes, have no fear at all;
  I answer for't, and take the sin upon me.

  (Elmire coughs still louder.)
  Your cough is very bad.

  ELMIRE
  Yes, I'm in torture.

  TARTUFFE
  Would you accept this bit of licorice?

  ELMIRE
  The case is obstinate, I find; and all
  The licorice in the world will do no good.

  TARTUFFE
  'Tis very trying.

  ELMIRE
  More than words can say.

  TARTUFFE
  In any case, your scruple's easily
  Removed. With me you're sure of secrecy,
  And there's no harm unless a thing is known.
  The public scandal is what brings offence,
  And secret sinning is not sin at all.

  ELMIRE (after coughing again)
  So then, I see I must resolve to yield;
  I must consent to grant you everything,
  And cannot hope to give full satisfaction
  Or win full confidence, at lesser cost.
  No doubt 'tis very hard to come to this;
  'Tis quite against my will I go so far;
  But since I must be forced to it, since nothing
  That can be said suffices for belief,
  Since more convincing proof is still demanded,
  I must make up my mind to humour people.
  If my consent give reason for offence,
  So much the worse for him who forced me to it;
  The fault can surely not be counted mine.

  TARTUFFE
  It need not, madam; and the thing itself ...

  ELMIRE
  Open the door, I pray you, and just see
  Whether my husband's not there, in the hall.

  TARTUFFE
  Why take such care for him? Between ourselves,
  He is a man to lead round by the nose.
  He's capable of glorying in our meetings;
  I've fooled him so, he'd see all, and deny it.

  ELMIRE
  No matter; go, I beg you, look about,
  And carefully examine every corner.



  SCENE VI

  ORGON, ELMIRE


  ORGON (crawling out from under the table)
  That is, I own, a man ... abominable!
  I can't get over it; the whole thing floors me.

  ELMIRE
  What? You come out so soon? You cannot mean it!
  Get back under the table; 'tis not time yet;
  Wait till the end, to see, and make quite certain,
  And don't believe a thing on mere conjecture.

  ORGON
  Nothing more wicked e'er came out of Hell.

  ELMIRE
  Dear me! Don't go and credit things too lightly.
  No, let yourself be thoroughly convinced;
  Don't yield too soon, for fear you'll be mistaken.

  (As Tartuffe enters, she makes her husband stand behind her.)



  SCENE VII

  TARTUFFE, ELMIRE, ORGON


  TARTUFFE (not seeing Orgon)
  All things conspire toward my satisfaction,
  Madam, I've searched the whole apartment through.
  There's no one here; and now my ravished soul ...

  ORGON (stopping him)
  Softly! You are too eager in your amours;
  You needn't be so passionate. Ah ha!
  My holy man! You want to put it on me!
  How is your soul abandoned to temptation!
  Marry my daughter, eh?--and want my wife, too?
  I doubted long enough if this was earnest,
  Expecting all the time the tone would change;
  But now the proof's been carried far enough;
  I'm satisfied, and ask no more, for my part.

  ELMIRE (to Tartuffe)
  'Twas quite against my character to play
  This part; but I was forced to treat you so.

  TARTUFFE
  What? You believe ... ?

  ORGON
  Come, now, no protestations.
  Get out from here, and make no fuss about it.

  TARTUFFE
  But my intent ...

  ORGON
  That talk is out of season.
  You leave my house this instant.

  TARTUFFE
  You're the one
  To leave it, you who play the master here!
  This house belongs to me, I'll have you know,
  And show you plainly it's no use to turn
  To these low tricks, to pick a quarrel with me,
  And that you can't insult me at your pleasure,
  For I have wherewith to confound your lies,
  Avenge offended Heaven, and compel
  Those to repent who talk to me of leaving.



  SCENE VIII

  ELMIRE, ORGON


  ELMIRE
  What sort of speech is this? What can it mean?

  ORGON
  My faith, I'm dazed. This is no laughing matter.

  ELMIRE
  What?

  ORGON
  From his words I see my great mistake;
  The deed of gift is one thing troubles me.

  ELMIRE
  The deed of gift ...

  ORGON
  Yes, that is past recall.
  But I've another thing to make me anxious.

  ELMIRE
  What's that?

  ORGON
  You shall know all. Let's see at once
  Whether a certain box is still upstairs.




  ACT V



  SCENE I

  ORGON, CLEANTE


  CLEANTE
  Whither away so fast?

  ORGON
  How should I know?

  CLEANTE
  Methinks we should begin by taking counsel
  To see what can be done to meet the case.

  ORGON
  I'm all worked up about that wretched box.
  More than all else it drives me to despair.

  CLEANTE
  That box must hide some mighty mystery?

  ORGON
  Argas, my friend who is in trouble, brought it
  Himself, most secretly, and left it with me.
  He chose me, in his exile, for this trust;
  And on these documents, from what he said,
  I judge his life and property depend.

  CLEANTE
  How could you trust them to another's hands?

  ORGON
  By reason of a conscientious scruple.
  I went straight to my traitor, to confide
  In him; his sophistry made me believe
  That I must give the box to him to keep,
  So that, in case of search, I might deny
  My having it at all, and still, by favour
  Of this evasion, keep my conscience clear
  Even in taking oath against the truth.

  CLEANTE
  Your case is bad, so far as I can see;
  This deed of gift, this trusting of the secret
  To him, were both--to state my frank opinion--
  Steps that you took too lightly; he can lead you
  To any length, with these for hostages;
  And since he holds you at such disadvantage,
  You'd be still more imprudent, to provoke him;
  So you must go some gentler way about.

  ORGON
  What! Can a soul so base, a heart so false,
  Hide neath the semblance of such touching fervour?
  I took him in, a vagabond, a beggar! ...
  'Tis too much! No more pious folk for me!
  I shall abhor them utterly forever,
  And henceforth treat them worse than any devil.

  CLEANTE
  So! There you go again, quite off the handle!
  In nothing do you keep an even temper.
  You never know what reason is, but always
  Jump first to one extreme, and then the other.
  You see your error, and you recognise
  That you've been cozened by a feigned zeal;
  But to make up for't, in the name of reason,
  Why should you plunge into a worse mistake,
  And find no difference in character
  Between a worthless scamp, and all good people?
  What! Just because a rascal boldly duped you
  With pompous show of false austerity,
  Must you needs have it everybody's like him,
  And no one's truly pious nowadays?
  Leave such conclusions to mere infidels;
  Distinguish virtue from its counterfeit,
  Don't give esteem too quickly, at a venture,
  But try to keep, in this, the golden mean.
  If you can help it, don't uphold imposture;
  But do not rail at true devoutness, either;
  And if you must fall into one extreme,
  Then rather err again the other way.



  SCENE II

  DAMIS, ORGON, CLEANTE


  DAMIS
  What! father, can the scoundrel threaten you,
  Forget the many benefits received,
  And in his base abominable pride
  Make of your very favours arms against you?

  ORGON
  Too true, my son. It tortures me to think on't.

  DAMIS
  Let me alone, I'll chop his ears off for him.
  We must deal roundly with his insolence;
  'Tis I must free you from him at a blow;
  'Tis I, to set things right, must strike him down.

  CLEANTE
  Spoke like a true young man. Now just calm down,
  And moderate your towering tantrums, will you?
  We live in such an age, with such a king,
  That violence can not advance our cause.



  SCENE III

  MADAME PERNELLE, ORGON, ELMIRE, CLEANTE, MARIANE, DAMIS, DORINE


  MADAME PERNELLE
  What's this? I hear of fearful mysteries!

  ORGON
  Strange things indeed, for my own eyes to witness;
  You see how I'm requited for my kindness,
  I zealously receive a wretched beggar,
  I lodge him, entertain him like my brother,
  Load him with benefactions every day,
  Give him my daughter, give him all my fortune:
  And he meanwhile, the villain, rascal, wretch,
  Tries with black treason to suborn my wife,
  And not content with such a foul design,
  He dares to menace me with my own favours,
  And would make use of those advantages
  Which my too foolish kindness armed him with,
  To ruin me, to take my fortune from me,
  And leave me in the state I saved him from.

  DORINE
  Poor man!

  MADAME PERNELLE
  My son, I cannot possibly
  Believe he could intend so black a deed.

  ORGON
  What?

  MADAME PERNELLE
  Worthy men are still the sport of envy.

  ORGON
  Mother, what do you mean by such a speech?

  MADAME PERNELLE
  There are strange goings-on about your house,
  And everybody knows your people hate him.

  ORGON
  What's that to do with what I tell you now?

  MADAME PERNELLE
  I always said, my son, when you were little:
  That virtue here below is hated ever;
  The envious may die, but envy never.

  ORGON
  What's that fine speech to do with present facts?

  MADAME PERNELLE
  Be sure, they've forged a hundred silly lies ...

  ORGON
  I've told you once, I saw it all myself.

  MADAME PERNELLE
  For slanderers abound in calumnies ...

  ORGON
  Mother, you'd make me damn my soul. I tell you
  I saw with my own eyes his shamelessness.

  MADAME PERNELLE
  Their tongues for spitting venom never lack,
  There's nothing here below they'll not attack.

  ORGON
  Your speech has not a single grain of sense.
  I saw it, harkee, saw it, with these eyes
  I saw--d'ye know what saw means?--must I say it
  A hundred times, and din it in your ears?

  MADAME PERNELLE
  My dear, appearances are oft deceiving,
  And seeing shouldn't always be believing.

  ORGON
  I'll go mad.

  MADAME PERNELLE
  False suspicions may delude,
  And good to evil oft is misconstrued.

  ORGON
  Must I construe as Christian charity
  The wish to kiss my wife!

  MADAME PERNELLE
  You must, at least,
  Have just foundation for accusing people,
  And wait until you see a thing for sure.

  ORGON
  The devil! How could I see any surer?
  Should I have waited till, before my eyes,
  He ... No, you'll make me say things quite improper.

  MADAME PERNELLE
  In short, 'tis known too pure a zeal inflames him;
  And so, I cannot possibly conceive
  That he should try to do what's charged against him.

  ORGON
  If you were not my mother, I should say
  Such things! ... I know not what, I'm so enraged!

  DORINE (to Orgon)
  Fortune has paid you fair, to be so doubted;
  You flouted our report, now yours is flouted.

  CLEANTE
  We're wasting time here in the merest trifling,
  Which we should rather use in taking measures
  To guard ourselves against the scoundrel's threats.

  DAMIS
  You think his impudence could go far?

  ELMIRE
  For one, I can't believe it possible;
  Why, his ingratitude would be too patent.

  CLEANTE
  Don't trust to that; he'll find abundant warrant
  To give good colour to his acts against you;
  And for less cause than this, a strong cabal
  Can make one's life a labyrinth of troubles.
  I tell you once again: armed as he is
  You never should have pushed him quite so far.

  ORGON
  True; yet what could I do? The rascal's pride
  Made me lose all control of my resentment.

  CLEANTE
  I wish with all my heart that some pretence
  Of peace could be patched up between you two

  ELMIRE
  If I had known what weapons he was armed with,
  I never should have raised such an alarm,
  And my ...

  ORGON (to Dorine, seeing Mr. Loyal come in)
  Who's coming now? Go quick, find out.
  I'm in a fine state to receive a visit!



  SCENE IV

  ORGON, MADAME PERNELLE, ELMIRE, MARIANE, CLEANTE, DAMIS, DORINE,
  MR. LOYAL


  MR. LOYAL (to Dorine, at the back of the stage)
  Good day, good sister. Pray you, let me see
  The master of the house.

  DORINE
  He's occupied;
  I think he can see nobody at present.

  MR. LOYAL
  I'm not by way of being unwelcome here.
  My coming can, I think, nowise displease him;
  My errand will be found to his advantage.

  DORINE
  Your name, then?

  MR. LOYAL
  Tell him simply that his friend
  Mr. Tartuffe has sent me, for his goods ...

  DORINE (to Orgon)
  It is a man who comes, with civil manners,
  Sent by Tartuffe, he says, upon an errand
  That you'll be pleased with.

  CLEANTE (to Orgon)
  Surely you must see him,
  And find out who he is, and what he wants.

  ORGON (to Cleante)
  Perhaps he's come to make it up between us:
  How shall I treat him?

  CLEANTE
  You must not get angry;
  And if he talks of reconciliation
  Accept it.

  MR. LOYAL (to Orgon)
  Sir, good-day. And Heaven send
  Harm to your enemies, favour to you.

  ORGON (aside to Cleante)
  This mild beginning suits with my conjectures
  And promises some compromise already.

  MR. LOYAL
  All of your house has long been dear to me;
  I had the honour, sir, to serve your father.

  ORGON
  Sir, I am much ashamed, and ask your pardon
  For not recalling now your face or name.

  MR. LOYAL
  My name is Loyal. I'm from Normandy.
  My office is court-bailiff, in despite
  Of envy; and for forty years, thank Heaven,
  It's been my fortune to perform that office
  With honour. So I've come, sir, by your leave
  To render service of a certain writ ...

  ORGON
  What, you are here to ...

  MR. LOYAL
  Pray, sir, don't be angry.
  'Tis nothing, sir, but just a little summons:--
  Order to vacate, you and yours, this house,
  Move out your furniture, make room for others,
  And that without delay or putting off,
  As needs must be ...

  ORGON
  I? Leave this house?

  MR. LOYAL
  Yes, please, sir
  The house is now, as you well know, of course,
  Mr. Tartuffe's. And he, beyond dispute,
  Of all your goods is henceforth lord and master
  By virtue of a contract here attached,
  Drawn in due form, and unassailable.

  DAMIS (to Mr. Loyal)
  Your insolence is monstrous, and astounding!

  MR. LOYAL (to Damis)
  I have no business, sir, that touches you;

  (Pointing to Orgon)
  This is the gentleman. He's fair and courteous,
  And knows too well a gentleman's behaviour
  To wish in any wise to question justice.

  ORGON
  But ...

  MR. LOYAL
  Sir, I know you would not for a million
  Wish to rebel; like a good citizen
  You'll let me put in force the court's decree.

  DAMIS
  Your long black gown may well, before you know it,
  Mister Court-bailiff, get a thorough beating.

  MR. LOYAL (to Orgon)
  Sir, make your son be silent or withdraw.
  I should be loath to have to set things down,
  And see your names inscribed in my report.

  DORINE (aside)
  This Mr. Loyal's looks are most disloyal.

  MR. LOYAL
  I have much feeling for respectable
  And honest folk like you, sir, and consented
  To serve these papers, only to oblige you,
  And thus prevent the choice of any other
  Who, less possessed of zeal for you than I am
  Might order matters in less gentle fashion.

  ORGON
  And how could one do worse than order people
  Out of their house?

  MR. LOYAL
  Why, we allow you time;
  And even will suspend until to-morrow
  The execution of the order, sir.
  I'll merely, without scandal, quietly,
  Come here and spend the night, with half a score
  Of officers; and just for form's sake, please,
  You'll bring your keys to me, before retiring.
  I will take care not to disturb your rest,
  And see there's no unseemly conduct here.
  But by to-morrow, and at early morning,
  You must make haste to move your least belongings;
  My men will help you--I have chosen strong ones
  To serve you, sir, in clearing out the house.
  No one could act more generously, I fancy,
  And, since I'm treating you with great indulgence,
  I beg you'll do as well by me, and see
  I'm not disturbed in my discharge of duty.

  ORGON
  I'd give this very minute, and not grudge it,
  The hundred best gold louis I have left,
  If I could just indulge myself, and land
  My fist, for one good square one, on his snout.

  CLEANTE (aside to Orgon)
  Careful!--don't make things worse.

  DAMIS
  Such insolence!
  I hardly can restrain myself. My hands
  Are itching to be at him.

  DORINE
  By my faith,
  With such a fine broad back, good Mr. Loyal,
  A little beating would become you well.

  MR. LOYAL
  My girl, such infamous words are actionable.
  And warrants can be issued against women.

  CLEANTE (to Mr. Loyal)
  Enough of this discussion, sir; have done.
  Give us the paper, and then leave us, pray.

  MR. LOYAL
  Then _au revoir_. Heaven keep you from disaster!

  ORGON
  May Heaven confound you both, you and your master!



  SCENE V

  ORGON, MADAME PERNELLE, ELMIRE, CLEANTE, MARIANE, DAMIS, DORINE


  ORGON
  Well, mother, am I right or am I not?
  This writ may help you now to judge the matter.
  Or don't you see his treason even yet?

  MADAME PERNELLE
  I'm all amazed, befuddled, and beflustered!

  DORINE (to Orgon)
  You are quite wrong, you have no right to blame him;
  This action only proves his good intentions.
  Love for his neighbour makes his virtue perfect;
  And knowing money is a root of evil,
  In Christian charity, he'd take away
  Whatever things may hinder your salvation.

  ORGON
  Be still. You always need to have that told you.

  CLEANTE (to Orgon)
  Come, let us see what course you are to follow.

  ELMIRE
  Go and expose his bold ingratitude.
  Such action must invalidate the contract;
  His perfidy must now appear too black
  To bring him the success that he expects.



  SCENE VI

  VALERE, ORGON, MADAME PERNELLE, ELMIRE, CLEANTE, MARIANE, DAMIS,
  DORINE


  VALERE
  'Tis with regret, sir, that I bring bad news;
  But urgent danger forces me to do so.
  A close and intimate friend of mine, who knows
  The interest I take in what concerns you,
  Has gone so far, for my sake, as to break
  The secrecy that's due to state affairs,
  And sent me word but now, that leaves you only
  The one expedient of sudden flight.
  The villain who so long imposed upon you,
  Found means, an hour ago, to see the prince,
  And to accuse you (among other things)
  By putting in his hands the private strong-box
  Of a state-criminal, whose guilty secret,
  You, failing in your duty as a subject,
  (He says) have kept. I know no more of it
  Save that a warrant's drawn against you, sir,
  And for the greater surety, that same rascal
  Comes with the officer who must arrest you.

  CLEANTE
  His rights are armed; and this is how the scoundrel
  Seeks to secure the property he claims.

  ORGON
  Man is a wicked animal, I'll own it!

  VALERE
  The least delay may still be fatal, sir.
  I have my carriage, and a thousand louis,
  Provided for your journey, at the door.
  Let's lose no time; the bolt is swift to strike,
  And such as only flight can save you from.
  I'll be your guide to seek a place of safety,
  And stay with you until you reach it, sir.

  ORGON
  How much I owe to your obliging care!
  Another time must serve to thank you fitly;
  And I pray Heaven to grant me so much favour
  That I may some day recompense your service.
  Good-bye; see to it, all of you ...

  CLEANTE
  Come hurry;
  We'll see to everything that's needful, brother.



  SCENE VII

  TARTUFFE, AN OFFICER, MADAME PERNELLE, ORGON, ELMIRE, CLEANTE,
  MARIANE, VALERE, DAMIS, DORINE


  TARTUFFE (stopping Orgon)
  Softly, sir, softly; do not run so fast;
  You haven't far to go to find your lodging;
  By order of the prince, we here arrest you.

  ORGON
  Traitor! You saved this worst stroke for the last;
  This crowns your perfidies, and ruins me.

  TARTUFFE
  I shall not be embittered by your insults,
  For Heaven has taught me to endure all things.

  CLEANTE
  Your moderation, I must own, is great.

  DAMIS
  How shamelessly the wretch makes bold with Heaven!

  TARTUFFE
  Your ravings cannot move me; all my thought
  Is but to do my duty.

  MARIANE
  You must claim
  Great glory from this honourable act.

  TARTUFFE
  The act cannot be aught but honourable,
  Coming from that high power which sends me here.

  ORGON
  Ungrateful wretch, do you forget 'twas I
  That rescued you from utter misery?

  TARTUFFE
  I've not forgot some help you may have given;
  But my first duty now is toward my prince.
  The higher power of that most sacred claim
  Must stifle in my heart all gratitude;
  And to such puissant ties I'd sacrifice
  My friend, my wife, my kindred, and myself.

  ELMIRE
  The hypocrite!

  DORINE
  How well he knows the trick
  Of cloaking him with what we most revere!

  CLEANTE
  But if the motive that you make parade of
  Is perfect as you say, why should it wait
  To show itself, until the day he caught you
  Soliciting his wife? How happens it
  You have not thought to go inform against him
  Until his honour forces him to drive you
  Out of his house? And though I need not mention
  That he'd just given you his whole estate,
  Still, if you meant to treat him now as guilty,
  How could you then consent to take his gift?

  TARTUFFE (to the Officer)
  Pray, sir, deliver me from all this clamour;
  Be good enough to carry out your order.

  THE OFFICER
  Yes, I've too long delayed its execution;
  'Tis very fitting you should urge me to it;
  So therefore, you must follow me at once
  To prison, where you'll find your lodging ready.

  TARTUFFE
  Who? I, sir?

  THE OFFICER
  You.

  TARTUFFE
  By why to prison?

  THE OFFICER
  You
  Are not the one to whom I owe account.
  You, sir (to Orgon), recover from your hot alarm.
  Our prince is not a friend to double dealing,
  His eyes can read men's inmost hearts, and all
  The art of hypocrites cannot deceive him.
  His sharp discernment sees things clear and true;
  His mind cannot too easily be swayed,
  For reason always holds the balance even.
  He honours and exalts true piety,
  But knows the false, and views it with disgust.
  This fellow was by no means apt to fool him,
  Far subtler snares have failed against his wisdom,
  And his quick insight pierced immediately
  The hidden baseness of this tortuous heart.
  Accusing you, the knave betrayed himself,
  And by true recompense of Heaven's justice
  He stood revealed before our monarch's eyes
  A scoundrel known before by other names,
  Whose horrid crimes, detailed at length, might fill
  A long-drawn history of many volumes.
  Our monarch--to resolve you in a word--
  Detesting his ingratitude and baseness,
  Added this horror to his other crimes,
  And sent me hither under his direction
  To see his insolence out-top itself,
  And force him then to give you satisfaction.
  Your papers, which the traitor says are his,
  I am to take from him, and give you back;
  The deed of gift transferring your estate
  Our monarch's sovereign will makes null and void;
  And for the secret personal offence
  Your friend involved you in, he pardons you:
  Thus he rewards your recent zeal, displayed
  In helping to maintain his rights, and shows
  How well his heart, when it is least expected,
  Knows how to recompense a noble deed,
  And will not let true merit miss its due,
  Remembering always rather good than evil.

  DORINE
  Now Heaven be praised!

  MADAME PERNELLE
  At last I breathe again.

  ELMIRE
  A happy outcome!

  MARIANE
  Who'd have dared to hope it?

  ORGON (to Tartuffe, who is being led by the officer)
  There traitor! Now you're ...



  SCENE VIII

  MADAME PERNELLE, ORGON, ELMIRE, MARIANE, CLEANTE, VALERE, DAMIS,
  DORINE


  CLEANTE
  Brother, hold!--and don't
  Descend to such indignities, I beg you.
  Leave the poor wretch to his unhappy fate,
  And let remorse oppress him, but not you.
  Hope rather that his heart may now return
  To virtue, hate his vice, reform his ways,
  And win the pardon of our glorious prince;
  While you must straightway go, and on your knees
  Repay with thanks his noble generous kindness.

  ORGON
  Well said! We'll go, and at his feet kneel down,
  With joy to thank him for his goodness shown;
  And this first duty done, with honours due,
  We'll then attend upon another, too.
  With wedded happiness reward Valere,
  And crown a lover noble and sincere.










End of Project Gutenberg's Tartuffe, by Jean-Baptiste Poquelin Moliere

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TARTUFFE ***

***** This file should be named 2027.txt or 2027.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/2/2027/

Produced by Dagny and John Vickers.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
