The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Short View of the Frauds and Abuses
Committed by Apothecaries, by Christopher Merrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A Short View of the Frauds and Abuses Committed by Apothecaries
       As well in Relation to Patients, as Physicians: And Of the
       only Remedy thereof by Physicians making their own
       Medicines.

Author: Christopher Merrett

Release Date: May 27, 2005 [EBook #15910]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRAUDS BY APOTHECARIES ***




Produced by Paul Murray, Richard Cohen and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. This file was produced from
images generously made available by the Bibliothèque
nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at http://gallica.bnf.fr.






[Transcriber's Note:

+ Hyphens splitting words across lines have been removed.

+ Original spellings have generally been retained, but
  the Errata from the Second Edition (at the end), and
  a mistake in the Errata (!) have been corrected
  silently. The original text can be found in the HTML
  version.

+ The Latin epigraph translates as: "They all represent
  themselves as Doctors--The Uneducated, The Priest,
  The Nurse, and The Barber, The _Apothecary_, The Old Woman."
]



Imprimatur,
Novemb. 13.
1669.
SAM. PARKER.



A
SHORT VIEW
OF THE
FRAUDS, and ABUSES
Committed by
APOTHECARIES;


As well in Relation to
PATIENTS, as PHYSICIANS:
AND
Of the only Remedy thereof by PHYSICIANS
making their own
MEDICINES.


BY
CHRISTOPHER MERRETT Dr. in Physic, Fellow of the College of
Physicians, and of the Royal Society.

             ----Fingunt se Medicos omnes, Idiota, Sacerdos, Nutrix, &
                                         Tonsor, _Pharmacopæus_, Anus.


The Second Edition more correct.

LONDON,
Printed for James Allestry, Printer to the Royal Society, at the Rose
and Crown in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1670




  A _Short View_ of the _Frauds_ and _Abuses_ committed by
  _Apothecaries_, as well in Relation to _Patients_, as _Physicians_;
  and of the only remedy thereof by _Physicians_ making their own
  Medicines.


Doubtless it will seem strange to most men, that after 30 years not
unsuccessful practice in this great City, I should now at last forbear
sending my Bills to the Apothecaries, knowing that hereby a whole
Company of men interested in the World (who by their number, noise,
and tricks, may be able to decry any Physician) will become my
implacable adversaries, and by their private whispers of untrue tales,
will endeavour to their utmost, either to keep me from any new, or
shuffle me out of my fixed imployment. But not fearing the utmost
their malice can invent, or proclaim; I shall publickly assert what I
privately practice, preferring the publick good, and the honour of my
profession before my own private profit. And although I have had some
experience what their groundless anger can do, when they some years
since proclaimed me in their publick Hall their Enemy, for acting the
College Interest, and of late for saving my Patients lives and purses,
by dispencing gratis my Medicines. Yet I hope no indifferent person,
when he knows that I have thus long slighted their weak endeavours,
will believe I can now at length have so poor an end as revenge;
especially when they shall consider on the one hand, the universal and
daily complaints of both Patient and Physician, the great cause they
have to do so, and the little hope of a remedy, and on the other,
besides that general obligation all men have of doing their
Country-men good, and the particular necessity I have of justifying my
actions, by leaving the World their judg upon the account I shall here
deliver of them. And lastly, that which will leave my Enemies not any
objection, I take upon me not only a great trouble, but charge,
without any other design then doing mankind good, by endeavouring to
restore my profession to its ancient and deserved honours. And had I
none of these inducements, I am sure the vulgar excuse of friends
importunities may be satisfactory to all persons for my publishing
what I here do, when I must acknowledge that many of my Collegues and
other Practisers in several parts, upon reading these papers furnished
me not only with some bad practices of their own experience, but
thereupon enjoyed the publishing of them. So that in these papers I do
but speak the common language of all Physicians, and of very many
Patients. Neither are all their frauds and abuses here inserted, the
rest (perhaps more in number) being reserved to another opportunity. I
shall only add by way of preface; that the last year a Book was
printed on the same argument, by an inquisitive person, now Dr. in
Physic, which might have spared me this labour, but that it was too
large for every ones reading, and in some things short. It was his
fate to be called by them Fool, Ass, and Simple Fellow, and much worse
language, bragging that some of their Boys should answer him. But upon
more serious thoughts, the whole Company have suffered it to find the
credit it well deserves, without the least reply but that of
revilings.

In these ensuing papers, I hope to prove, that these abuses complain'd
of by all sorts of persons, arise from this only cause, that
Physicians dispence not themselves such Medicines, they use for the
relief of their Patients, but commit this work to the Apothecaries, or
rather their Servants.

Now the Apothecaries abuses generally relate either to the Medicines,
Patients, or Physicians; which three do comprehend all I shall say on
this subject.

But the Reader is to take notice, that all here charged on the
Apothecaries, is not meant of every single one, but of some, or more
of them, and may in a short time in all probability be verified of
them all, according as their number, cajoling the ignorant, and bold
daring in Physic increase.

But before I descend to particulars, I shall first lay down this
Proposition, their own confession, and in their own Language, viz.
That they may be the veriest Knaves in England. Because they may put
in bad ingredients, and more or less then the composition requires,
they may substitute one thing for another; and all this without being
detected, and consequently not be punished for such misdemeanors; but
more especially in Medicines for private mens uses, wherein they may
do what they please without the least discovery of the Patient, and
from this general confession of theirs, it clearly follows, that
whatsoever deceit, covetous wits can invent, may at least be suspected
to be used by them, and whatsoever is here alledged may find easier
belief.

And Secondly, Most men wonder, that this Corporation, being but of few
years standing, and to the setting up of whose Trade so small a Stock
is necessary; should live so high, spend so freely, gain so great
Estates, by their return of so little money yearly, which how 'tis
done every man may conceive to be effected by the following Artifices.

More particularly, the Frauds by them committed relate either to their
falsifying of Medicines, or secondly, to the number of their Bills,
and prescriptions, or thirdly, to the prices of them.

First, They use Medicines quite contrary to the prescription,
Myrtle-leafs shewed the Censors for Sena, a Binder for a Purger.
Mushroms of the Oak, &c. rub'd over with Chalk for Agaric, which Mr.
Evelyn in his late publisht Book of Forest Trees, pag. 27. observes,
to the great scandal of Physic as he adds; Hemlock-Dropwort Roots for
Pæony Roots, Poysons for wholesome remedies; Privet by some, by others
Dog-berries, for those of Spina Cervina, no Purgers for a strong one.
Sheeps Lungs for Fox Lungs, the Bone of an Oxe Heart for that of a
Stags Heart, Damsons for Damasc Prunes, Syrup of Limons, for that of
Citrons, Bryony Roots for Mechoacan, &c.

Secondly, They falsify the grand Compositions of the London
Dispensatory. It being a common trade with them to buy unsound, and
decayed Simples of some Druggists, and to return them back so much of
the composition as will pay for the Simples. Secondly, whereas
Apothecaries are bound to shew publickly to the Censors of the
College, and the Master and Wardens of their Company, Mithridate,
Diascordium, Alkermes, &c. Yet for all this some of them privately
make a great deal more of the Composition then is shewed, of unsound
Drugs, and some without any view at all; others put in the Scrapings
that ought to be thrown away; and by these Arts they under-sell, and
ruine one another, selling the Composition at a lower rate then good
Ingredients cost them; and with these complaints they daily mutiny
amongst themselves.

Thirdly, 'Tis very common for them to load Medicines with Honey, and
other cheaper ingredients, and to leave out in whole or in part, those
of greater value; viz. Saffron in Ruffus Pills, and in Oxycroceum
Plaster, which latter, they colour of a saffron colour with Turmeric,
Sanders &c. Ambergrise in Alkermes, Diascordium was found by the
Censors in their search made only of Honey, and Bole-Armeniac. Which
false composition was taken away by the then Master of the Company.

Such Chymists which sell preparations honestly made complain, that few
Apothecaries will go to the prices of them. Whence it comes to pass,
that most of the preparations found in the Shops are sophisticated, to
the great abuse of City and Country. These abuses daily increase since
the Censors, discouraged by the multitude of Empirics swarming in
every Corner, have omitted their wonted searches, being to their loss
of time, and expences out of their own Purses for the publick good
only. Now since the Chymical Oyls, by reason of their great prices are
most of them adulterated, and very few of them right good, and that
nothing hath been published on this matter, and to leave the buyers of
them unexcusable, I shall here add briefly, yet sufficiently the ways
to discover these Cheats. First for sweet-scented Chymical Oyls, viz.
those of Cloves, Cinnamon and Sassaphras. Only drop a little of them
into fair water, and that part which is true good will sink under the
water, but the adulterated part will swim on the top of it. Some
others draw deep tinctures from the said Spices with Spirit of Wine
highly rectified, and sell them for the Oyls; but these mix with the
water throughout, neither swimming, nor sinking. Others more craftily
digest with the said tinctures some of the true Oyls, which compound
being put into water, will for a time render it white. Another way of
sophisticating is with Oyl of Turpentine mixed in great quantity with
that which is adulterated; You may easily discover the Oyl of
Turpentine, by setting it on fire, for it yields abundance of
ill-scented smoak, with very little savour of the Herb, Flour, or
Seed, &c. and soon takes fire. To correct the ill smell of the
Turpentine, they digest it with, and distil it off with Spirit of
Wine. Those sophisticated with Turpentine, fired in a Silver Spoon
colour it, and quickly diffuse themselves upon a Knife, or Paper. The
best way to try by firing, is to put a drop or two of these Oyls on
the end of a broad pointed Knife, which being first heated, and then
thrust into a lighted Candle, presently take fire, and break out into
a flame with much dark smoak; but if you will try them in a Spoon,
heat it first over a Candle, and then blow the flame of lighted paper,
or of a Wax Candle on them. To try the scent, blow out the flame of
the good Oyls, and your smell will soon discover the ill scent of the
Turpentine from that of the good Oyl. But on the contrary, all Oyls
drawn from Plants by distillation hardly flame, and the flame soon
goes out, and the smoak gives a full flavour of the Plant it self,
whereas those sophisticated as before, differ from the true in both.
The same Oyls are also sophisticated with cheap ones drawn from
decayed Oringes, and Limons; Your smell on firing will soon discover
these mixtures. A third way of sophisticating Chymical Oyls is, by
mixing with them such Oyls as are made by expression, which are easily
discovered by rubbing them on white paper, which being held and dryed
at the fire, the Chymical part soon flyes away, and leaves the paper
transparent, looking no otherwise then oyled paper; but pure Chymical
Oyls totally fly away, leaving the paper white as 'twas before, and
not transparent, and in this way Oyl of sweet Almonds and Spike have a
great share. As for Oyls drawn by Retort, they all of them smell so
strong of the fire, that neither smell nor tast can well discover any
fraud in them. Now for the fixed Salts, most of them are made of the
Ashes of Tobacco-stalks, &c. More might be said for the discovery of
the Cheats of other Chymical preparations, which shall be reserved to
another opportunity, and had Physicians just encouragement, they would
spend both their time and moneys on the like discoveries for the
publick Utility.

Fifthly, Add to the former (though perhaps 'tis an error of ignorance
only) that if such Simples are prescribed they know not, they fetch
from the Herb-women what they give them, true or false; for many of
these Women give to very many Plants false names; Now if the
Apothecary be so careful to consult an Herbal, which few have, and
fewer know how to make use of, yet they too frequently mistake the
thing by reason of several names given to the same thing, or of one
name to several things, and many of them consult the common
Dictionaries only, which are most erroneous in the names of natural
things; insomuch that in my first practice (being curious of these
particulars) I have found two or three mistakes in one prescription, a
Catalogue of which mistakes, and names ill given, I had collected, but
the late fire consumed it, though many of them my memory hath
reserved.

Sixthly, Many of the London, and most of the Country-Apothecaries, buy
of the whole-sale men, who affirm of one another, especially of such
who gain great Estates in short time, that they cannot sell their
Medicines honestly made at so low a rate as they do.

Seventhly, I shall need to say little of such distilled waters, as
discover themselves neither to smell, nor tast, but shall only recite
a known Story of an Apothecary, who chid his man for sending away a
Customer that came for Plantan water, telling him there was enough at
the Pump.

Eighthly, As for Ointments, and Plasters, they are sold by some at so
low a price, viz. 3 d. per l. for Ointments, as I have been informed,
that 'tis not possible to make them at, and yet such however falsifyed
maintain a trade amongst Country, and low-priced City-Apothecaries,
and the Chirurgeons profess they cannot effect their Cures with the
Shop-Medicines, and that this is the reason why they make their own
Oyls, Oyntments, &c. as the Apothecaries Charter allows them to do;
and why may not Physicians think this to be the cause why they
sometimes fail in their Cures, as well as Chirurgeons? and also make
their own Medicines as well as they, especially since the Apothecary
may as easily falsify, and to greater profit in the one, then in the
other?

Ninthly, As to their use of bad or decayed Drugs, 'tis so common a
practice that I shall need to give but one notorious instance of it,
and 'tis this, I having occasion to use some Seeds, sent for them to a
Seeds-man, the Messenger desiring to have those of the same Year. The
Tradesman knowing him to live with me, asked, if they were for
Physical use, he replyed in the affirmative, whereat he presently
shewed him others, which were of 6 or 7 years old (as he confessed)
affirming them to be as good for that use as the newest, which he sold
only for sowing, and that he kept the others, though never so old, for
the Apothecaries only, who still asked for them, buying them though 20
years old, not regarding if they were decayed and wholy effete (for no
Seed will preserve its vegetative faculty above 7 years much less its
Physical) so they could but have them cheap. Besides their pretty
knacks (as they call them) of making their Compounds fair to the eye,
more vendible, but worse for use, by restoring them to their colour
and consistence, that they may pass for good, which perhaps 'tis
better to pass over in silence, lest by confuting I should teach the
younger Fry, who may better be honestly ignorant of them. Now for
their substituting one thing for another, and detracting where they
please, I shall add but one Story of an Apothecary, who commanded his
man (who told him they had no good Rhabarb in the house) that he
should put in double quantity of what they had. Nay I have known one
simple of a quite different nature used for a whole composition.

Tenthly, I shall conclude this ungrateful Discourse, with saying that
by reason more frauds may be committed by the Apothecaries, then by
any other Trade, and by supposition that gain will tempt most men to
dishonest actions, especially where they may act undiscovered; I say;
that this seems to be the cause why they have two Supervisors set over
them more then any Company that I know of, viz. the Censors of the
College of Physicians, and the Master and Wardens of their own
Company.

The next thing is the inlarging and multiplying their Bills and
Medicines.

First, When in Chronical Diseases a Physician is consulted, they go on
of their own heads with the same prescription, frequently enough to
the Patients great disadvantage, both of health and purse.

Secondly, By giving and intermixing Medicines of their own Phancy,
with the Physicians prescriptions, viz. some pleasing Medicine,
whereby too often the Physicians intention is quite crost, and the
effect made uncertain, and hazardous.

Thirdly, By giving Medicines themselves on small accounts, and such as
require only a good ordering, and no more.

Fourthly, By repeating long courses of Physic unadvisedly, and
needlesly, when either nothing, or very little is needful to be done.

Fifthly, By creating diseases in easie mens Phansies, and so decoying
them into courses of Physic.

Sixthly, Some of them get private and worthless receipts, and sell
them at what rate they please; Mr. Delaune by one Pill alone, though
not a very safe one, got some thousands of pounds.

Seventhly, If one of them get a private receipt from a Physician
called by the inventor his Nostrum, if another Apothecary have
occasion to use it, he shall be sure to pay sawce for it.

Eighthly, Another trick is when the Patient is cured, and the
Physician therefore hath given over his Visits, then comes the
Apothecary and insinuates by his words and passions, either some
danger of relapse, or some other present distemper, and repairs to the
Physician for a Bill to cure the imaginary disease.

Ninthly, But their principal Art of all is, to cry up, and bring in to
Patients such Physicians, who through design must comply with the
Apothecaries Interest, and such Practisers they extol and cry up for
good Physicians, which some of them call more expresly good
Apothecaries Physicians, and such without doubt, the whole Company
will endeavour to raise unto a fame and practice. But such as write
only for the good of the Patient, and not at all for the benefit of
the Apothecary (as all honest men ought to do) they will endeavour to
prevent their calling in, or to shuffle them out.

Now this good Apothecaries Physician, they describe by his frequent
though needless visits, but especially by the multitude of his Bills,
by his visiting twice a day, or oftner (a very careful and painful
Doctor) and by still writing new Medicines, when half the former, or
perhaps none of them have been taken, making an Apothecaries Shop in
the Patients House, planting the Cupboards and Windows with Glasses
and Gally-Pots, and not a quarter of the whole made use of. He
prescribes a Medicine for every slight complaint, and never goes away
from the Patient or the Patient from him, without a Bill, for fear of
the Apothecaries grumbling.

And from this burdening the sick with multiplicity of Medicines, too
often contrary to, and destructive one of another, it proceeds that in
the Small Pox, and Measles, many are afraid to use Physicians, and
commit the care of the sick to Nurses, and Old Women, and perhaps
sometimes not without cause, for by continual multiplication of
Medicines, the humours of the body may be made, or kept in too great a
state of fluidity, whence the Flox followeth. Whereas a Medicine or
two duly administred, may suffice to bring them well forth, and then
there needs no more but good ordering, unless perhaps some accident
arise, which may require further care. And here as well as in other
Cases, the Patient is to be rectified, who requires the Physicians
Visits, and yet dismisseth him without a reward, unless he writes a
Bill, whereas it might have been better if nothing at all had been
prescribed; and the Physician left to his own judgment; and hence it
is that many enlarge their Bills, that the Patient may think he hath
enough for his money, whereby the Apothecary is gratified, who ought
to commend the Medicines as necessary for the sick person, and
singular in themselves, whereas in truth this great farcy proves
ungrateful to the tast and stomach; inconvenient to health, by curing
one disease, but creating more; and by this means keeping them
continually in a way of Physic.

A third abuse of the Apothecaries relates to the prices of their
Medicines; first they put what rates they please on their Simples,
Compounds, and Receipts, and none are judges of them, but those of
their own Trade; insomuch that they gain a 11 d. in the Shilling, if
they say true of themselves. Whereas the Colleges of Physicians beyond
Sea, yearly set a tax upon the Simples, and Compounds of the Shops. So
that the Customer can tell the price of what he hath occasion to use,
and not stand at the mercy of the Apothecary to rate them as he lists,
and to this purpose they put in print the prices of them every year.

Secondly, Suppose a Physician hath prescribed a Pint of Juleb, &c. to
be taken at four several times, some Apothecaries carry not the whole
pint at once, but divide it into four parts, and carry but one at a
time, and so of other Medicines, and then will charge their Bill for
every single Potion, or Draught, as they ought the whole Pint; so that
by this Art they gain four times as much for the whole Medicine as in
Conscience they ought; and a Juleb, which cost them six pence, will be
rated at 10, 12, or more Shillings. But perhaps 'tis fit they should
be paid for their created Visits; and for this unnecessary
officiousness, persons of great estates may be contented to pay
roundly, if they please.

Thirdly, When a Physician hath prescribed 20 Pills, some of the
Apothecaries will make 30 of them, under pretence the Patient cannot
swallow them else; now reckoning each Pill at a certain rate (as they
usually do) they gain a third part more then they ought.

Fourthly, To advance the prices, you shall hardly ever see a Bill
without Bezoar, or Pearls in it, to make people think them very
chargeable; whereas sometimes there is not above a grain or two of
these dear ingredients in the prescription, and a few grains of these
or Ambergrise doubles or trebles the prices of the Medicines, and are
sure never to be omitted in their Bills, besides the guilding of the
Pills, and covering their Bolusses, and Electuaries with Gold (which
have only an imaginary and no real use in Medicines so used) much
inhanseth their prices, and a rich Cordial inserted exceedingly
advanceth most of their Bills; or if China or any other dear
ingredient be in the receipt 'tis not omitted.

Fifthly, Some Apothecaries offer, and perhaps some Physicians have
taken presents to help them to Customers, which must necessarily be
squeazed out of their higher-rated Medicines.

Sixthly, I have heard some prudent persons complain of their bringing
in their Bills but once in a year, or two; supposing they made them
pay Lombards Usury for their forbearance. And through this neglect
they sometimes lose their money, and whether they raise other Mens
Bills to make up these losses, I affirm not.

Seventhly, Another cause of raising their prices is a necessity of
keeping in their Shops such Medicines as are seldom used, or such as
must upon necessity decay, and grow useless. Now suppose they throw
such away, this reason is good, but you will find a remedy for this
hereafter.

To conclude this second Complaint. By reason of the dear Bills of the
Apothecaries, many are deterred from going to the Physician, and run
to common Mountebanks, and I think this to be the reason (as some
disabused persons have confessed to me) why they have so much cryed up
the abilities of Apothecaries for practice, because they would save
their credit in taking Physic of them. St. Augustine candidly in his
Book of Confessions declares, that through covetousness he repeated a
course of Physic, without consulting the Physician (who had before
cured him of the same disease) to his greater charge, danger of his
life, and offence against God.

Having done with the Apothecaries abuses relating chiefly to the
Patients Health and Purse, and such as are willfully committed (though
all of them reflect on the Physician) I shall now touch on a few
neglects, and mistakes proving often very mischievous.

First, They frequently mistake the Physicians directions, which of
what dangerous consequence it is, every one can tell.

Secondly, They carry a Medicine appointed for one sick person to
another.

Thirdly, They often neglect the sending of Medicines in due time,
especially such as have no Servants, or but raw ones, when the Master
is out of Town, or upon long visits.

Having now done with the Apothecaries as they relate principally to
the sick, I shall in the next place speak of them, as they relate to
Physicians, and that either to the profession in general, or to the
particular practisers of it.

As to the Physicians in general, they endeavour to extirpate them, and
some have been so bold to say, they hope in few years to see never a
Physician in London, and to profess they will scramble with them for
practice. And that this hath been and is their intention, the
following particulars will clearly demonstrate.

First, They have always endeavoured and aimed at the depression and
ruine of the College of Physicians, the only Corporation of that Art
in England, considering rightly, that the depression of the College is
their interest and rise, and that the total subversion of it will make
them absolute Masters in Physic and Physicians their Servants. In
Order hereunto they have constantly, both publickly and privately
opposed the College in whatsoever hath been offered to setle the
liberty of practice on them, their only priviledg and subsistence,
though they have been offered all they could desire for the security
of their Trade, and legal employment, and far beyond whatsoever any
Corporation of Apothecaries in all, or in any forreign part enjoy, yet
nothing would ever content them, but an unlawful, unreasonable,
dangerous, and destructive Usurpation of liberty to some pretended
practice, that thereby they might gain the whole.

Secondly, They have continually traduced the College, and troubled
them in Parliaments, at the Council-Board, &c. to their great charge
and molestation. And for such their great demerits against the
College, the King and his Council, Anno 1639. granted a Quo Warranto
to the Attorney General (the Judges having first heard the whole
matter) to take away their Charter, which doubtless had been effected,
had not the troubles, and long civil War immediately ensued.

Thirdly, And in this present Parliament, how did they endeavour to
prepossess the Members of the House of Commons with strange, and false
prejudices and assertions drawn from irrational, and groundless
suppositions, making us the greatest Tyrants in the World, inferring
ridiculously that a Lady, or Charitable Gentlewoman (for in that
believing Sex they have gain'd a great deal of ground by their
falsities) might not give the Poor a Cordial, &c. without being
questioned by the College; whereas they know in their Consciences,
that the College hath power enough by their first Charter to act as
much in this kind against themselves, and all other persons, as they
desired of this present Parliament; And yet neither Apothecary, or any
other who practised charitably, were ever troubled for so doing. They
pretended also they were abridged wholy from their Trade, and might
not sell a penny-worth of Mithridate, &c. without a Doctors Bill.
Whereas there's not a word in the Charter to that purpose; the sole
intent whereof was to keep them as well as other Mountebanks, from
prescribing (which they call selling) the Physicians only livelyhood.
And as to the bill itself so much railed on by them in
Westminster-Hall, Coffee-Houses, Ale-Houses, &c. 'tis easie to make it
out, that this Charter as proposed gives the Apothecaries more liberty
and freedom of exercising their lawful Trade, then is enjoyed in any
other Nation, where both Corporations are erected, and that it doth in
nothing infringe, or diminish their freedom as Citizens, or their
Charter as Apothecaries; and that our Charter was compiled by some,
and perused and approved by others the most eminent Lawyers in England
for Worth and Place; and yet none of these could find any thing in it
either Illegal, Tyrannical, or unfit to be desired of the Parliament.
Nay many mis-informed Members being rightly instructed in the true
state of the matter, have acknowledged the justice of it; And was no
more then King James by his Letters Patents, dated the 18th of
October, in the 15th year of his Reign, granted to the said College;
near about the same time the Apothecaries Charter was granted; and
being almost nothing else but a supply of what was short in their
former Grants, viz. That whereas their Charter granted by King Henry
the Eighth, gave power to punish offenders in the practice of Physic;
and because there was no power given to summon, nor penalty imposed
for the non-appearance of such offenders; therefore by their
non-appearance, the said power of the Censors was eluded; for no such
offenders would appear before them, and consequently no punishment
could be inflicted on them, according to the true meaning of the said
Act. Now this Charter so much declaimed against, prayed only a supply
of this defect, and also better and more necessary ways and means,
without which, such and all other offenders against the lives and
healths of his Majesties Subjects could not be discovered; and they
had reason not to doubt a grant of the said power, since by the said
Charter a power was granted them to imprison offenders, whom the
Keepers of the Prisons would not receive, because no command, nor
penalty was imposed on them, for not receiving such offenders sent by
the Censors (a thing ridiculous to our present Lawyers) however this
defect was supplyed by an Act in the first of Queen Mary. Now whereas
since the making of the said Acts and Powers, granted to the College,
several other Trades, besides the Apothecaries, relating to Physic
(being then all Members of the Grocers Company) viz. Druggists,
Chymists, Sellers of Strong-Waters and Oyls, have arose distinct from
each others, and many abuses have been and are committed in each of
them, as they all confess. The said Charter prays for the publick good
only (there being the same reason of all) they might have the same
power of Surveying them also, as they have of the Apothecaries, which
most of the Judicious, and sober of the said Companies, as well in
relation to their own private profit, and also the publick, by having
all Medicines good, did not oppose, but liked well of. Nay there was
nothing in the said Charter, but what was judged good by all or most
of the Judges of England, several times convened by Order of the King
and his Council, to deliver their opinions concerning some Quæries,
which comprised the main of what was desired and petitioned for by the
College, of this present Parliament. But before the Committee could
make report to the House, the Parliament was adjourned, whereupon
Apothecaries falsly gave out, and made people believe our Charter was
taken from us. And in this transaction before the Committee, one
Cocket an Apothecary exhibited in the name of the Chymists such a
Scandalous Libel, as the Committee would not suffer to be read; drawn
as some conceive by the assistance, and countenance, if not
contrivance of his Company.

Lastly, The Company of the Apothecaries are bound by their Charter to
bring their Servants (before they make them Free) to be examined by
the Censors of our College, and to have their approbation of their
fitness to exercise their Art, and set up their Trade. Now that they
have herein neglected their duty, and consequently may be
dis-franchised and lose their Freedoms for this omission, 'tis
manifest not only by the vapours of some of them to some members of
our Body, that they never underwent this examination; but also by
comparing of our Register (wherein are recorded the names of all such
as have been examined) with theirs, if they keep any for this purpose.
Sure I am, that in two years together, when I was Censor, very few, if
any, did appear to their examination, whereas yearly a very great
number set up their Trades. Nay since the firing of London not one
Apothecaries Servant hath been examined by the Censors, for more then
these three Years last past, in which time perhaps no less then 100
have been made free by the Company.

Before our presenting this Charter to the Parliament, they would admit
no Arbitrators betwixt our Corporation, and Theirs, not contenting
themselves with their Charter lately granted in King James's Reign,
and that by the procurement of some of our College for these
unthankful persons. For they would not refer themselves (as the
Chirurgeons without many words or dispute did) to the most upright,
and most knowing Sir Orlando Bridgeman then Lord Chief Justice, and
now Lord Keeper, for a clause to be by him drawn, in order to preserve
their immunities and Charter; which they refused, fearing belike he
would exclude them from the Practice of Physic, which the Law hath
already done, and which is all they could doubt of; but the
Corporation of Chirurgeons did acquiesce in the clause drawn by the
said Lord Chief Justice, and never appeared before the Committee
against the said Charter.

Their increasing dis-respect, and undervaluing the College, appears in
this, that of late years they place our Censors invited to their new
Masters Dinner, at their second Tables whereas always heretofore they
were seated at the first Table, next to the Master of the Company.

And to hinder the building of a New College, and the Contribution of
the Honorary Fellows thereunto, they tell them that we deceived them
in their admission, and never intend the building of a New College,
though a large contribution hath been made, and ground purchased in
order thereunto by the Members of their Corporation.

And their further design appears in their great triumphing, and
rejoycing when any illiterate person hath gained any reputation for a
Cure performed, especially where Physicians have been concerned,
though the Patients neglect or obstinateness, have been the sole cause
of this non-performance, and by their continued detraction from
Physicians, and applauding themselves, hoping by the former, that
people will think such Mountebanks able to do better Cures then
learned Physicians, and then they can easily insinuate themselves
superior to such Mountebanks, and consequently to Physicians. By the
latter, they seek to depress, and level us to themselves, being
conscious they can never rise to that worth and ability, required in a
Physician.

Another manifest sign of their endeavour to usurp our Practice is,
their absurd calling the sick their Patients, for 'tis most certain
that in all reason and language the Physician and Patient only have
relation to each other, but not to the Apothecary, who is but a
Tradesman, and manual Operator. Now a Tradesman and his Customer, or
Chapman, are Relatives each to other, but those Apothecaries who
intrude themselves and usurp on our profession, may call their
Customers Patients, and that in a true literal sence, when by their
ignorance they make them really sufferers under them; and if they deny
Apothecary and Patient to be non-sence, they shew themselves pitifully
ignorant in the Laws, and Rules of Reason, or else profess themselves
Physicians. And the like non-sence they commonly utter by calling
Physicians that make their own Medicines, Mountebanks and Quacks,
whereas none can be such but those who practise without Lawful
Authority, as the Apothecaries, &c. do; and they are not ignorant in
this their malice, that the Law of England would punish them roundly
for so saying. And were I troublesome or vindicative, I could make
some of them examples, but I freely remit the slanders in this kind
that are past.

Having done with the main part of the Disease, next follows the
Remedy; and the only firm and proper one will appear to be, that
Physicians make their own Medicines; the benefit whereof to the
publick, the reasonableness of the thing it self, the necessity in
relation to the Physician, will be manifest by that which follows.

And First, All that hath been said demonstrates this last proportion.

Secondly, The desire of most persons, and the censure of all wise men,
who say we are wanting to our own interest, if we make not use of the
remedy in our own hands, performing our Art in all its members,
whereof making of Medicines is a chief one.

Thirdly, The common practice, and constant usage of all former and
antient Physicians in all other Nations, and in England also (for 'tis
easie to say when there was not one Apothecary in this Kingdom) the
Laws of our Nation, nay even the Apothecaries Charter allow it, the
Language of all Physicians, our College voting it honourable so to do,
nay Apothecaries themselves commending it in such Physicians as buy
their Medicines of them.

Fourthly, The Kings Physicians have formerly made the Kings Medicines,
as 'tis manifest by my Lord Coke, in his 4th. Book of the Institutes,
part 4. pag. 251. where he comments on Rot. Pat. 32 H 6. m. 17. He
there first recites the Roll it self, wherein are appointed (the King
being then sick) 3 Physicians and 2 Chirurgeons, to freely minister
and execute Physic about the Kings Person, and there are also recited
in general, Medicines external, and internal. And on this Roll Coke
among other things infers, that the Physicians may use the aid of
those Chirurgeons named in the Warrant, but of no Apothecary, but to
prepare and do all things themselves, &c. And the reason of all this
is, the precious regard had of the health and safety of the King, who
is the head of the Common-wealth. And I am told by one of his present
Majesties Physicians, that the King himself affirmed heretofore we are
unwise in neglecting our duty herein, and lately of these papers, that
'twas the publick interest so to do.

Fifthly, Chirurgeons (as before) will not trust them to make external
Remedies; and the King, and East-India Company commit the making of
their Chests for their Fleets to the Chirurgeons.

Sixthly, Have not Ladies and Charitable Gentlewomen their Closets well
furnished with various Medicines for the Poors use, and for their own
also, when Physicians are called to their houses in the Country?
Distillers of Strong-waters, Makers of Plaisters, Confectioners make
Medicines bought by the Apothecaries, Ale-Houses sell purging Drinks,
and Book-sellers sell Chymical Medicines, and all this without much
regret of the Apothecaries. But if a Physician intermix a Medicine
with theirs, though the Patients life be saved thereby, what noise,
and murmuring, and proclaiming of it the next Market-day to the rest
of their Company? to what purpose any one may judg.

Seventhly, Why should not Physicians, being lawfully authorized
thereunto, practise with their own Medicines, as well as the
Apothecaries with theirs, though against Law, and incurring thereby
the penalty of 5l. per Month, which the College never troubled them
for, or exacted of them?

Eighthly, Physicians will be necessitated to it for their subsistence
and honour, and to preserve their Art from being prostituted to
illiterate persons, the Apothecaries becoming now their Competitors.

Ninthly, By this means Physicians will avoid multitudes of
inconveniencies, proceeding from writing of Bills, and the
Apothecaries Visits.

First The mistakes, and frauds in the Ingredients, especially
committed by the great practising Apothecaries, who may, as appears by
the following story, be suspected to send, instead of what was
prescribed, the remains of his own practice, or else some cast-by
Medicines; for else how could it be when a Medicine was prescribed to
stand in Infusion or steep a whole night, that it should be brought
two hours after the Bill was written, even the very same Evening?
Which by accident the Patient confessed, wanting the expected success.

Secondly By this course Physicians avoid the many opprobrious terms
cast upon them by Apothecaries:

As First, In saying that if he had not omitted or added something, the
Patient might have miscarried; which he may say at pleasure without
any contradiction, though doubtless many have been killed by this
means.

Secondly, By saying the Bill could never have been made without some
alteration of the Apothecary, thereby insinuating the Doctors
ignorance in compounding.

Thirdly, In saying the Doctor is not versed in Medicines, because
forsooth he varieth not at every Visit, and multiplieth not new Bills
for the Apothecaries profit.

Fourthly, In saying they teach Physicians, and help them to, and in
their practice. The first and last are vile and foolish Scandals; as
to the Second, 'tis true indeed, that younger Apothecaries recommend
Physicians to their acquaintance; but 'tis no longer then they have
learned enough (as they think) to set up for themselves.

Fifthly, In saying, they knew before-hand what such a Doctor would
prescribe, and hence it is they have nick-named some Physicians of no
mean practice, by the Medicines they frequently use, which names in
respect to the persons, I shall conceal; and of such Physicians, they
brag they can prescribe as well as they. But if a Physician advise
things unknown to them, or out of the common tract, then they say the
Doctor intends to puzzle them.

Sixthly, He will avoid the censure of his Bills, which every pitiful
fellow, nay their very Boys will absolve or condemn at pleasure, and
that openly too, nay sometimes to the Patient himself, and thereby
call in his good Apothecaries Physician. Now what a shame is it, that
a Physicians credit and livelihood, should stand at the mercy of such
pitiful ignorant, and self-ended Souls? I have heard one of them say
of the now most Eminent Practiser in London, that his Boy could write
as good a Method as he, and that he understood the practice of Physic
as well as any Physician in London except 2, or 3, though the same
person was soon made to confess, he neither knew the Disease, Cause,
nor Cure of a Pleurisy, pretended to be throughly understood by him.

Thirdly, He will avoid the trouble put upon him after he hath writ his
Bill, by the Apothecaries ignorance in not understanding it, who to be
informed came to the Doctor heretofore, with their Hats off, but now
send their Boys, who soon put theirs on. Such respect do they give
Physicians, when they come to them as to their Masters to teach them.

Fourthly, He will avoid the impertinent Visits of the Apothecaries,
and non-sensical, troublesome, and discouraging, frightful discourses
to the Patient, of whom no man can expect more then the Common Proverb
gives to Praters, and impertinent Speakers, That they talk like
Apothecaries.

Fifthly He will avoid the mischiefs from their Visits, who by their
shrugs, signs, or words, may diminish the Physicians reputation, and
good opinion, whether in his skill, or Medicines, whereby good
Medicines are neglected and the expectation of a good success upon the
use of them taken away, or at least causing an averseness to them;
which actings do exceedingly prejudice the Patient, in reference to
his Cure.

Sixthly, He will avoid this inconvenience, that some Apothecaries have
attributed the Cure to some of their intermixed Medicines, or
alteration of the Doctors Bill.

Seventhly, He will avoid that incivility of such of them, who in the
Physicians presence, will feel the Pulse, judg of the Urine, discourse
the Cause, Nature, what the Disease is, and what will be the issue of
it, propose Medicines, nay sometimes endeavour to advise with the
Physician, to contradict and dispute with him, to compare and set
himself above the Physician; and to say truth, these odious and
intolerable Comparisons and intrusions daily complained of by my
Collegues, were a great cause of my departing from them.

Eighthly, He will avoid those Scandals they have opportunity to raise,
that such a Physician is Covetous, Proud, Negligent, and minds not his
practice, and the like without the least ground, and are frequently by
such Artifices, the Cause of introducing another Physician, knowing
that thereby more Bills will come to their File, and many times the
former Medicines be layed aside, and in this shuffling in and out of
Physicians, they have commonly a great share.

Ninthly, Apothecaries being now Competitors with Physicians for
practice, and down-right Enemies to such as make their own Medicines;
why should not we suspect them of this false Play, by telling the
Patient the Doctors Medicine will not work (which he knows well enough
how to effect) and then to tell him he will prepare him one of his own
that will work, when perhaps that he calls his own preparation, was
nothing but what the Doctor had prescribed before; and by this
Artifice to advance himself above the Physician.

Another mischief in sending Bills to the Apothecaries is, that though
the Apothecaries be honest (and who can tell which of them is so?) yet
the Servants neglect, or ignorance (to whom they commit the whole care
of dispensing, and are intruth the Apothecaries (and not their
Masters) may mar all in their Masters absence, who is visiting abroad,
or at his recreations.

And now I have done with the unpleasant talk of raking into the faults
of the Apothecaries, and with discoursing how Physicians may save
themselves from their devices, I shall next shew the advantages that
will come to the Patient, the Physician, and people, by this way of
remedy proposed.

As for the Patients, they may hereby save most of the great charges of
Apothecaries Bills, which in long Cases amount to very great sums in a
year, although the Physician hath received very few Fees; the
Physician may so order his business as to take his Fee for his Visits
only, and at home such competent Fees for his advice alone, as are
usually given, and in both Cases take nothing for his Medicines, and
so save the Patient the whole charge of the Apothecaries Bill, which
very seldom comes short, and for the most part manifoldly exceeds the
Physicians Fees. And this he may very well do by making fewer, less
chargable, more effectual, and durable Medicines then the Shops
afford, and suffer nothing in the non-use, or decay of his Medicines;
because he need make no more then will serve his own practice: and I
must here profess, that which I intended not to have published, that
this is the course I have generally taken, for the four Months last
past, since I made my own Medicines, but that some Apothecaries have
given out most falsly, that I have sent in Bills to Patients for
money; but to convince such of their wonted lying, I do hereby oblige
my self to give 100 pound to any of them that shall produce such a
Bill. Secondly, This way will not clog the Patient with more Medicines
then are needful, nor will omit anything may conduce to his recovery,
for if he fails in either, 'tis to his prejudice, either in spending
more Medicines which cost him money, or in not performing his Cure,
which loseth his practice.

But I do not propose this course of mine as a general rule to all
Physicians, but leave this to every mans private judgment; Neither do
I hereby bind my self to the same practice, because some few Cases may
fall out (though to an equal advantage to the Patient) may perswade me
to the contrary. For I find some persons of that perswasion, as to
think they have not given satisfaction, unless they have payed for the
Medicines; but to such persons, I have always allowed them to give me
what they pleased themselves, for the cure only, to the full
satisfaction of both parties. Though I will not deny but some persons
out of gratitude for their Cure, have rewarded me beyond this
proposal. Some of my acquaintance have desired me to be more plain in
this last Paragraph, especially in that part of it where I say I do
not bind my self to the said practice; and to declare more fully the
Cases that may perswade me to the contrary; which are these and such
as these. First Where Patients of their own free offers will contract
with the Physician, or have formerly too meanly rewarded him for his
Cure, in both which the Statutes of our College allow a contract to be
made with Patients. Another case is, if a Physician be consulted once,
and for his Fee hath given Medicines gratis, if the Patient frequently
send for his Medicines without the least reward at all. Or if the
Patient living far in the Country, having (as before) once consulted
the Physician, as in the last case, and shall for weeks, nay months,
send for the same Medicines. Or if the Patients friend shall recommend
a Medicine to another friend of his unknown to the Physician; and
where he gives no Counsel, if a Physician in the Country shall desire
some of his Medicines, which are all the cases that occur at present;
I say in some of these, the Physician must needs be payed for his
Medicines; but in other, 'tis rational he should be payed for his
advice, as he desireth new Medicines, which charge will be far short
also of the Apothecaries Medicines, whether repeated or prescribed
upon new advice.

Now the great charge of Apothecaries Bills, and nauseousness of their
Medicines, appears to be the cause why long habitual diseases, as the
Kings Evil, Falling-Sickness, Convulsions, Melancholies, and Winds in
the Bowels, Gouts, &c. become seldom relieved, though they may with a
constant, facile way, be perfectly cured, where neither the great
charge, nor unpleasantness of Medicines, deterr them from a continued
necessary use of Remedies. And for the same reasons many will be kept
from relapses, who being tired out with taking variety of Medicines,
give over before the tone and strength of their parts is restored,
which is necessary to be done in all long Diseases.

He may so contrive his Medicines, first, That they may be taken in
small quantity, and be made more grateful to the tast, and stomach,
and perform more then those of the Apothecaries, commonly slovenly
made, and of themselves Fulsom, Nauseous, and Sluggish. Secondly, His
Medicines made for particular persons, may last Weeks, Months, nay
Years, whereas the Apothecaries Drinks, especially in the Summer time,
must be renewed once, or twice every day, to the excessive charge of
the Patient.

That his Medicines may be fewer, is evident in Physicians that
practise in the Country, who ride far to Patients, and carry in their
Mans Cloak-bag, Medicines enough, not only for the person he is sent
to, but also for most other persons, and Cases he meets with in his
Travels, and therefore his Closet needs contain but few, yet noble and
generous Medicines, and such as may serve him upon all occasions,
supplying what's defective from the Fields or Gardens. He may avoid
all pompous, useless, chargable Medicines of the Shops, and substitute
in their place, cheaper, and more conducible to health; He may very
well lay aside the precious Stones, Saphir, Emerals, &c. the high
priced Magistrals of Coral, and Pearl, made worse by their
preparations, or rather destroyed thereby in their Virtue, as also
Unicorns Horn; and Bezoar, all which are now rarely used alone, but in
the received Compositions; He may also spare the charges of leaf-gold,
for guilding Pots, Glasses, Pills, Electuaries, Boles, &c. which
serves only to raise the Bill.

He may teach the Patients facile and easie Remedies, as to make a
Clyster, apply Blisters, or Medicines to the feet, where they are
needful, &c. and in many Cases may cure by well ordering his Patient
only, without any Remedies at all, or but very few; being free to act
for the Patients Health, without the grumbling of the Apothecary; and
many other ways he may daily meet with, very advantageous to the
Patient.

He will have little use of Conserves, Syrups, Lohocks, &c. a greater
part whereof Sugar makes up, which doth more hurt to most persons,
then the other ingredients do good.

As for Infusions and Decoctions, he will find by experiment, how much
liquor, or Menstruum will suffice to extract the full vertue of the
ingredients, and what are helps, or hinderances thereunto, and thereby
neither suffer loss in the quantity, or quality of them.

He will discover the inefficacy of many of the Syrups and other
Medicines in the Shops, made of such ingredients, the qualities
whereof, what with boiling, what with the great quantity of Sugar
necessary to keep them, are either made useless or opposite to the
ends they are proposed for. Especially in such Plants, Seeds, and
Flowers, which consist of fine volatil parts, and even in drying and
pounding, or the least boiling exhale and evaporate, and therefore in
the common way of ordering them, lose their whole vertue or most of
their efficacy, and alter in their properties. From which by several
methods known to some Physicians, very generous and singular Medicines
may be produced.

He need not use so large Compositions consisting of such confused and
contrary ingredients, and will find good reason to lay aside those
unintelligible and unreasonable Compositions of Mithridate, and
Treacle, and the so much magnified Treacle-water, and will substitute
better in their places, of smaller charge, and less trouble; and this
all Physicians I have conversed with, and the College it self, by
their Book published for the common good, in the year before the
Plague, and all those Physicians in this City, who make or intend to
make their own Medicines, do confess.

But here Apothecaries open wide, and cry out that the Physicians are
great Cheats, and envious persons, for continuing such flat Medicines,
and not recommending to the World, or rather their Shops, our greater
secrets. The answer is easie, that the Medicines in our Pharmacopæa,
are the best of any other Pharmacopæa in the World, both for their
goodness, and well preparing of them, whether they be Chymical, or
Galenical; and therefore the same scandal will ly on all Pharmacopæa's
whatsoever. Secondly, I say that within these few last experimental
years, the practical part of Physic hath been much improved (as well
as Anatomy) especially by such as have put their hands to work; and
therefore till such improvement, this could not be well amended.
Furthermore, in making new Dispensatories, a full content must be had,
and 'twere not fit to move where the motion were not like to take
place, for though private men invent new ways of compounding and
preparing, and using their own invented Medicines, yet 'twill require
a long time to make them publickly known, and brought into common use,
and till that be done 'tis not possible to have them brought into a
common Dispensatory; besides, no man would make a motion for such a
reformation, unless he were well furnished with specificks, and then
'twill be required of him to expose them to the whole World, which how
incongruous it will be, every man may easily conceive; hereto add,
that the Apothecaries think themselves able enough by this present
Dispensatory, to out-beard Physicians, and do publickly profess (as
hath been said) that they understand the practice of Physic well as
they; how much more would they have said so, if they had been made
Masters of these secrets? And here I shall admonish those of my own
Faculty, who have devoted their Studies, Labours, and Purses, for the
improvement of their Art, to consider, that as natural things have
their bounds and limits, and that there is no new Creation of them,
and besides, that these things have their bounds also of improvement,
beyond which 'tis impossible for man to go; and that by a good method
and industry, that end may be attained; (though at present I must
confess, no Art is more capable of enlargement then ours:) I say let
all consider, and they will find, what a vast encouragement they have
to improve their knowledg so far, that they shall not only be able to
leave mankind destitute of no remedy Nature did ever produce; but also
restore and setle those Honours ignorant men would usurp, upon the
Learned Professors of this Science, and I see no reason why Physicians
should communicate their secrets to such persons, who will make use of
them, to the ruine of the Inventors, which is indeed a failer of
trust, for when a Physician writes his Bill, he trusts the Apothecary
only with making the Medicine for a particular occasion, and not to
make use of it as his own when be pleaseth for his own profit, and the
Inventor have no further benefit by it, then perhaps one single
advantage.

Lastly, When Dispensatories were first made, the Apothecaries were
really Physicians Servants, and wholy at their command, not in the
least intrenching on their business, and the rates of Medicines were
reasonable; which superiority over them still continues only in their
prescriptions, the forms whereof are always commanding to take this
and that, and to mix them, &c. but within these few last years they
have set up for themselves, and advanced the rates beyond all reason;
and to be sure, the more we teach them by our Books, the more they
will trangress in both.

He may receive encouragement from what he discovers, that is more then
ordinarily useful, whereas by writing Bills, he soon communicates to
the ignorant and lazy, who will neither spend time nor money to
advance the Art, but while the one is at work to his great charge,
lots of time, much pains and trouble, the others seek by petty tricks
and Arts to gain a name, and profit from the industrious. Nay some
Mountebanks have been set up by purchasing receipts of the Apothecary
or his Servants. And one of them told me, he set up a Quack by selling
and commending to him a Medicine he had long kept in his Shop and
could not otherwise put off, and that by degrees he made him a famous
practiser among the ignorant and poor people. An Act quite contrary to
the interest of the Company.

Hence also will arise an emulation amongst Physicians, who shall
exceed each other in noble remedies, and from thence a full and happy
improvement of whatsoever God hath created for the recovery of mans
health impaired; for from the Physician alone the advancement of
Physic is to be expected. How many simples of unknown properties have
been brought into use, to the great comfort of the sick? and many more
may be, as also many preparations, both simple and compound, both in
the Galenical, and Chymical practice, and by this means the Art will
be advanced to its just dignity, now much diminished, dishonoured, and
near to be lost by the intrusion of ignorant persons.

Greater respect will be given to such Physicians, as being the
immediate instruments of life and health, who will derive unto
themselves that which is now given to the Apothecaries, which proceeds
chiefly from fear lest they should do the Patient hurt; and so their
honour will be doubled, which every Physician looks principally at;
but the Apothecary being not so far concerned, looks chiefly at his
own profit, and regards not the Patients charge. For the greater the
Patients charge, the greater must needs be the Apothecaries gain;
whereas on the contrary, 'tis the Physicians Interest to cure the
Patient with the greatest ease.

He may proceed on safely and securely in his well experienced
Medicines, having before him not only what he hath prescribed for the
same Patient, but for all others in the like Case, and thereby keep in
memory what he would have forgot, if his Bill had remained on the
Apothecaries File; viz. the Medicines and their success. By means
whereof Physicians do not advance their knowledg so far as they might;
for how is it possible they should remember the particulars of their
Bills writ some days before? and therefore know not how to proceed so
well. But the Apothecaries having before them the whole series of
Medicines, brag they can do more then the Physicians, and by this
means insinuate the same opinion into people.

The Physician will be consulted in the beginning of Diseases, to the
safety and little expence of the Patient, who will not go first to the
Apothecary, who practiseth on him till the Case is desperate, and then
calls in a Physician when 'tis too late; and if he dyes, the Physician
must carry away the disgrace alone; but if he recover, the Apothecary
if he be so minded, by some trick will share with him in the honour:
and by this resort of people to the Apothecaries in beginning of
Diseases; we meet with few Cases of easie Cure, but are chiefly made
use of in dangerous Diseases, or those of short period, or such as are
accompanyed with great pains and torments, to our great and continual
anxiety.

The Physicians experience hereby as 'tis surer, so 'twill be greater.

He will make use of no Medicines but the choicest, and when they are
in their full vigour, and such as are durable, and after once or twice
Tryal of them, will seldom fail in his expected success; which cannot
be certainly had without some tryal. For though a man buy the choicest
ingredients, viz. Sena, which may appear to the Senses very good, yet
he cannot positively say, how well, nor yet what quantity of it will
work, till he hath made use of it. But afterwards he may confidently
apply the whole parcel he hath bought to his purpose. The like may be
instanced in a crop of Wheat or Barley, which the skillfullest
Husband-man cannot tell how they will yield for Bread, or Malt, till
he hath used them. Now how is it possible that a Physician can with
any certainty make use of several Shops, since there is so great
difference in the ingredients? and 'tis certain the same Medicine made
by several Apothecaries, shall differ much in colour, smell, and tast,
and consequently effect too; which cannot proceed from any other cause
then the difference of the ingredients themselves, or by omitting some
ingredients, or by substituting one thing for another; or by distinct
ways of preparing them. The same also may be said of Compositions,
much more of Chymical Medicines so much sophisticated, and of so much
danger and hazard, if not well prepared, which he cannot discover till
he hath seen the effect of them, unless it be such as he makes
himself, nor those neither till he hath made some tryal of them.

He will much inlarge Materia Medica, Chymistry and Pharmacy, and
discover the grounds of them, and wherein the efficacy of remedies
lyes, and thereby lay open a whole Ocean for new discoveries, and by
the by observe many useful products and Phenomena of Nature, to the
great improvement of his Art, and sound Natural Philosophy, which are
not taken notice of by Apothecaries, and their Servants; for all which
they have neither will nor skill.

As to the improvement of Medicines, this may be added, by the
experimenting Physician, that in distill'd waters he will consider and
find which of them will afford any virtue, which only phlegm
equivalent but to Conduit-water, which of them will keep long, and in
perfection, which soon or in what time decay, and spend them
accordingly, and in compound distill'd waters, will find cause to lay
aside many simples as nothing conducing, or rather weakning the
efficacy of the Medicine designed; whereby much charge and trouble
will be spared, and better compositions be made.

He will gain and keep to himself Patients, who have diseases they are
unwilling should be known by Apothecaries and their Boys, and all such
as have a mind to turn over their File.

The Patient will have better opinion of the Medicines, and confidence
in the use or them, and the Physician more satisfied in his
Conscience, and better assured of the success.

He will gain reputation to his Art, by restoring it to its first
institution and practice, by the Founders and Heroes of Physic.

By constantly practised Medicines he will find out a better method of
Cure, and may hereby arrive at the true causes of diseases.

He will observe what Medicines by precipitation or other ways, alter,
destroy, or weaken one another, whereby of good ingredients singly
used, a bad Composition may be made, and therefore fail in the success
expected. Many more things might be here added, which a skillful
observer, and versed in the way to make experiments (no easie matter)
will daily find, and at present I do not so much as give hints of
them, but shall hereafter, as occasion and opportunity require.

He will have more scope to be charitable to the poor, and more civil
and obliging to his friends, by curing them gratis, or at small
charges.

He need not trouble himself with ways of concealing the use of his
Medicines, by setting down no directions in his Bill, but giving them
to the Patient, which the Apothecary soon learns; nor with giving some
of his own Medicines at a pinch, which if they succeed not, to be sure
the Apothecaries will cry down in all places, but will conceal all
eminently good successes, as disadvantageous to themselves; nor by
placing their Arcana's in the Shops of those Apothecaries they
commonly make use of; nor by recommending their Patients to such
Apothecaries they intrust their secrets with. For then great
complaints are made that the Physicians carry away their Customers,
and take away their livelyhood, affirming they are willing to fetch
them from the prescribing Doctors Apothecaries. To which I answer,
that they do fetch them, but perhaps not always; since I have heard
them often say, these secrets were but the Medicines of the London
Dispensatory disguised under new names, to the discredit of the
Physicians that prescribed them. And I well remember some of them have
neglected to fetch from my house, not far from their own, some of my
preparations, though they had them gratis, for the fetching; whereby
the Patients have suffered, and thought I neglected them, 'till they
were rectified by another Visit. Nay one of them told me, he had
rather dy with his own Shop-Medicines, then be cured with my
Magistrals: much more would he have said of Patients, manifestly
preferring his own profit before their lives; a most Unchristian
saying!

One singular advantage such a Physician will have, that the slanders
of the Apothecaries will appear to be malicious, as being raised
against such as act contrary to their profit.

By this means Physicians will unite against the common Enemy, will
contribute mutual assistance, and communicate more freely to one
another their practice and remedies; and also the frauds and unlawful
practices of the Apothecaries, will conceal the counsels, and act
whatsoever may tend to the advance of their Art; and Patients also
will discover the Apothecaries censures, and practices against the
Physicians and their prescriptions.

Hereby that great interest will decay Apothecaries have in Families
for their petty officiousnesses (which Physicians not to displease
them have put them upon) these will be taught Nurses, and the
assistants, and which are by some of these as well, certainly more
diligently performed then by the Apothecaries.

Hereby the filii Artis, or younger Physicians, will sooner come into a
better and more setled practice, and not be beholden to Apothecaries
to bring them Patients wherewith they often upbraid them, and glory
amongst themselves and to other persons, that they introduced such and
such a Physician.

Hereby Chirurgeons will be restored to some of their employment now
usurped by the Apothecaries, as leting of blood, applying Leeches,
Plasters, Cupping-Glasses, Syringing and Salivation, wraping up bodies
in Cere-Cloaths, &c. which indeed do more properly belong to them then
to the Apothecaries; hereby also haply many occasions of quarrel
betwixt Physicians and the Apothecaries will cease, each party acting
according to his own way.

By this means Pseudochymists, and other Mountebanks mouths and
revilings will be stopped, only exclaiming for this, that Physicians
make not their own Medicines. But since the publication of these
papers I am informed that the said Pseudochymists and Mountebanks rail
against me, this Book, and the way propounded, as much as the
Apothecaries, though before equal Enemies each to others. So that they
have fulfilled the Proverb, of like to like. And no wonder since
hereby their Kingdom of darkness is brought to light, and they are
obliged to oppose it, as the Copper-Smiths were to revile St. Paul for
speaking against the Idol of Diana of the Ephesians, whereby their
trade was lost.

And as for the reasonableness of it, that the Physician ought to
support himself by all lawful ways and means, and to have præeminence
above those ignorant persons that incroach upon his profession, 'tis
confessed by all that have considered the great charge, study, and
labour, before he can arrive at any benefit from it; for he must take
the chargeable degrees of Batchellor, and Master of Arts, Batchellor
of Physic, and after 14 years standing, the degree of Doctor; besides
his bare expences for his maintenance in the University, Charges in
Anatomies, knowledg of natural things; Travels abroad, Chymistry, and
Experiments; his Library, Habit, his more free way of living in a
suitable house, and Attendants, greater Taxes, &c. insomuch that a
Doctor of Physic spends more before he comes to practise, then will
set up perhaps a dozen Apothecaries in a way of livelihood; and
besides, great sums of money before he can put himself in a fitting
Equipage: whereas on the contrary, many young men before their time of
Apprenticeship is out, provide well for themselves by Quacking; and
certainly the Study of Physic, and consequently the knowledge of
Nature, must bid farewel to the Universities, if Shops be permitted to
make practisers, for such the people will soon create Doctors, which
title the Apothecary takes upon him, though he understand not the
reason of the name, to the great shame of the Universities, and
Faculty, when ignorant people shall give, and they challenge the same
title for nothing, attained by the Physician at a great rate and long
study, the vulgar taking Practiser and Doctor to signifie the same
thing. And which no persons of knowledg and education do, and perhaps
most other persons give them in way of Jeering.

From the handsom support of Physicians these benefits will accrue to
the publick, that thereby the honour all Nations yield to the English
Physicians will be kept up, who in the late times, when the reputation
of the Nation was well neer forfeited abroad, the Physicians then in
being, most whereof are now living, and Members of the College,
maintained the credit, for learning and value, of this Kingdom, and
since his Majesties happy return, some of them have kept up the honour
of the Faculty; which manifestly appears by the great esteem
Foreigners have of their Books, by often printing them, and
translating into Latin what hath been published in English, though
they are no where so depressed as in England.

A second benefit to the publick is, that men of competent Estates will
breed up their Sons in the Art of Physic, giving them such education
as is necessary, and will not vouchsafe to place them out to
Apothecaries, though now adays want of learning and degrees are
adjudged as needful a qualification for the exercise of Physic, as
formerly 'twas for Preaching, and the Shops fit to supply both.

I will conclude this part of my discourse with this observation; that
the Laws of England in all their Acts of Parliament, have granted the
practice of Physic to Physicians and them alone, and in no clause
thereof put in any restraint at all upon them, but every where, either
new priviledges, or a confirmation of the old, have been granted, by
the said powers. Whereas on the contrary, the Law supposeth cheats in
the Apothecaries Shops, and therefore impowers our Censors to destroy
and burn what they find bad and corrupt.

The next thing to be treated of, shall be the ways of Apothecaries
creeping into practice, and their unfitness thereunto. As to the
first, heretofore when they were Members of the Company of Grocers,
and dispersed in place, as well as in counsel, they then were wholy
subordinate to the Physicians, only keeping in their Shops, and
faithfully making the prescriptions they received from the Physicians,
and when made, sending them to the Patient by their men (as they still
continue to do in Foreign Countries) and not committing the
preparation to raw Boys, or Apprentices, which is the true interest of
the Patient they should do here likewise. But in process of time,
Physicians in acute diseases having taught them somewhat, sent them to
visit their Patients, to give them the best account they could of the
estate of their health, and effect of their Medicines. And of later
years some Physicians took them along with them in their Visits,
whereby they acquired a little smattering of diseases, by which means,
and their continual officiousness, they insinuated themselves into
Families, and by applying (right or wrong) the terms of Art they had
learned from the Physicians, they made people believe they had
acquired some skill in the Art, and afterwards began to venture a
little at practice, and but until these 10 years last past kept
themselves within some bounds and limits; but since that time have
daily more and more incroached upon our Profession, being assisted by
a greater familiarity of conversation with younger Physicians. And in
the Plague time they took upon them the whole Practice of Physic,
which ever since they have continued, being much helped also therein
by the dispersing of Physicians into places unknown to their Patients,
by the Fire, but above all by the burning of the College, by means
whereof their Government and view of their Shops have been omitted,
insomuch that now they are past all restraint, having insinuated and
(as they think) rooted themselves by the aforesaid Artifices, so that
there remains now no other real remedy but that proposed.

Now here I shall take occasion in a short digression, to discourse
briefly the reason, why in all Ages there have been so many pretenders
to Physic, and why some of them have got reputation in the World. One
hath been mentioned before, viz. the great charges sick men are put
to, caused by the separation of the Physician from the Apothecary. But
the principal reason is, the want of knowledge in most persons, both
of the materials used, and the grounds for which they are applyed.
Insomuch that there are but few that can judg, and distinguish rightly
of either, and no wonder therefore that in their reasonings they
commit more absurd mistakes, or Paralogisms then in any other Art
whatsoever, and censure Physicians by the success alone. Which my Lord
Verulam accounts the great unhappiness both of the States-man and the
Physician, both being alike censured by those that know not the bottom
and rise of their Actions and Counsels. For how can any man in either
make a sound Judgment without a full knowledge of the business it
self; and of all the circumstances thereunto belonging; nor in Physic
without the concurrent knowledg of the sick mans habit, disease,
cause, remedies, and many other particulars necessary to make a clear
judgment upon the success? Yet notwithstanding, many will censure and
grumble at the actions of the States-men, though their proceedings
have been never so wise, and prudent, and oft-times from muttering and
whispering, fall to down-right distast, and mutiny against their
Superiors. So that the good success, in State-affairs, of rash and
imprudent undertakers, have been extolled and preferred before the
wary, and prudent management, and guidance of the soberest and wisest
States-men. The same likewise happens between the bold Empiric, and
learnedst Physician. But in this way of censuring, the States-man hath
this advantage above the Physician, that 'tis possible he may meet
with a series of Business so circumstantiated, as seldom or never to
miscarry, especially having a greater power over subordinate persons
then Physicians have. But the irreversible statute of Heaven forbids
us to expect a constant recovery of our Patients, for 'tis appointed,
that all men must die. 'Tis sufficient therefore for us, to employ
those remedies God hath given to the Sons of men, to the utmost vertue
the Creator hath endowed them withal: since his eternal decree hath
limited their efficacy from making man immortal. Now since (if men
judg by the success alone) it cannot be otherwise, but that the most
learned Physician, and most sottish Empiric must be thought equal in
skill, by those that are not able to make a right judgment and
difference betwixt them on other principles. Hence it comes to pass,
that where some ignorant person hath cured accidentally a slight
disease, and a Physician hath a Patient dye of an irrecoverable Case,
here the Empiric shall be applauded, and the Physician decryed. Nay
many will say the disease is the same in both, whereas we daily see
most gross mistakes in such opinions, when the Cases differ totally in
their Nature, agreeing in one sign only common to both the Cases
proposed, nay to many other also. Furthermore, if a Patient dy under
an Empirics hand, the friends willingly conceal their Names, lest some
discredit should befal them for using such worthless practisers; but
if under the hands of a known Physician he shall be sure to be named,
and sometimes his attendance falsly fathered on him, when Mountebanks
only have been employed: but to besure if an Empiric hath first been
made use of, and afterwards an able Physician called in (when all
opportunity of doing good was past) and the Patient dy, the Mountebank
hath never been mentioned, but the Physician perhaps condemned though
he hath done whatsoever could have been thought on, rational in that
Case.

Add to the former reasons, the bold and confident brags, and promises
of Empirics, that they have cured worse diseases, and will in few
hours free them from their maladies, especially where sober Physicians
have pronounced doubtfully of the event. No wonder that these pleasing
promises to persons in danger and distress bring them into employment
even with a rejection of the former sober Physician.

Besides, a foolish opinion prevails with some ignorant persons, that
they will deal only with such as will undertake the Cure, (that is)
contract with them for a sum of money, one half whereof to be payed in
hand, and the other the Cure being done, and so are usually cheated of
one half of their money; and such people will have nothing to do with
such Physicians as will not undertake them in this sence.

Another Stratagem is, to give strange and hard names to their
Medicines, such as are Pilulæ radiis Solis extractæ, and in English is
no more then Pills dryed to that consistence by the Sun-Beams, which
ignorant people have thought were made of the Sun Beams. Others
commend their Extract of the Soul of the Heathen Gods. One sets up
with a receipt received from Van Helmonts own hands; Another hath
received from a Jew the shining of Moses Face; nay I have heard a
Pseudochymist blasphemously brag, he saw in the making of a grand
Elixir, the Quintessence of the Trinity in Unity, and infinite other
pitiful captivations of silly people, to be seen on every Gate and
Post of this City; such as are the Spirit of the Salt of the World,
Panchymagogon, and other ten-footed Greek names, and some other
Mongrel non-sensical ones compounded of several Languages; promising
certain, speedy, and concealed Cure of incurable Diseases.

And no less ridiculous and absurd to considering persons are, their
cantings of themselves, wherewith they no less befool, amuse, and
beguile the people; as that by long prayer, and seeking of God, they
have had many secrets revealed to them from Heaven. Another by long
Travels through Hungary, Poland, &c. hath attained great secrets from
Kings and Emperours. Another a Gentleman lately come from Oxford, or
Cambridg, Cures the Pox, Running of the Reins, &c. in Capital Letters,
at all which what sober man cannot but laugh? Yet such as these are
inducements to many to resort to them; moreover some of them are
Astrologers, Physiognomers, Fortunetellers, Professors of Palmistry
and such other vain Arts; much applauded by the weaker sort of people.

Besides, the former they have their Emissaries, Scouts, and Setters up
and down, to cry up the skill And feigned Cures done by them, Nurses,
Good-fellows, Midwives, &c. to make up the cry and full noise.

Now it being natural to most people to admire what they understand
not, and for Admiration to infer Love, and Love Praise, and Praise the
use especially of such things as are set off with high and lofty
expressions, it necessarily follows that such persons will cry up, and
make use of, those that by these means captivate their understandings,
especially their credits being ingaged also; but above all, if they
proceed from meaner persons, of whom they are most credulous, having
in suspition wiser men, believing the former are not able, and that
the wiser are able; and therefore will deceive them. All which appears
in some with us cryed up above any Physician that ever was in England,
though for pitiful, dangerous, nay sometimes mortal Medicines, whereby
great sums of money have been gained in a short time; I shall instance
first in Lockyers Pills made of Antimony, discovered to be so by some
of my Collegues, and my self, at the first selling of them. A Medicine
as ill made as any of that Mineral, and no Physician though meanly
versed in Chymistry, but could have excelled it. Yet so great a Vogue
this Pill had for some time, that infinite people resorted to him, and
purchased them for their lives, both for themselves, and Families, and
(as I have heard) for their posterities too. Though a common Chimney
in a little time would have made enough of it to have served the whole
Nation for some years to come, and that at very small charges. But
Experience, the Tutor of too many, hath in a short time brought these
Pills into a dis-use, if not a total Oblivion, even amongst the
vulgar.

A second cryed up Medicine was Mathews's Pills, made of Opium (to
which the virtue of the whole Composition must be attributed) of white
Hellebor Roots, and Oyl of Turpentine, whereto some add Salt of
Tartar, which will puzzle the most knowing Naturalist to declare why
these should be thus jumbled together; unless to obscure the Opium.
'Tis indeed a very cunning Composition, for by giving rest and ease it
may easily decoy people into the use of them, though by long taking of
them, diseases become far more uncurable then they are in their own
Nature.

A third Universal Medicine was Hughes's Powder, sold by him at 10 s.
the Grain, and 3 l. 10 s. the Dose, made doubtless of Gold and
Quicksilver. The tast and weight of it manifestly discover the former
to be an ingredient into it, and the effect, viz. Salivation proves
the latter to be part of the compound. Besides I have made of these
two dissolved, and digested in their peculiar Menstruums, in no long
space of time, a Medicine that had the same effect with his, and in
the same Dose, and having a View of his Cabinet left after his Death,
containing a large quantity of the said Powder (being all he left
behind him) there was found crude Gold, and Quicksilver in the same
Cabinet. Now these three Notorious Universal Medicines were put to
sale by most ignorant persons. Add hereunto the forementioned Mr.
De-laun's Pill, whereof I shall say nothing, being mentioned under the
Name of the Pilule ex duobus, in the London Dispensitory, though some
make them of the Extract of Coloquintida. The last of any Fame with
us, were Dr. Goddard's Drops, a good Medicine, but not so universal,
and superlative as he would have made the World believe, and was
nothing else but what some Physicians many years since enjoyed. I well
remember that in the late troubles, a Person then in great Authority,
having cryed up this above all the Medicines in the World, a round
wager was offered, that the Doctor should not distinguish his own from
two others that should be brought him, both which were but Spirit of
Harts-horn. But the wager would not be accepted of. Furthermore, that
this Medicine of his was Spirit of Harts-horn, some relations plainly
argue; One whereof was the following.

A certain person in Norfolk having sent for as much as came to a 11 l.
and dying upon the 2d. dose of it, and by accident most part of the
remainder being spilt; there comes in a friend to the House, of some
skill, who supposing it to be Spirit of Harts-horn, told the Widow he
would endeavour to gain back the money for her. And thereupon went to
a Chymist, and bought as much of the said Spirit, as would make up the
quantity purchased of Dr. Goddard, who after Tryal of it by smell, and
tast, acknowledged it to be his, and honestly payed back the sum 'twas
first sold for; which I think few of the Mountebanks do. Sure I am
that a Quack sold 21 Pills for 20 l. whereof the Patient took 4 at two
doses, to the great hazard of his life, who then repairing to me for
my advice, I by Tryal of one of them found them to be Mercurial, and
wished him to return them back, but the Quack would not give him 10 s.
for the 16 remaining.

The inference and sum of what hath been said, is to shew briefly by
what Artifices people are deceived in their Healths, and Purses, and
how easily the ignorant are couzened, and such practices used, that
Physicians, men of honesty and repute, would be ashamed to own, and
must by using them in a short time be ruined and discredited. And such
Cheats as these, the College of Physicians are bound by the Laws of
the Land to decry, and punish (though by so doing it hath often
incurred the censure and clamor of the vulgar) Besides the Statute of
the 14th. and 15th. of Henry the Eighth injoyns us to it, declaring
that 'tis good for the Common-wealth of this Realm, and therefore
expedient, and necessary to provide that no person of the College of
Physicians (for all practisers then were of the said body) be suffered
to exercise, and practise Physic, but only those persons that be
profound, sad, and discreet, groundly learned, and deeply studyed in
Physic. Now certain it is, that none of the said body did or dare use
any of the forementioned frauds and deceits, but will constantly
indeavour (since 'tis impossible but there will be Cheatees;
(according to the old Proverb, Populus vult decipi, The People will be
deceived) to abridge the number of the Cheaters, who answer to the
former part of the Proverb, Decipiatur, Let them be couzened.

I shall end this discourse by returning from my digression to the
Apothecaries, who may and do use some of the tricks before-mentioned,
and shall here briefly recite some great advantages they have, and
make use of above Physicians. One is, that they live in this City 7 or
8 years as Apprentices, as also by their retail Trade, and by living
in open Shops, by frequent converse with their fellow Citizens,
whether in Commerce or Offices, by many friendly and Neighbourly
mutual kindnesses and actions, wherein they spend their whole lives,
and are never diverted by studies, and ingenuity from their proposed
way of gain, by all which means they get into a fixed familiarity and
good opinion with their Neighbours, and a large acquaintance in the
World. Now for their skill, besides what hath been before-mentioned,
and common to them with the Mountebank, viz. Vapouring and braging of
their skill, and decrying Physicians, by talking above the Capacity of
those they converse with, who therefore take all they say to be
authentick, though never so absurd, and trivial, and many times to set
off themselves they will venture to speak Latine commonly as false as
the matter, although some of them at Coffee-Houses, and in other mixt
Companies, by venturing so boldly have been met with and baffled, and
made to depart thence with shame and discredit enough, which their
friends and acquaintance take little notice of. Add hereunto their
exposing to view their Compositions of Treacle, Mithridate,
Diascordium and Alkermes, which all their friends, and neighbours one
time or another must see; (being set off by some very curiously) and
seeing cannot but admire the great charge, art, and labour of the
Apothecary, and perhaps hear his learned Lecture upon them, whereby
they imply their great skill, knowledg in the virtues of these
ingredients, and consequently an ability to practise with them; all
which are below the dignity of a Physician; and therefore a long time
is necessary for him to gain acquaintance, wanting the fore-mentioned
opportunities the Apothecaries enjoy. Lastly, Their painted Pots and
Glasses, with false Titles on them, more win the vulgar then a
Physicians Library of far greater value.

As to their incapacity for Practice, 'tis manifest by their education,
and ignorance of all those things which are required in an able
Physician, viz. the knowledg of Arts and Languages; by the former
whereof men learn the way and rules of observing, and improvements to
be made thereon; by the latter, what the learned searchers of Nature
have in all Ages taken notice of, necessary, and little enough in an
Art so difficult as that of Physic. They are wholy ignorant also of
all Philosophy, and the very Elements of the Art, and therefore
unskillful in knowing diseases; and more surely their causes, whereto
respect is to be had, as well as to the diseases, to which, fit
remedies are to be applyed. For want of Anatomy know neither the part
affected, nor how 'tis affected; much lets any thing of Chirurgical
directions. And through their ignorance in Philosophy, and Arts, they
have not skill enough to advise a diet sutable to diseases; a thing
most necessary, as well in curing diseases as in preserving of health,
and which requires a great insight into the nature of things; nor the
true grounds and reasons of compounding, practising their way rather
by rote then by rule; with better reason may a Brick-layer or
Carpenter pretend to be a Mathematical, or a Common Fidler to be a
Musick Reader in the Universities, or Gresham-College, since both
these have the practical part of those Sciences, which Apothecaries
have not in Physic, in the least measure.

And to conceal their mis-actings, they generally do all by word of
mouth, and not enter their prescriptions into their Books, being haply
ashamed any knowing men should discover their sins of omission, as
dangerous many times in point of life and health, as those of their
commission. Whereas Physicians Bills are on the File, or registred in
Order in their own Books, which is their justification from all
misrepresentations.

Again, they sufficiently confess their ignorance, by calling in
Physicians when their own, or any of their relations healths are
concerned, and the same all people acknowledge, when they are in
distress and danger. And very few understanding persons, and none that
are learned and knowing, will trust them at all. But I shall refer the
Reader to the forementioned Writer against the Apothecaries, viz. Dr.
Daniel Coxe, who permitted me to name him here; by whom this and many
other things here but briefly touched, are judiciously handled, and
more largely.

And as for their skill in practice, we daily see their gross errours
and omissions, being called where they have given Medicines. I shall
instance only in one that hapned at the writing hereof; viz. that an
Apothecary gave strong Purging Pills on the Fit day of a gentle
Quartan Ague, which turned it into a violent Fever, to the great
hazard of the Patients life.

And at how easie rate they practise, many of their Bills brought and
complained of to our College, (in some whereof I have seen Fees set
down for Visits) witness, wherein upon a slight disease 5 l. hath been
demanded for four days practice. And I have heard one of them brag,
that he commonly had from 20 to 100 l. besides presents, for cure of a
Clap (as they call it) which might have been more speedily and
securely performed for a manifold lesser sum.

I now come to answer some slight objections; as first, that Physicians
are unskillful in the Art of making Medicines; but sure those that
thus object cannot deny them that ability which Ladies, and almost all
ordinary women have; viz. of distilling of waters of all sorts, making
of Syrups, Conserves, Preserves, Powders, Trochiscs, Electuaries (and
what not) and as many think, more cleanly and neatly then the
Apothecaries; and some of them Ointments, and Plasters, in which two
lyes their main skill. Some whereof, to those that understand not the
way of dissolution of bodies, and the nature of their mixture may be
difficult. Yet this defect they may supply by lessening the number of
ingredients, and may perform more with 2, or 3 Simples, then with the
larger Compositions, as 'tis manifest in the use of Galbanum alone,
now used and found better then Emplastrum Hystericum, consisting of 21
ingredients.

And though as matters now stand, Physicians have not the honour to be
counted superiour to Apothecaries in their Art, yet every one knows
that they alone are the prescribers and directors of the Apothecaries
in what they know; and are able to puzzle them in infinite things that
concern their Trade, besides in Chymical preparations, whereof most of
them are totally ignorant; and should Physicians withdraw themselves
from their conversation, few pretenders to Physic would appear more
unskillful then they, neither knowing how to deal with a new Simple,
nor a new disease. And for all their pretences of skill in Drugs, 'tis
most certain that the State makes Physicians not Apothecaries, Judges
of them; and the Statute of Henry the VIII. appoints the College
Censors upon Oath, not the Apothecaries to judg, and condemn false and
sophisticated Medicines.

A second objection wherewith they flatter themselves, is, that the
great expence of time in preparing Medicines will keep Physicians from
this course. I answer, that the Physician needs not spend much more
then half an hour in a day, one with another, on this work, and may
faster dispense them then the Apothecaries to Hospitals, who in an
afternoon can provide for 100, nay sometimes 200 sick men, and carry
them to the Hospital, and dispose them to each single person, which
takes up much time, which the Physicians Servants need not be put to.

A third objection is, that this course, which before 'twas put in
practice they derided, now used is railed at, will undo them. I answer
that if needs, one or the other must be ruined, 'tis more reasonable
that the Apothecary should suffer then the Physician, because the one
acts but his duty, and for the publick good, but the other are
transgressors of the Law, and act above the Sphere of their skill, and
do many prejudices to the precious lives, and healths of men; and the
rather, because 'tis in their own power to prevent this mischief, by
stinting the number of their Servants (as 'tis in foreign parts, and
in England also, in very many if not most other Trades. Nay our State
allows but a set number of Printers) for they acknowledg themselves,
that the exceeding increase of their number must necessarily in a
short time bring them all to shifting and beggery, and a greater want
of skill then what they now pretend to. But to answer this Objection
more fully, I affirm Apothecaries have made and do make use of several
other ways of subsistence; besides their bare trades (none of which
Physicians can use) viz. some of them in this City as well as in the
Country, sell Grocery-wares, and by both together, gain Estates.
Secondly, They barter in Drugs and other Commodities, selling them
amongst themselves, and to other Tradesmen. Furthermore, they are now
building a Laboratory to make all sorts of Chymical Medicines,
intending to supply the whole Nation with them, which must necessarily
undo all the Chymists in London; and whether in time they will not
distil Strong-waters, &c. (an easie thing for them to undertake) and
by this means to ruine the Corporation of Distillers of Strong-waters,
I leave to the said Company to conceive as they please. However, this
I have heard several of them say, that they resolve to buy all sorts
of Drugs, and make a Magazine of them, as well as of the greater
Compositions, at their own Hall; and to sell them to the Members of
their Company, whereby the Trade of the Druggist, must be much
lessened, if not totally over-thrown. So little regard have they of
any other employment but of their own, yet all these things they may
do without any offence against the Laws of the Land. Why then should
they, who have so many ways of subsistence, envy, and usurp unlawfully
over the single and lawful way granted Physicians for their
livelihood? Or why would they repine, and revile them for advancing
their Art, the publick health and profit, and for maintaining their
profession by their Pens, and actings against themselves, who are the
first aggressors in this division? Which I profess to be the sole end
of these present papers, and heartily wish they may thrive and prosper
as long as they conform themselves to the Laws of Honesty, Reason, and
of the Land. Besides, why may not the Plaisterer more reasonably
pretend the same to the Painter, and many other Trades against one
another, as the Brick-layer to the Stone-Cutter, &c. that they
understand the Trade, and that truly too, and that they cannot subsist
without this incroachment? And why should not Chirurgeons keep open
Apothecaries Shops? but that the same Law limits those Tradesmen, as
well as prohibits the Apothecary from the practice of Physic. And
surely the Law and State have no consideration of those persons
subsistence, who conform not to them; and why should we have of those,
subordinate to us, who against all good Conscience take away from us
all that is our due, and continually traduce and slander us very
untruly and designingly?

The last objection (and a strange one) is, that in this private way of
giving Medicines, Physicians may poyson their Patients. But this is
easily retorted upon the Apothecaries, who may themselves or their
Servants do the like, as 'tis known in the poysoning of Sir Thomas
Overbury; besides, since it cannot be otherwise, but that the Patient
must trust somebody, 'tis better to trust one then many; and if one,
better him whose education will teach him better Morality, (and who
hath given his Faith (equivalent to an Oath) twice to the Body of the
College; viz. once at his admission as Candidate, and a second time at
his admission as Fellow; whereby he promiseth in these words, That he
shall give nothing to cause miscarriage, or to destroy, or hinder
Conception, nor Poysons (for of such, good Medicines may be made) to
an evil purpose, nay that he shall not even teach them where there is
any suspicion of ill using of them. Which promise is nothing else but
the Oath proposed by Hippoc. to Physicians, in the entrance to his
Books) then to trust such as want these qualifications; and this seems
to be the reason why our Common Law makes it Felony, for any person to
have any one dy under his hand, unless he were a lawful Physician.
More noble and generous was the opinion of Alexander the Great,
concerning his Physician, who confidently drank off that Medicine
which cured him, though he was before informed by some friend that
'twas poysoned. Neither can History it self to my knowledg produce any
example, that ever any such foolish Villany was acted; Though
doubtless many lives might have been saved if the Apothecaries would
have complyed with the College, in their proposed Orders for selling
Rats-bane.

In the next place I shall recite some few of their devices against
those Physicians in particular that make their own Medicines, as to
tell the Patient that is averse to Chymical Medicines, that the Doctor
is Chymical, and that because forsooth he makes his own Medicines; but
to those that affect Chymical, that the Doctor is but a Galenist, and
useth only dull and ineffectual remedies, as best suits to the sick
mans Palat. A second is, that if this Physician be called in to a
Patient, the Apothecary will pretend present danger, and in his
absence call in another, or pretend he is abroad when he is not, or
else that the Case requires the counsel of two Physicians; and what
other devices they use, I have not well learned.

Now briefly follow some small Scandals they cast upon the said
Physicians, as first that they do it for want of practice; the falsity
whereof is known by those few that do act this way already, and
shortly 'twill be more apparent, when many more of good practice,
singular parts and honesty will do the like, and certainly nothing but
lazyness, ignorance, or want of will to do the utmost good they are
able for the sick, can hinder them from so doing, except age,
infirmity of body, or want of convenience. But suppose 'tis so as they
alledg, doubtless every man may and ought to use all lawful means for
his own subsistence; and do not our adversaries say they are inforced
to it, affirming that unless they give Medicines of themselves, their
acquaintance will go to another Apothecary who will do it, though one
of their Company told me, they had power by their Charter to restrain
practice? Whence (if true) it clearly follows that the whole Company
allows it.

But those Physicians, that for the reasons above, cannot nor will not
take this course, are to be admonished, to do here as the Physicians
did in France, for the good of people, viz. to tell their Patients the
prices of Medicines, and to write their Bills in English, that thereby
the Patients may not pay too unreasonable for them.

I now conclude, having performed this ungrateful task, with as much
brevity, mildness of Spirit, and language, as the business would
permit (and what the prudent Statutes of our College require of each
of their members, that we shall by all honest and lawful ways and
means prosecute all illiterate Mountebanks and Impostors, &c. and is
no more then the Laws and Charters granted to us allow, and what we
twice faithfully promise (as much an Oath as we can give) viz. at our
admission as Candidate and as Fellow) being obliged to another work of
greater difficulty, and concern, long since promised, having been too
long diverted with fitting my self for my intended practice, and
several other unavoidable Occasions.


Postscript.

Reader, There intervening so small a space from the publication of the
first Edition of these Papers to this second; I thought to have added
nothing to it, but to have put it out only more correct, as the Title
intimates; but since some Sheets were printed off, I have had the
opportunity to be informed of some exceptions taken to them, which
being but few, I shall give the Objectors full satisfaction in. Though
one answer might serve for all; viz. that an Apothecary in the
presence of two Physicians, said, that he had told me of all these
Cheats, and indeed they are so common, that whosoever shall be
conversant with them, may observe most of these to be a great part of
their discourse. The First exception against Myrtle-leafs, that they
were not shewed the Censors for Sena, a Binder for a Purger; the time
I have forgot; the Censors then were, Sir George Ent, Dr. Goddard, Dr.
King, and my Self; the places, Tut-hill-street, and some Shops in
King-street; Mr. Shellberry being then Master of the Company.
Secondly, As for Mushrooms rubbed over with Chalk for Agaric; this was
found by the Censors in the Old-Baily, at the Shop of one now dead,
and therefore I shall say no further of it, it being taken notice of
by Mr. Evelyn, as is intimated before. p.8. A Third is Diascordium
made of Honey and Bole-Armeniac, this was discovered in a Shop at the
end of Drury-lane near Holborn, concluded to be so by Sir George Ent,
My Self, and Mr. Richardson then Master of the Company, and the rest
of the Censors and Wardens, easily to be remembred, and was by them
taken away to their Hall; a pound whereof I had, and by dissolution
found it to be no otherwise; what the Apothecaries did with the large
Pot of the remainder I know not. Besides these, I have heard no
exception to the whole concerning frauds.

Now since the Cheaters with the Cheatees, most insist on the objection
of Poyson; I add to what hath been formerly said; that Poysons are not
necessarily to be given in Medicines alone, but may be given in
Broaths, Beer, or any other thing taken into the Body, and that
without the consultation or knowledg of any Physician, and surely if
any one had a mind to Poyson his Relations (an Action abominable to
the English Nation) he would rather Act privately himself, having many
opportunities offered to him, rather then by communicating it to
others, make himself obnoxious to their discovery. But if he should
communicate to others, 'tis more probable he would communicate it to
meaner, and more Mercenary persons, as Apothecaries and Nurses, at a
smaller rate and with more security, then reveal such secrets to
Physicians, Men of Honour, and Honesty. Furthermore, if any mans life
be suspected to be taken away with Poyson, and by opening the body it
should appear so (and without which it cannot well appear) the
Physician is doubtless as lyable to the Law as any other person
whatsoever. So that the Patient hath as much moral security from this
mischief, as possibly can be had, or wished in humane affairs. Nay
suppose the Physician might be so corrupted (as to take away his
Patients life) he might effect it without the least suspition; either
by neglecting, or omitting what was necessary, or by giving him
unproper Medicines, for which he could be accused of ignorance or
errour only; besides, if he had a mind to poyson, he as well as
others, assistants of Visitors, might do it securely enough, by
conveying into a singular Cordial, or any Medicine made by the Shops,
and often taken by the Patient before with good success, a mortal dose
without any knowledg or surmise of any such horrid practice. Add
hereunto what an able Chirurgeon suggested, that Apothecaries taking
upon them the wrapping up, and Embalming of Bodies (whereby they gain
more money then by several years practice upon them; for their
embalming amounts to very great sums) may upon better reason be
suspected of poysoning then any other persons whatsoever conversant
among the sick, since both a particular interest and convenience of
concealing may induce them to it. Lastly, did this Objection carry any
weight in it, then neither Physicians, Chirurgeons, Apothecaries,
Nurses, nor Friends, might administer to the sick; because all these,
as well as Physicians, may clandestinely poyson their Relations. And
therefore that an Objection should be raised by such persons that have
more opportunities and advantage (in a thing never proved to be done,
because 'tis possible only) to hinder so manifest and publick a profit
as hath been proved; appears to be very weak and absurd.

And having done with the Objections made to others, and to my self
also by some of the Company, with whom I have conversed, who huff'd
exceedingly at my first discourse with them, but departed (seemingly
at least) well satisfied, I am sure fully and without reply answered,
and with addition of many other Cheats besides, which I shall not here
mention for the reasons above specified: I shall here transcribe one
gratulatory Letter amongst many sent me by a Divine well known in
Physic, being very comprehensive of most I have said, to the end the
Universities and all learned men may see what is like to become of one
of the three of their noble professions: The words of the Letter are
these.

  "Your design all ingenious persons approve highly, to whom I have
  communicated it. 'Tis frequent with a Master Apothecary that hath
  served but 2, or 3 years, nay some scarce one, to take Apprentices
  for as little, or less time, with a little more money then
  ordinarily; and presently they assume the Title of Doctors, though
  they understand no more then only to write to a whole-sale
  Apothecary in your City. And truly their couzenages here in the
  Country do exceed those in the City. For I have known 2s. 6d.
  taken for a little Plaster of Galbanum, and it is usual to make
  one pectoral Syrup serve for all; as having occasion to enquire
  for Syrup of Jujubs, one of them ingenuously confessed (not
  knowing what Jujubs were) that he used one pectoral Syrup for all,
  a little varying the colour sometimes, and this a peculiar receipt
  of his own, something differing from any in the Dispensatory."

As for their opposition also in the Country, take this one Example. An
eminent Physician of Gloucester by reason of the Apothecaries Frauds,
&c. betook himself to make his own Medicines, taking for his Servant
one that was not a Freeman of the said City. Who in his Masters
absence, and contrary to his command, sold to an Apothecary a Medicine
not to be had, or at least pretended not to be had in the Town, for a
most urgent and necessary use; whereupon the Apothecaries conspiring
together, exhibited a complaint to the Mayor and Court of Aldermen,
requiring of them, that the said Physician (who was a Freeman, and had
lately born the Office of Mayor) might be dis-franchised. Which being
not granted them, they set the whole City into such disorder, that
they refused to attend the Mayor on a Solemn day (as their Custom is,
and are bound to do) with their Flags from their Town-Hall to the
Church, which the prudence of the Magistrates for the present
qualified. This relation I had from the then Mayor my Kinsman, in the
presence of a London Apothecary.

Next as to the Lyes and Scandals of my self, I shall take notice only
of those that concern practice (the rest being but generally false and
non-sensical revilings.) One is, that they most untruly entitle me to
have been Physician to the Lady Anderson, and many others which I
never saw or heard of; and that I soon dispatched them. Another
wherewith they make great noise, is, of one Mr. Staples in
Covent-Garden, whom they say also I dispatched in few days. The true
relation whereof was this. An able Physician of the College had him in
hand for the Jaundice, about two Months before I was called, whereupon
we consulted and writ a note to the Apothecary; a week after the
consultation I was sent for, and desired to take care of him alone; he
was then, besides the Jaundice, troubled with continual Torments in
his Bowels, which were as hard as a Board (as they say) his Stomach
gone, his nights restless, a vehement Cough joyned with a Hectick
Fever, having long before had an ill Habit of Body. In this Case I
found him, and in a Months time or thereabouts, I cured his Jaundice,
relieved his Torments, removed the hardness of his Bowels, mitigated
his Cough, but the Hectick Fever continuing he declined; at length
another Physician was called in, who can witness the truth of what was
done, and upon the whole we had good reason to think his Liver to be
Apostemated. After which consultation he had no more of me, telling me
he would rely on Kitchin Physic, and after that I never saw him. Now
this being the only relation I have heard in this kind, I have been
the larger to recite it, that thereby the Reader may take an estimate
of their dealing with me in the like reports. The like or worse, some
of them have said of other Physicians, which perhaps hereafter shall
be more fully related with all the Circumstances.

As for their malicious anger, and disadvantageous to themselves, take
this one example; I having prescribed a Plaster for the Head, an
Apothecary would not make it, because prescribed by me; and I have
been informed that many of them agreed they would make nothing for
such Physicians as made their own Medicines; a poor and pitiful
revenge, to their own loss and discredit.

Another Scandal is, the fewness of my Medicines. 'Tis true my Closet
is not open to every bodies Eye, nor have I so many and large Pots and
Glasses, or fill'd with as good as nothing, or the same Medicine, in
several with different Titles, neither are any of mine guilded to make
a shew with; yet I dare offer to view with the best of their Shops,
for number of good and really useful Medicines fit to answer presently
any Physicians intentions, for internal remedies. And this will be
attested by some of my learned Collegues, who have seen and perused
them. Whereas the Shops contain only some general Medicines, whereof
few single Physicians make use of one quarter in their practice, and
upon most particular cases are compell'd to prescribe what is not
readily dispensed in the Shops. Others insinuate my seldom change of
Medicines. To which I answer, that where all circumstances are the
same, and a good success follows, I neither do, nor will much vary,
the easiest thing in the World to be done, both to colour and tast.
For such changes (necessary to be used in Shop-practice) without
manifest reason, clog a Patients Purse and Stomach, may not suit with
the Patients Disease nor Constitution. And doubtless every Physician
writes at first what he conceives most fit, and proper in the Case
proposed; and if this agrees fully to his expectation, runs some
hazard in the alteration, which he is necessitated to do in the
Shop-way, for many reasons before-mentioned. Besides, who scruples to
take the Medicinal Waters of Epsom, Barnet, and Tunbridge, many weeks
together? or who refuseth a constant unalter'd Diet-Drink for some
Months, or Years together? And do not Apothecaries in all Diseases of
the Lungs, fly to their pectoral decoction for all persons, and for
the same person at all times, unless perhaps with the addition of a
little China to it?

Some Patients of the middle rank have by these and such like Artifices
been drawn from me, but have soon returned, being undeceived by the
fulsomness, charge, and the non-success of the Shops.

Now these things I have here published to this end alone, that both
Physician and Patient may take notice of them; the former to neglect
and slight such poor Calumnies, and the other to avoid the
inconveniencies thence arising.

The care I had not to injure any particular person, by naming him in
my first Edition, or this (although I had so many witnesses of credit,
as appears by the Postscript, to justifie any thing they can object
against) makes me hope they will leave off their personal animosities,
or redress their Crimes, their Vanity of threatning me with 20000 l.
Actions, and affrighting my publishing this, together with my further
proceedings, by their intended assaults and batteries; which make them
appear so ridiculous, that I smile at the first, and pardon the last;
wishing them to consider seriously how the expectation some have of
what they can say for themselves, together with the necessity that
obliges them to it (if possible) were enough one would think, besides
their many large brags of a speedy and full answer (which they have a
long time buzzed about the Town as a present remedy in this exigence)
this I say were enough to make any man conclude them guilty, but 'tis
hoped this Edition will either work in them an amendment, or bury
their confident presumptions, leaving no man a belief of their
innocency. If their promised answer be any thing else but Libelling,
or a Ballad without rhime or reason, stuft with falsities and
revilings, such as was only given to Dr. Coxe's Book; I shall return
it a speedy and full answer, and with an addition of far greater
Frauds and Abuses, if they therein desire it.

                                                               Feb. 20
                                                        Hatton-Garden.

       *       *       *       *       *


Pag. 35. l. 6 read Physician, pag. 67. l. 13. read then to trust.

FINIS.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Short View of the Frauds and Abuses
Committed by Apothecaries, by Christopher Merrett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRAUDS BY APOTHECARIES ***

***** This file should be named 15910-8.txt or 15910-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/9/1/15910/

Produced by Paul Murray, Richard Cohen and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. This file was produced from
images generously made available by the Bibliothèque
nationale de France (BnF/Gallica) at http://gallica.bnf.fr.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
