The Project Gutenberg EBook of Paul Gerhardt's Spiritual Songs,
by Paul Gerhardt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Paul Gerhardt's Spiritual Songs
       Translated by John Kelly

Author: Paul Gerhardt

Translator: John Kelly

Release Date: October 30, 2009 [EBook #30362]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAUL GERHARDT'S SPIRITUAL SONGS ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, based on page images provided
by Google Books, with rough OCR by the Internet Archive)










                     PAUL GERHARDT'S SPIRITUAL SONGS


                                 LONDON:

             PRINTED BY W. CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET
                           AND CHARING CROSS.




                     PAUL GERHARDT'S SPIRITUAL SONGS


                        TRANSLATED BY JOHN KELLY

                      ALEXANDER STRAHAN, PUBLISHER
                        56, LUDGATE HILL, LONDON
                                  1867




                                CONTENTS.




                                                                     PAGE
  Preface                                                             vii
  Biographical Sketch                                                  xi
  Index of First Lines                                              xliii
  Of the Holy Trinity                                                   1
  Advent                                                                5
  Birth of Christ--Christmas                                           14
  Circumcision of Christ--New Year                                     43
  The Sufferings of Christ--Good Friday                                49
  Resurrection of Christ--Easter                                       71
  Whitsuntide                                                          78
  Repentance                                                           83
  Prayer and the Christian Life                                        97
  Songs of the Cross and Consolation                                  143
  Songs of Praise and Thanksgiving                                    238
  Morning and Evening Songs                                           270
  Miscellaneous                                                       289
  Of Death, the Last Day, and Eternal Life                            312




                                PREFACE.


This volume contains a large selection from Paul Gerhardt's "Spiritual
Songs." Every piece included is given in full, and is rendered into the
metre of the original. A few of the following translations have appeared
at various times during the last three years in different periodicals.
They have been revised for this volume. Several of the hymns have been
beautifully translated by others; and had the Translator been compiling a
volume composed of selections from various authors, this might have
formed a strong reason for not doing them again, but to have omitted them
from a volume like the present would have been to give a selection from
Gerhardt without some of his most celebrated productions; besides, in the
other collections where they appear they are not all given in full, nor
are they always rendered into the metre of the original, save in those
published with the music attached. As far as the Translator is aware, the
greater number of the following songs have never appeared in an English
dress before.

Every one who has reflected on the subject, or attempted metrical
translation, knows that literality is rarely attainable, that a certain
measure of freedom must be used. The Translator has, however, striven to
maintain fidelity to the sense of the original, and has occasionally
somewhat sacrificed euphony to fidelity.

It is not to be expected that the people's poet of one nation and of a
former age will become, through translation, the people's poet of another
nation in a later generation. Individual translations may win for
themselves a place side by side with the favourite songs of native
growth. Instances of this will occur to every one familiar with our
hymnology; but this can hardly happen in many cases. The translations on
the principle of this volume may neither be uninteresting nor unedifying
on that account, and it may be permitted to the Translator to trust that
Paul Gerhardt in his present dress may be found stimulating and
refreshing to many. Gerhardt was peculiarly a son of consolation. The
Translator has found him so in the hour of trial, and he will feel repaid
if he should become the cup-bearer of the rich wine of consolation
contained in the hymns of the staunch old German Lutheran to any English
Christian readers "who may be in any wise afflicted."

The work of translation has been a labour of love. It has been the
recreation of leisure hours from graver duties, and occasionally the
occupation of days of unwilling, but unavoidable, total or partial
freedom from professional engagements.

The edition used in this translation was Wackernagel's "Paulus Gerhardt's
Geistliche Lieder getreu nach der bei seinen Lebzeiten erschienenen
Ausgabe wiederabgedrückt. Neue Auflage, in Taschenformat."--Stuttgart,
Verlag von Samuel Gottlieb Liesching, 1855. This edition has been
followed in the classification and titles both of the sections and hymns.

The principal sources whence the materials for the biographical sketch
have been drawn are "Paul Gerhardt's Geistliche Andachten, &c., mit
Anmerkungen, einer Geschichtlichen Einleitung und Urkunden herausgegaben,
von Otto Schultze."--Berlin, 1842. "Paul Gerhardt, nach seinem Leben und
Wirken, aus zum Theile ungedrückten Nachrichten dargestellt," von E. G.
Roth, Pastor Primarius zu Luebben in der Niederlausitz.--Leipzig, 1829.

Feustking, Langbecker, Herzog, and others were also read, or more or less
consulted.




                          BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH.


Paul Gerhardt was born in Graefenhainichen in Electoral Saxony, where his
father, Christian Gerhardt, was Burgomaster. There is some doubt as to
the precise year of his birth, owing to the destruction of the church
books when the place was burnt by the Swedes on the 16th of April, 1637.
According to some, the event took place in the year 1606; according to
others, in 1607. The probability is in favour of the former date, for
General Superintendent Goltlob Stolze, of Lübben,[1] says that he died,
in the 70th year of his age, in the year 1676.

There is no information concerning his youth and education. He was still
very young when the Thirty Years' War broke out, and his preparation for
his profession and entrance on it took place in those troublous times,
which may account for his late settlement in a ministerial sphere. In the
year 1651, when in his forty-fifth year, we find him still only a
candidate[2] of theology, and resident as a tutor in the family of
Andreas Bertholdt, Chancery Advocate in Berlin, whose daughter he
subsequently married. In that year a vacancy occurred in the ministry at
Mittenwald, by the death of Probst Caspar Göde. The magistracy of that
place applied to the clergy of Berlin to recommend a suitable man to them
for the office. Paul Gerhardt was their unanimous choice. They
recommended him as an honourable, estimable, and learned man, whose
diligence and erudition were known, of good parts and incorrupt doctrine,
of a peace-loving disposition and blameless Christian life, which
qualities had procured for him the love of all classes, high and low, in
Berlin. They furthermore added that he had frequently, at their friendly
invitation, exercised the excellent gifts with which God had endowed him
for the edification of the church, and had thereby deserved well of the
people, and endeared himself to them. The clergy met together for
consultation, and sent this recommendation to Mittenwald without the
knowledge of Gerhardt; no higher testimony, therefore, could have been
given to his character, learning, and abilities. He was accordingly
appointed and set apart to his office in St. Nicholas' Church, Berlin, on
the 18th of November, 1651, and entered before the close of the year on
his duties. The church book which he kept from Jan. 1, 1652, till Dec.
31, 1656, bears testimony to his fidelity and conscientiousness in the
discharge of this part of the duties of his office.

On February 11th, 1655, he was married to Anna Maria, daughter of the
Chancery Advocate Bertholdt, in whose family he had been tutor. Before he
left Mittenwald, his first child, a daughter, was born and died. There is
a slab to her memory still standing in the church. Several circumstances
in his position at Mittenwald conspired to make Gerhardt desire a change,
and welcome a translation to Berlin when an opportunity offered. The
relation between his colleague, Deacon Allborn, and himself was not
friendly: Allborn had been passed over by the magistrates in favour of
Gerhardt. The want of cordiality which prevailed in consequence must have
been very trying to a man of Gerhardt's disposition. The income of the
office was also small, and his circumstances consequently straitened. His
ties and associations in Berlin would also be strong inducements of
themselves to the acceptance of an appointment there.

The welcome relief came when the magistrates appointed him to the third
Diaconate of St. Nicholas' Church, vacant by the death of Probst Peter
Vher, and the consequent promotion of the other ministers. The spirit in
which he received and accepted the invitation is shown in his letter to
the magistrates on accepting their offer. He humbly and gratefully
recognized the hand of God in the matter; and, owning his own weakness,
earnestly solicited the prayers of the faithful. His letter is dated June
4, 1657, and in the register of St. Nicholas there is an entry of a
baptism made by him on the 22nd of July. Consequently he must have
entered on his duties soon after. Gerhardt, doubtless, joyfully returned
to Berlin, anticipating a happy ministry there; but it was there his
greatest trials awaited him. These trials arose out of the measures taken
by Frederick William,[3] at that time Elector of Brandenburg, to allay
the animosity prevailing between the adherents of the Lutheran and
Reformed Confessions respectively. The feud was of long standing, and the
efforts made to heal it had been hitherto in vain.

With the laudable desire of pacifying party strife, the Elector appointed
a conference to be held between the Lutheran and Reformed clergy of
Berlin and Cöln-on-the-Spree, under the direction of the Lord President,
Baron Otto von Schwerin, on the Reformed side, and Chancellor Lorenz
Christian von Somnitz, of Pomerania, and others, on the Lutheran side.
The Lutheran clergy of the three chief churches in Berlin and Cöln, and
the Reformed court preachers, Bartholomew Stosch and Johann Kunschius,
the rector of the Joachimsthal Gymnasium, and the philologue Joh.
Vorstius, constituted the membership of the conference. Kunschius, being
soon after summoned to accompany the Elector to Königsberg, took no part
in the conferences, and his place was filled by Gerson Vechner, of the
Joachimsthal Gymnasium.

The object of the Conference, according to the Electoral Rescript, was to
consider the following points:--

I. Whether in the Reformed Confessions, particularly in those named in
the last Electoral Edict (January 2nd, 1662), viz.:--The Confessio
Sigismundi, the Colloquium Lipsiacum, the Declaratio
Thoruniensis,--anything is taught or affirmed, in teaching, believing, or
affirming which any one is, _judicio divino_, accursed.

II. Whether anything is denied or passed over in silence, without
acknowledging or practising which no one could be saved.

The Berlin clergy were reluctant to enter on the conference. They thought
that as it concerned the Church of the Mark generally it should not be
limited to Berlin and Cöln, and that it was a subject requiring mature
consideration. At length, however, having protested in vain, they
consented, but manifestly determined to concede nothing.

The conference met at various times during the years 1662-63. Gerhardt
took no public part. The speaking devolved first on Probst Lilius, but
soon afterwards, and for the remainder of the meetings, on Archdeacon
Reinhardt. Gerhardt wrote a judgment unfavourable to the conferences,
because he thought nothing but syncretism would come out of it--_i.e._,
the confusion of the two confessions, into which the Rinteln theologians
had permitted themselves to be seduced. By his votes he evinced his
interest in all its proceedings.[4]

As might be surmised, from the state of party feeling, the conference was
not only fruitless, but left matters in a worse condition than they were
when it first met. Furthermore, at the last sitting but one, on the 22nd
of May, 1663, the Berlin clergy incurred the high displeasure of the
Elector, by defending and approving the conduct of their speaker
Reinhardt on an occasion when he had given great offence to his Highness.
It is thought, that at this time Gerhardt wrote his heart-stirring and
beautiful hymn,--Ist Gott für mich, so trete? (Is God for me, t'oppose
me?) The Elector, in consequence of the result of the conferences, issued
an edict on the 16th of September, 1664, in substance the same but more
stringent than the previous one. All were required to pledge themselves
to obedience to this edict, whereas subscription to the former one had
been required only from candidates at ordination. The edict required the
clergy of both confessions, on pain of dismissal from office and other
penalties, to refrain from vituperating each other, from deducing absurd
and impious doctrines from each other's dogmas, and imputing them to
their opponents. The edict also commanded that the ordinance of baptism
should be administered without exorcism, when the parents desired it. The
edict produced the most profound consternation. It was regarded as
endangering religious liberty and the freedom of conscience. The Lutheran
preachers felt themselves hampered by it in the discharge of their
duties. Regarding, as they did, their symbolical books and ecclesiastical
customs as sacred things, using their authorized formularies in the
instruction of the people, and introducing the element of controversy
largely into their ministrations, they felt themselves quite crippled in
the discharge of their functions. It seemed to them that if they gave up
their liberty in the pulpit, they would be necessitated to give up their
customs also, and so violate their solemn obligations. They thought that
compliance would imperil the Lutheran Church, the welfare of their
congregations, and the peace of their own souls. Such was the view taken
of the matter by many strict and conscientious men. We cannot help
thinking that their view was mistaken and exaggerated, that these things
were not endangered, that it was perfectly possible for them to have been
loyal to their church, to have instructed their people faithfully in all
the peculiar doctrines of their system, and yet have rendered obedience
to the Electoral edict.

Many were actually conducting themselves both according to its letter and
spirit, and yet were filled with those alarms which we must call
groundless, at the very thought of binding themselves by a pledge to act
as they were doing. While we hold them to have been mistaken, we cannot
but respect their fidelity to their honest convictions, and their
fortitude in accepting the sad consequences,--the severing of the ties
that bound them to beloved flocks, the loss of office and emolument, and
expatriation. The principles of toleration were not rightly understood,
either by the Church or State at the time.

As we read the painful annals of the time, the thought often arises in
the mind, how much better had it been if the evil which it was the
laudable intention of the Elector to correct, had been permitted to work
its own cure. There were doubtless many, who had given too much cause for
complaint by the licence they allowed themselves in the pulpit in
attacking their theological adversaries, but those who suffered most
would probably be those, who, like Gerhardt, were not open to reproach,
yet felt themselves constrained by conscience to refuse obedience to the
Elector's command. Hundreds signed the edict. Some who had scruples
yielded on account of their wives and children. There was a witticism
current at the time which was put into the mouths of the pastors'
wives:--

    "Schreibt, Schreibt,
    Lieber Herre, auf dass ihr bei der Pfarre bleibt."

Which may be freely and roughly rendered,--

    "Subscribe, subscribe, dear husband, do!
    Lest you must from the parish go."

Very many, however, were thrown into the greatest distress of mind, and
could not obey and preserve a good conscience. The Berlin ministers
sought the opinion of various theological faculties and churches on the
crisis.

The Elector, ignorant of the trouble given to the consciences of many
worthy men, viewed this conduct on their part as self-willed, and an
unwarrantable opposition to what appeared to him a needful regulation. He
ordered Lilius and Reinhardt to be removed from office, if they delayed
to subscribe, and gave the others time for consideration. The two former,
failing to obey, were deposed.

Gerhardt, with the three others who were threatened, turned to the
magistracy, and solicited their good offices in intercession with the
Elector. The magistrates represented to the Elector that the Berlin
clergy had observed the edict, but that they objected to subscription;
they begged the Elector not to enforce subscription on those already in
office, as it would tend to compromise them with the people and foreign
churches; they furthermore stated, that obedience rests not so much in
subscription and in the letter, as in the mind and in deed. They begged
him to reinstate Lilius and Reinhardt in office.

The Berlin clergy presented a petition, substantially to the same effect,
at the same time. They stated, in addition, that the Reformed clergy had
not been compelled to sign. The only result of this petition was, that
the Reformed were forthwith commanded to subscribe the edict.

The ministers, in another document, set forth their scruples at large,
but thereby only incurred the further displeasure of the Elector. The
deposition of Lilius and Reinhardt, however, caused such an uproar, that
the Elector issued a declaration on May 4, 1665, setting forth the
seasons of his procedure. Further efforts were made, and the result was,
that time was allowed to Lilius to reconsider his refusal, and in the
beginning of the following year he subscribed. On account of his
compliance, he became the object of the most bitter and galling attacks,
and did not long survive. The last days of the old man were embittered by
the treatment he received at the hands of zealous, but uncharitable
Lutherans, and death was doubtless a welcome event to him. In the case of
Reinhardt, the result was only a more severe sentence. He was banished
from the town, forbidden to maintain any correspondence with it, and the
magistrates were ordered to fill up the vacancy caused by his removal. He
removed to Leipzig, where he was chosen to the pastorate of St. Nicholas'
Church, and was subsequently made Professor of Theology, which office he
held till his death, in 1669.

Paul Gerhardt was the next minister who was called on to subscribe the
edict. The Elector was convinced that, next to Reinhardt, he was the most
vehement opponent of peace between the Lutheran and Reformed. When
Reinhardt was reproached in the Consistory with inciting his colleagues
to resistance, Gerhardt said, with some warmth, that it was not so, that
he had encouraged Reinhardt when he showed a disposition to yield; he was
older in years, and had been longer in office, and he should be sorry to
follow others. It was also said, that during an illness which befell him,
he sent for his colleagues, and earnestly warned them not to subscribe
the bond pledging them to observance of the edict. These things were, at
least, carried to the Elector, and prejudiced him against Gerhardt. On
the same day that Lilius was reinstated in office, Gerhardt was cited to
appear before the Consistory (Feb. 6th, 1666), and called upon to sign.
Eight days were allowed him for consideration, and in the first instance
he accepted the delay, but before the rising of the same session, he
declared that he had had ample time for consideration, and that he could
not change his mind, whereupon he was deposed from office, in the name of
the Elector.

Great as was the agitation produced in the public mind by the deposition
of Lilius and Reinhardt, the sensation occasioned by Gerhardt's was much
more profound. He was the most beloved, as well as most celebrated, of
all the ministers. Measures were immediately taken by the community in
his favour. The citizens and the guilds of the cloth-makers, bakers,
butchers, tailors, and pewterers, united to petition the magistrates in
favour of exemption for Gerhardt. They said that every one knew that he
had never spoken against the faith and the co-religionists of the
Elector, much less vituperated them, but that he had sought to lead every
one to true Christianity, and had never attacked any one in word or deed.

The magistrates, on presenting this representation to the Elector, on the
13th of February, added:--"He has not thought of the Reformed, much less
insulted them; he has maintained a blameless walk, giving offence to no
one, so much so, that his Highness, without any suspicion, had admitted
his songs into the hymn-book for the Mark, in 1658. Should a man so
pious, so intellectual, so celebrated in many lands, leave the town, it
was to be feared that grave thoughts would be excited in the minds of
foreigners, and that God would visit them for it. If he refused
subscription, it would not be imputed to disobedience, but to scruples of
conscience, seeing that before the publication of the edict he had
fulfilled its object by his modest behaviour." The Prince, in reply,
stated that he had sufficient grounds for enforcing the provisions of the
edict, and that Gerhardt must comply with them, or bear the penalty.

A second petition was got up in his favour, in which, in addition to the
above guilds, the carpenters, cutlers, armourers, and coppersmiths
joined. As this petition also was unfavourably received, the States of
the Mark took up the cause of the deposed. "The dismissal of Gerhardt,"
they informed the Elector, on the 27th of July, 1666, "excited great fear
in the country for religion, for this man is recognized by the adherents
of both confessions as a pious, exemplary, and, without doubt, a
peace-loving theologian, against whom no charge can be brought save his
refusal to subscribe the edicts."

The Elector yielded at length. After his return from Cleve, he summoned
the magistrates to appear before him, on January 9th, 1667, at three
o'clock in the afternoon; and through the Lord President, Otto von
Schwerin, in presence of several privy councillors, made the desired, but
hardly expected announcement, that as there was no complaint against Paul
Gerhardt, save that he refused to subscribe the edicts, his Electoral
Highness must believe that he has misunderstood the purport of them; he,
therefore, restored him to his office, and absolved him from the
necessity of subscription.

Immediately after the audience, the Elector sent a private secretary to
Gerhardt, to convey the intelligence to him, and to say at the same time
that his Highness cherished the confident expectation that he would act
conformably to the edicts, without subscription, and continue to manifest
his known moderation. Next day the magistrates, delighted with the grace
of the Prince, hastened to inform Gerhardt of his unconditional
restoration to office, and on the 12th of January, the joyous event was
announced in the _Sunday Mercury_, a weekly paper very much read in
Berlin at that time. But the private message from the Elector threw
Gerhardt into fresh distress of mind. He felt hampered by the condition
still attached to his restoration to office, and he applied to the
magistrates to aid him in discovering the exact terms of his restoration.
In his letter to the magistrates, he expressed his earnest desire to
spend the remainder of his life among his flock, if he could do so with a
good conscience, saying how wretched a thing it was to hold office with
an uneasy conscience. He knew the anxieties incident to the faithful
discharge of the pastoral office, and said, that he would be the most
wretched man on earth if to them were added the reproaches of a guilty
conscience. His desire was not in the very least to appear to depart from
his previous mode of teaching, and from the customs of his church, which,
as a Lutheran clergyman, he had sworn to maintain. Referring to the
moderation which had been so commended in him, he said, "I have never
understood it, and never can understand it otherwise, than that I shall
be permitted to remain faithful to my Lutheran confessions of faith, and
especially to the 'Formula Concordiae,' and that I am not required to
regard any of them, or permit others to regard any one of them, as a
dishonourable, injurious, or blasphemous book."

The magistrates sent him a copy of the decree reinstating him in office,
hoping thereby to remove his scruples. He made a further representation
to the magistrates on the 26th of January, 1667. In this he pointed out
how the decree ascribed his refusal to a misunderstanding of the edicts,
and that, though absolved from subscription, he was bound by them still;
that he could only understand the edicts literally; that he could not
re-enter his office with any other conscience than he had first entered
it with; he could not inflict on himself the wound on re-entrance into
office which he had, in the strength of the Holy Ghost, patiently and
silently endured a year's suspension to avoid; that if his conscience
permitted him to yield obedience he would subscribe the edicts, "for,"
said he, "what I can do with a good conscience, I can easily consent and
promise to do." He begged them to intercede for him with the Prince, that
he might be absolved from obedience to the edicts on resuming office. In
everything else he promised all possible hearty and humble obedience. He
begged that he might be permitted to adhere to his Lutheran Confessions
and "Formula Concordiae;" that he might so instruct his flock, and pledge
himself to no other moderation than was rooted in these confessions. Only
on these terms, he said, could he consent to preach. Gerhardt also wrote
to the Elector to the same effect.

The magistrates resolved once more to apply to the Elector. They briefly
stated the case, and begged his Highness to relieve Gerhardt's scruples.
The Elector, on the very same day, returned their statement to the
magistrates, with these words written on the margin:--"If the preacher,
Paul Gerhardt, will not resume the office so graciously vouchsafed to him
again, by his Serene Electoral Highness, for which he will have to answer
to the Most High God, let the magistrates of Berlin, at their earliest
convenience, invite some other able and peace-loving persons to preach as
candidates; but let them not call any one until they have first humbly
made known his qualifications to his Serene Highness.--Cöhl-on-the-Spree,
Feb. 4th, 1667.--(Signed) Friederich Wilhelm."

Gerhardt resigned his office, and so ended his ministry in Berlin. So
great was the love his former flock bore to him that they still continued
to contribute to his support.

It is commonly believed, that after his deposition in Berlin, he was
invited to Saxe-Merseberg by Duke Christian, and that, on refusing the
offer, the Duke granted him a pension. Otto Schultze, one of his
biographers, and seemingly the most careful and thorough of them, says
that he was unable to find any certain testimony to either of these
facts. It seems strange that he should refuse to go to Saxe-Merseberg,
when, a short time after, he unhesitatingly accepted an invitation from
the magistrates of Lübben, which was in the territories of Duke
Christian; and in his correspondence with the magistrates of Lübben there
is no reference to such an invitation from the Duke. The fact of his
refusal, in the first instance, and his ready acceptance in the second,
might be accounted for, however, by the death of his wife, which took
place in March, 1668, whereby one very strong tie that bound him to
Berlin was severed.

A story is told about this period of his life, and was for a long time
received as an undoubted fact, which is so romantic that we could almost
wish it were true. It is said, that having no certain dwelling-place, he
set out with his wife and family to return to his fatherland, Electoral
Saxony; that one evening his wife was sitting in the hotel where they
were staying for the night, bemoaning her hard lot. Gerhardt in vain
endeavoured to console her, and quoted Psalm xxxvii. 5, to her. Touched
by the words himself, he went and sat down on a garden seat and wrote the
song,

    "Commit whatever grieves thee," &c.,

and came and read it to his wife, who was immediately comforted. Later in
the evening the Duke of Saxe-Merseberg's messengers arrived, bearing a
letter to Gerhardt, offering him a pension, till he was otherwise
provided for. They were glad when they found out who Gerhardt was, and
handed him the letter, which he in turn handed to his wife, saying, "Did
I not tell you to commit your ways unto the Lord?" Unfortunately for this
story, the hymn in question had been published in 1666, and the story is
otherwise inconsistent with the known facts of his history.[5] The story
is equally groundless, that this hymn was the means of procuring him an
invitation from the Elector to return to Berlin.

The magistrates of Lübben, hearing of him, invited him to preach there,
as a candidate for the vacant archdiaconate. He went thither and preached
before them on October 14th, 1668. The next day he was informed as to the
income, inspected the official residence, expressed his willingness to
accept the appointment, and was assured that it would be offered to him.
He then returned to Berlin. He did not take up his residence in Lübben
until June in the following year, owing partly to domestic affliction,
and partly to the vexatious delay in preparing his official house for his
reception, arising from the dilatoriness and indifference of the
magistrates in the matter. He had expressed hope, when he saw the house,
which was unfit for any minister to live in, and not large enough for his
family, that a more convenient one might be provided. He was assured that
a deacon's house adjoining wonld be added to it. A friend visited Lübben
some time after his appointment, and the work was not begun, nor even at
a later period, when he himself went over. No sympathy was manifested
towards him. He was asked if he wished to recede from his promise, and
whether he wished a house _pro dignitate_; and was told that they did not
know he had so large a household, and that what had been good enough
before might be good enough still. All this must have been exceedingly
annoying and humiliating to Gerhardt. Other points were raised with
reference to the details of his ministerial duties; but leaving them for
friendly settlement after his entrance on his office, he simply claimed
that a house, not _pro dignitate_, but _pro necessitate_, should be
prepared. A full statement of the case, addressed by him to the
Government President, Alex. von Hoymb, at length produced the desired
effect.

He took the oath of religion before the Consistory on the 6th of June,
and entered on the duties of his office on the third Sunday in Trinity.
Gerhardt, in these transactions, appears to great advantage, in the
reasonableness of his demands, and the manner he dealt with the
ungenerous imputations made upon his motives and character. He would have
removed to Lübben sooner had there been a suitable house to be got; but
there was none. He laid stress, in his correspondence, on the want of a
study in the Archdeacon's house, and insisted on the necessity of having
a place for meditation and prayer, if he was to discharge his duties
aright.

There are no written records concerning his work in Lübben. Dim tradition
says, that he was often melancholy, that in these moods he would betake
himself to the church, and kneeling before the crucifix, seek strength in
fervent prayer. Feustking (who was almost his contemporary), General
Superintendent in Anhalt-Zerbst, says, in the preface to his edition of
his songs,--"Along with his piety Gerhardt had the devil, the false
world, and the enemies of religion continually on his neck, with which he
had to contend on the right and on the left, day and night. He also
prayed very diligently, as earnestly as one pleads with his father. At
the close of his life he had pious Arndt's 'Prayer and Paradise Garden'
continually before him, and so highly did he esteem it, that he wrote
several hymns on its contents."

Many of Gerhardt's songs appeared in the first instance in various
hymn-hooks. The first complete edition was published by J. E. Ebeling,
Director of Music in the chief church in Berlin, in ten folio parts, each
containing twelve songs, in 1666-67. It seems that Gerhardt never derived
any pecuniary advantage from their publication. Tradition says, that
after a warm conflict with the enemy he wrote the hymn "Wach auf mein
Herz und Singe," in proof of which the second verse is quoted. But he
wrote no song after leaving Berlin. Schultze mentions that there is no
song bearing his name that had not been printed in 1667.

His will, and the rules of life, written before his death, for his son
Paul Friedrich, are worthy of quotation, revealing as they do the piety,
simplicity, purity, integrity, and also the narrowness of his
character.[6] After expressing his gratitude to God for all the goodness
and truth shown him from his mother's womb till that hour (he had then
reached his seventieth year), his hope of speedy deliverance from this
life and entrance into a better, and praying God when his time came to
take his soul into His Fatherly hands and grant his body quiet rest till
the last day, when he should be reunited with those gone before as well
as those left behind, and behold Jesus face to face, in whom he had
believed though he had not seen Him, he goes on to say:--

"To my only son I leave few earthly possessions, but an honourable name,
of which he will have no special reason to be ashamed.

"My son knows, that from tender infancy I gave him to the Lord my God as
His own, that he should be a servant and preacher of His Holy Word. Let
it be so, and let him not turn aside because he may have few good days
therein, for God knows how to compensate for outward trial by inward
gladness of heart and joy in the Holy Ghost. Study sacred theology in
pure schools and incorrupt universities, and beware of Syncretists, for
they seek the things of time, and are faithful neither to God nor man. In
thine ordinary life, follow not bad company, but the will and commandment
of thy God. In particular

"1. Do nothing evil in the hope that it will remain secret,

    'For nothing can so small be spun
    That it comes not to the sun.'

"2. Never grow angry out of thine office and calling.

"If thou findest that anger hath inflamed thee, be perfectly silent, and
do not utter a word until thou hast first repeated to thyself the Ten
Commandments and the Christian Creed.

"3. Be ashamed of sinful, fleshly lusts; and when thou comest to years
that thou canst marry, do so seeking direction from God, and the good
counsel of pious, faithful, and judicious persons.

"4. Do people good whether they can requite you or not, for what men
cannot requite the Creator of Heaven and earth has long ago requited, in
that He created thee, hath given thee His dear Son, and in holy baptism
hath received and adopted thee as His son and heir.

"5. Flee covetousness like hell. Be content with what thou hast acquired
with honour and a good conscience, though it may not be too much. Should
God grant thee more, pray Him to preserve thee from any hurtful misuse of
temporal possessions.

_Summa_; pray diligently, study something honourable, live peacefully,
serve honestly, and remain steadfastly in thy faith and confession. So
wilt thou one day die and leave this world willingly, gladly, blessedly!
Amen."

He died on the 7th of June, 1676, as the Lübben church-book testifies,
after he had been seven years in Lübben and twenty-five in the ministry.

It is said, that he died with the words of one of his own hymns on his
lips. "Death can never kill us even," from verse 8th of the Christian
Song of Joy.

    "Why should sorrow ever grieve me?"

He is buried in the chief church, probably near the altar, though the
precise spot cannot be determined. A portrait in oil, hung up in the
church, testifies to the estimation in which he was held by the
congregation, for besides his, there are only the portraits of a few
General Superintendents, and none of any of his predecessors in office.

Towards the side, at the foot of the picture are the words:--

"Theologus in cribro Satanae versatus."[7]

And under that again, the following epigram written by J. Wernsdorf:--


    "Sculpta quidem Pauli, viva est atque imago Gerhardti,
    Cujus in ore, fides, spes, amor usque fuit.
    Hic docuit nostris Assaph redivivus in oris
    Et cecinit laudes, Christe benigne, tuas.
    Spiritus aethereis veniet tibi sedibus hospes,
    Haec ubi saepe canes Carmina Sacra Deo."[8]


It is not known what became of his son, and nothing is known of his
posterity.

The editor of the Selection of Gerhardt's Songs--Bremen, 1817--states in
his preface: "There is at present living in Bremen a great-granddaughter
of Gerhardt's, eighty-one years of age, a simple Christian soul. Her
father was, as she says, an advocate in Oldenburg; of her ancestor the
poet she has neither written nor oral information."

There are three of Gerhardt's sermons extant in the library of the
gymnasium of the Grey Cloister in Berlin; and the titles and texts of
three more are known. They are all funeral sermons. We would close this
notice of the life of Gerhardt with a few extracts from Wackernagel's
preface to his edition of Gerhardt's Spiritual Songs.

"Paul Gerhardt," he says, "may be viewed in a one-sided manner, from two
quite opposite points of view, in relation to the spiritual contents of
his songs. His poems appear to mirror the transition character of his
age, when the personal life of the feelings, the subjective tendency,
began to assert itself beside the Christian consciousness of the
congregation. He may therefore be regarded as the last and the most
perfect of those poets who were grounded in the
ecclesiastico-confessional faith, and with him the line of the strict
ecclesiastical poets closes. He may also be regarded as beginning the
line of those in whose songs, praise and adoration of the revealed God
recede before the expression of the feelings that master the soul in
contemplating its relation to God revealing Himself to it as its
salvation. The true view is, that Gerhardt stood in the fore front of his
age and united in himself in the most lively manner both tendencies.
Though he did not write so expressly for the congregation, so immediately
in the interest of the church, as Luther, but from personal necessity, in
personal temptations, yet the pulsation of his inner life was the common
ecclesiastical confession; and his experiences, however personal they
might be, were only waves of the flood of baptism and life which every
other member of the church breathed and shared. His sorrow, and God's
love, the soul's questions, and God's answers in him and in his songs,
become one--so one as can only be when the experience is not only true
for the individual, but also for the people and the church.

"For this reason Paul Gerhardt's are people's songs. They remind us
sometimes of Friedrich Spee; above all, the glorious song,

    'Go forth, my heart, and seek delight.'

But how much richer and more many-sided is the Evangelical than the
Catholic poet, and at the same time better known and more familiar to the
people! The Catholic congregations know nothing now of Friedrich Spee;
but where is the Evangelical congregation that does not know Paul
Gerhardt; in what churches are not his holy songs heard? What the pious
Catherine Zell of Strasburg says of beautiful spiritual songs in her
hymn-book is true of him:--'The journeyman mechanic at his work, the
servant-maid washing her dishes, the ploughman and vine-dresser in the
fields, the mother by her weeping infant in the cradle, sing them.' High
and low, poor and rich alike, find them equally consoling, equally
edifying; in all stations, among young and old, there are examples to be
found where some song of Gerhardt at particular periods in the history of
the inner life was engraven for ever on the soul, and subsequently became
the centre point of the dearest reminiscences. Winckleman's favourite
song, even in Italy, after he had passed over to the Catholic Church,
was,

    'I sing to thee with heart and mouth.'

And once when he ordered a song-book from Germany, he was vexed, yea,
exasperated, when he found that it did not contain this song.

"Schiller's mother nurtured the young mind of her son with the songs of
our poet, with whom the song

    'Now spread are evening shadows'

was a favourite,--the same song concerning which Johann Falk narrates
that a beggar boy was preserved amid many temptations by singing to
himself the stanza commencing

    'O Jesus! be my cover.'

"Books devoted to the exposition of spiritual songs, or to facts
concerning pious persons, relate how many of Gerhardt's hymns have
quickened many hearts in heavy affliction and anxiety, and have quietly
composed their minds in the hour of death, and led them to peace....

"Above all, it was the mothers who fostered the domestic spiritual song,
and handed down the old songs to the new generation. The noble picture of
such a mother, even of his own, is sketched by T. F. Hippel, and the
words in which she described the peculiarity of the poet to her son serve
to portray herself as well as Gerhardt:--

"'After Luther, I must confess, I know no better hymn-poet than Gerhardt.
He, Rist, and Dach form a trefoil, but the chosen instrument, Luther, was
the root. Gerhardt wrote during the ringing of the church bells, so to
speak. A certain impressiveness, a certain sorrowfulness, a certain
fervour, were peculiar to him; he was a guest on earth, and everywhere in
his one hundred and twenty-three songs sunflowers are sown. This flower
ever turns to the sun, so does Gerhardt to a blessed eternity.'

"The love with which the contemporaries of Gerhardt, as far as the bell
of an evangelical church was heard, turned to his song, has only one
precedent--the veneration, the devotion, with which Luther's songs were
regarded. The songs of no other poet, either before or since, have ever
produced so mighty an effect or obtained so speedy and so wide a
circulation."


----------

[1]Wetzlar's "Analecta Hymnica."

[2]One qualified and authorized to preach, but not ordained, ordination
   taking place only when the candidate is placed over a congregation as
   a pastor.

[3]The Elector Sigismund had gone over to the Reformed Confession in
   1613, and the position of the Lutherans and Reformed in the Mark in
   relation to the court had since been reversed.

[4]Wackernagel says, that it was his official duty to sketch the writings
   in attack and defence, that they display great tact and acuteness, and
   furnish a new proof that critical acumen may be combined with a
   poetical temperament.

[5]Since writing this sketch, the writer observes that currency has been
   given to this apocryphal story in a recent work, "Our Hymns: their
   Authors and their Origin. By the Rev. Josiah Miller."

[6]In the reference to the Syncretists.

[7]A Theologian experienced in the sieve of Satan.

[8]




    A graven, indeed, yet living image of Paul Gerhardt,
    In whose mouth, faith, hope, love have ever been.
    Here Asaph returned to life, taught in our coasts, and sang thy
              praises, O Gracious Saviour!
    The Spirit will come to thee as a guest, from the heavenly seats
              wherever thou shalt sing these Sacred Songs to God.




                          INDEX OF FIRST LINES.




                                                                     PAGE
  A Lamb bears all its guilt away                                      49
  A rest here have I never                                            316
  After clouds we see the sun                                         261
  Ah! faithful God, compass'nate heart                                169
  Ah! lovely innocence, how evil art thou deem'd                      160
  Awake, my heart! be singing                                         276
  Be glad, my heart! now fear no more                                 329
  Be joyful all, both far and near                                     75
  Be thou contented! aye relying                                      202
  Behold! behold! what wonder's here!                                  14
  Bless'd is he the Lord who loveth                                   132
  Bless'd is he who never taketh                                      130
  By John was seen a wondrous sight                                   347
  Come, and Christ the Lord be praising                                24
  Commit whatever grieves thee                                        225
  Creator, Father, Prince of might!                                   109
  Father of mercies! God most high                                    175
  For Thee, Lord, pants my longing heart                               88
  Full of wonder, full of art                                         302
  Full often as I meditate                                            143
  Go forth, my heart, and seek delight                                289
  How can it be, my highest Light!                                    259
  How heavy is the burden made                                        246
  How long, Lord, in forgetfulness                                    235
  I have deserv'd it, cease to oppose                                 165
  I into God's own heart and mind                                     219
  Immanuel! to Thee we sing                                            37
  In grateful songs your voices raise                                 238
  In prayer your voices raise ye                                       45
  Is God for me? t'oppose me                                          208
  Jesus! Thou, my dearest Brother                                     112
  Let not such a thought e'er pain thee                                83
  Look up to thy God again                                            195
  Lord God! Thou art for evermore                                     312
  Lord, lend a gracious ear                                            92
  Lord, Thou my heart dost search and try                             138
  Lord! to Thee alone I raise                                         135
  Mine art Thou still, and mine shalt be                              333
  My face, why shouldst thou troubled be                              322
  My God! my works and all I do                                       102
  My heart! the seven words hear now                                   63
  Now at the manger here I stand                                       32
  Now gone is all the rain                                            298
  Now spread are evening's shadows                                    285
  Now with joy my heart is bounding                                    18
  O Father! send Thy Spirit down                                       78
  O God! from Thee doth wisdom flow                                    97
  O God, my Father! thanks to Thee                                    117
  O God! who dost Heaven's sceptre wield                              294
  O Jesus Christ! my fairest Light                                    122
  O Lord! I sing with mouth and heart                                 255
  O my soul, why dost thou grieve                                     155
  Oh! bleeding head, and wounded                                       59
  Oh, Jesus Christ! how bright and fair                               307
  On thy bier how calm thou'rt sleeping                               338
  Praise God! for forth hath sounded                                  251
  Praise ye Jehovah                                                   279
  Say with what salutations                                            10
  Scarce tongue can speak, ne'er human ken                              1
  See, world! thy Life assailèd                                        54
  Shall I not my God be praising                                      240
  The daylight disappeareth                                           282
  The golden morning, joy her adorning                                270
  The Lord, the earth who ruleth                                      266
  The time is very near                                               341
  Thou art but man, to thee 'tis known                                148
  Thou must not altogether be                                         230
  Thy manger is my paradise                                            26
  'Tis patience must support you                                      184
  Twofold, Father! is my pray'r                                       107
  Up! up! my heart with gladness                                       71
  What pleaseth God, my faithful child                                189
  Why should sorrow ever grieve me                                    214
  Why should they such pain e'er give Thee                             43
  Why without, then, art Thou staying                                   5




                             SPIRITUAL SONGS




                          Of the Holy Trinity.


    Scarce tongue can speak, ne'er human ken
      The myst'ry could discover,
    That God, from His high throne to men
      Makes known the world all over:
    That He alone is King above
      All other gods whatever,
    Great, mighty, faithful, full of love,
      His saints doth aye deliver,
    One substance but three persons!

    God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost!
      The name thrice holy given,
    On earth by all the ransom'd host,
      And by the hosts of heaven.
    He's Abraham's and Isaac's God,
      And Jacob's whom He knoweth,
    The Lord of Hosts, who every good
      Both night and day bestoweth,
    Who only doeth wonders!

    His Son, from all eternity
      Begotten hath the Father,
    Who came as man, when God's decree
      Had fix'd, His sheep to gather.
    The Holy Ghost eternally,
      While all Their glory sharing,
    Their honour, pow'r, and majesty,
      A crown all equal wearing,
    Proceeds from Son and Father!

    Be glad, my heart! thy portion see,
      Thy rich unequall'd treasure,
    He is thy Friend, supply will He
      Thy needs with bounteous measure.
    Who made thee in His image fair
      Thy load of guilt removeth,
    Gives thee His chosen's faith to share,
      Thy Joy in sorrow proveth,
    Through His own word most holy.

    Bestir thyself, with all thy heart
      Thy God to know endeavour:
    Sweet rest such knowledge will impart,
      Thy soul with pure love ever
    Will cause to glow, and nourish thee
      For life and joy in heaven;
    Things heard of only here, shall be
      To open sight there given,
    By God to His dear children.

    Woe! woe! to the besotted crew
      In wilful blindness living,
    Rejecting God, the honour due
      To Him, to creatures giving.
    The time will come when close shall He
      'Gainst them the door of heaven;
    Who God drive from them here, shall be
      By Him hereafter driven,
    From His high throne most holy!

    O Prince of might! Thy mercy show,
      Thou God of earth and heaven,
    To every sinner here below
      May saving grace be given!
    Bring back Thy sheep who go astray,
      And blinded eyes enlighten,
    And turn Thou every thing away
      That wickedly might frighten
    Thine own, whose faith is feeble.

    Grant this, that we Thy people may
      All reach the heav'nly portals,
    And in Thy kingdom sing for aye,
      'Mid all the bless'd immortals:
    That Thou above art King alone
      All other gods high over,
    The Father, Son, and Spirit, One,
      Thy people's Shield and Cover,
    One substance but three persons!




                                 Advent.


                  WHY WITHOUT, THEN, ART THOU STAYING?


    Why without, then, art Thou staying,
      Blessed of the Lord from far?
    Enter now, no more delaying,
      Let it please Thee--Thou, my Star!
      Thou, my Jesus, Friend indeed,
      Helper in the hour of need!
    Saviour! ease the wounds that pain me,
    Let Thy comforts rich sustain me.

    Lord, my wounds are pain and sorrow,
      That the hammer of the law
    With its terrors, night and morrow,
      Causeth, filling me with awe.
      Oh! the dreadful thunder peals
      When His anger God reveals,
    All my blood to tingle making,
    And my heart's foundation shaking!

    Then with wiles the great deceiver
      Would to me all grace deny,
    Saying, in the hell for ever
      That torments him, I must be.
      But I suffer sorer pangs,
      For with poison'd serpent fangs
    Doth my conscience gnawing, tearing,
    Stir remorse beyond all bearing.

    Do I seek my woe to soften,
      And to lessen pain desire,
    With the world commingling often,
      Sink I quite into the mire.
      There is comfort that deceives,
      Joy that by my mischance lives,
    Helpers there who only grieve me,
    Friends who only mock and leave me.

    Nothing in the world endureth,
      Or the soul's thirst can allay;
    Fleeting is the rank that lureth.
      Have I riches? What are they
      Better than small dust of earth?
      Have I pleasure? What's it worth?
    What to-day my heart doth gladden,
    That to-morrow doth not sadden?

    Comfort, joy, in boundless measure,
      Stor'd, Lord Jesus, are in Thee,
    Pastures of unfading pleasure,
      Where we roam and feast so free.
      Light of joy! illumine me
      Ere my heart quite broken be!
    Jesus, let mine eyes behold Thee;
    Lord, refresh me and uphold me!

    Heart, rejoice, for He doth hear thee,
      And He visits thee again;
    Now thy Saviour draweth near thee,
      Bid Him gladsome welcome then,
      And prepare thee for thy guest,
      Enter thou into His rest,
    While with open heart receiving,
    Tell Him all that is thee grieving.

    Lo! the things that seem'd to hinder
      How they all fall out for good.
    Hark! how He in accents tender
      Comforts thee in gracious mood.
      Ceas'd the dragon has to roar,
      Scheming, raging, now no more.
    His advantages forsake him,
    He must to th' abyss betake him.

    Now thy life is calm and even,
      All thy heart's desire is thine;
    Christ Himself to thee hath given
      All He hath--exhaustless mine!
      His grace is thy fairest crown,
      Thou His seat art and His throne;
    With Himself as one He makes thee,
    Freely to His bosom takes thee.

    God His golden-curtain'd Heaven
      Spreadeth to encompass thee!
    Lest thou shouldst away be driven
      By thy raging enemy.
      Angel hosts keep watch and ward
      At thy side and are thy guard;
    Lest in journeys aught should hurt thee,
    By the way their arms support thee.

    All the ill thou hast done ever
      It is now remitted quite;
    God's love thee doth now deliver
      From sin's tyrant pow'r and might.
      Christ the Prince hath won the day,
      Rise against thee what ill may,
    He, to purest good converting,
    Robbeth of the pow'r of hurting.

    All for thine advantage proveth,
      E'en what hurtful may appear.
    Christ accepteth thee and loveth,
      And His thoughts are all sincere.
      Thou in turn but faithful be,
      Then shall certainly by thee,
    With the angel hosts in Heaven,
    Thanks and praise for aye be given.


                       SAY WITH WHAT SALUTATIONS?


    Say with what salutations
      Shall I Thine advent greet?
    Desire of all the nations,
      My Joy and Succour meet!
    O Jesus! Jesus! lead me
      On by Thy blessèd light;
    What's Thy delight thus guide me
      To understand aright.

    With palms doth Zion meet Thee,
      Spreads branches in the way;
    To raise my soul to greet Thee
      Glad psalms I'll sing to-day.
    My heart shall blossom ever,
      O'erflow with praises new,
    And from Thy name shall never
      Withhold the honour due.

    What hast Thou e'er neglected
      For my good here below?
    When heart and soul dejected,
      Were sunk in deepest woe,
    When from Thy presence hidden,
      Where peace and pleasure are,
    Thou camest, and hast bidden
      Me joy again, my Star!

    In bitter bondage lying,
      Thou com'st and sett'st me free;
    'Neath scorn and shame when sighing,
      Thou com'st and raisest me.
    Thy grace high honour gives me,
      Abundance doth bestow,
    That wastes not, nor deceives me
      As earthly riches do.

    No other impulse led Thee
      To leave Thy throne above,
    Upon Thine errand sped Thee,
      But world-embracing love!
    A love that deeply feeleth
      The wants and woes of men,
    No tongue its fulness telleth,
      It passeth human ken.

    In thy heart be this written,
      Thou much afflicted band!
    Who evermore art smitten
      With griefs on every hand.
    Fear not! let nothing grieve thee,
      For help is at thy door,
    He'll consolation give thee,
      Oil in thy wounds will pour.

    No care nor effort either
      Is needed day and night,
    How thou may'st draw Him hither
      In thine own strength and might.
    He comes, He comes with gladness!
      O'erflows with love to thee,
    To chase away the sadness
      He knows oppresseth thee.

    Sin's debt, the mighty burden
      Let not thy heart affright;
    The Lord will freely pardon,
      His grace will cover quite.
    He comes! He comes! Salvation
      Proclaiming everywhere,
    Secures His chosen nation
      Their heritage so fair!

    Thy foes why should they move thee?
      Their wiles and rage are vain,
    Thy Saviour, who doth love thee,
      Will scatter them again.
    He comes! a Conq'ror glorious,
      He'll scatter every band
    Of foes--His course victorious
      Too few they're to withstand.

    He comes to judge each nation;
      Who curs'd Him, curse shall He;
    With grace and consolation,
      Who lov'd, receiv'd shall be.
    Oh! come, Thou Sun, and lead us
      To everlasting light,
    Up to Thy mansions guide us
      Of glory and delight.




                      Birth of Christ.--Christmas.


                    OF THE APPEARANCE OF THE ANGELS.


    Behold! behold! what wonder's here!
    The gloomy night turns bright and clear,
    A brilliant light dispels the shade,
    The stars before it pale and fade.

    A wondrous light it is, I trow,
    And not the ancient sun shines now,
    For, contrary to nature, night
    Is turned by it to day so bright.

    What means He to announce to us,
    Who nature's course can alter thus?
    A mighty work design'd must be
    When such a mighty sign we see.

    To us vouchsafèd can it be
    The Sun of Righteousness to see,
    The Star from Jacob's stem so bright,
    The woman's Seed, the Gentiles' Light?

    'Tis even so--for from the sky
    Heav'n's hosts with joyful tidings hie,
    That He is born in Bethl'hem's stall,
    Who Saviour is and Lord of all!

    Oh blessedness! the goodly throng
    Of sainted fathers waited long
    To see this day, with hope deferr'd,
    As we may learn from God's own word.

    Awake, ye sons of men, awake!
    Up! up! and now your journey take
    With me, let us together go
    To where the blessèd angels show.

    Behold! there in yon gloomy stall
    He lies who ruleth over all;
    Where once their food the cattle sought,
    The Virgin's child for rest is brought.

    Oh, child of Adam! ponder well,
    And stumble not at what I tell,
    He who appears in this low state
    For us is, and aye shall be great.

    In mortal flesh we Him behold,
    Who all things made and doth uphold,
    The Word who was with God is He,
    Himself is God whom now we see.

    It is God's sole-begotten Son
    Through whom we now approach His throne,
    The First and Last, the Prince of Peace,
    The Conqueror through whom wars cease.

    The times predicted are fulfill'd,
    God's fiery wrath must now be still'd;
    His Son, made man, doth bear our load
    Of guilt, our peace buys with His blood.

    It is a time of joy to-day,
    With mourning and with woe away!
    Woe, woe to him who us revil'd!
    God's seen in flesh--we're reconcil'd.

    The Lord who bears our sin is here,
    Who'll bruise the serpent's head is near,
    The Death of death--the Woe of hell--
    The Lord of Life with us doth dwell.

    All foes are put our feet beneath,
    For sin and Satan, hell and death,
    Are brought to shame and put to flight
    Upon this great, this wondrous night.

    Oh! happy world, thrice happy they!
    Who on this lowly infant stay
    Their souls, and with believing eyes
    In Him their Saviour recognize.

    Now praise the Lord whoe'er can praise,
    Who from their low estate to raise
    His enemies, from His high throne
    Sent down His lov'd, His only Son.

    Up! join the angel host and cry,
    Now glory be to God most High;
    Let peace prevail the world around,
    Good-will to men and joy abound.


                   NOW WITH JOY MY HEART IS BOUNDING.


    Now with joy my heart is bounding,
          With delight
          Angels bright
    Praises forth are sounding.
    Hark! hark! how the choirs of Heaven,
          Through the sky
          Raise the cry,
    Christ to you is given!

    He who's mighty to deliver,
          Goes that He
          Earth may free
    From all woes for ever.
    God is man, man to deliver,
          His dear Son
          Now is one
    With our blood for ever.

    God in us must now take pleasure,
          For He gives
          Whom He loves
    Far beyond all measure.
    To redeem us He hath given
          His own Son
          From the throne
    Of His might in Heaven.

    Who Himself and Kingdom ever,
          Giveth free,
          Oh! could He
    Drive us from Him?--never!
    Will not God's own Son now bless us?
          He who loves
          And removes
    All things that distress us!

    Had our human nature ever
          By the Lord
          Been abhorr'd,
    He had been man never.
    Had our Lord delighted ever
          In our grief,
          He relief
    Would have brought us never.

    All transgression He assumeth,
          That we've done
          'Neath the sun,
    And our Lamb becometh.
    As our Lamb His life is given,
          So that we,
          From death free,
    May have peace and Heaven!

    Now He's in the manger lying,
          Me and thee
          Calleth He,
    In sweet accents crying,
    "Banish, brethren, what's distressing,
          All your ills,
          All that falls,
    I bring times of blessing."

    Come, and let us now go thither,
          Let us all,
          Great and small.
    Flock in crowds together.
    Love Him who with deep love burneth,
          See the light
          He so bright
    Kindly on us turneth.

    Ye who sink in deepest anguish,
          Look ye here,
          Joy is near,
    Grieve no more, nor languish.
    Cleave to Him and He will bring you
          To the place,
          By His grace,
    Where no pain will wring you.

    All ye hearts, oppress'd with sorrow,
          Ye who feel
          Sin's sore ill
    And conviction's arrow,
    Courage now! for One is living
          Who hath skill
          You to heal,
    All your pain relieving.

    All ye poor ones and distressèd,
          Come--come ye
          Take--'tis free,
    Of His store so blessèd.
    Here do all good gifts flow over,
          Here is gold
          Stores untold!
    Here your hearts recover!

    Gracious Saviour! deign to hear me,
          And let me
          Hang on thee,
    Undisturb'd stay near Thee.
    Of my life Thou art the Giver,
          I through Thee
          Joyfully
    Live contented ever.

    Guilt no longer can distress me,
          Son of God!
          Thou my load
    Bearest to release me.
    Stain in me Thou findest never,
          I am clean,
          All my sin
    Is remov'd for ever.

    For Thy sake I'm clean all over,
          Thou dost me
          Graciously
    With fair raiment cover.
    To my heart's throne I will raise thee,
          Glory mine!
          Flow'r divine!
    Let me love and praise Thee.

    Diligently I'll preserve Thee,
          To the skies
          To Thee rise,
    Here live for and serve Thee.
    With Thee I at last shall wander,
          Joyfully,
          Endlessly,
    And in glory yonder!


                                A CAROL.


    Come, and Christ the Lord be praising,
    Heart and mind to Him be raising,
    Celebrate His love amazing,
      Worthy folk of Christendom!

    Sin, death, hell, may all be grieving,
    Satan shame feel to him cleaving,
    We salvation free receiving,
      Cast our every care away.

    See what God for us provideth,
    Life that in His Son abideth,
    And our weary steps He guideth
      From earth's woe to heav'nly joy.

    His soul deeply for us feeleth,
    He His love to us revealeth,
    He who in the heavens dwelleth
      Came to save us from our foe.

    Jacob's star His advent maketh,
    Soothes the longing heart that acheth,
    And the serpent's head He breaketh,
      Scattering the pow'r of hell.

    Op'd hath He and freedom gain'd us
    From the prison that contain'd us,
    Where much grief and sorrow pain'd us,
      And our hearts were bow'd with woe.

    O bless'd hour when we receivèd
    From the foe who us deceivèd
    Liberty, when we believèd,
      And Thee, gracious Savior, prais'd.

    Beauteous Infant in the manger,
    O befriend us! beyond danger
    Bring us where is turn'd God's anger,
      Where with angel hosts we'll praise!


                             AT THE MANGER.


        Thy manger is
        My paradise,
        O Jesus Christ!
    Where feeds my soul delighted.
        There 'fore mine eyes
        The Word now lies,
        Who to our flesh
    In person is united.

        Whom wind and sea
        Obey, e'en He
        In servant's form
    And place for men's appearing.
        God's own Son, Thou
        Assumest now
        Clay weak and mean,
    Such as our own, art wearing!

        Thou, highest Good!
        Dost raise our blood
        Up to Thy throne,
    High o'er all heights whatever!
        Pow'r endless, Thou
        Art brother now
        To us who like
    The grass and flowers, wither!

        What harm can do
        Our soul's dread foe
        To us at all,
    Though full of gall his spirit?
        The things that he
        Accuseth me
        And others of,
    From Adam we inherit.

        Be silent, fiend!
        There sits my Friend,
        My flesh and blood,
    High in the heav'ns enthronèd:
        What Thou dost smite
        The Prince of might
        From Jacob's stem
    With honours high hath ownèd.

        His health and light,
        Heal and give sight,
        And heaven's Joy
    All earthly ill undoeth.
        Immanuel,
        Of joy the Well,
        The devil, hell,
    And all their pow'r subdueth.

        Believing heart,
        Whoe'er thou art,
        Be of good cheer,
    Let nothing e'er depress thee;
        Because God's Son
        Makes thee God's own,
        God must prove true
    To thee, and ever bless thee.

        Now think and see
        How gloriously,
        He over all
    Distress hath thee uplifted.
        He who reigns o'er
        The angels, more
        Than thou art, is
    With blessedness not gifted.

        Lo! seest thou
        Before thee now,
        Thy flesh and blood,
    Who air and clouds rules ever.
        What can there be
        (I ask of thee)
        That can arise,
    To fear thee to deliver?

        Things oft affright
        Thy feeble sight
        And make thee sigh,
    Thy consolations vanish:
        Come hither, then,
        Behold again
        Christ's manger here,
    And all misgivings banish.

        Though plagued with care,
        Yet ne'er despair!
        Thy Brother ne'er
    Thy misery disdaineth;
        His gracious heart
        Feels every smart,
        Nor when He sees
    Our woe, from tears refraineth.

        To Him now go,
        He'll help bestow
        And rest, and thou
    Good cause shalt have for blessing.
        Full well He knows
        What burns and glows,
        What on the heart
    Of each sick one is pressing.

        He therefore bore
        The wrath so sore
        Of the dread cross
    In His flesh, shrinking never,
        That through His pain
        He might retain
        The memory
    Of our distresses ever.

        The gate is He
        That leadeth me
        To present joy,
    And to eternal blessing.
        He soon doth send
        A happy end
        To all the grief
    On pious heart that's pressing.

        The world's base pelf
        Leave to itself,
        And make thou sure,
    This treasure thine remaineth.
        It firmly keep
        Nor let it slip,
        It there a crown
    For soul and body gaineth!


                           BESIDE THE MANGER.


    Now at the manger here I stand,
      My Jesus, Life from Heaven!
    I stand, and bring Thee in my hand
      What Thou to me hast given.
    Take it, it is my mind and wit,
    Heart, soul, and all I have, take it,
      And deign to let it please Thee!

    With Thy great love beyond compare,
      My soul Thou fillest ever,
    Thy glance so sweet, Thine image fair,
      My heart forgetteth never.
    How otherwise e'er could it be,
    How could I ever banish Thee,
      From my heart's throne, O Saviour!

    Ere ever I began to be,
      Thou hadst for me appearèd,
    And as Thine own hadst chosen me
      Ere Thee I knew or fearèd.
    Before I by Thy hand was made,
    Thou hadst the plan in order laid,
      How Thou Thyself shouldst give me.

    I lay still in death's deepest night,
      Till Thou, my Sun, arising,
    Didst bring joy, pleasure, life, and light,
      My waken'd soul surprising.
    O Sun! who dost so graciously
    Faith's goodly light to dawn in me
      Aye cause; Thy beams how beauteous!

    With rapture do I gaze on Thee,
      Ne'er can enough adore Thee,
    Pow'r more to do is not in me,
      I'll praise and bow before Thee.
    Oh! that my mind were an abyss,
    My soul a sea, wide, bottomless,
      That so I might embrace Thee.

    Oh! let me kiss that mouth of Thine,
      My Jesus, Saviour gracious!
    Thy mouth that e'en the sweetest wine,
      And milk and honey precious,
    In pow'r and virtue doth excel,
    Of comfort, strength, and sap 'tis full,
      And inwardly refreshes.

    When oft my heart within doth cry,
      No comfort can discover,
    It calls to me, Thy friend am I,
      Thine ev'ry sin I cover;
    My flesh and bone, why mournest thou?
    Let thy heart be of good cheer now,
      Thy debt, I have discharg'd it.

    Who is the Master, where is he,
      Who in perfection sketcheth
    The hands this infant dear to me
      Now smilingly outstretcheth?
    The snow is clear, and milk is white,
    But both lose all their value quite
      Before these hands so beauteous.

    Oh! wisdom fails me utterly
      For honouring and praising
    The eyes this infant fixedly
      To mine is ever raising.
    The fall moon, it is clear and fair,
    The golden stars most beauteous are,
      But these eyes far excel them.

    Oh! that a star so passing fair
      Should in a crib be holden!
    Who mighty nobles' children are
      Should lie in cradles golden!
    Ah! hay and straw too wretched are,
    Silk, velvet, purple better far,
      Were for Thee, Child! to lie on.

    Remove the straw, remove the hay,
      From where the child reposes,
    And flow'rs I'll bring that lie He may
      On violets and roses.
    With tulips, pinks, and rosemary,
    From goodly gardens pluck'd by me,
      I'll from above bestrew Him.

    And snow-white lilies here and there
      His side shall be thrown over;
    When closed His eyes with slumber are,
      Them shall they softly cover.
    But Thou mayest love the grass so dry,
    My Child! more than the things that I
      Have spoken or have thought of.

    Not for the world's pride dost Thou care,
      Nor joys the flesh doth offer;
    In human form Thou liest there,
      For us to do and suffer,
    Seek'st joy and comfort for my soul,
    While waves of trouble o'er Thee roll;
      I never will Thee hinder.

    One thing I hope Thou'lt grant to me,
      My Saviour! ne'er deny me,
    That I may evermore have Thee
      Within, and on, and by me.
    And let my heart Thy cradle be,
    Come, come and lie Thou down in me,
    With all Thy joys and treasures!

    'Tis true, that I should think how poor
      And mean my entertaining,
    Than dust and ashes I'm no more,
      Thou mad'st, art all-sustaining,
    Yet Thou'rt a guest belov'd and priz'd,
    For never yet hast Thou despis'd
      Him who delights to see Thee!


                       IMMANUEL! TO THEE WE SING.


    Immanuel! to Thee we sing,
    The Fount of life, of grace the Spring,
    Than fairest lily fairer far,
    Lord of all Lords, the morning Star!
    Hallelujah!

    With all Thy people, Lord, we raise
    To Thee our heart-felt songs of praise,
    That Thou, O long-expected Guest!
    Hast brought us our desirèd rest.
    Hallelujah!

    Since the Creator said--"Light be!"
    How many a heart hath watch'd for Thee!
    Of Fathers, Prophets, Saints the throng
    With ardent hope have waited long.
    Hallelujah!

    Than others more, the Shepherd King
    Belov'd by Thee, and wont to sing
    Thy praise on sounding harp, inspir'd
    By deeper longing, Thee desir'd.
    Hallelujah!

    Ah Zion! that thy Lord to thee
    Would come and set thy captives free;
    Ah! that our help would now arise
    And gladden Jacob's waiting eyes.
    Hallelujah!

    There art Thou now, Thou ever-bless'd!
    There dost Thou in the manger rest;
    The world Thou deck'st, all things hast made--
    Thou'rt naked there, in weakness laid.
    Hallelujah!

    A stranger art Thou here below,
    To whom the Heav'ns allegiance owe;
    A mother's milk dost not despise,
    Who art the Joy of angels' eyes.
    Hallelujah!

    The bounds of ocean fix'd hast Thou,
    Who art a swaddled infant now;
    Thou'rt God--a bed of straw Thou hast.
    Thou'rt man--yet art the First and Last.
    Hallelujah!

    Of every joy Thou art the spring,
    Yet sorrow oft Thy heart doth wring.
    The Gentiles' Light and Hope Thou art,
    Yet findest none to soothe Thy heart.
    Hallelujah!

    The sweetest Friend of man Thou art,
    Though many hate Thee in their heart!
    The heart of Herod loathèd Thee,
    Yet what art Thou? Salvation free!
    Hallelujah!

    Thy meanest servant, Lord! am I,
    I say it in sincerity;
    I love Thee, but not half so well
    As I should love,--more love I'd feel.
    Hallelujah!

    My pow'r is weak, though will be there,
    But my poor heart against Thee ne'er
    Shall rise t' oppose,--Thou wilt receive
    By grace the little I can give.
    Hallelujah!

    Thou to be weak dost not disdain,
    Dost choose the things the world deems vain,
    Art poor and needy, and dost come,
    By love impell'd, to want's drear home!
    Hallelujah!

    Thou sleepest on the lap of earth,
    The manger where Thou at Thy birth
    Wast laid to rest, the hay, the stall
    Were mean, were miserable all.
    Hallelujah!

    And therefore doth my courage rise,
    Thy servant wilt Thou not despise;
    The gracious mind that dwells in Thee
    Fills me with hope and gladdens me.
    Hallelujah!

    Lord! though I've pass'd in sin my days,
    And wandered far from wisdom's ways,
    Yet therefore Thou to earth hast come,
    To bring the wand'ring sinner home.
    Hallelujah!

    Had I no debt of sin to face,
    How could I ever share Thy grace?
    In vain for me Thine advent here,
    Had I no wrath of God to fear.
    Hallelujah!

    Lord, fearlessly I come to Thee,
    Thou keep'st my soul from anguish free;
    Thou bear'st the wrath, dost death destroy,
    And sorrow turnest into joy.
    Hallelujah!

    My Head Thou art, Thy member I
    In turn am, and Thy property;
    Lord, I will serve Thee while I live
    With all the grace Thou deign'st to give.
    Hallelujah!

    Loud hallelujahs here I'll sing,
    With joy that from my heart doth spring,
    And when I reach yon mansions fair
    I will repeat them ever there.
    Hallelujah!




                                New Year.


                     OF THE CIRCUMCISION OF CHRIST.


    Why should they such pain e'er give Thee,
      Why inflict such cruel smart?
    Jesus, why should they so grieve Thee,
      Who're uncircumcis'd in heart,
    By this rite? Though Thou art free
    From the law's yoke utterly,
    Yet man's nature art Thou wearing,
    But no sin its beauty marring.

    For Thyself Thou dost not bear it,
      Of the Cov'nant Thou art Head;
    'Tis our debts that make Thee share it,
      That like grievous load of lead
    Lie upon us, and Thy heart
    Pierce e'en to the inmost part;
    These Thou bearest to deliver
    Us, who could have paid them never.

    Let your hearts be glad, ye debtors!
      Let the world rejoice to-day,
    For the Son of God our fetters
      Breaks, the price begins to pay.
    This day is the Law fulfill'd,
    This day is God's anger still'd,
    Whom to death law did deliver,
    God's Son makes God's heirs for ever.

    We this grace enough can never
      Own, nor for it grateful be;
    Heart and mouth, O Saviour! ever
      Shall exalt and honour Thee!
    We shall praise with all our pow'r
    All Thy goodness, Thee adore,
    While in weakness here we wander,
    And Thy praise re-echo yonder!


                                  SONG.


    In pray'r your voices raise ye
    To God, and Him now praise ye,
    Who to our life from heaven
    All needed strength hath given.

    The stream of years is flowing,
    And we are onward going,
    From old to new surviving,
    And by His mercy thriving.

    In woe we often languish,
    And pass through times of anguish,
    When fearful war aboundeth,
    That earth itself surroundeth.

    As faithful mother keepeth
    Guard while her infant sleepeth,
    And all its grief assuageth
    When angry tempest rageth;

    So God His children shieldeth,
    Them full protection yieldeth;
    When need and woe distress them,
    His loving arms caress them.

    In vain is all our doing,
    The labour we're pursuing
    In our hands prospers never,
    Unless God watcheth ever.

    Our song to Thee ascendeth,
    Who every day defendeth
    Us, and whose arm averteth
    The pain our hearts that hurteth.

    O God of mercy! hear us;
    Our Father! be Thou near us;
    'Mid crosses and in sadness
    Be Thou our Spring of gladness.

    To me and all be given,
    Who from the heart have striven
    To gain Thy benediction,
    Hearts patient in affliction.

    Oh! close the gates of sorrow,
    And by a glorious morrow
    Of peace, may places sadden'd
    By bloodshed dire be gladden'd.

    With richest blessings crown us,
    In all our ways, Lord! own us;
    Give grace, who grace bestowest
    To all, e'en to the lowest.

    Of all forlorn be Father,
    All erring ones ingather,
    And of the poor and needy
    Be Thou the succour speedy.

    Grace show to all afflicted,
    And to all souls dejected,
    By melancholy haunted,
    May happy thoughts be granted.

    All earthly gifts excelling,
    The Holy Ghost indwelling,
    Give us to make us glorious,
    And lead to Thee victorious.

    All this Thy hand bestoweth,
    Thou Life! whence our life floweth,
    Thus Thou Thy people meetest
    With New Year's blessing greetest.




                 The Sufferings of Christ.--Good Friday.


                    A LAMB BEARS ALL THE GUILT AWAY.

                             Isa. liii. 4-7; John i. 29.


    A Lamb bears all its guilt away
      The world thus to deliver,
    All sins of sinners patiently
      It bears and murmurs never.
    It goes, and weak and sick is made
    An off'ring on the altar laid,
      All pleasure it forsaketh,
    Submits to shame, and scorn, and wrath,
    To anguish, wounds, stripes, cross, and death,
      This cup with gladness taketh.

    This Lamb, He is the soul's great Friend
      And everlasting Saviour,
    God chooseth Him sin's reign to end
      And bring us to His favour.
    "Go forth, my Son! redeem to Thee
    The children who're exposed by me
      To punishment and anger.
    The punishment is great, and dread
    The wrath, but Thou Thy blood shalt shed,
      And free them thus from danger."

    "I'll go where, Father! thou dost send,
      Bear what on me Thou layest,
    My will doth on Thy word depend,
      My work is what Thou sayest."
    O mighty love! O wondrous love!
    Thou canst do all our thoughts above,
      Make God His Son deliver!
    O love! O love! Thy pow'r how great!
    Thou did'st Him e'en to death prostrate
      Whose glance the rocks can shiver.

    Thou martyr'st Him upon the tree,
      With spear and nails destroying
    Thou slay'st Him, lamblike, ruthlessly,
      Till heart and veins are flowing,
    The heart with many a long-drawn sigh,
    And till His veins are copiously
      Their noble life-blood yielding.
    Sweet Lamb! what shall I do for Thee
    For all the good Thou doest me,
      Thus saving me and shielding?

    All my life long I'll cleave to Thee
      And shall forget Thee never,
    As always Thou embracest me
      I will embrace Thee ever.
    My heart's Light Thou shalt ever be,
    And when my heart shall break in me
      Thy heart shall fail me never.
    O Thou, my Glory, I to Thee
    Myself as Thine own property
      Herewith resign for ever!

    I ever shall both night and day
      Thy loveliness be singing,
    An offering of joy shall aye
      Myself to Thee be bringing.
    My stream of life shall still to Thee,
    And to Thy name, outpourèd be,
      In gratitude enduring.
    Of every good Thou doest me,
    My soul shall mindful strive to be,
      In memory securing!

    Shrine of my heart! now open'd be,
      To thee shall now be given
    Fair treasures that far greater be
      Than earth, and sea, and heaven.
    Away! gold of Arabia,
    Myrrh, calamus, and cassia,
      Far better I discover!
    My priceless treasure is, O Thou
    My Jesus! what so freely now
      From Thy wounds floweth over!

    Good use of this behoves it me
      At all times to be making,
    My shield in conflict shall it be,
      My joy when heart is breaking,
    In happiness my song of joy;
    When all things else my taste do cloy,
      This manna then shall feed me,
    In thirst my well-spring shall it be,
    In solitude converse with me,
      And out and in shall lead me!

    What can death's poison do to me?
      Thy blood to me life giveth,
    And when the sun burns fervently,
      With grateful shade relieveth;
    And when with sorrow sore oppress'd
    I ever find in it my rest,
      As sick men on their pillows.
    My anchor art Thou, when my skies
    Are clouded o'er, and tempests rise,
      My bark 'whelm in the billows.

    And when at last heav'n's gate I see,
      And taste the kingdom's pleasure,
    This blood shall then my purple be,
      I'll clothe me in this treasure;
    It shall be then my glorious crown,
    In which I'll stand before the throne
      Of God, with none to blame me;
    And as a bride in fair array,
    I'll stand beside my Lord that day,
      Who woo'd, and then will claim me.


                     SEE, WORLD! THY LIFE ASSAILED.


    See, world! thy Life assailèd;
    On the accurs'd tree nailèd,
      Thy Saviour sinks in death!
    The mighty Prince from Heaven
    Himself hath freely given
      To shame, and blows, and cruel wrath!

    Come hither now and ponder,
    'Twill fill thy soul with wonder,
      Blood streams from every pore.
    Through grief whose depth none knoweth,
    From His great heart there floweth
      Sigh after sigh of anguish o'er!

    Who is it that afflicts Thee?
    My Saviour, what dejects Thee,
      And causeth all Thy woe?
    Sin Thou committed'st never,
    As we and our seed ever,
      Of deeds of evil nought dost know.

    I many times transgressing,
    In number far surpassing
      The sand upon the coast,
    I thus the cause have given,
    That Thou with grief art riven,
      And the afflicted martyr host.

    I've done it, and deliver
    Me hand and foot for ever
      Thou justly might'st to hell.
    The mock'ry to Thee offer'd,
    The scourging Thou hast suffer'd,
      My soul it was deserv'd it well.

    The load Thou takest on Thee,
    That press'd so sorely on me,
      Than stone more heavily.
    A curse, Lord, Thou becamest,
    Thus blessings for me claimest,
      Thy pain must all my comfort be.

    Not death itself Thou fearest,
    As surety Thou appearest
      For all my debts and me.
    For me Thy brow is crownèd
    With thorns, and Thou'rt disownèd
      By men, and bear'st all patiently.

    Into death's jaws Thou springest,
    Deliv'rance to me bringest
      From such a monster dire.
    My death away Thou takest,
    Thy grave its grave Thou makest;
      Of love, O unexampled fire!

    I'm bound, my Saviour, ever,
    By ties most sacred never
      Thy service to forsake;
    With soul and body ever,
    With all my pow'rs t' endeavour,
      In praise and service joy to take.

    Not much can I be giving
    In this poor life I'm living,
      But one thing do I say:
    Thy death and sorrows ever,
    Till soul from body sever,
      My heart remember shall for aye.

    Before mine eyes I'll place them,
    And joyfully embrace them,
      Wherever I may be,
    They'll be a glass revealing
    Pure innocence, and sealing
      Love and unfeign'd sincerity.

    Of sin how great the danger,
    How it excites God's anger,
      How doth His vengeance burn
    How sternly He chastiseth,
    How His wrath's flood ariseth,
      Shall I from all Thy suff'rings learn.

    From them shall I be learning,
    How I may be adorning,
      My heart with quietness,
    And how I still should love them
    Whose malice aye doth move them
      To grieve me by their wickedness.

    When tongues of bad men grieve me,
    Of peace and name deprive me,
      My restive heart I'll still;
    Their evil deeds enduring,
    Of pardon free assuring
      My neighbour for his ev'ry ill.

    I'll on the cross unite me
    To Thee, what doth delight me
      I'll there renounce for aye.
    Whate'er Thy Spirit's grieving,
    There I'll for aye be leaving,
      As much as in my strength doth lay.

    Thy groaning and Thy sighing,
    Thy thousand tears and crying,
      That once were heard from Thee,
    They'll lead me to Thy glory,
    Where I shall joy before Thee,
      And evermore at rest shall be!


                  TO THE COUNTENANCE OF THE LORD JESUS.


    Oh! bleeding head, and wounded,
      And full of pain and scorn,
    In mockery surrounded
      With cruel crown of thorn!
    Oh Head! before adornèd
      With grace and majesty,
    Insulted now and scornèd,
      All hail I bid to Thee!

    They spit upon and jeer Thee,
      Thou noble countenance!
    Though mighty worlds shall fear Thee,
      And flee before Thy glance.
    How hath Thy colour faded,
      The light too of Thine eye!
    Say who to pale hath made it?
      None shone so brilliantly.

    Now from Thy cheeks is vanish'd
      Their colour once so fair;
    From Thy red lips is banish'd
      The splendour that was there.
    Death's might hath all things taken,
      Hath robb'd Thee ruthlessly;
    Thy frame, of strength forsaken,
      Doth hence in weakness lie.

    O Lord! it was my burden
      That brought this woe on Thee,
    I earn'd it--for my pardon
      It has been borne by Thee.
    A child of wrath, look on me,
      Turn not away Thy face;
    O Saviour! deign to own me,
      And smile on me in grace.

    My Guardian, now confess me,
      My Shepherd, me receive!
    Thou evermore dost bless me,
      All good things dost Thou give.
    Thy mouth hath often given
      Me milk and sweetest food.
    And many a taste of Heaven
      Thy Spirit hath bestow'd.

    Oh! do not, Lord, deride me,
      I will not hence depart,
    Here will I stand beside Thee,
      When breaks Thine anguish'd heart;
    When on Thy breast is sinking
      In death's last fatal grasp
    Thy head, e'en then unshrinking
      Thee in mine arms I'll clasp.

    Nought ever so much blesses,
      So much rejoices me,
    As when in Thy distresses
      I share a part with Thee.
    My Life, ah! were it ever
      Vouchsaf'd me on Thy cross
    My soul up to deliver,
      How blessèd were my loss!

    Thanks from my heart I offer
      Thee, Jesus, dearest Friend,
    For all that Thou didst suffer,
      My good didst Thou intend.
    Ah! grant that I may ever
      To Thy truth faithful be,
    And in the last death-shiver
      May I be found in Thee.

    When hence I must betake me,
      And death at last must meet,
    Lord, do not then forsake me,
      Thy child with welcome greet.
    When terror has bereft me,
      Of heart and hope, again,
    Lord! from my woe uplift me,
      In virtue of Thy pain.

    Be Thou my consolation
      When death o'ertaketh me;
    May Thy death-tribulation
      Before mine eyes then be!
    I'll on Thee, fondly gazing,
      Fix my believing eyes,
    While firmly Thee embracing,--
      He dies well who so dies.


         THE SEVEN WORDS SPOKEN BY THE LORD JESUS ON THE CROSS.


    My heart! the seven words hear now
      That Jesus Christ hath spoken,
    When on the cross His heart through woe
      And murder dire was broken;
        Ope now the shrine,
        And lock them in,
      As gifts all price excelling.
        In bitter grief,
        They'll give relief,
      'Neath crosses joy instilling.

    His first and chiefest care He made
      Who hated Him to cover:
    God for the wicked men He pray'd,
      That He'd their sin look over.
        "Forgive, forgive,"
        He said in love,
      "Them every one, O Father!
        Not one doth see
        What doeth he,
      In ignorance 'tis rather!"

    How fair it is, let all learn here,
      To love their foes who grieve them,
    And all their faults with hearts sincere
      Aye freely to forgive them.
        He also shows,
        How grace o'erflows
      His heart, how kind His mood is,
        That e'en his foe,
        Who'd work Him woe,
      Doth in Him find what good is!

    Then to His mother doth He speak,
      Who stood near him He loveth,
    And as He can, though voice be weak,
      With words of comfort sootheth:
        "Woman! there see
        Thy son, for me
      Thou shalt by him be guarded.
        Disciple! see,
        Let her by thee
      As mother be regarded."

    O faithful heart! thou car'st for all
      Thine own who truly love Thee,
    When they in tribulation fall
      Thou seest, the sight doth move Thee;
        A friend in need,
        In word and deed,
      Thou at their side appearest,
        Dost by Thy grace
        Find them a place,
      Them to good souls endearest.

    The third thing that Thy lips have said
      Thou spak'st to him beside Thee,
    When, "Think upon me then," he pray'd,
      "When God Himself shall guide Thee
        Up to Thy throne,
        Thy head shall crown
      As Lord of earth and heaven:"
        "To walk with Me
        To-day shall thee
      In Paradise be given."

    O blessèd word! O voice of joy!
      Can aught affright us?--never!
    Let death who seeketh to destroy,
      Now disappear for ever!
        Though he rage sore,
        What can he more
      Than soul and body sever?
        And meanwhile I
        Mount up on high,
      In joy to dwell for ever.

    Christ's word gives deepest peace and joy,
      The robber's trouble stilleth;
    But He cries from the agony
      His holy breast that filleth,
        "Eli, my God,
        What heavy load
      Am I, Thy Son, now bearing?
        I call, and Thou
        Art silent now,
      Though I sink, seem'st not caring."

    This lesson learn, thou child of faith,
      When God His count'nance veileth,
    Lest thou be cast down in the path
      When trouble thee assaileth:
        Firm to Him cleave,
        Though He may leave,
      He'll comfort soon, and cheer thee;
        True do thou be,
        Cry mightily,
      Until He turn and hear thee.

    The Lord His voice now clear doth raise
      Through thirst that paineth sorely;
    "I thirst," the Spring eternal says,
      The Lord of life and glory.
        What meaneth He?
        He showeth thee
      How He thy load sinks under,
        That thou did'st pile
        For Him, the while
      In sin's ways thou did'st wander.

    Thereby He also telleth thee
      How much He longs that ever
    His cross in each may fruitful be,
      Fail of its end may never.
        Mark this all ye,
        Now carefully,
      Who're in soul tribulation:
        Th' eternal Sun
        Refuseth none
      The soul's part and salvation.

    And as the gloomy night of death
      Upon the Lord descended,
    "'Tis finish'd," He with dying breath
      Said, "now my work is ended;
        What was foretold
        In days of old,
      By seers who went before me,
        Doth now betide;
        I'm crucified,
      And men now triumph o'er me."

    "'Tis finish'd!"--why then toilest thou?
      In vain thy labour ever!
    As if aught human strength can do,
      Could e'er from guilt deliver!
        'Tis done! beware,
        And never dare
      To add aught to it ever;
        Do thou believe,
        In faith aye cleave
      To Him, forsake Him never.

    His voice at length the Lord doth raise,
      High over all 'tis swelling:
    "My spirit, Father! to the place
      Take where Thou'rt ever dwelling,
        My soul receive,
        That now doth leave
      This body sorely riven."
        And at the word,
        To the great Lord
      Release from pain was given.

    Oh! would to God, that I might end
      My life as His was ended,
    My spirit unto God commend
      As His was then commended.
        O Christ, my Lord!
        May Thy last word
      The last be by me spoken;
        So happily
        I'll go to Thee,
      When life's last thread is broken.




                    Resurrection of Christ.--Easter.


                     UP! UP! MY HEART WITH GLADNESS.


    Up! up! my heart with gladness,
      See what to-day is done!
    How after gloom and sadness
      Comes forth the glorious Sun!
      My Saviour there was laid
      Where our bed must be made,
      When to the realms of light
      Our spirit wings its flight.

    They in the grave did sink Him,
      The foe held jubilee;
    Before he can bethink him,
      Lo! Christ again is free.
      And victory He cries,
      And waving tow'rds the skies
      His banner, while the field
      Is by the Hero held!

    Upon the grave is standing
      The Hero looking round;
    The foe, no more withstanding,
      His weapons on the ground
      Throws down, his hellish pow'r
      To Christ must he give o'er,
      And to the Victor's bands
      Must yield his feet and hands.

    A sight it is to gladden
      And fill the heart with glee,
    No more affright or sadden
      Shall aught, or take from me
      My trust or fortitude,
      Or any precious good
      The Saviour bought for me
      In sov'reign love and free.

    Hell and its bands can never
      Hurt e'en a single hair,
    Sin can I mock at ever,
      Safe am I everywhere.
      The mighty pow'r of death
      Is my regard beneath;
      It is a pow'rless form,
      Howe'er it rage and storm.

    The world my laughter ever
      Moves, though it rage amain,
    It rages, but can never
      Do ill, its work is vain.
      No trouble troubles me,
      My heart from care is free,
      Misfortune is my prize,
      The night my fair sunrise.

    I cleave, and cleave shall ever,
      To Christ, a member true,
    Shall part from my Head never,
      Whate'er He passes through;
      He treads the world beneath
      His feet, and conquers death
      And hell, and breaks sin's thrall;
      I'm with Him through it all.

    To halls of heav'nly splendour
      With Him I penetrate;
    And trouble ne'er may hinder
      Nor make me hesitate.
      What will, may angry be,
      My Head accepteth me,
      My Saviour is my Shield,
      By Him all rage is still'd.

    He to the gates me leadeth
      Of yon fair realms of light,
    Whereon the pilgrim readeth,
      In golden letters bright:
      "Who's there despised with me,
      Here with me crown'd shall be;
      Who there with me shall die,
      Here's raised with me on high!"


                    BE JOYFUL ALL, BOTH FAR AND NEAR.


    Be joyful all, both far and near,
      Who lost were and dejected:
    To-day the Lord of glory here,
      Whom God Himself elected
    As our Redeemer, who His blood
    Upon the cross shed for our good,
      Hath from the grave arisen.

    How well succeeded hath thy might,
      Thou foe of life so ruthless!
    To kill the Lord of life and light;
      Thine arrow through Him scathless
    Hath pass'd, thou base injurious foe!
    Thou thought'st when thou hadst laid Him low,
      He'd lie in dust for ever.

    No, no! on high His head is borne,
      His mighty pow'r asunder
    Thy gates hath burst, thy bands hath torn,
      Thyself hath trodden under
    His feet; who doth in Him confide
    Thy pow'r and claims may now deride
      And say, "Thy sting, where is it?"

    Thy pow'r is gone, 'tis broken quite,
      And it can hurt him never
    Who to this Prince with all his might
      With heart and soul cleaves ever,
    Who speaks with joy, "I live, and ye
    Shall also live for aye with me,
      For I this life have purchas'd.

    "The reign and pow'r of death are o'er,
      He never need affright you;
    I am his Lord, the Prince of pow'r,
      And this may well delight you;
    And as your risen Head I live:
    So ye, if ye on me believe,
      Shall be my members ever.

    "Of hell have I the overthrow
      Accomplish'd, none now needeth
    To fear the pains of endless woe,
      Who Me and My word heedeth;
    He's freed from Satan's grievous yoke,
    Whose head I bruis'd, whose might I broke,
      And he can never harm him."

    Now prais'd be God, who vict'ry hath
      To us through Jesus given,
    Who peace for war, and life for death,
      With entrance into heaven,
    Hath purchas'd, who death, sin, and woe,
    World, devil, what our overthrow
      Would seek, for aye hath vanquish'd.




                              Whitsuntide.


                     O FATHER! SEND THY SPIRIT DOWN.


    O Father! send Thy Spirit down,
    Whom we are bidden by Thy Son
      To seek, from Thy high heaven;
    We ask as He taught us to pray,
    And let us ne'er unheard away
      From 'fore Thy throne be driven.

    No mortal man upon the earth
    Is of this gift so noble worth,
      No merit we've to gain it;
    Here only grace availeth aught,
    That Jesus Christ for us hath bought,
      His tears and death obtain it.

    O Father! much it grieves Thy mind
    Us in such woful plight to find,
      As Adam's fall hath brought us;
    The evil spirit's pow'r, this fall
    Hath brought on him, and on us all,
      But Christ to save hath sought us.

    To our salvation, Lord, we cleave,
    That we are Thine in Christ believe,
      From Him nought shall us sever;
    And through His death and precious blood,
    Our mansions fair, and highest good,
      We look for, doubting never.

    This is a work of grace indeed,
    The Holy Spirit's strength we need,
      Our pow'r is unavailing;
    Our faith and our sincerity
    Would soon, O Lord! in ashes lie,
      Were not Thy help unfailing.

    Of faith Thy Spirit keeps the light,
    Though all the world against us fight,
      And storm with every weapon.
    Although the prince of this world too,
    May take the field to lay us low,
      No ill through him can happen.

    The Spirit's is the winning side,
    And where He helps, the battle's tide
      Assuredly abateth.
    What's Satan's might and majesty?
    It falleth when His standard high
      The Spirit elevateth.

    The chains of hell He rends in twain,
    Consoles and frees the heart again
      From everything that grieveth;
    And when misfortunes o'er us low'r
    He shields us better in their hour,
      Than ever heart conceiveth.

    The bitter cross He maketh sweet,
    In gloom His light our eyes doth greet,
      Care of His sheep He taketh,
    Holds over us the shield, and when
    Night falls upon His flock, He then
      To rest in peace us maketh.

    The Spirit God gives from above
    Directeth all who truly love
      In ways of safety ever;
    He guides our goings every day,
    From paths of bliss to turn away
      Our feet permits us never.

    He maketh fit, and furnishes
    With needed gifts for service those
      Who here God's house are rearing,
    Adorns their minds and mouths and hearts,
    And light to them for us imparts,
      What's dark to us thus clearing.

    Our hearts He opens secretly
    When they His word so faithfully
      As precious seed are sowing;
    He giveth pow'r to it, where'er
    It takes root, tending it with care,
      And waters it when growing.

    He teacheth us the fear of God,
    Loves purity, makes His abode
      The soul that sin refuseth;
    Who contrite are, virtue revere,
    Repent, and turn to Him in fear
      And love, He ever chooseth.

    He's true, and true doth aye abide,
    In death's dark hour He's at our side,
      When all from us recedeth;
    He sootheth our last agony,
    Up to the halls of bliss on high
      In joy and trust He leadeth.

    Oh! happy are the souls and bless'd,
    Who while on earth permit this Guest
      To make in them His dwelling;
    Who now receive Him joyfully,
    He'll take up to God's house on high,
      Their souls with rapture filling.

    Now, Father, who all good dost give,
    Our pray'r hear, may we all receive
      From Thee this priceless blessing;
    Thy Spirit give, that here He may
    Rule us, and there in endless day
      Our souls be aye refreshing.




                               Repentance.


                       CONSOLATION FOR PENITENCE.


    Let not such a thought e'er pain thee,
      As that thou art cast away,
    But within God's word restrain thee,
      That far otherwise doth say.
      E'en though thou unrighteous art,
      True and faithful is God's heart.
    Hast thou death deserv'd for ever?
    God's appeas'd, despond thou never!

    Thou art, as is every other,
      Tainted by the poison, sin,
    That the serpent, and our father,
      Adam, by the fall brought in.
      But if thou God's voice dost hear,
      "Turn to me, do good," ne'er fear,
    Be of good cheer, He thy yearning
    Will regard, thy pray'r ne'er spurning.

    He is not a bear nor lion
      Thirsting only for thy blood,
    Faithful is thy God in Zion,
      Gentle ever is His mood.
      God aye as a Father feels,
      He's afflicted by our ills,
    Our misfortune sorrow gives Him,
    And our dying ever grieves Him.

    "Truly," saith He, "as I'm living,
      I the death of none desire,
    But that men themselves upgiving,
      May be rescu'd from sin's mire."
      When a prodigal returns,
      God's heart then with rapture burns,
    Wills that not the least one even
    Ever from His flock be driven.

    Shepherd was so faithful never,
      Seeking sheep that go astray;
    Couldest thou God's heart see ever,
      How He cares for them alway,
      How it thirsts and sighs and burns
      After him who from Him turns,
    From His people's midst doth wander,
    Love would make thee weep and ponder.

    God the good not only loveth
      Who in His house ever dwell,
    But His heart compassion moveth
      Tow'rds those whom the prince of hell
      Hath enslav'd, the cruel foe
      Who men's hearts with hate to glow
    Makes 'gainst Him, who when He ever
    Moves His foot, can make earth quiver.

    Deep His love is and enduring,
      His desire is ever great,
    He is calling and alluring
      Us to enter heav'n's wide gate.
      When they come, whoe'er they be,
      Seeking now that liberty
    From the devil's fangs be given,
    Glad are all the hosts of heaven.

    God and all on high who're dwelling,
      'Fore whom heav'n must hush its voice,
    When their Maker's praise forth-telling,
      O'er our penitence rejoice;
      But what has been done amiss
      Cover'd now and buried is,
    All offence to Him we've given,
    All, yea all, is now forgiven.

    From no lake so much is gushing,
      No depth is so deep at all,
    With such force no stream is rushing,
      All compar'd with God is small;
      Nought is like His grace so great,
      That remits our mighty debt,
    That He ever throweth over
    All our lives e'en as a cover.

    Soul, why art thou sad and dreary?
      Rest now and contented be!
    Why wilt thou thyself so weary
      When there is no need for thee?
      Though thy sins appear to thee
      Like a vast and shoreless sea,
    If thou with God's heart compare them,
    'Twill a trifle seem to bear them.

    Could we myriad worlds discover
      All sunk in apostacy,
    Had the sins there o'er and over
      Every one been done by thee,
      Oh! still they were less by far
      Than the light of grace so clear
    Could on earth extinguish ever,
    God from greater could deliver.

    Of such wondrous love and favour
      Open wide the door to me;
    Ey'rywhere and aye, my Saviour,
      Tasted be Thy grace by me.
      Love me, Lord! and let me be
      Nearer ever drawn to Thee,
    That I may embrace and love Thee,
    Never more to anger move Thee!


                FOR THEE, LORD, PANTS MY LONGING HEART.--PSALM XXV.


    For Thee, Lord, pants my longing heart,
    My hope and confidence Thou art;
    My hope can never shaken be,
    Nor e'er be put to shame by Thee.

    Whoe'er he be that scorns Thy name,
    And turns from Thee, shall come to shame;
    But he who ever lives to Thee,
    And loves Thee, shall untroubled be.

    Accept my soul, O Lord! by grace,
    And keep me right in all my ways,
    And let Thy truth illumine me
    Along the path that leads to Thee.

    Thou art my only light below,
    No other helper here I know;
    I wait on Thee both night and day,
    Why dost Thou, then, O Lord, delay?

    Ah, Lord! now turn Thine eyes away
    From paths where I have gone astray;
    Of my ill ways what thinkest Thou,
    That I've pursued from youth till now?

    Remember, Thou my Guardian Lord!
    Thy loving-kindness and sweet word,
    Whereby Thou giv'st them comfort sweet
    Who lay themselves low at Thy feet.

    Who prove themselves, and sin confess,
    The Lord in mercy rich will bless;
    Who keep His testimonies all,
    The Lord will hold them when they fall.

    The heart that with the Lord is right
    In grief He'll gladden with His light,
    When sunk in need, weigh'd down by loss,
    Shall triumph e'en beneath the cross.

    Ah! Lord, full well thou knowest me,
    My spirit lives and moves in Thee;
    Thou seest how my bleeding heart
    Longs for the help Thou canst impart.

    The griefs that now my heart oppress,
    The griefs my heavy sighs express
    Are great and sore, but Thou art He
    To whom nought e'er too great can be.

    To Thee I therefore raise mine eyes,
    To Thee mine ardent longings rise--
    Ah! let Thine eye now rest on me
    As Thou wast wont, Lord, graciously.

    And when I need supporting grace,
    Turn not away from me Thy face;
    May what Thou deignest to impart
    Of my desires be counterpart.

    The world is false, it acts a part,
    Thou art my Friend, sincere in heart;
    Man's smile is only on his mouth,
    Thou lovest us in deed and truth.

    Foil Thou the foe, his nets all tear,
    And baffle every wile and snare;
    When all with me once more is well,
    May gratitude my bosom swell.

    Still may I in Thy fear abide,
    And go right on nor turn aside;
    Give single aim that honours Thee,
    Smarts rather than a burden be.

    Rule, Lord, and bring me unto Thee,
    And other saints along with me;
    Remove whate'er of ill dost find,
    Renew and cleanse each heart and mind.

    Wash Thou away each sinful stain,
    Deliver from all grief and pain,
    And lead us soon by heav'nly grace
    To realms of endless joy and peace.


                        SONG OF REPENTANCE FROM PSALM CXLIII.


    Lord, lend a gracious ear
    To my desire sincere,
    From heart all free from guile,
    And glad me with Thy smile,
      Accept my petition.

    Not wealth is my request,
    That on the earth doth rest,
    That shall at length decay,
    With earth must pass away,
      And can never save us.

    The treasure I desire
    Is Thine own grace, O Sire!
    The grace that Thy dear Son,
    Of saving grace the throne,
      By His death hath purchas'd.

    Thou pure and righteous art,
    Unholy is my heart,
    All dead in sin I live,
    But sin dost Thou forgive,
      Who art God most faithful.

    And be Thy faithfulness
    My trust and happiness;
    Turn from my sin Thy face
    With overflowing grace
      My guiltiness cover.

    Consider what we be--
    A moment, where are we?
    As brittle as frail glass,
    As fading as the grass,
      By a breath we're swept off.

    If Thou wilt only view
    The evil that we do,
    So great our load of sin,
    None e'er could stand within
      Heaven's gate most holy.

    How Jesus Christ for me
    Himself hath giv'n, see!
    What I to do have fail'd
    His power hath avail'd,
      His doing and dying.

    Thou lov'st remorse and smart,
    Behold, here is a heart
    That knows and feels its sin,
    And burns like fire within
      With grief, pain, and sorrow.

    I'm like a thirsty land
    From which Thy gracious hand
    Hath long withheld the rain,
    Until we seek in vain
      For strength, fruit, or moisture.

    Like hart upon the heath,
    That cries with gasping breath
    For water fresh and clear,
    I call into Thine ear,
      Fount of living water!

    My spirit, Lord, revive,
    Rich consolation give;
    Speak, that my soul may rest
    Upon the friendly breast
      Of Thy love eternal.

    Give me a trustful mood,
    That when the mighty flood
    Of sin o'erwhelmeth me,
    My grief absorb'd may be
      In Thy mercy's ocean.

    Drive off the wicked foe
    That seeks my overthrow;
    Thou art my Shepherd, I
    Will be eternally
      A sheep of Thy pasture.

    As long as I shall dwell
    On earth, to do Thy will
    I give myself to Thee,
    And evermore shall be
      Thine own faithful servant.

    Though feeble, I shall be
    Still grateful unto Thee,
    For in Thy might alone,
    That worketh in Thine own,
      All my power standeth.

    Then send Thy Spirit down,
    Who points out to Thine own
    The way that pleaseth Thee;
    They never mov'd shall be,
      Who keep Him indwelling.

    Thou shalt go on before,
    Shalt open me the door
    That leads to wisdom's way,
    I'll follow every day,
      Copying Thee ever.

    And when at length 'tis giv'n
    To tread the courts of heav'n,
    With angel hosts to Thee
    I'll sing eternally
      To Thy praise and glory.




                     Prayer and the Christian Life.


                               FOR WISDOM.


    O God! from Thee doth wisdom flow,
    All I can do Thou well dost know;
    If Thine own grace doth not sustain,
    Then all my labour is in vain.

    As shapen in iniquity,
    No good by nature can I see;
    My heart can never serve Thee right,
    In folly it is sunken quite.

    Yea, Saviour! I'm too mean and small
    To treat Thy law and claims at all;
    What for my neighbour's good may be,
    Is hid from and unknown to me,

    My life is very short and weak,
    A thread, a passing wind may break;
    The splendour that the world doth prize
    Is vain and worthless in mine eyes.

    If earth with all its gifts would dow'r,
    And give me honour, fame, and pow'r,
    And did I not enjoy Thy light,
    Then were I nought, 'twere deepest night.

    What use, though much we've learnèd here,
    If first we do not learn Thy fear,
    And ne'er to serve Thee right attain?
    It is more loss to us than gain.

    The knowledge men themselves attain
    May easily mislead again;
    And when our art hath done its best,
    On all sides obstacles arrest.

    How many ruin now the soul
    Through craft, as did Ahithophel,
    And come, through ignorance of Thee,
    And through their wit, to misery.

    O God, my Father! lend an ear,
    My supplication deign to hear;
    Far from me may such folly be;
    A better mind, Lord! give to me.

    Give me the Wisdom from above
    Thou giv'st to all who truly love,
    The wisdom that before Thy throne
    For ever shineth in their crown.

    I love her lovely face so bright,
    She is my joy and heart's delight,
    The fairest is that holdeth me,
    Mine eyes she pleaseth wondrously.

    She's noble, and of rarest worth,
    From Thee, Most High! derives her birth;
    She's like the Monarch of the day,
    Rich gifts and virtues her array.

    Her words are sweet and comfort well,
    When grief our eyes with tears doth fill;
    When 'neath affliction's rod we smart,
    'Tis she revives the drooping heart.

    She's full of grace and majesty,
    Preserves us from mortality;
    Who earnestly to get her strives,
    E'en when he's dying, still he lives.

    She's the Creator's counsellor,
    In deeds and words excels in pow'r;
    Through her the blind world knows and sees
    What God in heav'n above decrees.

    What mortal knows His Maker's mind?
    Who is he that could ever find
    The counsel out God hath decreed,
    The way wherein He'd have us tread?

    The soul upon the earth doth live,
    Its heavy burdens sorely grieve,
    The faculties distracted be,
    From error here are not set free.

    What God doth who can e'er explore,
    And say what He rejoiceth o'er?
    Unless Thou who dost ever live
    Dost Thine own wisdom to us give.

    Then send her from Thy heav'nly throne,
    And give her to Thine handmaid's son;
    Her bountifully, Lord! impart
    To the poor dwelling of my heart.

    Command her to abide with me,
    And my companion aye to be;
    Whene'er I labour, may she e'er
    Me help my heavy load to bear.

    May I be taught by her wise hand
    To know and rightly understand
    That I to Thee alone may cleave,
    According to Thy will may live.

    And give to me ability,
    To truth may I still open be,
    That sour of sweet I never make,
    Nor darkness for the light may take.

    To Thy word give desire and love,
    And true to duty may I prove;
    To pious souls join'd may I be,
    Take counsel with them constantly.

    And may I gladly every man,
    By deed and counsel when I can,
    To guide and succour ready be,
    In truth and in sincerity.

    So that in ev'rything I do,
    In Thy love I may ever grow;
    For who to wisdom doth not give
    Himself, unlov'd by Thee must live.


      FOR SUCCESS AND BLESSING IN ALL CHRISTIAN WORKS AND PURPOSES.


    My God! my works and all I do,
    Rest only on Thy will, I know,
      Thy blessing prospers ever,
    When Thou dost guide, we persevere
      In right ways, erring never.

    It standeth not in human might
    That man's devices issue right,
      His way with gladness endeth:
    God's counsel only prospers sure,
      'Tis He success who sendeth.

    Man often thinks in haughty mood
    That this or that is for his good,
      Yet widely he mistaketh;
    He often thinketh that is ill
      Whereof the Lord choice maketh.

    But wise men e'en who joyfully
    Begin a good work, frequently
      Reach no good termination;
    They build a castle firm and strong,
      But sand is the foundation.

    How many in their fancy stray
    High over mountain peaks away,
      Ere they bethink them ever;
    Down to the ground they fall, and vain
      Has been their strong endeavour.

    Dear Father! therefore, who the crown
    And sceptre bear'st on Heav'n's throne,
      Who from the clouds dost lighten,
    Regard my words, and hear my cry,
      From Thy seat my soul brighten!

    Vouchsafe to me the noble light
    That from Thy countenance so bright
      On pious souls aye breaketh,
    And where the pow'r of wisdom true
      Through Thine own pow'r awaketh.

    Give understanding from on high,
    That I henceforward may rely
      Upon mine own will never.
    Be Thou my counsel, that I may
      Fulfil the good, Lord! ever.

    Prove all things well, whate'er is good
    Give to me, but what flesh and blood
      Doth choose, withhold it ever.
    The highest good, the fairest part,
      Thy glory is and favour.

    Sun of my soul! my chief delight!
    Whate'er is pleasing in Thy sight,
      Oh! may I choose and do it;
    And what's displeasing unto Thee,
      May I, O Lord! eschew it.

    Is it from Thee? my work then bless;
    Is it of man? withhold success,
      And change what I'm resolving.
    Dost Thou not work? 'twill come to nought,
      In failure soon involving.

    But should Thine and our enemy
    Begin to rage revengefully
      Against the good Thou'rt meaning,
    My comfort is, Thou canst avert
      His wrath, me ever screening.

    Draw near, and let it easy be,
    What seems impossible to me,
      A happy issue give it;
    What Thou Thyself didst undertake,
      Thy wisdom did conceive it.

    Though hard at first the work may be,
    And I may through the deepest sea
      Of bitter grief be passing,
    Oh! may I only driven be
      To sighs and pray'r unceasing.

    Whoever prays and trusteth Thee,
    With valiant heart shall victor be
      O'er all that frightens ever,
    In thousand pieces speedily
      Grief's heavy stone shall shiver.

    The way to good is almost wild,
    With thorns and hedges is it fill'd;
      Along this way who goeth
    He by the Spirit's grace at last
      What heav'nly joy is knoweth.

    I am Thy child, my Father Thou!
    Thou hast abundance to bestow,
      Nought can I find within me;
    Help, that I may maintain my ground,
      As victor home, Lord! bring me.

    Thine be the glory and the pow'r!
    Thy mighty works I'll more and more
      From heart with rapture swelling,
    Before Thy folk and all the world,
      All my life long be telling.


                    TWOFOLD, FATHER! IS MY PRAYER.--PROV. XXX. 7-9.


    Twofold, Father! is my pray'r,
    Twofold the desire I there
    Lay before Thee, who dost give
    What's good for us to receive;
    Grant the pray'r that Thou dost know,
    Ere my soul to Thee must go
    From the body's bands below.

    Grant that far from me may be
    Lying and idolatry;
    Poverty immoderate
    Give me not, nor riches great;
    Too great wealth or poverty
    Is not good, for either may
    'Neath the devil's pow'r us lay.

    Give to me, my Saviour! give
    Modest portion while I live;
    Evermore supply my need,
    Giving me my daily bread;
    Little, with contented mood,
    And a conscience pure and good,
    Is the best can be bestow'd.

    If my cup should overflow,
    Proud in spirit I might grow,
    Thee deny with scornful word,
    Asking who is God and Lord?
    For the heart with pride doth swell,
    Often knows not when 'tis well,
    How itself enough t' extol.

    Should I bare and naked be,
    Sunk in too deep poverty,
    Faithless, I might wickedly
    Steal my neighbour's property;
    Force might use and artifice,
    Follow lawless practices,
    Never ask what Christian is.

    God! my Treasure and my Light,
    Neither course for me were right,
    Either would dishonour Thee,
    Sink me into hell's dark sea;
    Therefore, give, Lord! graciously,
    What Thy heart designs for me,
    Moderate my portion be!


             SIRACH'S PRAYER FOR A HAPPY AND TEMPERATE LIFE.


    Creator, Father, Prince of might!
      Who life to me art giving,
    Unless Thou guid'st my life aright
      In vain here am I living.
    For while I'm living, I am dead,
      To sin devoted ever;
    Whose life in mire of sin is led,
      The true life he hath never
      Beheld one moment even.

    Then turn on Thy poor child Thy face,
      In darkness do not leave me;
    That I may shun sin and disgrace,
      Good counsel ever give me!
    To keep my lips a guard, Lord, send,
      May no word ever leave them
    That e'er Thy people could offend
      Let nought I say e'er grieve them,
      Nor ever Thee dishonour!

    Forbid, Father! that mine ear
      Upon this earth so evil,
    Against Thy name and pow'r should hear
      The wicked rage and cavil.
    Let not the poison and the gall
      Of slanderers defile me;
    If I such filth should touch at all
      It surely would beguile me,
      Might e'en quite overthrow me.

    Lord, keep mine eyes, control their glance,
      May they work evil never;
    A bold and shameless countenance
      Keep Thou far from me ever!
    What's honest, keeps due boundaries,
      What angels seek in heaven,
    What is well-pleasing in Thine eyes,
      For it by me be striven,
      All luxury disdaining.

    Oh! may I ne'er delighted be
      By revelling and eating;
    Be what Thou lov'st belov'd by me,
      Though others shun it, hating.
    The lusts wherein the flesh doth roll,
      To hell will draw us ever;
    The joys the world doth love, the soul
      And spirit will deliver
      To torment everlasting.

    Oh! happy he who eats heav'n's bread,
      And heav'nly water drinketh,
    Who tastes nought else, nought else doth heed,
      Nought else desires, and thinketh
    Of that alone which strength can bring,
      The life we'll live for ever
    With God, and with the hosts who sing
      His praise, in joy that never
      Shall know an interruption.


                   FOR CONSTANT CHRISTIAN FRIENDSHIP.


    Jesus! Thou, my dearest Brother,
      Who dost well to me intend,
    Thou mine Anchor, Mast, and Rudder,
      And my truest Bosom-Friend.
    To Thee, ere was earth or heaven,
    Had the race of man been given;
      Thou, e'en me, poor guest of earth,
      Chosen hadst before my birth.

    Thou art free from guile, Lord! ever
      Innocent of all that's base;
    But on this sad earth whenever
      I in meditation gaze,
    There I find deception living;
    Who excelleth in deceiving,
      Who the best dissemble can,
      He's the best and wisest man.

    Hollow and unfaithful ever
      Is the friendship of the earth;
    Seemeth she a man to favour?
      'Tis but for the gold he's worth;
    Are we prosp'rous, do we flourish?
    She will smile on us, and nourish;
      Doth misfortune o'er us low'r?
      She forsakes us in that hour.

    Drive away from me, and shield me
      From such instability;
    If I, Father, have defil'd me
      (For I also human be)
    With this mire, and did I ever
    Falsehood love, oh! now deliver.
      All my guilt I own to Thee,
      Patience give, and grace to me!

    May I ne'er be overtaken
      By the evils Thou hast said
    Come on those who've truth forsaken,
      And with wares deceptive trade;
    For Thou sayest Thou disownest,
    As abomination shunnest,
      Ev'ry hypocrite's false mood,
      Who talks, but doth not the good.

    May my heart be constant ever,
      Faithful still to every friend;
    When to grief Thou dost deliver
    Them, and 'neath the cross they bend,
    May I even then ne'er shun them,
    But like unto Thee, Lord, own them,
      Who, when we were poor and bare,
      Tended'st us with fondest care.

    After Thy will, Saviour, give me
      One in whom I may confide,
    Who will faithful counsel give me
      When my heart is sorely tried;
    To whom I may freely utter
    All I feel, with nought to fetter,
      In the measure I may need,
      'Till my heart from care is freed.

    Oh! let David's bliss betide me,
      Give to me a Jonathan
    Who will come and stand beside me
      Like a rock, though every man
    From my company should sever,
    Who his heart will give me ever,
      Who'll stand firm in every hour,
      When sun shines or tempests low'r.

    Out of all the men who're living,
      Choose me a believing friend,
    Who to Thee is firmly cleaving,
      On Thine arm doth aye depend;
    Who may by Thy will relieve me,
    Help and comfort ever give me,
      Help, from sympathizing heart,
      Comfort, when I feel grief's smart.

    When 'tis only the mouth loveth,
      Then the love is ill bestow'd;
    Whose love but to good words moveth
      While he keeps a hateful mood,
    Whom self-interest rules ever,
    Who when honey falls, stays never,
      But escapeth speedily,--
      Ever far be such from me!

    In my weakness and my sinning,
      Move my friend to speak to me,
    By his words of kindness winning,
      Never as an enemy.
    Who reproves in love and sadness
    Is like him, in days of gladness,
      Who pours balsam over me
      That by Jordan floweth free.

    Riches great were I possessing,
      Priceless were my property;
    Jesus! did Thy hand such blessing
      Graciously bestow on me,
    Were such friend, Lord! ever near me,
    By His constancy to cheer me;
      Who doth honour Thee, and fear
      He hath such a treasure near.

    Good friends like to staves are ever,
      Whereon men lean as they go,
    That the weak one can deliver,
      When he slides and lieth low:
    Sad his case who such ne'er knoweth,
    Who through life all friendless goeth,
      Weary is his lonely way,
      When he falls, to help who stay?

    Gracious Saviour! let it please Thee,
      Be my Friend in every hour,
    Be my Friend, till death release me,
      Be my faithful Staff of pow'r!
    When Thou to Thyself wilt bind me,
    Then a heart Thou soon wilt find me,
      By Thy Holy Spirit fir'd
      With good thoughts to me inspir'd.


                    FOR TEMPORAL AND ETERNAL WELFARE.


    O God, my Father! thanks to Thee
    I bring with deep humility,
      That Thou Thine anger endest,
        And that Thy Son,
        Our Joy and Crown,
      Into the world Thou sendest.

    He hath appear'd, His precious blood
    Hath pourèd forth in such a flood,
      That all our sins it washes.
        Who to Him cleaves,
        He soon relieves
      Of burdens, and refreshes.

    I come, Lord! as the best I may,
    Take me into the band, I pray,
      Of those who are forgiven,
        Who through this blood
        Are just and good,
      And shall be bless'd in heaven.

    Oh! let mine eye and hand of faith
    This noble pledge keep without scath,
      Away from me ne'er casting;
        And let this light
        Lead me aright,
      To the light everlasting.

    The mansion of my soul prepare,
    Cast out whate'er is evil there,
      And build in me Thy dwelling:
        Thy grace so free
        Reveal to me,
      My soul with Thy love filling.

    All things are mine when I have Thee,
    Thou void of gifts canst never be;
      A thousand ways Thou knowest
        On earth to keep
        Thy feeble sheep;
      Enough Thou aye bestowest.

    Grant that I in my station here
    Thee in Thy word may ever fear,
      So guide what things concern me,
        That found in me
        True faith may be,
      And may with truth adorn me.

    And give me a contented mind,
    For when with godliness combin'd,
      Great gain thence ever floweth.
        Then what of good
        It pleaseth God
      To give, great peace bestoweth.

    The little that by God's great grace
    The righteous as his portion has,
      To honour more commendeth,
        Than all the gold
        The world doth hold,
      And with proud spirit spendeth.

    The faithful, Lord, to Thee are known,
    Thou art their Joy, and they Thine own,
      To shame thou putt'st them never;
        Comes scarcity,
        Their bread from Thee
      They find in all lands ever.

    God loveth him who fears and cleaves
    To Him, sees that no mischance grieves,
      In his ways joyeth ever;
        And if he slide,
        God doth abide,
      Doth bless him and deliver.

    God's eye is upon all who wait
    And hope in Him both soon and late,
      In all need to deliver,
        E'en in the hour
        When to devour
      Death threatens them for ever.

    Lord, Thou canst only gracious be,
    Thou givest all to know and see
      Thy goodness and Thy favour,
        Who with their mouth
        And heart in truth
      Own Thee their only Saviour.

    Make Her[9] Thy care especially,
    Whom Thou as monarch hast rais'd high
      This land and nation over;
        With rest and peace
        The land, Lord! bless,
      The throne with blessings cover.

    Preserve, Lord! our dear native land
    In Thine embrace and mighty hand;
      Protect us all together
        From error's voice,
        From enemies,
      From fire and plague deliver.

    All whom I love, keep every day,
    Let all the hosts of hell away
      From young and old be driven!
        Here, may we be
        In time by Thee
      Preserv'd, and there in heaven!


----------

[9]For obvious reasons the original has been slightly altered. The German
   is,
    Insonderheit nimm wohl in acht
    Den Fürsten, &c.


                         FOR THE LOVE OF CHRIST.


    O Jesus Christ! my fairest Light,
      Who in Thy soul dost love me,
    I ne'er can tell it, nor its height
      Mete, 'tis so high above me,
      Grant that my heart may warm to Thee,
        With ardent love ne'er ceasing,
            Thee embracing,
      And as Thy property,
        Cleave to Thee, ever gazing.

    Grant that an idol in me may
      Dwell e'en a moment never,
    Grant me to make Thy love, I pray,
      My crown and prize for ever!
      Cast all things out, take all away,
        That Thee and me would sever,
            So that ever
      By Thy love, my pow'rs may
        Be kindled, and cool never!

    How friendly, blessèd, sweet, and fair
      Is Thy love, Jesus ever!
    While this remains, distress and care
      Can grieve my spirit never.
      Then let me only think of Thee,
        Be seeing, hearing, feeling,
            Loving, telling
      Of Thee, and Thy great love to me
        Oh! be Thou more revealing!

    Oh! that this greatest, highest good,
      I might for aye be tasting!
    Oh! that in me this noble blood
      Might glow to everlasting!
      Help me to watch, Lord! day and night,
        This blessèd treasure shielding
            From unyielding
      Foes, who 'gainst us the might
        Of Satan's realm are wielding!

    My Saviour! Thou in love to me
      Hast down to death descended,
    And like a murd'rer on the tree
      And thief hast been suspended,
      Spit on, despis'd and wounded sore,
        The wounds which Thee have riven,
            May it even
      To me at the heart's core
        With love to feel be given.

    The blood that hath been shed by Thee
      Is good and precious ever,
    My heart is wicked desp'rately,
      Hard as a millstone nether.
      Ah! let the virtue of Thy blood
        My flinty heart be bending,
            Entrance finding;
      And may Thy love, life's flood
        Through all my veins be sending.

    Oh! were my heart op'd to receive
      The blood-drops that were falling
    From Thee, wrung by my sin that eve
      In agony appalling!
      Oh! that the fountains of mine eyes
        Were op'd, and with much sighing,
            And sore crying,
      Gush'd forth, as tears and sighs
        Of men in love who're dying.

    Oh! that I as a little child
      With weeping eyes might trace Thee,
    E'en till Thy heart with love was fill'd
      And Thine arms did embrace me.
      And until Thou Thy heart to me
        With sweet love flowing over,
            Should'st discover,
      And we united be,
        Thy goodness for my cover.

    Ah! draw me, Saviour! after Thee,
      And so shall I be hasting,
    I run, and in my heart shall be
      Thy love with rapture tasting;
      The gracious words from Thee I'll hear
        Sweet comfort shall give ever;
            Me deliver
      From sin, and every fear,
        These shall o'ercome me never.

    My Comfort, Treasure, Health, and Light,
      My Life and Saviour tender!
    Ah! take me for Thy portion quite
      As I myself surrender!
      There's nought but pain apart from Thee,
        I nought but gall discover,
            Earth all over,
      Nought ever comforts me,
        No balm can me recover.

    But Thou the Rest most blessed art,
      In Thee are joys eternal.
    Grant, Jesus! grant that my poor heart
      Feed in Thy pastures vernal!
      Be Thou the flame that burns in me,
        My Balsam, ease that giveth,
            And relieveth
      Pain that here constantly
        Makes me heave sighs, and grieveth.

    Ah! fairest one, what faileth me
      In Thy great love, of blessing?
    It is my sun that lightens me,
      My well-spring, me refreshing!
      My sweetest wine, my heav'nly bread,
        My cov'ring when before Thee,
            And my glory,
      My shield in hour of need,
        My house that riseth o'er me!

    Ah! dearest love, why was I born,
      If Thou my soul forsakest?
    If Thou withdraw'st, I'm all forlorn,
      All good from me Thou takest.
      O may I seek Thee as my guest,
        With all my best endeavour
            Keep Thee ever;
      And when I Thee arrest,
        Let Thee go from me never.

    I've been belov'd by Thee for aye,
      To follow Thou did'st move me;
    Before I good could e'er essay,
      E'en then did Thy heart love me:
      Ah! noble Rock! Thy love below
        May it for ever guide me,
            And beside me
      Be it where'er I go,
        To aid whate'er betide me.

    And may Thy love adorn my place,
      Where'er my lot Thou'rt casting;
    And if I wander from Thy ways,
      To bring me back be hasting.
      And let me ever counsel wise,
        Good works from Thee be learning,
            From sin turning,
      And when from falls I rise,
        Come back to Thee with yearning!

    And ever be my joy in woe,
      When weak, with Thy strength stay me;
    And when my course is run below,
      I down to rest will lay me.
      Then may Thy love and truth with me,
        O Christ! abide for ever,
            Leave me never,
      Till I Thy glory see,
        Oh! may they waft me thither!


                                  THE FIRST PSALM OF DAVID.


    Bless'd is he who never taketh
      Counsel of ungodly men!
    Bless'd, the right who ne'er forsaketh,
      Nor in sinners' paths is seen,
      Who the scorners' friendship spurns,
      From their seats away who turns,
    Who delight in God's word taketh,
    This his meditation maketh.

    Bless'd is he who pleasure taketh
      In God's laws' most perfect way,
    It is his lov'd resort who maketh
      Where he lingers night and day!
      Oh! His blessing blooms and grows,
      As the palm where water flows,
    And abroad its branches spreadeth,
    And the wayworn pilgrim shadeth.

    He will truly ever flourish
      Who God's word delights to do,
    Air and earth alike will nourish
      Him, till ripe his fruit shall grow.
      Though his leaf grow old, yet he
      Ever fresh and green shall be,
    God success to his endeavour
    Giveth, and it prospers ever.

    But he who in sin's ways goeth
      Is like chaff the wind before,
    When it riseth up and bloweth,
      And we find it here no more.
      Where the Lord His people guide,
      There the godless ne'er abide,
    God the faithful loves and guideth,
    On the wicked wrath abideth.


                                  THE 112TH PSALM OF DAVID.


    Bless'd is he the Lord who loveth,
      At His word doth tremble aye!
    Bless'd whose heart him freely moveth
      God's commandments to obey.
      Who the Highest loves and fears,
      Findeth increase with the years
      Of all that to him is given
      By the bounteous hand of Heaven.

    His dear children shall stand ever
      Like to roses in their blow;
    Flowing with God's goodness over,
      On his generations go.
      What the body needs below
      God who rules all will bestow,
      He will bounteously relieve them,
      Plenty in their dwellings give them.

    The right deeds of the believer
      Nought can shake, they stand secure;
    If a storm o'ertakes him ever,
      Still doth God, his Light endure,
      Comforts, shieldeth with His pow'r,
      So that after darkness' hour,
      After night of tears and sorrow,
      Joy and sunshine glad the morrow.

    God's compassion, grace, and favour
      For the faithful still endure.
    Blessèd are the souls who ever
      Think upon the needy poor,
      Love them, seek to do them good;
      For the ever-living God
      In His arms of grace will bear them,
      And a home above prepare them.

    When the black clouds o'er them lighten,
      And the pealing thunders shock,
    They shall sit, and nought shall frighten,
      Like the dove hid in the rock;
      They'll remain eternally,
      And their memory shall be
      Upon every side extending,
      As their branches trees are sending.

    When misfortunes overtake them,
      Whereby sinners low are laid,
    Firm their courage, nought can shake them,
      And their hearts are undismay'd;
      Undismay'd, from care are free,
      Hearts that unreservedly
      To the Lord their God are given,
      Love Him when forsaken even.

    Who delight take in relieving
      Sad ones, to the Lord are dear;
    What the loving hands are giving,
      God will recompense e'en here.
      Who much giveth much will gain,
      He shall not desire in vain,
      What his heart desires and willeth,
      God in His good time fulfilleth.

    But the foes who triumph'd o'er them,
      They shall see depart beneath;
    Satan who such malice bore them,
      Evermore shall gnash his teeth:
      Sorely will it him displease
      When their blessedness he sees,
      Yet that he can rob them never,
      Only waste himself for ever.


                                  THE 121ST PSALM OF DAVID.


    Lord! to Thee alone I raise
      Evermore mine eager eyes,
    Upturn'd is my constant gaze
      To the hills that pierce the skies:
    To the hills whence flow to me
    Help and saving health from Thee!

    All my succour comes to me
      From my great Creator's hand,
    Who hath deck'd so beauteously
      Earth and sky, air, sea, and land,
    And with ev'ry good supplied,
    That our needs be satisfied.

    Lest thy feet, my soul! should stray
      From the narrow path of right,
    He is with thee in the way,
      And preserves thee day and night.
    Trust Him! and the hosts of hell
    Never more shall work thee ill.

    Sleepless vigils doth He keep
      When thou liest down to rest;
    When thou'rt sunk in slumbers deep,
      To thy side at His behest
    Angel hosts then wing their flight,
    Thee to guard through all the night.

    All thou hast and all thou art
      Is encircled by His love;
    Ev'ry grief that wrings thy heart
      Doth He graciously remove.
    Soul and body shieldeth He,
    When dark tempests threaten thee.

    When the noonday's burning sun
      All thy body's strength doth blight,
    When the midnight stars and moon
      Dazzle with their brilliant light,
    Then His hand of mighty pow'r,
    Shades thee in the trying hour.

    May He still protection yield,
      Faithful Shepherd be, and near
    Still remain thy rock and shield,
      When thy heart's oppress'd with fear.
    When of need thou feel'st the smart,
    May He press thee to His heart.

    Dost thou sit or rise again,
      Dost thou speak or dost thou hear,
    Still at home dost thou remain,
      Art abroad when none is near,
    Dost thou wander in or out?
    He will compass thee about.


                                  THE 139TH PSALM OF DAVID.


    Lord, Thou my heart dost search and try,
    And what is hidden from mine eye
    Thou seest, all I am and own
    To Thine omniscient mind is known.

    Whene'r I sit, lie down, or stand,
    Or walk, or run, on ev'ry hand
    Thy presence doth encompass me,
    At all times I am hard by Thee.

    And all the thoughts that stir my heart,
    That lurk in its most secret part,
    Thy searching eye doth scrutinize
    Ere they to consciousness arise.

    And never from my tongue a word
    Escapes, by Thee, O Lord, unheard;
    Thou order'st all I speak or do,
    And guidest me life's journey through.

    'Tis true, I know, but must remain
    A knowledge I can ne'er attain,
    A mystery beyond the ken
    Of feeble and short-sighted men.

    Where shall I from Thy Spirit fly,
    Escape from Thine omniscient eye?
    Where shall I from Thy presence hide,
    And where remote from Thee abide?

    If I ascend the utmost height
    Of heav'n, there art Thou, thron'd in light;
    Or should I down to hell repair
    And make my bed, I'd find Thee there.

    Should I on morning's pinions ride,
    As far as ocean's empire wide
    Of stormy waves breaks on the land,
    I'd be upheld by Thy right hand.

    Or if the help of night I sought,
    No change by darkness would be wrought,
    For let the night be as it may,
    With Thee is ever cloudless day.

    'Mid darkest shadows Thou canst see,
    The darkness is a light to Thee,
    Thy glance is ever clear and bright,
    From sun and moon Thou need'st no light.

    My reins Thou ever hast possess'd,
    For in Thy hand they ever rest,
    From infancy Thou hast me led,
    With daily blessings crown'd my head.

    Thou hast, who'rt greatly to be fear'd,
    My frame with cunning hand uprear'd;
    Thy works, Thy wondrous pow'r forth tell,
    And that my soul doth know right well.

    My substance was not hid from Thee,
    When I in secret curiously
    Was fashion'd in the depths of earth,
    From whence Thy pow'r hath brought me forth.

    Before my time, my times for me
    Determin'd were by Thy decree,
    The tale of years and days I'd see,
    Hours, moments, all were fix'd by Thee.

    My God, how precious, sweet, and fair,
    I see array'd before me there
    The thoughts of wisdom of Thy heart,
    In all Thy bounty doth impart.

    The sum of these so high doth mount,
    That when their number I would count,
    I find them infinitely more
    Than dust or sand, on field or shore.

    How doth the bold blaspheming band
    Thee vilify on every hand,
    O God of wonders! and Thy name
    Despise and treat with open shame.

    Their scornful mouths, Lord, close and seal,
    Against them speedily reveal
    Thy wrath! against Thy foes arise,
    Thy foes are hateful in mine eyes.

    Though in return, their hatred sore
    Against Thee burn, I do no more
    Amid the rage of angry foes,
    Than 'neath Thy shelt'ring wings repose.

    Lord, search and know my heart and mood,
    See if my way be right and good,
    The everlasting joyful road
    Lead me that brings me home to God.




                   Songs of the Cross and Consolation.


                     UNDER THE TRIALS OF THIS LIFE.


    Full often as I meditate
    Upon the world's disorder'd state,
    I ask myself if earthly life
    Be good, and worthy of the strife,
    Has he not acted for the best
    Who laid himself betimes to rest?

    Reflect, my friend, say, if you know
    What station is there here below
    Without its fall and daily share
    Of sorrow, pain, and anxious care?
    And tell me if a place there be
    From sorrow, tears, vexation free.

    And doth not every passing day,
    From youth to manhood, bear away
    Its own peculiar load of grief
    Upon its back, and such relief
    As transient joy may seem to bring,
    Is it not full of suffering?

    If times be good, and fortune smile,
    My God! how envy storms the while;
    If dignity and honours great
    Attend thy steps, alas! their weight.
    If others thou'rt preferr'd before,
    Than others too thou'rt burden'd more.

    Art thou to-day in joyous mood,
    Rejoicing in thy share of good?
    Lo! ere thou think'st, thy gains are gone,
    Thy joyous mood with them is flown,
    The hurricane so suddenly
    Doth sweep away thy property.

    Dost from the world withdraw thyself,
    And lov'st God more than gold or pelf?
    Thy crown, thy jewel, thy good name
    Is cover'd by the world with shame.
    For he who can't dissembler play,
    The world as fool will spurn away.

    'Tis true, alas! that trouble waits
    In daily watch before our gates;
    On earth the cross is borne by all,
    All feel its weight, and taste its gall;
    But shall we therefore cast away
    The Christian's light? I tell thee--nay.

    The saints, who to their Saviour cleave,
    In faith and in the Spirit live,
    Unhurt by any ill or woe
    Pass through their pilgrimage below;
    Though things may sometimes fall out ill
    Yet with them it is ever well.

    Though they no gold have stor'd away,
    They've God, and care not what men say,
    Reject with joy, and aye despise
    The world's vain pomp and vanities;
    Their honour is to hope and wait,
    From God alone comes all their state.

    The Christian, God as Father knows,
    Can in His faithfulness repose;
    Whatever trial God may send,
    Can't separate him from his friend;
    The more He smites, he loves the more,
    Remaineth true, though chasten'd sore.

    He only plays a hero's part
    Who cherishes within his heart
    The Saviour's love; whate'er betide,
    Firm as a rock shall he abide
    When heav'n and earth shall pass away;
    Though men forsake, God's word's his stay.

    The word of God beguiles our fears,
    And turns to smiles our bitter tears;
    It robs misfortune of the pow'r
    Of hurting in the evil hour;
    It brings the sadden'd heart relief,
    When bow'd beneath the load of grief.

    Now cease, I pray, your tale of woe:
    Though full of grief this life below,
    Still falleth to the Christian's share
    Salvation and God's guardian care;
    Who loves the Saviour, trusts in God,
    Remains unmov'd beneath the rod.

    As gold into the fire is cast,
    And comes forth purified at last,
    So saints supported by God's grace
    Uninjur'd through affliction pass;
    A child his father's child is still,
    Although his father's rod he feel.

    Dear heart, chase all thy fears away,
    On thy God's faithfulness now stay,
    Though smiting with His chast'ning rod,
    He means it well, 'tis for thy good;
    Confide in Him, His guiding hand
    Will bring thee to the better land.

    Live on according to His will,
    Although the way be rough, be still!
    In heav'n Thou hast a mansion fair,
    Where joy will banish every care;
    If here we to the Saviour cleave,
    With Jesu's angels shall we live.


                            THOU ART BUT MAN!


    Thou art but man, to thee 'tis known,
      Why dost thou then endeavour
    To do what God should do alone,
      Or can accomplish ever?
    A thousand griefs thou goest through,
    In spite of all thy wit can do;
    Upon thine end thou pond'rest,
    What it will be thou wond'rest.

    'Tis all in vain, in vain thy care,
      With all thy musings earnest,
    In all thy life a single hair
      Thou white or black ne'er turnest.
    The griefs by which thou'rt sore distress'd
    Can only serve to mar thy rest,
    Cause anguish unavailing,
    Thy life itself curtailing.

    Wilt thou do what is for thy good,
      And what thy God good seeth?
    Then cast on Him each heavy load,
      'Fore whom earth and heav'n fleeth.
    Thy life and labour, all that's thine,
    With joy into God's hand resign;
    A happy end He'll ever
    Give thee, and thee deliver.

    Who car'd for thee ere light of day
      Had dawn'd upon thy vision,
    While in the womb thy soul still lay
      As in a gloomy prison?
    Who thought upon thy welfare then?
    What good did all the might of men
    Do, when to thee were given
    Life, mind, and pow'r from heaven?

    Whose skill was it that fashion'd thee?
      And who thy frame uprearèd?
    To glad our eyes, by whose decree,
      Say, hath the light appearèd?
    Who hath thy veins in order laid,
    For each a course convenient made?
    Who hath thy frame replenish'd
    With members fair and finish'd?

    Where were thy mind and will and heart
      When land and ocean over,
    Yea, even earth's remotest part,
      The sky was spread to cover?
    Who made the sun and moon to shine,
    Who gave herbs, trees, and beasts as thine,
    Who bid them satisfy thee,
    And no desire deny thee?

    Lift up thy head, see everywhere,
      Above, around, below thee,
    How God in all for thee His care,
      And at all times, doth show thee!
    Thy meat and drink, the clothes dost wear,
    Did God, ere need thou felt'st, prepare.
    God, ere thou wast, prepar'd thee
    Thy mother's milk, that rear'd thee.

    The raiment that in infancy
      Thy nakedness did cover,
    The cradle that receivèd thee,
      The roof thy young head over,
    Were all in love prepar'd for thee,
    Ere yet thine eye was op'd to see
    The wonders that abounded,
    The world that thee surrounded.

    Yet wilt thou walk by thine own light
      Thy life long, only heeding,
    Believing nothing but thy sight,
      Go whither it is leading.
    In all that thou dost undertake,
    Thy heart thy counsellor dost make,
    Unless by it selected,
    Is ev'ry plan rejected.

    Behold! how oft and openly
      God's providence undoeth
    The plans thy hand so ardently
      And hopefully pursueth.
    But it doth happen frequently,
    That e'en the very things we see
    The wisest men could never
    Predict, or think of ever.

    How oft thy stiff-neck'd self-will hath
      To bitter need reduc'd thee!
    When heart and mind deluded, death
      To take for life, seduc'd thee!
    And had the Lord thy work and deed
    Along the path allow'd proceed
    That thou thyself had'st taken,
    Lost wert thou and forsaken.

    He who to us love endless feels,
      When self-involv'd, then frees us,
    Ev'n self-inflicted wounds He heals,
      Guides when astray He sees us.
    Paternal kindness, tender love,
    To these His heart doth ever move,
    This love poor sinners beareth,
    For whom as sons He careth.

    Ah! silence doth He often keep,
      But still the while He blesses,
    E'en though we tears of anguish weep,
      Though grief the heart depresses,
    Although our eager eyes we strain,
    And seek for light, but seek in vain,
    And seek deliv'rance ever
    From woe, but find it never.

    But God our Lord still onward straight
      His path pursueth ever,
    And brings us to heav'n's peaceful gate,
      Where storms assail us never.
    What dark was and mysterious here
    In all God's ways, shall be then clear,
    His wisdom we'll discover
    When our life-work is over.

    Then peace, be still, my troubled breast!
      And let no grief distress thee,
    God ever plans for thee the best,
      His heart is set to bless thee.
    Thy cause the Saviour ne'er can leave,
    In this assuredly believe,
    Tow'rd us He ever yearneth,
    His ardent love aye burneth.

    With grace and truth His loving heart
      For evermore is glowing,
    And keenly feeleth He the smart,
      When from our eyes are flowing
    Hot tears, caus'd by vain sorrow's load,
    As if in wrath and hate our God
    Could ever helpless leave us,
    Would never comfort give us!

    The evil thought, ah! put away,
      No more may it deceive thee,
    Although what happ'neth, seldom may
      Increase of pleasure give thee.
    But that will happen certainly
    Which God thy Father doth decree;
    From what He wills to send thee,
    No mortal can defend thee.

    Then to thy Father's arms of love
      In confidence betake thee,
    Pray on till His compassion move,
      His special care He make thee!
    Then by His Spirit will He guide,
    Through unknown paths still at thy side,
    From all thy woe and striving
    At last deliv'rance giving.


                         CHRISTIAN CONTENTMENT.


    O my soul, why dost thou grieve,
      Why dost mourn so bitterly,
    That more freely God doth give
      Gifts to others than to thee?
        In thy God delight thy heart,
        He's the good enduring part.

    Of the human race have none
      In this world to be a right,
    All, yea each created one,
      But a guest is for a night.
        God in His house Lord is still,
        Gifts divideth as He will.

    Know, thou art not therefore here,
      That thou should'st possess the earth;
    Look thou up to heav'n so clear,
      There's thy gold of priceless worth,
        There is honour, there is joy,
        Without envy or alloy!

    Great the folly his who grieves
      For a little vanity,
    When God to him freely gives
      Treasures of eternity.
        Is the handredweight thy gain?
        Thou canst then despise the grain.

    All thy fair possessions see,
      That are valued by thy heart,
    None of them can go with thee
      When from earth thou must depart.
        Thou must leave them here below,
        When death's door thou passest through.

    The soul's nourishment, God's grace,
      And the Saviour's precious blood,
    Ne'er through time in worth decrease,
      But remain for ever good.
        Earthly goods must pass away,
        Soul-goods never can decay.

    Still art thou so blind, alas!
      Thinking--but all erringly,
    Eyes hast thou, but in the glass
      Of the word thou dost not see.
        Child of man! fix there thine eyes,
        For it is a peerless prize.

    Count thy fingers every one,
      And thine other members o'er,
    They are precious, they're thine own,
      Lov'd by thee than treasure more,
        Gold could never from thee buy
        E'en the least, though men should try.

    Search and ask thine inmost heart,
      'Twill instruct thee what of good
    Daily falleth to thy part,
      By God's bounteous hand bestow'd;
        Than the sand upon the shore
        More, and yet desir'st thou more!

    Did thy Heav'nly Father see
      That it would be for thy good,
    What desires so eagerly
      Thy misguided flesh and blood,
        He would ne'er thee joyless leave,
        But would of His bounty give.

    God to thee is full of love,
      Faithful and sincere is He,
    When thou wishest aught, He'd prove
      Of what kind thy wish may be:
        If 'tis good, He will bestow,
        If 'tis ill, He'll answer--no.

    Meanwhile doth His Spirit give
      Manna to thy fainting heart,
    Food by which the angels live,
      Grace to deck thee doth impart,
        For His portion chooseth thee,
        Thou shalt share salvation free.

    Look then to thy God above,
      Sad and troubled countenance!
    Cease to sigh, faith's virtue prove,
      By thy clear and joyous glance!
        While thy sky is overcast
        By affliction, hold it fast!

    And as Heav'n's adopted son,
      Thy rebellious will restrain;
    Touch thy harp, let 'fore God's throne
      Grateful songs resound again.
        More at all times doth God give
        Than thou'rt worthy to receive.

    Live thou ever in God's fear,
      As thou journeyest to heav'n,
    Take whate'er befalls thee here
      As a gift in wisdom giv'n.
        Are they evil days, thou'lt see
        God and Heav'n endure for thee.


           UNDER THE VEXATIONS OF THE WICKED PROSPEROUS WORLD.


    Ah! lovely innocence, how evil art thou deem'd,
    How lightly oft thy work by all the world's esteem'd!
    Thou servest God, thy Lord, and to His word thou cleavest;
    For this, from men thou nought but scorn and hate receivest.

    Right on thy road thou go'st, flee'st from the crooked way;
    Another steppeth in and bears the prize away,
    Increaseth his small store, his chests and barns he filleth;
    Thou'rt poor with all thy house, scarce earn'st what hunger stilleth.

    The wicked one thou chid'st, who walks not righteously,
    Another practiseth a sweet hypocrisy
    That love and praise secures, and him on high upraises,
    While in the lurch the world thee leaves, and much abases.

    Thou say'st that virtue is the Christian's fairest crown,
    But reputation doth the world lay stress upon;
    He who will this secure, it saith, must ever labour
    To suit the times, and live and act just like his neighbour.

    Thou boast'st thyself in God, thy tongue doth aye commend
    The blessing God doth as His children's portion send:
    "If this be then the case," the world says, "come and show it,
    The happy fortune thou hast had, we'd see and know it."

    Stand firm, thou pious heart, stand firm, thy faith retain!
    'Mid disappointment sore thy God will true remain,
    Commit thy ways to Him, let Him protect and guide thee,
    Thou'lt triumph at the last o'er evils that betide thee.

    Dost fail to please thy kind?--It is a sad disgrace!
    Enough, if on thee smile thy heav'nly Father's face.
    The worst that man can do is to betray and leave thee;
    But God is righteous, and His judgment can't deceive thee.

    Doth He say, "Thou art Mine, thy way doth please Me well?"
    Then be thy heart consol'd, let joy thy bosom swell,
    Cast to the wind the lies by wicked men indited,
    Be still, and thou shalt see, by God shall all be righted.

    Pride, arrogance, and pomp are ne'er enduring found,
    Like brightest glass they fall, and break upon the ground;
    So when the luck of men has mounted up to heaven,
    It soon comes crashing down, and on the earth lies riven.

    And all ill-gotten wealth, when right our estimate,
    Is on the heart and mind a dead oppressive weight
    That burdens evermore, with pain the conscience wringeth,
    Its quiet rest disturbs, and into trouble bringeth.

    And what have many more than of the poor the sweat?
    What do they eat and drink, and what gain do they get?
    They rob the widows' store, spite of their tears them wronging,
    Who like a thirsty land for sympathy are longing.

    Is this felicity? is this magnificence?
    Oh! what a sentence dire will God the Judge pronounce
    Upon the day of doom, when from His throne so loudly
    It sounds, how shall they seem who strut and boast so proudly!

    But thou who now thy God dost honour with whole heart,
    And never from His ways dost let thy feet depart,
    Shalt in the goodly throng, whom God with manna feedeth,
    With praise and honour clad, walk with Him where he leadeth.

    In patience, then, possess thy soul a little while,
    Do right, and persevere and live all free from guile,
    Act that the fairest prize in yonder life be given
    Thee, from His gracious hand who rules in earth and heaven.

    Whate'er on earth betide, from care remain all free,
    'Twill fall out for thy good, as God the best may see;
    Rest thou assur'd, He will no wish of thine deny thee,
    With joy fulfil thy will, with every good supply thee.


             "I WILL ENDURE THE INDIGNATION OF THE LORD."--MICAH VII.


    I have deserv'd it, cease t' oppose
      The Lord's will, shall I never?
    Thou bitter cup, thou heavy cross,
      Come hither to me ever!
        From pain all free
        May never be
      He 'gainst the Lord who fighteth,
        As I each day,
        Who trod the way
      Wherein the world delighteth.

    I'll bear the chastisement of God,
      A patient soul possessing,
    For born in sin, sin's path I trod,
      Aye ventur'd on transgressing,
        That pleasures vain
        I might attain,
      In wantonness time wasting,
        The gracious word
        Of God the Lord,
      As I ought, never tasting.

    The road of God's commandments good
      I often have forsaken,
    And on the way that leads from God
      Am therefore overtaken
        By grief and smart,
        That pierce my heart;
      God's hand thus am I feeling,
        Who 'fore His throne
        To each his own
      Awards, in justice dealing.

    For just and true is God above,
      We fail His goodness telling,
    A mother's truth, a father's love
      Alike in him are dwelling.
        God's wrath, I ween,
        As oft hath been
      Ours, is not unrelenting.
        Men steel their heart,
        Refuse t' impart
      Grace e'en to the repenting.

    In sooth 'tis not the mind of God,
      His anger ever endeth,
    Return we, He removes the rod,
      And to the weary sendeth
        A sweet release,
        To mark doth cease,
      And visit our transgressing;
        His wrath He turns,
        And tow'rd us yearns,
      Gives after cursing blessing.

    And so the Lord will deal with me,
      And every one behold it,
    And vindicate the right will He,
      My cause, He will uphold it.
        Thy face so bright,
        Lord! to the light,
      From deepest pit will raise me,
        That ever I
        May heartily
      Thy truth exalt, and praise Thee.

    Rejoice not o'er me, then, my foes,
      I lie not here for ever,
    My God will come ere ye suppose,
      And speedily deliver.
        His holy hand
        Will make me stand,
      Firm and secure for ever;
        Good times to me
        And joy will He
      Give after stormy weather.

    I am in need, yet scarce can speak
      Of real need and sorrow;
    When God my Light is, day must break
      And bring a glorious morrow,
        E'en in the night,
        While yet the might
      Of darkness much increaseth,
        And when this Light
        Dawns on my sight,
      Whate'er oppresses ceaseth.

    The time will come, e'en now 'tis near,
      When I shall sing salvation,
    When he who lov'd to mock and jeer
      At me in tribulation,
        And bid me tell
        Where God doth dwell,
      Shall from God's face be driven
        With head cast down;
        To me a crown
      Of honour shall be given!


                      FOR PATIENCE IN GREAT SORROW.


    Ah! faithful God, compass'nate heart,
      Whose goodness never endeth,
    I know this bitter cross and smart
      Thy hand it is that sendeth!
    Yea, Lord, I know this burden great
    Thou sendest not in wrath and hate,
      But 'tis in love appointed.

    That ever is Thy way all-wise,
      Thy child in woe must languish,
    Thou whom Thou lovest, dost chastise,
      'Fore joy Thou sendest anguish,
    Sink'st us to hell, in woe we lie,
    And raisest us again on high,
      Thus with us fares it always.

    Thou ever leadest wondrously
      Thy children dear who please Thee!
    Would I have life? Then first must I
      E'en down to death abase me.
    In honour who'd be raised on high,
    He self-abas'd on earth must lie
      As worthless dust and ashes.

    On earth, Lord, Thy belovèd Son
      Such sorrow had to try Him;
    Ere He could reach His glorious throne
      Ill men must crucify Him.
    He pass'd through trouble, need, and woe,
    Nor shrunk He from death's cruel blow,
      To reach the joys of heaven.

    Did then Thy good and holy Son
      Himself for us deliver,
    And I enslavèd, sinful one,
      Shall I resist Thee ever?
    Of patience aye the glass is He,
    And who His face desires to see
      Must in His footsteps follow.

    How is it reason finds it hard,
      The truth so oft rejecteth,
    That Thou with favour dost regard
      E'en while Thy hand afflicteth?
    How long doth oft the cross remain,
    How hardly can we love and pain
      Then reconcile together.

    God of the Church! when fails my pow'r,
      Strength graciously then give me;
    And grant that nought in trial's hour
      Of faith may e'er deprive me.
    Uphold me by Thy might, O Lord,
    Establish me then in Thy word,
      From murmuring deliver!

    When I am weak, be Thou my stay,
      In faithfulness be near me,
    That I continually may pray,
      And call on Thee to hear me.
    While yet a heart hopes and believes,
    And still in pray'r unceasing lives,
      Bold is it, and unvanquish'd.

    In measure, Lord, apply the rod,
      Lest I sink altogether;
    Thou know'st how I can bear the load,
      How life's imperill'd ever,
    For neither steel nor stone am I,
    But sooner pass away and die,
      E'en than a fleeting vapour.

    Ah! Jesus, who did'st stoop so low,
      Thy blood shed, life that giveth,
    The bitter cross full well dost know,
      And how the spirit grieveth
    When cross and heavy woe combine,
    So wilt Thou hear each cry of mine,
      When bitterly complaining.

    I know Thou feelest sympathy
      When want and woe distress me,
    That Thou with help wilt visit me,
      And graciously wilt bless me.
    Ah! strengthen Thou my feeble hand,
    And lead my feet where I may stand
      In safety--Come and save me!

    Speak courage to my fainting heart,
      With comfort, Lord, support me.
    Of weary souls the Rest Thou art,
      My Tow'r, where none can hurt me!
    My Rock, where from the sun I hide,
    My Tent, where safely I abide
      When storms without are raging!

    And as in love, while here I dwell,
      Thou suff'ring hast decreed me,
    Thy grace vouchsafe Thy child, Lord, still,
      In Thy green pastures lead me;
    That I in faith may patience gain,
    Through patience rich reward attain,
      When I've endur'd the trial.

    Oh! Holy Ghost, of joy the Oil,
      Whom God from Heaven giveth,
    Refresh me, pour into my soul
      What heart and flesh reviveth.
    Of glory, Thou the Spirit art,
    Know'st what in heav'n shall be my part
      Of grace, joy, consolation!

    How fair 'twill be, ah! let me gaze
      Upon the life so glorious,
    That Thou wilt give to those who pass
      Through trials sore, victorious.
    The earth with all its treasures fair
    Can never with this life compare,
      They pale and fade before it.

    Thou'lt deal with me so graciously,
      I'll endless joy be tasting,
    For trials known to Thee and me
      Have glory everlasting.
    Thou'lt wipe the tear-drop from mine eyes,
    To exultation turn my sighs,
      Lord! I believe it. Amen!


                UNDER THE CROSS WHEN GOD DELAYS HIS HELP.


    Father of mercies! God most high,
      Deign graciously to hear me,
    Thou say'st, "Knock at my door and cry,
      In time of need draw near me.
          As urgently
          Thou long'st, to thee
      I'll come to help and raise thee,
          That with thy mouth,
          In very truth,
      Thou joyfully may'st praise me."

    Commit to God, both morn and night,
      Thy ways, and doings ever;
    He knoweth how to guide thee right,
      And always will deliver.
          To Him reveal
          Whate'er dost feel
      Thy heart to sorrow moveth;
          He is Thy Lord,
          Knows how to guard
      And shield thee whom He loveth.

    For His belovèd child will care
      The faithful loving Father;
    Who righteous and believing are,
      He to His rest will gather.
          Then, people dear,
          Hope ever here
      On Him who aye relieves you;
          His throne before
          Your hearts outpour,
      Tell Him whatever grieves you!

    Ah! God our Shield! Thy word how sweet
      It sounds to Thine afflicted:
    "I'll come to thee with succour meet,
      When thy heart is dejected.
          He loveth me,
          So lov'd shall be,
      Secure for aye I'll make him,
          From care all free
          Shall sit by me,
      I'll to my bosom take him."

    The Lord to them is ever nigh
      Who trustfully draw near Him,
    He's at their side whene'er they cry,
      Helps them o'ercome, who fear Him.
          In misery
          Who low do lie,
      He raiseth and relieveth,
          And joy imparts
          To fainting hearts,
      Them pow'r and might he giveth.

    "In truth, who my great name doth fear,"
      Saith Christ, "and firm believeth,
    God doth regard his pray'r sincere,
      His heart's wish freely giveth."
          Then one and all
          Draw near and call,
      Who asketh, he obtaineth;
          Who seeketh there,
          The fruit so fair
      With great advantage gaineth.

    Hear what yon unjust judge doth say:
      "This widow's supplication
    I must regard, lest day by day
      Her coming cause vexation."
          His people's cry
          Shall God deny,
      Who day and night are praying?
          It cannot be,
          He'll set them free
      From woe, not long delaying.

    For when the just shed tears through care,
      God soon with joy relieveth,
    To those who broken-hearted are,
      Again He laughter giveth.
          He'll suffer woe
          Who will below
      'Mid men be godly living;
          But at his side
          Will God abide,
      Him grace sufficient giving.

    "A moment I've forsaken thee,
      And left thee in temptation;
    With mercy great, as thou shalt see,
      And boundless consolation,
          I'll give the crown,
          And to the throne
      Of glory shall I raise thee,
          To joy convert
          Thy grief and hurt,
      Thou evermore shalt praise me."

    Ah! gracious God, ah! Father's heart!
      For years my consolation!
    Why dost Thou let me feel such smart,
      Pass through such tribulation?
          My sad heart aches,
          My eye awakes,
      And bitter tears sheds ever,
          My face once bright
          Doth lose its light,
      From sighing ceasing never.

    How long, O blessèd Lord! wilt Thou,
      Unmindful of me, leave me?
    How long shall I in grief lie low,
      And inward sorrow grieve me?
          How long wilt chide,
          And Thy face hide,
      In darkness let me languish?
          Say, when care's load
          Shall cease, my God!
      To wring my heart with anguish?

    Wilt Thou eternally repel,
      And show Thy goodness never?
    And shall Thy word and promise fail,
      Be put to shame for ever?
          Doth wrath so burn,
          That Thou'lt ne'er turn
      To me, and stand beside me?
          Yet, Lord, I will
          Cleave to Thee still,
      Thy hand in all can guide me.

    My heart amid earth's misery
      For Thee, O Lord! is aching;
    My God! I wait and hope in Thee,
      Let not shame me o'ertaking;
          Thy friend in woe
          Plunge, or the foe
      Give cause for jubilation;
          But, Lord, may I
          Rejoice, rais'd high,
      In glorious exaltation.

    Ah! Lord, Thou true and faithful art,
      Thy heart can ne'er disown me;
    Nerve me in fight to bear my part,
      With victory then crown me!
          Lay Thou on me
          The load, by Thee
      Appointed, that I bear it.
          When Thou the rod
          Dost use, my God!
      In measure may I share it!

    Thy strength, O Lord! is infinite,
      Thy hand hath all created,
    Could all again with ruin smite,
      Its pow'r is unabated.
          We sound Thy name
          With high acclaim,
      As Lord of Hosts we own Thee!
          In counsel right
          No skill nor might
      Can foil, nor e'er dethrone Thee.

    Thou who dost Israel console,
      Thou, Saviour, in affliction!
    Ah! why permittest Thou my soul
      To sink in sore dejection?
          Thou dost not rest,
          Thou'rt as a guest,
      Who'rt in the land a stranger!
          A hero Thou
          Whose courage low
      Sinks 'fore disgrace or danger?

    Nay, Lord, not such a one art Thou!
      My inmost heart believeth;
    Thou standest firm, 'mid us shines now
      The light that Thy word giveth.
          Here restest Thou,
          Lord, with us now;
      Who call upon Thee ever,
          At fitting hour
          Wilt by Thy pow'r
      From ev'ry woe deliver.

    O Lord! my lengthen'd tale is o'er,
      Then hear Thou my petition,
    Help me, who often at Thy door
      Have knock'd, and sought admission.
          Help, Helper, me!
          I'll joyfully
      Thankoff'rings lay before Thee;
          And when life's o'er
          Shall evermore
      In heav'n above adore Thee.


                    'TIS PATIENCE MUST SUPPORT YOU.--HEB. X. 35-37.


    'Tis patience must support you
      When sorrow, grief, or smart,
    Or whate'er else may hurt you,
      Doth rend your aching heart.
      Belov'd and chosen seed!
    If not a death will kill you,
    Yet once again I tell you,
      'Tis patience that you need.

    The cup of patience drinketh
      With nausea flesh and blood,
    Back from the cross it shrinketh;
      When threaten'd with the rod,
      It shuddereth with fear.
    'Tis bold when nought assaileth,
    Heart shrinks, and courage faileth,
      When storms and rain are here.

    Why patience causeth sadness,
      Is that the carnal mind
    Unclouded joy and gladness
      In God aye hop'd to find,
      Though He hath made it clear,
    He chastens whom He loveth,
    And whom He much approveth,
      He much afflicteth here.

    God giveth patience ever,
      The Spirit in the breast
    Begetteth it whenever
      Within us He doth rest;
      The worthy, noble Guest
    Preserves us from despairing,
    And nerves for burden-bearing
      The heart when sore distress'd.

    From faith all patience springeth,
      On God's own word depends,
    To this she firmly clingeth,
      Herself with this defends.
      'Tis her high tow'r and wall,
    Where she securely hideth,
    Where God for her provideth,
      Here fears she ne'er a fall.

    And patience trust reposeth
      On Jesu's death and pain;
    When Satan her opposeth,
      Here takes she heart again,
      And saith, "Thou Prince of hell!
    Thou never shalt devour me,
    Too high I'm lifted o'er thee,
      In Jesus do I dwell."

    Contented patience stayeth
      On God's decree all-wise;
    Although His grace delayeth,
      Scarce feels fatigue arise;
      With trust she bears her load,
    And joyfully endureth,
    This thought her heart assureth,
      It is the hand of God.

    Long, long, can patience waiting
      The weary time beguile,
    On God's word meditating
      Get saving good the while.
      With earnest fervent pray'r,
    Each morn and eve she guardeth
    Herself from ill, and wardeth
      Off Satan's every snare.

    To God's will patience boweth,
      Doth His command fulfil,
    'Mid scorn of foes she knoweth
      'Tis wisest to be still.
      Who will, let him despise,
    Unhurt by the dishonour
    And shame thus put upon her,
      Her heart doth o'er it rise.

    To honour patience serveth
      Her God, and never more
    From love and fealty swerveth;
      Although He smiteth sore,
      Yet doth she ever praise
    His holy hand, and telleth
    That God on high who dwelleth,
      Doth well in all his ways.

    And patience life sustaineth,
      Adds to our tale of years;
    She drives away what paineth
      The heart, and stills its fears.
      It is a beauteous light
    That giveth him who heedeth,
    And whom God's guidance leadeth,
      A face with joy all bright.

    Great joy from patience springeth,
      The head a noble crown,
    Gems for the neck she bringeth
      From throne of Heaven down.
      She wipes from weeping eyes
    The tears of grief and anguish;
    Whose souls with longing languish,
      With ample good supplies.

    My soul for patience sigheth,
      My heart longs eagerly,
    How urgently it crieth
      And oft is known to Thee,
      Of grace who hast full store!
    Lord, hear my supplication,
    Give patient resignation;
      I ask for nothing more.

    For patience the petition
      Shall often up to Thee,
    From out my low condition,
      Ascend, O Lord, from me.
      And in my dying hour,
    Thy mercy still extending,
    Oh! grant a patient ending,
      Then need I nothing more.


                           WHAT PLEASETH GOD!


    What pleaseth God, my faithful child,
    Receive with joy; although the wild
    And wintry wind thy heart appal,
    Have faith, thee only can befal
                What pleaseth God!

    The will of God is aye the best,
    In it we can so calmly rest;
    Thyself to it anew resign,
    And only seek to have as thine
                What pleaseth God!

    God's counsel is the only wise;
    Soon comes to nought what men devise;
    Their projects fall, fall out of use,
    Oft mischief work, not oft produce
                What pleaseth God!

    God's mood is the most gracious mood,
    To all intending, doing good;
    He blesses, though hard words may speak
    The wicked world, and never seek
                What pleaseth God!

    The truest heart is God's own heart,
    Who bids our misery depart;
    Who screens and shelters, day and night,
    The man who makes his chief delight
                What pleaseth God!

    Ah! could I sing, as sing I would,
    From out my heart, and ever should,
    I'd ope my mouth--in Him rejoice,
    This moment praise with heart and voice
                What pleaseth God!

    His counsel wise would I make known,
    The works of wonder He hath done;
    His saving grace, eternal pow'r,
    That work producing every hour
                What pleaseth God.

    He rules above and rules below;
    On Him hangs all our weal and woe;
    He bears the world in His high hand,
    For us brings forth the sea and land
                What pleaseth God!

    His hands the elements restrain;
    His hands our mortal life sustain--
    Give summer, winter, day, and night,
    That evermore to do delight
                What pleaseth God!

    His host, the stars, the moon, and sun,
    Their wonted courses ever run;
    Corn, oil, and must, bread, wine, and beer,
    The fruitful earth brings forth each year,
                Which pleaseth God!

    His understanding is all wise,
    He knows--they are before his eyes,
    Who evil think and evil do,
    As well as who the good pursue
                That pleaseth God!

    His little flock to Him is dear;
    When sinning they forsake His fear,
    He chastens with His Father's rod,
    Till they return and do the good
                That pleaseth God!

    What cheers and strengtheneth our heart
    He knows, and ever doth impart
    Whatever good each one requires,
    Who seeks for good and aye desires
                What pleaseth God!

    Is't so? then let the world retain
    What pleaseth her, and she deems gain;
    But thou in God delighted be,
    My heart! approve whate'er you see
                That pleaseth God!

    Let others then in haughty mood
    Rejoice in stores of earthly good;
    But thou the Cross with patience bear,
    Contented if thou hast the share
                That pleaseth God!

    Dost live in sorrow, sunk in grief,
    Hast much affliction--no relief?
    Still murmur not, for thou dost bear
    In this thy bitter life of care
                What pleaseth God!

    In suff'rings art thou doom'd to live?
    Then to thy great Protector cleave;
    The world and all the creatures too
    Are under God, can only do
                What pleaseth God!

    Doth ev'ry one despise Thy name?
    Do foes Thee scorn and treat with shame?
    Be not cast down, for Christ will raise
    Thy head, who seeth in thy ways
                What pleaseth God!

    Faith fastens on the Saviour's love
    Works patience, hope that looks above;
    Lock both within thy secret heart,
    Thou'lt have as thine eternal part
                What pleaseth God!

    Thy part is in the Heav'nly throne,
    There is thy sceptre, kingdom, crown;
    There shalt thou taste, and hear, and see,
    There shall for ever happen thee
                What pleaseth God!


                     IN DESPONDENCY AND TEMPTATION.


    Look up to thy God again,
      Soul, sunk in affliction!
    Shall He be reproach'd by men
      Through thy sore dejection?
    Satan's wiles dost thou not see?
      By severe temptation,
    Gladly would he keep from thee
      Jesu's consolation.

    Shake thy head in scorn, and "flee,"
      Bid the old deceiver--
    "Wilt renew thy thrusts at me,
      Me to fear deliver?
    Serpent! bruis'd thy head I see;
      Through His pain hath freed me
    From thy grasp, my Lord, and He
      To His joy will lead me.

    "Dost thou charge my sin to me?
      When did God command me
    Judgment to require from thee?
      Tell me, I demand thee!
    Who did pow'r on thee bestow
      Sentence to deliver?
    Who thyself art sunk so low
      In hell's flames for ever."

    What I have not done aright
      Me with sorrow filleth,
    But of Jesu's blood the sight
      All mine anguish stilleth.
    He the ransom price hath paid,
      From the cross relieves me,
    When before God's throne 'tis laid,
      Inward joy He gives me.

    In Christ's innocence I boast,
      His right is my glory,
    Mine His merit, there I trust
      As in stronghold hoary,
    That the rage of every foe
      Evermore resisteth,
    Though the might of hell below
      It to storm assisteth.

    Rage then, devil, and thou, death!
      Ye can never hurt me;
    In the trials of my path
      Doth God's grace support me.
    God His only Son to me,
      Mov'd by love, hath given,
    That to endless misery
      I may not be driven.

    Cry then, foolish world! amain,
      That God lov'd me never,
    That my cherish'd hope is vain,
      Has deceiv'd me ever.
    Had God been averse to me,
      Would He have supported
    All the gifts so rich and free
      He to me imparted?

    What is there in sky or sea,
      What the wide earth over,
    What that works no good for me,
      Canst thou then discover?
    Why do star so beauteously
      Shine on us from Heaven?
    Why are, but for good to me,
      Air and water given?

    Why do clouds their streams outpour?
      Why do dews earth cover?
    Why with verdure's cover'd o'er,
      Why flow blessings over
    Hill and valley, field and wood?
      Truly for my pleasure,
    That I dwell secure, and food
      Have in plenteous measure.

    My soul on God's word most dear
      Feeds and liveth ever,
    That all Christians love to hear
      Daily, tiring never.
    Soon and late my heart in me
      God opes for receiving
    Of the Spirit's grace that He
      Is so freely giving.

    Why through holy men of old
      Have God's words been given?
    That we by their light might hold
      On our way to heaven,
    My heart's darkness to dispel,
      From doubt to deliver,
    That the conscience sure and well,
      Be establish'd ever.

    Now upon this holy ground
      Build I most securely,
    See how hell's malicious hound,
      Spends 'gainst me his fury.
    He can never overthrow
      What God hath upraisèd,
    But what Satan's hand doth do
      That shall be abasèd.

    I am God's, and mine is God,
      Who from Him can part me?
    Tho' the cross with heavy load
      Press on me and smart me.
    Let it press--the hand of love
      Hath the cross laid on me,
    He the burden will remove,
      When the good is done me.

    Children whom aright to guide
      Parents would endeavour,
    Must the father often chide,
      Or they'd prosper never.
    If I'm then a child of grace,
      Should I shun God ever,
    When He from sin's devious ways,
      Seeks me to deliver?

    Gracious are the thoughts of God,
      In the pain He's sending,
    Who here weeps beneath the rod,
      Reaps not woe unending,
    But eternal joy shall taste
      In Christ's garden dwelling,
    That he shall be there at last,
      Now assurance feeling.

    Often God's own children here
      Sow in tears and sadness,
    But at length the long'd-for year
      Comes of joy and gladness;
    For the reaping time appears,
      All their labours after,
    When are turn'd their grief and tears
      Into joy and laughter.

    Christian heart! courageously
      All the griefs that pain thee
    Cast behind thee joyfully,
      More and more sustain thee
    Let sweet consolation's light;
      Praise and honour give you
    To the God of love and might,
      He'll help and relieve you.


                           BE THOU CONTENTED.


    Be thou contented! aye relying
      On thy God, who life is giving,
    For He hath joys soul satisfying,
      Wanting Him--in vain thy striving.
          Thy Spring is He,
            Thy Sun that ever
          Rejoiceth thee,
            And setteth never.
    Be thou contented!

    He lightens, comforts, and supports thee,
      True in heart, by guile unstainèd;
    When He is near nought ever hurts thee,
      E'en when smitten sore and painèd.
          Cross, need, and woe
            He soon averteth,
          O'er the last foe
            His pow'r asserteth.
    Be thou contented!

    How it fareth with thee and others,
      Truly none from Him concealeth,
    He ever from on high discovers
      Burden'd hearts, and for them feeleth.
          Of weeping eyes
            The tears He counteth,
          The pile of sighs
            'Fore Him high mounteth.
    Be thou contented!

    When not another on earth liveth,
      To whom safe thou may'st confide thee,
    He'll faithful prove, who ne'er deceiveth,
      And to happiest end will guide thee.
          The secret grief
            Thy soul that boweth,
          And when relief
            To give, He knoweth.
    Be thou contented!

    The sighing of thy soul He ever,
      And thy heart's deep plaint is hearing;
    What to another thou wouldst never
      Tell, reveal to God, ne'er fearing.
          He is not far,
            But standeth near thee,
          Who poor men's pray'r
            Marks, soon will hear thee.
    Be thou contented!

    To God cleave, He'll salvation show thee,
      Let not anguish then depress thee;
    Although devouring floods o'erflow thee,
      Rise above it, He will bless thee.
          When 'neath the load
            Thy back low bendeth,
          Thy Prince and God
            Soon succour sendeth.
    Be thou contented!

    Why for thy life should care so grieve thee,
      How to nourish and sustain it?
    Thy God, who ever life doth give thee,
      Will provide for and maintain it.
          He hath a hand
            With gifts o'erflowing,
          On sea and land
            For aye bestowing.
    Be thou contented!

    Who for the forest songsters careth,
      To their daily portion leads them,
    For sheep and ox enough prepareth,
      Slakes their thirst, with plenty feeds them;
          He'll care for thee,
            Thee, lone one! filling,
          So bounteously
            Thy hunger stilling.
    Be thou contented!

    Say not, the means nowhere appeareth,
      Where I seek, my effort faileth;
    God this high name of honour beareth,
      Helper, when no help availeth!
          When thou and I
            Fail to discover
          Him, speedily
            He'll us recover.
    Be thou contented!

    Although away thy help is staying,
      He will not for ever leave thee;
    Tho' anxious makes thee His delaying,
      'Tis for thy greater good, believe me.
          What on the way
            To come ne'er hasteth,
          Doth longer stay,
            And sweeter tasteth.
    Be thou contented!

    Though 'gainst thee hosts of foes are scheming,
      Let not all their lies affright thee;
    Still let them rage against thee, deeming
      God will hear it and will right thee.
          Doth God support
            Thee and thine ever?
          The foe can hurt
            Or ruin never.
    Be thou contented!

    To each his share of ill is given,
      Would he only see and know it;
    No course on earth so fair and even,
      That no trouble lurks below it.
          Who can declare,
            "My house was ever
          All free from care,
            And troubled never?"
    Be thou contented!

    So must it be, in vain our grieving,
      All men here must suffer ever,
    Whate'er upon the earth is living,
      Evil days avoideth never.
          Affliction's blow
            Doth oft depress us,
          And lays us low,
            And death then frees us.
    Be thou contented!

    A day will dawn of rest and blessing,
      When our God will come and save us
    From the vile body's bands depressing,
      And the evils that enslave us.
          Death soon will come,
            From woe deliver,
          And take us home
            Then all together.
    Be thou contented!

    He'll bring us to the hosts in glory,
      To the chosen and true-hearted,
    Who when they clos'd this life's sad story,
      Hence in peace to joy departed,
          And on the shore,
            The ever-vernal,
          Hear evermore,
            The voice eternal.
    Be thou contented!


                A SONG OF CHRISTIAN CONSOLATION AND JOY.


    Is God for me? t'oppose me
      A thousand may uprise;
    When I to pray'r arouse me,
      He'll chase mine enemies.
    And doth the Head befriend me,
      Am I belov'd by God?
    Let foes then rise to rend me,
      The wild opposing brood!

    I know--from faith none moves me,
      I boast--nor feel I shame,
    That God as father loves me,
      In Him, a friend I claim.
    Whene'er the tempest rageth,
      At my right hand is He,
    Its violence assuageth,
      And peace restores to me.

    My faith securely buildeth
      On Jesus, and His blood;
    This, and this only, yieldeth
      The true eternal good.
    The life that my soul liveth,
      Finds nothing on the earth;
    What Christ the Saviour giveth
      Of all our love is worth.

    My Jesus is my Glory,
      My Splendour, and clear Light,
    Liv'd He not in and for me,
      Before God's eye so bright,
    And 'fore His pure throne never
      Could I a moment stay,
    Must quickly flee for ever,
      As wax 'fore fire away.

    My Jesus death subdueth,
      My sin remitteth quite,
    He washeth aad reneweth,
      The crimson maketh white.
    I joy in Him, can ever
      A hero's courage feel,
    And judgment fear dare never,
      As though uncleansèd still.

    Nought, nought, can e'er condemn me,
      My courage take away;
    Hell's flames can ne'er o'erwhelm me,
      For me they're quench'd for aye.
    No sentence e'er can move me,
      No evil e'er deject,
    My Saviour who doth love me,
      Doth with His wings protect.

    His Spirit in me dwelleth,
      And ruleth every pow'r,
    All pain and sorrow stilleth,
      Dispels all clouds that low'r.
    What He in me implanteth,
      He blesseth every hour,
    Help to say "Father" granteth,
      With every ransom'd pow'r.

    When heart with terror breaketh,
      And weak and worn I feel,
    Words whispers He and speaketh
      That are unspeakable;
    My mouth can frame them never,
      To God they are well known,
    Who what delights Him ever
      Discovers in His own.

    His Spirit mine relieveth
      With words of comfort blest,
    Shows how God succour giveth
      To all who seek His rest;
    And how a new and golden
      Fair city rear'd hath He,
    Which here from sight withholden,
      My joyful eyes shall see.

    My mansion's there so splendid,
      Prepar'd in yonder land;
    Though when my course is ended,
      I fall--Heav'n still doth stand.
    Though care here often saddens
      And causeth tears to flow,
    My Jesu's light oft gladdens
      And sweetens every woe.

    Whoe'er to Jesus bindeth
      Himself, doth Satan hate,
    He's troubled much and findeth
      His burden sore and great;
    To suffer scarce is able,
      Disgrace and scorn he meets,
    The cross and every trouble
      As daily bread he eats.

    My mind this clear perceiveth,
      Yet am I undismay'd;
    To Thee my heart aye cleaveth,
      On Thee shall cares be laid.
    Though life and limb it cost me
      And everything I have,
    Unshaken shall I trust Thee,
      Thee never shall I leave.

    The world may ruin shiver,
      Thou liv'st eternally,
    Nor sword nor flame shall ever
      Divide 'twixt Thee and me.
    No thirst nor gnawing hunger,
      No pain nor poverty,
    Nor mighty prince's anger
      Shall ever hinder me.

    No angel, nought that gladdens,
      No throne nor majesty,
    No love nor aught that saddens,
      No grief nor misery,
    Nor aught that man discovers,
      Be it small or great,
    From Thee, my heav'nly Lover's
      Embrace can separate.

    My heart with joy is springing,
      And sad I cannot be,
    'Tis full of joy and singing,
      The sunshine doth it see.
    The Sun that looks with pleasure
      On me is Christ my King;
    The glory beyond measure
      That waits me, makes me sing.


                        A SONG OF CHRISTIAN JOY.


    Why should sorrow ever grieve me?
          Christ is near,
          What can here
    E'er of Him deprive me?
    Who can rob me of my heaven
          That God's Son,
          As mine own,
    To my faith hath given?

    Naked was I and unswathèd
          When on earth
          At my birth
    My first breath I breathèd.
    Naked hence shall I betake me,
          When I go
          From earth's woe,
    And my breath forsake me.

    Nought--not e'en the life I'm living,
          Is mine own,
          God alone
    All to me is giving.
    Must I then His own restore Him?
          Though bereft
          Of each gift
    Still shall I adore Him.

    Though a heavy cross I'm bearing,
          And my heart
          Feels the smart,
    Shall I be despairing?
    God can help me, who doth send it,
          He doth know
          All my woe
    And how best to end it.

    God oft gives me days of gladness,
          Shall I grieve
          If He give
    Seasons too of sadness?
    God is good, and tempers ever
          Every hurt,
          Me desert
    Wholly can He never,

    Though united world and devil,
          All their pow'r
          Can no more
    Do than mock and cavil.
    Let derision now employ them,
          Christ e'en here
          Will appear
    And 'fore all destroy them.

    True believers shrinking never,
          Where they dwell
          Should reveal
    Their true colours ever.
    When approaching death would scare them,
          Still should they
          Patient stay
    And with courage bear them.

    Death can never kill us even,
          But relief
          From all grief
    To us then is given.
    It doth close life's mournful story,
          Make a way
          That we may
    Pass to heav'nly glory.

    There I'll reap enduring pleasure,
          After woe
          Here below
    Suffer'd in large measure.
    Lasting good we find here never,
          All the earth
          Deemeth worth
    Vanisheth for ever.

    What is all this life possesseth?
          But a hand
          Fall of sand
    That the heart distresseth.
    Noble gifts that pall me never,
          Christ so free
          There gives me
    To enjoy for ever.

    Shepherd! Lord! joy's fountain ever,
          Thou art mine,
          I am Thine,
    No one can us sever.
    I am Thine, because Thou gavest
          Life and blood
          For my good,
    By Thy death me savest.

    Thou'rt mine, for I love and own Thee,
          Ne'er shall I,
          Light of joy,
    From my heart dethrone Thee.
    Let me, let me soon behold Thee
          Face to face,
          Thy embrace
    May it soon enfold me!


                    CHRISTIAN DEVOTION TO GOD'S WILL.


    I into God's own heart and mind
      My heart and mind deliver,
    What evil seems, a gain I find,
      E'en death is life for ever.
          I am His son,
          Who spread the throne
    Of heaven high above me.
          Tho' I bend low
          Beneath His blow,
    Yet still His heart doth love me.

    He ne'er can prove untrue to me,
      My Father aye must love me,
    And tho' He cast me in the sea,
      He only thus would prove me;
          In what He good
          Doth count, He would
    My heart establish ever.
          And if I stand,
          His mighty hand
    Will raise me, and deliver.

    Vain had my own pow'r ever been,
      To have adorn'd or made me;
    In soul and body God is seen,
      He form'd and He array'd me,
          Plac'd mind and wit
          On the soul's seat,
    And flesh and bones did give me.
          Who thus so free
          Supplieth me
    Can ne'er mean to deceive me.

    Say, where a place to lay my head,
      On earth had I attainèd?
    Long since had I been cold and dead
      Had God not me sustainèd
          With His strong arm,
          That ever warm,
    And glad and healthy maketh.
          Whom He gives joy
          May praise employ,
    What He leaves, falls and breaketh.

    Wisdom and understanding true
      In Him are ever dwelling;
    Time, place, to leave undone or do,
      He knoweth, never failing.
          He ever knows
          When joys, when woes,
    Are best for those He loveth.
          What He doth here--
          Tho' it appear
    Ill--to be good aye proveth.

    Thou think'st indeed, if thou hast not
      What flesh and blood is yearning
    To have, that trial mars thy lot,
      Thy light to darkness turning.
          Of toil and care
          Thou hast large share,
    Ere thou thy wish attainest,
          And dost not see
          Whatever thee
    Befals, thereby thou gainest.

    In truth, He who created thee,
      His glory in thee showing,
    Hath long ago in His decree
      Determin'd--all foreknowing--
          What good for thee
          And thine will be,
    In faithfulness he'll give it.
          Curb thou thy will,
          Wait! be thou still,
    To His good pleasure leave it.

    Whate'er to send, seems good to God,
      'Twill be at last refreshing,
    Altho' thou call'st it cross and load
      'Tis fraught with richest blessing.
          Wait patiently,
          His grace to thee
    He'll speedily discover.
          All grief and fear
          Shall disappear
    Like mist the hills spread over.

    The field, unless the storm rage high,
      Its ripe fruits yieldeth never,
    So men were ruin'd utterly
      If all were prosp'rous ever.
          Though health it gives,
          And thus relieves,
    The bitter aloe paineth;
          So must the heart
          With anguish smart,
    Ere it to health attaineth.

    My God! my God! into Thy hand
      I joyfully now yield me,
    Keep me, a stranger in the land,
      E'en to the end, Lord! shield me.
          Deal with me now
          As well dost know,
    That I may profit by it;
          Then more and more
          Thy glorious pow'r,
    Lord! show, and magnify it.

    Wilt cause Thy sun on me to shine,
      With pleasure, Lord, I'll share it;
    Should trial or mischance be mine,
      Then patiently I'll bear it.
          Of life the door
          Should it before
    Me open here stand ever,
          Where Thou lead'st me,
          I'll joyfully
    Go with Thee, shrinking never.

    Should I along the path of death,
      Through the dark vale be treading,
    'Tis well, 'tis the appointed path,
      E'en there Thine eyes are leading.
          My Shepherd! Thou
          Art all below
    To such an issue bringing,
          That I to Thee,
          Eternally,
    Shall songs of praise be singing.


   COMMIT THY WAY UNTO THE LORD, TRUST ALSO IN HIM, AND HE SHALL BRING
                              IT TO PASS.--PSALM XXXVII. 5.


    Commit whatever grieves thee
      At heart, and all thy ways,
    To Him who never leaves thee,
      On whom creation stays.
    Who freest courses maketh
      For clouds, and air, and wind,
    And care who ever taketh
      A path for thee to find.

    The Lord thou must repose on
      If thou wouldst prosper sure,
    His work must ever gaze on
      If thine is to endure.
    By anxious care and grieving,
      By self-consuming pain,
    God is not mov'd to giving;
      By pray'r must thou obtain.

    Thy grace that ever floweth,
      O Father! what is good,
    Or evil, ever knoweth,
      To mortal flesh and blood.
    What to Thine eye all-seeing,
      And to Thy counsel wise
    Seems good, doth into being,
      O mighty Prince, arise!

    For means it fails Thee never,
      Thou always find'st a way,
    Thy doing's blessing ever,
      Thy path like brightest day.
    Thy work can no one hinder,
      Thy labour cannot rest,
    If Thou design'st Thy tender
      Children should be bless'd.

    Though all the powers of evil
      Should rise up to resist,
    Without a doubt or cavil
      God never will desist;
    His undertakings ever
      At length He carries through;
    What He designs He never
      Can fail at all to do.

    Hope on, thou heart, grief-riven,
      Hope, and courageous be,
    Where anguish thee hath driven,
      Thou shalt deliv'rance see.
    God, from thy pit of sadness
      Shall raise thee graciously;
    Wait, and the sun of gladness
      Thine eyes shall early see.

    Up! up! to pain and anguish
      A long good night now say;
    Drive all that makes thee languish
      In grief and woe away.
    Thine 'tis not to endeavour
      The ruler's part to play,
    God sits as ruler ever,
      Guides all things well each day.

    Let Him alone--and tarry
      He is a Prince all wise,
    He shall Himself so carry,
      'Twill strange seem in thine eyes,
    When He as Him beseemeth,
      In wonderful decree,
    Shall as Himself good deemeth,
      O'errule what grieveth thee.

    He may awhile still staying
      His comforts keep from thee,
    And on His part delaying,
      Seem to have utterly
    Forgotten and forsaken
      And put thee out of mind,
    Though thou'rt by grief o'ertaken,
      No time for thee to find.

    But if thou never shrinkest,
      And true dost still remain,
    He'll come when least thou thinkest,
      And set thee free again,
    Thee from the load deliver,
      That burdeneth thy heart,
    That thou hast carried never
      For any evil part.

    Hail! child of faith, who gainest
      The victory alway,
    Who honour's crown obtainest,
      That never fades away.
    God in thy hand will give thee,
      One day, the glorious palm;
    Who ne'er in grief did leave thee,
      To Him thou'lt sing thy psalm.

    O Lord no longer lengthen
      Our time of misery,
    Our hands and feet now strengthen,
      And until death may we
    By Thee be watched and car'd for,
      In faithfulness and love,
    So come we where prepar'd for
      Us is our bless'd abode.


                          SONG OF CONSOLATION.


    Thou must not altogether be
      O'ercome by sad vexation,
    God soon will cause to shine on thee
      The light of consolation.
    In patience wait, and be thou still,
    And let the Lord do what He will,
      He never can do evil.

    Is this the first time we have known
      And tasted sore affliction?
    What have we had but grief alone
      On earth, and sore dejection?
    We've had an ample share of grief,
    Yet God hath sometimes sent relief,
      A respite brief of gladness.

    Not so doth God our Father mean,
      When His afflictions grieve us,
    That no more shall His face be seen
      That He'll for ever leave us;
    His purposes quite other are,
    That those who from Him wander far
      By trial be recover'd.

    It is our nature's evil mood
      That when in joys we're living,
    We then forsake our highest good,
      Ourselves to license giving.
    We earthly are, and deem more worth
    The things and pleasures of the earth,
      Than all that dwells in heaven.

    God therefore all our joys doth blight,
      Lets trials overtake us,
    Takes that wherein our hearts delight,
      Look up to Him to make us,
    That to His goodness and His pow'r,
    That we've neglected heretofore,
      We may return as children.

    When we return to Him again
      He graciously receives us,
    To joy He turns our every pain,
      To laughter turns what grieves us;
    To Him it is a simple art,
    He soon doth help to him impart
      Whom He with love embraceth.

    Afflicted band! oh, fall ye now
      With contrite hearts before Him,
    Tell Him that ye in homage bow
      To His great name; implore Him
    In grace your sins to take away,
    The load He on your backs did lay
      To bear, your wounds to bind up.

    Grace always before right must go,
      And wrath to love yield ever;
    His merest mercy, when we low
      Are lying, must deliver.
    His hand it is upholds us all,
    If we let go, then break and fall
      Must all our work to pieces.

    On God's love must thou ever stay,
      Nor let aught overthrow thee,
    E'en when the heav'ns shall pass away
      And earth shall crash below thee:
    God promiseth His grace to thee,
    His word is clear, who fearlessly
      Trusts it, is ne'er deceivèd.

    So darest thou His pow'r so great
      Ne'er doubt a moment even,
    Who is it that doth all create,--
      By whom all gifts are given?
    God doth it, and His counsel wise
    Can ever ways and means devise,
      When every man despaireth.

    Seems help impossible to thee?
      This should'st thou know however,
    God by our narrow thoughts can be
      Hemm'd and confinèd never,
    This ne'er to us alloweth He;
    He everywhere,--His arm is free,--
      Doth more than we can fathom.

    What is His wide dominion fair?
      'Tis full of varied wonder;
    He helpeth us when dark despair
      We helplessly sink under,
    To His great name this is the praise,
    If thou wilt see His holy place,
      Thou must ascribe for ever.


                                  THE 13TH PSALM OF DAVID.


    How long, Lord, in forgetfulness
      And darkness wilt Thou leave me?
    How long will sorrow on me press
      And deep heart-anguish grieve me?
    Wilt Thou Thy face, Lord, utterly
    Turn from me? wilt ne'er look on me
      In grace and in compassion?

    How long shall I, thy stricken child,
      Bereft of soul-rest languish?
    How long shall storm and wind so wild,
      Fill heart with fear and anguish?
    How long shall my proud enemy,
    Who only meaneth ill to me,
      Exult o'er me in triumph?

    Ah! look on me, my Shield and Lord!
      Down from Thy holy heaven,
    And hear now my complaining word,
      My pray'r from heart grief-riven.
    Give to mine eyes, Lord, pow'r and might,
    And do not let death's gloomy night
      So speedily o'ertake me.

    For then, Lord, ev'ry enemy
      Would never cease to glory,
    And were I prostrate utterly,
      Would ever triumph o'er me.
    "There lieth he," they'd cry in joy,
    "Who caus'd us evermore annoy,
      He's prostrate and ne'er riseth."

    I know them, and I know fall well
      The wickedness they're planning,
    Their hearts with ev'ry evil swell,
      No good them e'er restraining.
    But Thou, the faithful One, Lord, art,
    And those who choose Thee for their part,
      Thou nevermore forsakest.

    My soul doth calmly trust in Thee,
      Thou true to me remainest,
    Of malice and of subtlety
      The course, with pow'r restrainest.
    This makes my heart with joy o'erflow,
    That willingly dost Thou bestow
      Salvation on the trusting.

    O Lord! for aye I'll trust in Thee,
      Thou'rt my sole joy for ever;
    Thou doest well, protectest me,
      From sorrow dost deliver.
    And therefore I my whole life long,
    Will sing Thee oft a gladsome song
      Of praise and of thanksgiving.




                    Songs of Praise and Thanksgiving.


                           IN GRATEFUL SONGS.


    In grateful songs your voices raise,
      All people here below,
    To Him whom angels ever praise,
      In heav'n His glory show.

    With gladsome songs now fill the air
      To God our chiefest Joy,
    Who worketh wonders ev'rywhere,
      Whose hands great things employ;

    Who from the womb to latest years
      Upholds the life He gave;
    Who when no help from man appears
      Himself appears to save;

    Who though our way His heart oft grieves,
      Maintains a gracious mood,
    Remits the pains, the sin forgives,
      And doth us nought but good.

    Oh, may He give a joyous heart,
      The mind from sorrow keep,
    And cast all care, fear, grief, and smart
      Into the ocean deep.

    And may His blessing ever rest
      On Israel's favour'd head;
    May all we do by Him be bless'd,
      May His salvation spread.

    May love and goodness toward us flow,
      In bounteous streams each day,
    And every anxious care we know,
      Be chas'd by Him away.

    As long as beats each throbbing heart,
      Our Saviour may He be,
    Our portion when from earth we part,
      To all eternity.

    When sinks the heart, when strength decays,
      By Him our eyes be press'd,
    Then may we see His open face,
      In everlasting rest.


                     SHALL I NOT MY GOD BE PRAISING?


    Shall I not my God be praising,
      And in Him not joyful be?
    For in all His works amazing,
      See I not His care for me?
    Is it not pure love that filleth,
      And His faithful heart o'erflows,
      When He ever cares for those,
    Who do only what He willeth?
      All things run their course below,
      God's love doth for ever flow.

    As its brood the eagle over,
      Ever more its wings doth spread.
    So the Highest aye doth cover
      With His arms of pow'r my head.
    In the womb e'en of my mother,
      When to me He being gave,
      E'en the life that now I have,
    Was He then my shield and cover.
      All things run their course below,
      God's love doth for ever flow.

    Not too great a gift He even
      Deem'd His only Son to be;
    Him to death hath freely given,
      Me from fear of hell to free.
    Oh! Thou spring of boundless blessing,
      How could e'er my feeble mind
      Of Thy depth the bottom find,
    Though my efforts were unceasing?
      All things run their course below,
      God's love doth for ever flow.

    And the Holy Ghost to guide me,
      Noble Leader! He hath giv'n,
    That He through the world may lead me,
      Onward to the gate of heav'n.
    That my heart He may be filling
      With th' unclouded light of faith,
      That can break the pow'r of death,
    And hell's rage hath pow'r of stilling.
      All things run their course below,
      God's love doth for ever flow.

    For my soul's well-being ever
      Full provision doth He make,
    And in ev'ry need deliver,
      For the body care doth take.
    When my pow'r, my best endeavour
      Cometh to extremity,
      Then my God appears to me,
    With His might comes to deliver.
      All things run their course below,
      God's love doth for ever flow.

    All the things in earth and heaven,
      E'en where'er I turn my eye,
    For my benefit are given,
      That they may my need supply.
    All that's living, all that's growing,
      On the hills or in the woods,
      In the vales or 'neath the floods,
    God is for my good bestowing.
      All things run their course below,
      God's love doth for ever flow.

    When I sleep, His eye is waking,
      When I wake, He strength'neth me,
    Each new morn fresh courage taking,
      I new love and goodness see.
    Had my God existed never,
      Had His face not guided me,
      From such ills so frequently,
    None could have deliver'd ever.
      All things run their course below,
      God's love doth for ever flow.

    'Gainst me many is the weapon,
      Forg'd by Satan's enmity,
    But no real hurt can happen,
      None hath yet befallen me.
    God's own angel whom He sendeth,
      Wardeth off each deadly blow
      Aim'd by the untiring foe,
    Who our ruin thus intendeth.
      All things run their course below,
      God's love doth for ever flow.

    As a father ne'er withdraweth
      From his child his love away,
    Though he often evil doeth,
      And from wisdom's paths doth stray.
    So God's heart towards me moveth,
      All my sins forgiveth He,
      Not in vengeance smiteth me,
    As a Father He reproveth.
      All things run their course below,
      God's love doth for ever flow.

    Ev'ry blow His hand inflicteth,
      Though the heart with pain it rend,
    When my heart aright reflecteth,
      Is a token that my Friend
    Thinks on me, and tow'rds me yearneth,
      Me from this ill world would free,
      That has so entangled me,
    By the cross to Him me turneth.
      All things run their course below,
      God's love doth for ever flow.

    This I know full well, and never
      Let it from my mind depart,
    Christ's cross hath its limit ever,
      And at length must cease to smart.
    When the winter snows are over
      Lovely summer will appear,
      Who can hope, from ev'ry fear,
    And from pain, shall they recover.
      All things run their course below,
      God's love doth for ever flow.

    In God's love there is no ending,
      Ne'er a limit find I there,
    So my hands to Thee extending,
      As Thy child, I raise my pray'r.
    Father! deign Thy grace to give me,
      That I may with all my might
      Thee embrace both day and night,
    All my life may never leave thee,
      And when life is o'er with me,
      Love and praise eternally.


          PROTECTION OF GOD IN HITHERTO DANGEROUS TIMES OF WAR.


    How heavy is the burden made
    That Thou upon our backs hast laid,
      O God! the Lord of Hosts,
    O God, whose anger rises high
    'Gainst workers of iniquity.

    The burden is the cruel tide
    Of war, that earth with blood has dyed,
      And fill'd with bitter tears.
    It is a fire that rages high
    'Neath suns of almost every sky.

    The burden's great and hard to bear,
    But Thy strong arm and Father's care
      Are not to us unknown.
    Thou punishest, but 'mid the woe
    Thou love and friendliness dost show.

    But true to Thee must we abide,
    For ne'er from us dost Thou quite hide
      Thy saving health and light.
    How many hast Thou given o'er,
    We've oft been shielded by Thy pow'r.

    In many a sad and weary hour,
    When gath'ring clouds did o'er us low'r
      Above our anxious heads,
    Thou still'd'st the storm, whose mighty hand
    Upholdeth sky and sea and land.

    How often, Lord, by day and night,
    Our enemies with craft and might
      Have threaten'd us, Thy flock!
    But, faithful Shepherd! Thou wast near,
    Repell'dst the wolf and still'dst our fear.

    Our brethren are compell'd to roam,
    Are driven forth from house and home,
      While we, Lord, still enjoy
    Each one his seat beneath the shade
    By his own vine and fig-tree made.

    Behold! my heart, on every hand
    The towns and fields of many a land
      Are doom'd to ruin sure,
    The homes of men are overthrown,
    The houses of our God cast down.

    But rest and order still remain
    With us, and we can still maintain
      The worship of our God.
    God's mind from out His holy word
    'Mongst us is daily taught and heard.

    Whoever this doth not perceive,
    But to the winds such thoughts doth give,
      Who in such blessèd light
    No grace, no love, no goodness find,
    How dark, thrice darken'd is their mind!

    O gracious God! preserve us free
    For aye from such stupidity;
      Lord, give us gratitude,
    That songs of praise in sweetest tone
    We may present before Thy throne.

    To nought we've done, or e'er can do,
    To Thee--to Thee alone is due
      The praise, O fount of love!
    We've earned destruction from Thy face,
    Thou deal'st with us in love and grace.

    Oh! may we meditate Thy grace,
    Till heart shall burn and tongue shall praise,
      And give angelic zeal,
    That every throbbing pulse may be
    A note of praise, O Lord! to Thee.

    But let the tide of woe recede,
    Restore to us our joy, we plead,
      May peace to us return.
    How many in this vale of tears
    Have never witness'd peaceful years!

    Are we unworthy? then with Thee
    We plead for helpless infancy,
      Who wrong have never done.
    Shall cradled infants feel the stroke,
    Shall they endure the heavy yoke?

    Have pity, Lord! oh, tender heart!
    What heavy sighs, what bitter smart,
      From our sad hearts are wrung!
    No stone, our Saviour God art Thou,
    How canst Thou so afflict us now?

    How grievous are our wounds and sore,
    They stink and fester more and more,
      But Thou canst heal them all.
    Pour in the oil of grace, that whole
    Can make the body and the soul.

    This wilt Thou do, we certainly
    Believe, although we nowhere see
      The means in all the world.
    But Thou in our extremity
    Dost find Thine opportunity.


               THANKSGIVING FOR THE DECLARATION OF PEACE.


    Praise God! for forth hath sounded
      The noble word of joy and peace,
    There's rest where strife abounded,
      The sword and spear their murders cease.
    Up! up! again, and bring ye
      Now forth the sounding lyre,
    O Germany! and sing ye
      In full and noble choir,
    Your hearts and minds now raise ye
      And thank the Lord, and say,
    "Thy grace and goodness praise we
      For they endure for aye!"

    'Twere just if God were driving
      Us in dire wrath from 'fore His face,
    For with us still are thriving
      The thorns of sin that grow apace.
    In deed and truth we feel it--
      His rod of chastisement!
    But say whoe'er can tell it--
      Who are they who repent?
    We're only evil ever,
      God's true continually,
    He helpeth to deliver
      From war and misery.

    With grateful hearts o'erflowing
      We greet thee, noble gift of peace!
    Where'er thou dwell'st, now knowing
      How richly thou dost ever bless.
    God to thy keeping giveth
      Our good and happiness,
    Who woundeth thee and grieveth,
      In his own heart doth press
    Grief's arrow, and in madness
      He quencheth in the land
    The golden light of gladness
      With suicidal hand.

    What could this lesson ever
      Grave on our hearts so solemnly,
    As forts laid low for ever,
      And towns that now in ruins lie:
    As fair and fertile meadows
      That wav'd with golden grain,
    Now wrapt in forest shadows
      And run to waste again.
    As graves full of the buried,
      Who fell in the dread hour
    Of battle in ranks serried,
      Whose like we'll see no more.

    O man! be now afflicted,
      And let thy tears in torrents flow,
    With countenance dejected
      To ponder to thy closet go;
    What heretofore hath given
      Thy God, didst thou deride,
    Thy Father who's in Heaven
      Now turn'd hath to thy side.
    From fury and from pressing
      He turneth for thy good,
    As if by love and blessing
      Constrain thy heart He would.

    Awake thee! now awake thee!
      Thou hard, cold world awaken'd be;
    Ere doom's dread hour o'ertake thee,
      By thee unlook'd for, suddenly.
    Ye for the Saviour living!
      Unshaken be your mood,
    The peace He now is giving
      Can only bring us good.
    This lesson He is giving,
      The end of all is nigh,
    Thou shalt with Him be living
      In peace eternally.


                  O LORD! I SING WITH MOUTH AND HEART.


    O Lord! I sing with mouth and heart,
      Joy of my soul! to Thee
    To earth Thy knowledge I impart,
      As it is known to me.

    Thou art the Fount of grace, I know,
      And Spring aye fall and free,
    Whence saving health and goodness flow
      Each day so bounteously.

    What have we here or what are we,
      Of good what can earth give,
    That we do not alone from Thee,
      Our Father, aye receive?

    The tent-like firmament who builds,
      Who spreads th' expanse of blue,
    Who sends to fertilize our fields
      Refreshing rain and dew?

    Who warmeth us in cold and frost,
      Who shields us from the wind,
    Who orders it that wine and must
      We in their season find?

    Who is it life and health bestows,
      Who keeps us with His hand
    In golden peace, wards off war's woes,
      From our dear native land?

    The work is Thine, my God! my Lord!
      And Thine must ever be;
    Before our door Thou keepest guard,
      In rest we're kept by Thee.

    Thou feedest us from year to year,
      And constant dost abide;
    When danger fills our hearts with fear,
      With help art at our side.

    With patience dost Thou ever chide,
      Nor long Thine anger keep,
    But castest all our sins aside
      Into the ocean deep.

    Whene'er our burden'd hearts we raise
      To Thee, Thou'rt soon appeas'd;
    The help Thou send'st shows forth Thy praise,
      And our sad hearts are eas'd.

    Thou mark'st how oft Thy people weep
      And what their sorrows are,
    Their tears dost in Thy bottle keep,
      However small they are.

    Our deepest needs dost Thou supply,
      Thou giv'st what lasts for aye,
    Thou lead'st us to our home on high,
      When hence we pass away.

    Awake! my heart, awake and sing,
      And joyous be thy mood,
    Thy God who maketh everything
      Is, and abides thy good--

    Thy treasure and inheritance!
      Thy glory and delight!
    Thy saving health and sure defence!
      He keeps and guides thee right.

    Why do thy cares both night and day
      Grieve thee so bitterly?
    Upon thy God thy burden lay,
      Who gave thy life to thee.

    Hath He not all the weary way
      From youth till now thee led,
    Oft chas'd misfortune's clouds away
      That gather'd o'er thy head?

    In all His rule no oversight
      Can happen, no mistakes;
    Whate'er He does or leaves is right,
      A happy issue takes.

    Let Him work who doth all things well,
      Nor with Him interfere,
    And so thou shalt in glory dwell,
      And peace enjoy while here.


                         TO GOD ALONE BE GLORY.


    How can it be, my highest Light!
    That as before Thy face so bright
      All things must pale and vanish,
    That my poor feeble flesh and blood
    Can summon a courageous mood
      To meet Thee, and fear banish?

    But dust and ashes what am I?
    My body what but grass so dry?
      What good the life I'm living?
    What can I with my utmost pow'r?
    What have I, Lord! from hour to hour
      But what Thyself art giving?

    I am a poor and feeble worm,
    A straw, the lightest passing storm
      Could drive away before it.
    When Thou Thy hand, that all doth stay,
    Dost on me e'er so lightly lay,
      I know not how t' endure it.

    Lord! I am nought, but Thou art He
    Who art all--all belongs to Thee,
      And live and move I ever
    In Thee--if Thou me terrifi'st,
    No store of grace to help suppli'st
      I can recover never.

    I am unjust, but true Thy heart,
    I evil am--Thou holy art,
      This thought should shame be giving,
    That I in such an evil stand,
    Should from Thy mild paternal hand,
      The least good be receiving.

    Nought else but ill from infancy
    Up e'en till now I've done to Thee,
      In sin was I begotten;
    And didst Thou not in faithfulness
    My sin remit, and me release,
      Lost were I and forgotten.

    Let boasting then be far from me,
    What is Thy due I render Thee,
      To Thee alone be glory!
    O Christ! may while I live below
    My spirit, and what thence may flow,
      With reverence adore Thee.

    And if aught hath been done by me
    That is well done, it came from Thee,
      My pow'r could do it never.
    Thee thanks and honour, Lord! I bring,
    All my life long Thy praise I'll sing,
      And tell Thy glory ever.


         SONG OF THANKSGIVING AFTER GREAT SORROW AND AFFLICTION.


    After clouds we see the sun,
    Joy we feel when grief is gone,
    After bitter pain and sore
    Cometh consolation's hour.
    Then my soul that sank before,
    Even down to hell's dark door,
    To the heav'nly choir doth soar.

    He 'fore whom the world shall flee,
    In my spirit comforts me,
    With His high and mighty hand,
    Tears me from the hellish band.
    With the love to me He shows,
    Swells my heart and overflows,
    And my blood with rapture glows.

    Did I e'er 'neath sorrow bend?
    Did my heart grief ever rend?
    Have I e'er been vexèd sore?
    Satan e'er fool'd me before?
    Aye--but henceforth am I free,
    Faithfully thou shieldest me,
    My salvation comes from Thee!

    What thou mean'st, my bitter foe!
    By thy deeds tow'rds me I know;
    Truly thou with all thy pow'r
    Seek'st me ever to devour.
    Had I too much trusted thee,
    Then had'st thou, ere I could see,
    In thy snares entangled me.

    All the guile I know full well
    That in thy bad heart doth dwell;
    Thou my God malign'st to me,
    Turn'st His praise to obloquy;
    Speaketh out His loving heart,
    Keeps He silence on His part,
    All He doth dost thou pervert.

    If I hope and look for good,
    If I'm in a joyous mood,
    From my mind thou driv'st away
    Every good thought--and dost say:
    "God doth far from thee abide,
    Riseth high misfortune's tide
    Round thee now on every side."

    Hence depart! thou lying mouth,
    Here is God's own ground in truth,
    For the face of God is here,
    And the beauteous light and clear
    Of His favour, here doth rise,
    All His word and counsel wise,
    Op'd are now before mine eyes.

    God lets none in sadness stay,
    He with shame drives none away,
    Who themselves up to Him give,
    With the whole heart to Him cleave,
    Who their cares on Him aye cast,
    And hope in Him--joy at last,
    For the soul and body taste.

    Though it comes not as we will,
    Just to-day--yet be thou still,
    For perchance to-morrow may
    Be the bright and joyous day.
    God's time comes with measur'd step,
    When it comes His word He'll keep
    And joy's harvest we shall reap.

    Ah! how often did I think,
    As my feet began to sink
    'Neath the heavy load of care,
    In the mire of blank despair,
    Now there is no hope for me,
    Rest for me there cannot be
    Till I enter death's dark sea.

    But my God put forth His pow'r
    To avert and to restore,
    That I ne'er enough can tell
    What His arm hath done so well;
    When no path I could descry,
    When no help to guide was nigh,
    Help God sent me from on high.

    When I timid and perplex'd
    Often have my spirit vex'd,
    Sleepless toss'd thro' all the night,
    Sick at heart when dawn'd the light,
    When heart fail'd me utterly,
    Hast Thou then appear'd to me,
    Turning my captivity.

    Now as long as here I roam,
    Have on earth a house and home,
    'Fore mine eyes continually
    Shall this thing of wonder be.
    All my life long shall I bring
    Offerings of thanks, and sing
    Songs of praise to God my King.

    Every grief and every smart,
    By th'eternal Father's heart
    Ever yet appointed me,
    Or that may hereafter be
    Chosen for me, all my days
    From His gracious hand always,
    I'll receive with joy and praise.

    I will tread woe's bitter path,
    I will onward go to death,
    I into the grave will go,
    Still my heart with joy shall glow.
    Whom the Highest will raise high,
    Whom th' Almighty standeth nigh,
    Ne'er can perish utterly.


                                  THE 23RD PSALM OF DAVID.


    The Lord, the earth who ruleth,
    And with His hand controlleth,
    Whose goodness never endeth,
    He watcheth me and tendeth.

    As long as He is near me
    With every gift He'll cheer me,
    Of fulness overflowing
    The riches aye bestowing.

    By pastures green He leads me,
    With gladness there He feeds me,
    From purest springs revives me,
    In need He counsel gives me.

    And when the soul is fearful
    Through grievous thoughts and careful,
    He comfort giveth ever
    And knows how to deliver.

    My steps aright He leadeth,
    And what to do me guideth,
    And for His name's sake glorious
    O'er fear makes me victorious.

    Though often left to ponder,
    While in dark vales I wander,
    No evil fear I ever,
    Distress o'ertakes me never.

    Thou standest still beside me,
    From wicked men dost hide me,
    Thy rod and staff protect me,
    And no fear can deject me.

    My table Thou preparest,
    For my refreshment carest,
    When foes are plotting round me,
    And seek to pain and wound me.

    My head with oil anointest,
    My empty soul appointest
    Of every good and pleasure
    A full o'erflowing measure.

    The goodness Thou bestowest,
    The mercy that Thou showest,
    Till life itself forsake me,
    Shall glad and joyful make me.

    Thy service will I never
    Forsake, but praise Thee ever,
    In Thy house where Thou livest,
    Reward to goodness givest.

    As long as life is given
    On earth here, and in heaven
    Where I shall stand before Thee,
    I'll evermore adore Thee!




                       Morning and Evening Songs.


                            MORNING BLESSING.


        The golden morning,
        Joy her adorning,
        With splendour near us
        Draweth, to cheer us
    With her heart-refreshing and lovely light.
        My head and members
        Lay wrapt all in slumbers,
        But now awaking,
        And sleep from me shaking,
    Heaven's bless'd sunshine doth gladden my sight.

        Mine eye beholdeth
        What God upholdeth,
        Made for His glory,
        To tell the story
    To us of His power and might so great,
        And where the Father
        The faithful shall gather
        In peace, whenever
        Earth's lies they shall sever
    And leave this mortal and perishing state.

        Come ye with singing,
        To God be bringing
        Goods and each blessing--
        All we're possessing--
    All be to God as an offering brought.
        Hearts with love glowing,
        With praises o'erflowing,
        Thanksgiving voices,
        In these God rejoices,
    All other off'rings without them are nought.

        To morn and even
        His thoughts are given,
        Increase He giveth,
        Sorrow relieveth,
    These are the works that He doeth alone.
        When we are sleeping
        Watch is He aye keeping,
        When we're awaking
        Care still of us taking,
    He makes the light of His grace to shine down.

        My thoughts I've raisèd
        To Thee who'rt praisèd
        For aye in Heaven!
        Success be given,
    May all my endeavours unhinder'd be!
        From ev'ry evil
        And work of the devil,
        All malice ever,
        Oh do Thou deliver!
    In all Thy precepts establish Thou me!

        May't pleasure give me,
        May no pain grieve me
        To see flow over
        The cup my brother
    Or neighbour hath, with Thy blessings so free.
        Covetous burning
        And unchristian yearning
        For ill possessions,
        Blot out such transgressions,
    Cast them, O Father! all into the sea!

        The life we're living
        What is it giving?
        Ere any thinketh
        To ground it sinketh,
    Soon as the breath of the grave on it blow.
        All things together
        Dread ruin must shiver,
        The earth and heaven
        They must perish even,
    Wrapt in the flames that shall ardently glow!

        All--all decayeth,
        But God still stayeth,
        His thoughts they waver
        A moment never,
    His word and will both eternally 'dure.
        His grace and favour
        Uninjur'd are ever,
        Deadly wounds healing,
        The heart with peace filling,
    Health here and yonder to us they ensure.

        My God for ever
        Do Thou deliver!
        Shield me, and cover
        My debts all over,
    In grace, Thine eyes from my sins turn away.
        Govern and guide me,
        Be ever beside me,
        As it is pleasing
        To Thee! am I placing
    All in Thy hand and disposal for aye.

        Wilt Thou give ever
        To me whatever
        My life is needing?
        May I be heeding
    Ever the faithful word spoken by Thee.
        God is the highest,
        The greatest, the nighest,
        Gracious is ever,
        Is changeable never,
    Of all our treasures the noblest is He.

        Wilt Thou then grieve me,
        Gall to drink give me?
        Must I be passing
        Through cares harassing?
    Do then as seemeth it good unto Thee.
        Whate'er supporteth,
        Is useful or hurteth,
        Thou knowest ever,
        And chastenest never
    Too much, in case we o'erburden'd should be.

        Trial God sendeth,
        Speedily endeth
        The storms of ocean,
        The wind's commotion
    Lightens the sunshine so gladsome and bright.
        Fulness of pleasure,
        And glorious leisure,
        Will then be given
        To me in yon Heaven
    Whither my thoughts aye to turn take delight.


                            AWAKE, MY HEART!


    Awake, my heart! be singing,
    Praise to thy Maker bringing,
    Of every good the Giver,
    Who men protecteth ever.

    As shades of night spread over
    Earth as a pall did cover,
    Then Satan sought to have me,
    But God was near to save me.

    When Satan would devour me,
    Thou, Father! spreadest o'er me
    Thy wing, Thou me embraced'st,
    All fear away Thou chased'st.

    Thou said'st "Lie still, I'm near thee;
    In spite of him who'd tear thee,
    Sleep, child! let nought affright thee,
    The sunlight shall delight thee."

    Thou truly, Lord! hast told it,
    The light--mine eyes behold it,
    From dangers hast releas'd me,
    Thou hast renew'd and bless'd me.

    Thou sacrifice would'st ever,
    My gifts I bring Thee hither,
    The offerings I'm bringing
    My pray'rs are and my singing.

    Such Thou disdainest never,
    The heart Thou can'st search ever,
    Thou know'st none can deceive Thee
    No better can I give Thee.

    Thou wilt, O Lord! be ending
    Thy work in me, and sending
    Who in his hands will take me,
    To-day his care will make me.

    May I in all I'm doing
    Wise courses be pursuing,
    Beginning, middle, ending,
    May all to bliss be tending.

    Thy blessings richly give me,
    My heart would now receive Thee,
    Thy word as food be given
    To me till I reach Heaven.


                           PRAISE YE JEHOVAH!


        Praise ye Jehovah,
        All ye men who fear Him!
    Let us with gladness to His name be singing,
    Be thanks and praises to His altar bringing.
          Praise ye Jehovah!

        The life we're living
        Who is ever giving;
    Care all the night who like a father taketh,
    And who with gladness us from sleep awaketh.
          Praise ye Jehovah!

        That we enjoy them,
        And can still employ them,
    Our mind and senses and our every member,
    Thanks do we owe for this let us remember.
          Praise ye Jehovah!

        By flames o'erpowering,
        Us and ours devouring,
    From house and homestead that we've not been driven
    We owe it to the care of God in Heaven.
          Praise ye Jehovah!

        That no thief, breaking
        Through our doors and taking
    Our property, and us assaulting hurt us,
    Is that He sent His angels to support us.
          Praise ye Jehovah!

        Oh, faithful Saviour!
        Fount of every favour!
    Ah! let Thy kindness and protection hover,
    By day and night our life at all times over.
          Praise ye Jehovah!

        Deign, Lord, to hear us,
        And to-day be near us!
    Supported by Thy grace, may nought e'er hinder
    Our progress; and, in need, help speedy render.
          Praise ye Jehovah!

        Our will subduing,
        Make us Thine be doing,
    Teach us to labour faithfully; whenever
    Beneath the load we're sinking, then deliver.
          Praise ye Jehovah!

        Do Thou direct us
        When Thou dost afflict us,
    That we may never mock; but be preparing
    Before Thy throne hereafter for appearing.
          Praise ye Jehovah!

        And all true-hearted
        Who're by grace converted
    Wilt Thou, Lord, come for, and by grace be bringing
    Where all Thine angels evermore are singing,
          Praise ye Jehovah!


                            EVENING BLESSING.


    The daylight disappeareth,
    It fleeth, and night neareth,
    Its gloom is spreading o'er us,
    With slumber to o'erpower us
      And all the wearied earth.
    The working day now endeth,
    My heart to Thee ascendeth,
    For toil and rest who'st given
    The morning and the even,--
      In praise my heart bursts forth.

    Break forth, my heart, in singing,
    Praise to thy Maker bringing,
    Who soul and body giveth,
    More good than heart conceiveth,
      Or tongue can ever tell;
    No moment passeth over
    That doth not much discover
    Of goodness overflowing,
    He's aye on us bestowing,
      Each hour doth show it well.

    Just as the shepherd's treasure,
    The sheep in boundless pleasure
    O'er greenest pastures wander,
    Their guardian's guidance under,
      With free and fearless mind,
    Themselves with flowers filling,
    Their thirst at fresh springs stilling,
    So me to-day hath guided,
    With every good provided,
      My Shepherd, good and kind.

    God hath not me forsaken,
    Though I sin's course have taken,
    Not fearing e'er to leave Him,
    By waywardness to grieve Him,
      And wound His Father-heart.
    Let, Father, Thy zeal never
    Burn 'gainst me, nor me sever
    From Thee and from Thy blessing;
    My doing and transgressing
      Awake regret and smart.

    Oh! hear me, Father, praying,
    My waywardness and straying
    From Thee, my evil doing,
    Into the ocean throwing,
      Forgive eternally.
    But may Thine angels hover
    Round me, and be my cover,
    All evil from me keeping;
    With Thee will I be sleeping,
      I'll rise again with Thee.

    Now may mine eyelids closing
    Be peacefully reposing,
    All free from care and sorrow,
    Till on the golden morrow
      I joyfully awake.
    Thy wings shall shield me ever,
    The enemy shall never
    Thy flock and me endanger,
    Whom day and night in anger
      His prey he seeks to make.

    When silent or when talking,
    When sitting or when walking,
    To Thee I'm wholly given,
    Thou art my life from heaven,
      This word is true and sore.
    In every undertaking,
    In sleeping hours and waking,
    My fortress art Thou ever,
    Thine arm doth aye deliver,
      My bliss doth aye endure.


                    NOW SPREAD ARE EVENING'S SHADOWS.


    Now spread are evening's shadows,
    O'er forests, towns, and meadows,
      And sleepeth ev'ry eye;
    Awake my pow'rs and sing ye,
    And pray'r and praises bring ye,
      That your Creator please on high!

    O Sun! where art thou vanish'd?
    The night thy light hath banish'd,
      The night of day the foe;
    Go then, for now appeareth
    Another Sun and cheereth
    My heart--'tis Jesus Christ, my joy!

    We've seen the day's declining,
    The golden stars are shining
      In yonder dark-blue sky.
    There shall I be for ever
    When God doth me deliver,
      From this low vale of misery.

    To rest the body hasteth,
    Itself of clothes divesteth,
      Type of mortality!
    I'll put it off, and o'er me
    Christ will the robe of glory
      Throw, and of immortality!

    Head, hands, and feet so tirèd
    Are glad the day's expirèd,
      That work comes to an end;
    My heart be fill'd with gladness
    That God from all earth's sadness,
      And from sin's toil relief will send.

    Lie down, my members tirèd
    Upon your couch desirèd,
      Lie down my wearied head!
    A day and hour is nearing
    They'll be for you preparing
      Beneath the sod, a quiet bed.

    Mine eyes scarce ope are keeping,
    A moment--I'll be sleeping,
      Where's body then and soul?
    In grace Thy care then make me,
    May evil ne'er o'ertake me,
      Thou Shepherd Lord of Israel!

    O Jesus, be my cover!
    And spread both Thy wings over
      Thy child, and shield Thou me!
    Though Satan would devour me,
    Let angels ever o'er me
      Sing, "This child shall uninjur'd be!"

    And you, my well belovèd!
    Shall by no ill be movèd,
      No danger shall betide.
    God peaceful slumbers send you,
    With golden arms defend you,
      Send guardian angels to your side!




                             Miscellaneous.


                              SUMMER SONG.


    Go forth, my heart, and seek delight
    In this summer time so bright,
      The bounties God displayeth,
    The garden's splendour go and see,
    Behold how God for me and thee
      Them gorgeously arrayeth.

    The trees with leaves are cover'd o'er,
    The earth with carpet spreads her floor
      Of green, all fresh and tender,
    The tulip and narcissus wear
    Attire of finer texture fair
      Than Solomon in splendour.

    The lark aspiring soars on high,
    Flies from her cleft the dove so shy,
      And seeks the woodland shadow;
    The nightingale with song so rare
    Delights and fills the ev'ning air
      O'er mountain, vale, and meadow.

    Leads forth her little brood the hen,
    The stork builds near the haunts of men,
      And feed their young the swallows;
    The stag so swift, the roe so light
    Of foot, come bounding from the height
      Into the grassy hollows.

    The brooklets murmur in the sand,
    And fringe the edge on either hand
      With myrtle rich in shadow;
    The shepherds and the sheep rejoice,
    In joy and mirth you hear their voice
      Sound from the neighb'ring meadow.

    The bee through all the live-long hours,
    Unwearied roams among the flow'rs,
      Its precious stores to gather;
    The strong juice of the vine each hour
    Is ever gaining strength and pow'r
      This glorious summer weather.

    While springeth fast the precious grain,
    The young and old exult again,
      Praise Him with all their powers,
    Whose benefits unceasing are,
    With gifts so manifold and rare
      Who human nature dowers.

    I cannot rest, I never dare,
    In my Creator's gracious care
      My inmost soul rejoices,
    To God most High, when all things raise
    A song of universal praise,
      My voice shall join their voices.

    Methinks it is so pleasant here,
    All things so beautiful appear
      In this our poor world even;
    What will it be when earth we leave,
    And at its golden gates receive
      Glad welcome into Heaven?

    What purest light, what ecstasy,
    Will in the Saviour's garden be!
      How will it sound when 'fore Thee,
    All with united heart and voice,
    Ten thousand seraphins rejoice
      And rev'rently adore Thee.

    Ah! blessèd God, oh! were I there
    Before Thy throne, and did I bear
      My branch of palm victorious,
    As angels do, my voice I'd raise
    Thine ever blessèd name to praise,
      In songs of triumph glorious.

    But though I still am dwelling here,
    And still the body's burden bear,
      Can I be silent?--Never!
    My heart, no matter where I be,
    Or here or there, shall bend to Thee,
      In adoration ever.

    Help! Lord, my soul with blessings crown,
    With blessings that from Heav'n flow down,
      That I may blossom ever!
    And may the summer of Thy grace
    Cause fruits of faith to grow apace,
      Fruits that shall wither never.

    And may Thy Spirit dwell in me,
    May I a good branch ever be
      Ingrafted in the Saviour!
    In Thine own garden may I be
    To Thy name's praise a goodly tree,
      Implanted by Thy favour!

    Grant me Thy paradise to share,
    And more fruit may I ever bear
      While I am going thither.
    Thine honour, Lord, to me is dear,
    Thee and Thee only shall I here
      And yonder serve for ever.


               OCCASIONED BY GREAT AND UNSEASONABLE RAIN.


    O God! who dost Heav'n's sceptre wield
    What is it that now makes our field,
    And everything that it doth bear,
    Such sad and ruin'd aspect wear?

    Nought else, in truth, but that the band
    Of men from Thee on every hand
    Have fallen utterly away,
    Their guilt increasing every day.

    They who as God's own property
    His name should praise continually,
    And of God's word should love the light,
    Like heathen are involv'd in night.

    The Heav'ns are all with darkness clad,
    The firmament's clear light doth fade;
    We wait to see the light again
    At dawn of day, but wait in vain.

    In ceaseless strifes involv'd men are,
    In every place is fearful war,
    In every corner hate and spite,
    Contentions every class delight.

    The elements o'er all the land
    Are stretching out 'gainst us the hand,
    And troubles from the sea arise,
    And troubles come down from the skies.

    It is a time of anguish sore,
    For hunted, plagued their time before
    The people are into the grave,
    No rest to them do they vouchsafe.

    The source of joy becometh sad,
    The sun hath ceas'd to make us glad,
    And all at once the clouds descend,
    Shed tears that never seem to end.

    Ah, child of man! go weep alone,
    Thy many grievous sins bemoan,
    Henceforward from thy crimes refrain,
    Repent, and be thou clean again.

    Fall on thy knees, thyself now throw
    On God, that He may mercy show,
    That His deservèd wrath may be
    By Him to grace turn'd speedily.

    He's faithful, and aye true will be,
    Nought else desireth but that we
    With reverence and godly fear
    To seek His mercy should draw near.

    Ah! Father, Father, hear our cry,
    Redeem us, 'neath sin's yoke we lie,
    From out the world drawn may we be,
    And Thou Thyself turn us to Thee.

    Subdue Thou our rebellious mood,
    And make us, sinners, pure and good;
    Whom Thou dost turn, soon turn'd is he,
    Who heareth Thee, is heard by Thee!

    And let Thine eye now friendly be,
    The anguish'd cry that reacheth Thee
    From earth, from our sad hearts, O Lord,
    With gracious ear do Thou regard.

    Wrath's black robe tear off with Thy hand
    And comfort Thou us and our land,
    And may the genial sun shine forth
    And ripen the fair fruits of earth.

    And, Lord, as long as we may live
    Our daily bread in bounty give,
    And when the end of time we see
    The bread give of eternity!


                   THANKSGIVING FOR GRACIOUS SUNSHINE.


    Now gone is all the rain,
    Rejoice my heart again,
    Sing after times of sadness
    To God thy Lord with gladness!
    Our God His heart hath turnèd
    Our pray'r He hath not spurnèd.

    On sea and on our land
    Outstretchèd was His hand,
    In anger us addressing;
    He said, "Ye're aye transgressing,
    In ways of sin ye wander,
    Nor ever turn, nor ponder.

    "So shall my Heaven's light
    Its countenance so bright
    With robe of blackness cover,
    With dark clouds be spread over;
    No longer shine in glory
    But shall be weeping o'er thee."

    Appeas'd His wrath our sighs
    That to His ears did rise,
    For He forgetteth never
    His mercy that dures ever,
    His Spirit tow'rd us yearning,
    His anger ceas'd from burning.

    The clouds away then sped,
    The path the damp winds tread,
    From whence the rain descended,
    Was clos'd, the torrents ended,
    And from the deeps of Heaven
    No waters more were given.

    Now wearied field away
    Thy robe of sadness lay,
    Arise from out thy sadness
    And let us hear with gladness
    Thee songs of summer raising,
    Thy great Creator praising.

    The glorious sun, see there,
    Comes forth again so fair,
    With blessings earth doth cover;
    Now all the rains are over,
    Hills, valleys are receiving
    Its wondrous beams life-giving.

    The earth's reviv'd again;
    What drown'd was by the rain
    Will once again be living
    And precious fruit be giving,
    The fields good wheat forth bringing,
    In meadows grass be springing.

    The trees so very fair
    Fruit-laden will stand there;
    From hill-sides like a river
    Will wine and oil flow ever;
    In warm and quiet weather
    Will bees their honey gather.

    Our portion He will give
    Who in the Heav'ns doth live.
    He'll bounteously bestow it,
    We shall partake and know it;
    And what earth will supply us
    Will amply satisfy us.

    God faithful is and true,
    His mercy's ever new,
    His anger soon is turnèd.
    He gives what we've ne'er earnèd
    He doth Himself discover
    To us, our sins looks over.

    O man! direct thy ways,
    And all thou dost, to praise
    Thy Master's love and favour,
    So that thy heart may never
    His faithful heart be grieving,
    To Him offence be giving!


                 THE WONDERFUL ESTATE OF MATRIMONY.[10]


    Full of wonder, full of art,
      Full of wisdom, full of pow'r,
    Full of kindness, grace, and heart,
      Full of comfort flowing o'er,
    Full of wonder, still I say,
    Is Love's chaste and gentle sway.

    Those who've never met before,
      Ne'er each other known nor seen,
    Never in the idlest hour
      Thus employ'd their thoughts have been,
    Yet whose hearts and hands in love
    Tieth God who lives above!

    His child doth _this_ father guide,
      _That_ one traineth his each day,
    Each their special wind and tide
      Speed upon their sep'rate way,
    When the time appointed's there,
    Lo! they're a well-mated pair!

    Here grows up a prudent son,
      And a noble daughter there;
    One will be the other's crown,
      One the other's rest from care
    Each will be the other's light,
    But from both 'tis hidden quite,

    Till it's pleasing in His sight
      Who the world holds in His pow'r,
    To all giveth what is right
      Freely in th' appointed hour;
    Then appears in word and deed
    What hath been by Him decreed.

    Then Ahasuerus' eye
      First doth quiet Esther see;
    To where Sara peacefully
      Dwells, Tobias leadeth He;
    David then, with pliant will,
    Fetcheth prudent Abigail.

    Jacob flees from Esau's face,
      And he meeteth Rachel fair;
    Joseph in a foreign place
      Serves, and winneth Asnath there;
    Moses did with Jethro stay,
    And bore Zipporah away.

    Each one taketh, each doth find
      What the Lord doth choose for him;
    What in Heaven is design'd,
      Comes to pass on earth in time.
    And whatever happens thus
    Order'd wisely is for us.

    This or that might better be,
      Oft this foolish thought is ours;
    But as midnight utterly
      Fails to be like noonday's hours,
    So the feeble mind of man
    God's great wisdom cannot scan.

    Whom God joins together live,
      What the best is knoweth He,
    Our thoughts only can deceive,
      His from all defects are free;
    God's work standeth firm for aye,
    When all other must decay.

    Look at pious children who
      Enter'd have the holy state,
    How well for them God doth do,
      See what joys upon them wait;
    To their doings God doth send
    Evermore a happy end.

    Of their virtues the renown
      Blossometh for evermore,
    As a shadow when is gone
      Of all other love the flow'r;
    When truth faileth everywhere,
    Their's still bloometh fresh and fair,

    Fresh their love is evermore,
      Ever doth its youth renew,
    Love their table covers o'er,
      Sweetens all they say and do.
    Love their hearts aye giveth rest,
    When they're burden'd and oppress'd.

    Though things oft go crookedly,
      Even then this love is still,
    Can the cross bear patiently,
      Thinking 'tis the Father's will.
    From this thought doth comfort taste,
    Better days will come at last

    Meanwhile streams of blessing gives
      God with bounty rich and free,
    Mind and body He relieves,
      And the house too foundeth He;
    What is small and men despise,
    Makes He great and multiplies.

    And when all is over here
      That the Lord designs in love,
    For His faithful children dear,
      Taketh them to courts above,
    And with great delight in grace
    Folds them in His warm embrace.

    Now 'tis ever full of heart,
      Full of comfort flowing o'er,
    Full of wonder, full of art,
      Full of wisdom, full of pow'r,
    Full of wonder, still I say,
    Is love's chaste and gentle sway.


----------

[10]This song used to be sung in Germany after wedding dinners, and in
   some places on the way to church before solemnization.


               SONG OF CONSOLATION FOR MARRIED CHRISTIANS.


    Oh, Jesus Christ! how bright and fair
    The state of holy marriage where
      Thy blessing rich is given
    What gracious gifts Thou dost bestow,
    What streams of blessing ever flow
      Down from Thy holy heaven,
            When they
            True stay
          To Thee ever,
          Leave Thee never,
      Whose troth plighted,
      In one life have been united.

    When man and wife are mated well,
    In harmony together dwell,
      Are faithful to each other,
    The streams of bliss flow constantly
    What bliss of angels is on high
      From hence may we discover;
            No storm,
            No worm
          Can destroy it,
          Can e'er gnaw it,
      What God giveth
      To the pair that in Him liveth.

    He giveth of His grace the boon,
    And in its bosom late and soon
      His own belov'd He keepeth,
    His arms He daily spreadeth o'er,
    Guards as a Father by His pow'r
      Us and our house, nor sleepeth.
            Still we
            Must be
          Here and thither
          Roaming ever,
      Till He gives us
      Pious homes, and thus relieves us.

    The husband's like a goodly tree
    Whose branches spread so fair and free;
      The wife a vine that giveth
    Much fruit, and nurtures what it bears,
    Whose fruit increaseth with the years,
      Fruit that remains and liveth.
            Jewel,
            All hail!
          Husband's treasure!
          House's pleasure!
      Crown of honour!
      On His throne God thinketh on her.

    O wife! the Lord hath chosen thee
    That from thy womb brought forth should be
      The folk His church that buildeth;
    His wondrous work goes on for aye,
    The mighty word His mouth doth say,
      What thou beholdest, yieldeth,
            Sons fair
            Stand there,
          Daughters sitting
          Working, knitting,
      Finely spinning,
      And with art time wisely winning.

    Be of good cheer, it was not we
    Who first this order did decree,
      It was a higher Father,
    Who lov'd and loveth us for aye,
    And from whose lips when griev'd each day
      We friendly counsel gather;
            Good end
            He'll send,
          What we're doing
          And pursuing,
      Or conceiving
      Wise and happy issue giving.

    A time will come, it cannot fail,
    When we 'neath trials sore shall quail,
      And tears be freely flowing;
    To him who bears it patiently,
    By God's grace shall his sorrow be
      Turn'd into joy o'erflowing.
            Toil now,
            Wait thou,
          He arriveth
          Who rest giveth,
      Who can ever
      Banish care and soon deliver.

    Come hither then, my King so bless'd!
    In trials guide, in pain give rest,
      In anxious times relieving!
    To Thee we shall ascribe the praise,
    Our hearts and voices we shall raise
      In one loud song, thanks giving,
            Till we
            With Thee
          Ever dwelling,
          And fulfilling
      Thy will ever,
      Thy name cease to praise shall never.




                Of Death, the Last Day, and Eternal Life.


                          OF DEATH AND DYING.--PSALM XC.


    Lord God! Thou art for evermore
      Thy people's habitation,
    And Thou existence hadst before
      Was laid the earth's foundation!
    Ere yet the hills began to be
    Thou lived'st in eternity,
      Of all things the beginning!

    Thou lettest all the crowds of men
      Through death's dark portals wander,
    And biddest them return again,
      Those others follow yonder.
    With Thee a thousand years are aye
    Like watch of night or yesterday
      When it is gone for ever.

    Thou lettest the base hosts of men
      E'en as a stream be flowing,
    And as a ship upon the main
      That fav'ring winds are blowing,
    And as a sleep and dream of night
    That when men wake at morning light
      They can no more remember.

    We're like an herb that early dies,
      Or grass in fields that groweth,
    That in the morning flourishes,
      Ere night the mower moweth.
    So is't with man: he blooms to-day,
    To-morrow he is borne away
      If but a breath doth touch him!

    Because Thy wrath 'gainst us doth glow,
      Lord! we so early vanish,
    And for our sins Thou lay'st us low,
      And from Thy face dost banish.
    Our sins Thou sett'st before Thine eyes,
    Then doth Thine indignation rise
      In Thine heart ever holy!

    This fire it is consumes in all
      Our bones the marrow ever;
    And hence it is that great or small
      From death escapeth never.
    And hence our days are passing o'er
    Like tales that oft beguile an hour
      And that are soon forgotten.

    And scarcely doth our life on earth
      To seventy years last even;
    And what are all our labours worth
      If four-score years be given.
    What is the sum of all our gain
    From youth to age, but toil and pain,
      Heart-sorrow and vexation?

    We're ever toiling full of care,
      And ere we do bethink us
    To stop our work, lo! death is there,
      Into the grave to sink us.
    And speedily we pass away,
    Yet of their end none ever stay
      To think, nor of God's anger.

    O teach us, Lord! to think each day
      Upon this earth's affliction,
    That when we think on death we may
      Grow wiser by reflection.
    Ah! turn on us again Thy face
    And be at peace, O God of grace!
      With Thy rebellious children.

    And early with Thy mercy free
      Be soul and body filling,
    And late and early, Lord, may we
      Thy glorious praise be telling.
    O chiefest joy! our hearts now cheer,
    And once more give us good times here,
      The days have been so evil.

    We've borne the cross these weary years,
      Now let Thy sun be shining,
    Vouchsafe us laughter after tears,
      And pleasure after pining.
    And evermore, O Lord! make known
    Thy works of wonder to Thine own,
      Thine honour to Thy children.

    Be Thou our faithful friend and God,
      Establish us for ever!
    And when we err from wisdom's road
      Give penitence and favour!
    Turn Thou our hearts again to Thee,
    May all our works establish'd be,
      Crown all we do with blessing!


                       A REST HERE HAVE I NEVER.--PS. CXIX.


    A rest here have I never,
      A guest on earth am I,
    Heav'n will be mine for ever,
      My Fatherland's on high.
    Here up and down I'm driven;
      In rest eternal there,
    God's gift of grace is given
      That endeth toil and care.

    What hath my whole life ever
      From youth been to this hour,
    But labour ceasing never,
      As long as I have pow'r
    To tell of; days of anguish
      I've past, and oft the night
    In sorrow did I languish
      Until the morning light.

    And on the ways I've wander'd
      What storms have terrified,
    It blew, rain'd, lighten'd, thunder'd,
      Fear was on every side.
    Hate, envy, opposition
      Rag'd, undeserv'd by me,
    This was the sad condition
      I must bear patiently.

    So liv'd the honour'd fathers
      In whose footsteps we tread,
    From whom the saint oft gathers
      The wisdom he may need
    Of trial what full measure
      Had father Abraham,
    Ere he attain'd his pleasure,
      To his right dwelling came.

    How rough too and uneven
      The way that Isaac trod,
    And Jacob, who had striven
      And had prevail'd with God;
    What bitter grief and wearing
      Felt he, what woe and smart;
    In fear and in despairing
      Oft sank his fainting heart.

    The holy souls and blessèd
      Went forward on their race,
    They chang'd with hearts distressèd
      Their wonted dwelling-place:
    They hither went and thither,
      Great crosses bore each day,
    Till death came to deliver,
      Them in the grave to lay.

    In patience am I giving
      Myself to just such woe?
    Could I be better living
      Than such have liv'd below?
    Here must we suffer ever,
      Here must we upwards strive;
    Who fights not well shall never
      In joy eternal live.

    While on the earth I'm staying,
      My life shall thus be spent,
    I would not be delaying
      For aye in this strange tent.
    Along the paths I wander
      That lead me to my home,
    God boundless comfort yonder
      Will give me when I come.

    My home is high above me,
      Where angel hosts for aye
    Praise Him whose heart doth love me,
      Who ruleth all each day,
    Who aye preserves and beareth
      All in His hand of might,
    Who orders and prepareth
      What good seems in His sight.

    For home my tir'd heart yearneth,
      I'd gladly thither go,
    From earth away it turneth
      From all I've here pass'd through.
    The longer here I'm staying
      I less of pleasure taste,
    My spirit's thirst allaying,
      The world's an arid waste.

    The dwelling is unholy,
      The trouble is too great.
    Why com'st Thou, Lord, so slowly
      To free me from this state?
    Come, make a happy ending
      Of all my wanderings,
    Relief by Thy pow'r sending,
      From all my sufferings.

    Where I've so long remainèd
      Is not my proper home;
    When my life's end is gainèd,
      Then forth from it I'll come,
    What here I've needed ever
      I'll put it all away;
    When soul and body sever,
      Me in the grave they'll lay.

    Thou, who my Joy art ever,
      And of my life the Light,
    When death life's thread doth sever,
      Bring'st me to heav'n so bright,
    To mansions everlasting,
      Where I shall ever shine,
    E'en as the sun, while tasting
      Of pleasures all divine.

    There I'll be ever living
      Not merely as a guest,
    With those who crowns receiving
      From Thee are ever bless'd;
    I'll celebrate in glory
      Thine ev'ry mighty deed,
    My portion have before Thee,
      From every evil freed.


                         CHRISTIAN JOY IN DEATH.


    My face, why should'st thou troubled be
      When thou of death art hearing?
    Know it, it cannot injure thee,
      Contemplate it, ne'er fearing.
          When thou dost know
          Death, all its woe
      Will soon be disappearing.

    From the old serpent's face first tear
      The mask he is assuming,
    And lo! no poison more is there,
      'Tis harmless through the coming
          Of Christ to save,
          Who to the grave
      Went down, death thus o'ercoming.

    Thou, Lord, didst break our foe's great pow'r,
      His sting thus from him taking,
    The butt of scorn he's evermore,
      No mischief can be making.
          Thy precious blood
          Damps his hot mood,
      His ardour's him forsaking.

    'Twas sin that was the sting of death,
      And on to dying drove us,
    For ever done away sin hath
      Our Saviour, who did love us.
          Its pow'r and might
          Is broken quite,
      Though it to grief may move us.

    Now sin is dead, God's anger's turn'd,
      He's reconcil'd; the Saviour
    Hath borne the curse our debts had earn'd,
      Restor'd us to God's favour.
          Who was our foe
          Our friend is now,
      Is full of grace for ever.

    It cannot be, if Thou'rt my friend,
      That Thou would'st kill me ever;
    Thy Father's heart can ne'er intend
      To death me to deliver,
          And who is e'er
          Thy child and heir
      By ill is injur'd never.

    But Thou, O Father! doest well
      When trials sore are grieving,
    When misery the life doth fill,
      The waves around us heaving,
          That us Thy hand
          To Fatherland
      Brings, from the floods relieving.

    When from the angry skies storms break,
      And mountains quake before them,
    The thunder of Thy wrath doth shake
      The hills, and pealeth o'er them,
          Then dost Thou come
          And takest home
      Thine own, Thou carest for them.

    When rage around our enemies,
      Our injury are seeking,
    When lions, wolves, and bears arise,
      Their vengeance on us wreaking,
          Thou tak'st Thy sheep,
          Dost safely keep
      Them near Thee, comfort speaking.

    And if the world treats evilly
      Him who to Thee is cleaving,
    Thou sayest, "Come to me, my son!
      Come, from me be receiving
          Love, pleasure, joy,
          That never cloy,
      That I for aye am giving."

    And angel hosts then joyfully
      Descend, and round us hover,
    And tend the soul so carefully;
      And when life's course is over
          To God on high
          It peacefully
      Goes with them 'neath their cover.

    The Lord His bride meets joyfully
      And saith, "Now welcome ever,
    I have espousèd thee to me,
      To all mine own come hither!
          Whom I 'fore thee
          Have brought to me,
      From yon world did deliver.

    "Thou true and faithful wast in heart,
      Wast ne'er asham'd to own me,
    And now receivest thou thy part,
      With crown of joy I crown thee.
          Thy part am I,
          Eternally
      Beside me I enthrone thee.

    "Of thine eyes now I dry the flood,
      Thy bitter tears am stilling;
    Here turn'd is to thy highest good,
      The grief thou once wert feeling;
          Of thy grief's sea
          No one shall be
      Here save with rapture telling.

    "All my belov'd ones clothe I here
      In pure white linen ever,
    With joy in heaven they appear,
      Here envy felt is never.
          Here is no death,
          No cross nor scath,
      Good friends at all can sever."

    O God! why should the thought of death
      With terror make me shiver?
    'Tis he who'll from the yoke beneath
      Of mis'ry me deliver.
          From torture He
          Will set me free,
      I can regret it never.

    For death is the Red Sea to me,
      Through which on dry land ever
    Thine Israel, so dear to Thee,
      Pass to the land of favour,
          Where milk and wine
          Flow ever in
      Full streams that cease shall never.

    It is heav'n's golden door to me,
      The fiery car God sendeth,
    Wherein my spirit speedily
      To th' angel choir ascendeth,
          When God shall say
          "Thy working day
      Of life below now endeth."

    O sweetest joy, O blessèd rest!
      To all true-hearted given,
    Come, let mine eyes by Thee be press'd,
      In peace take me to heaven.
          May I roam there
          'Mong pastures fair
      Where day ne'er knoweth even.

    What fails us here, there will He give,
      Full measure to us bringing,
    Our grateful songs shall He receive,
      From loving hearts up-springing.
          And there shall I
          Too, willingly
      Song after song be singing.


     JOYFUL RESIGNATION TO A HAPPY DEPARTURE FROM THIS WEARY WORLD.


    Be glad, my heart! now fear no more,
      Let nothing ever grieve thee;
    Christ lives, who lov'd thee long before
      Thy being He did give thee,
    And ere He made thy wondrous frame;
    His love remaineth still the same,
      It ne'er can change to hatred.

    Be of good cheer! thy nearing end,
      My heart! need not appal thee,
    No ill's in it; God doth extend,
      His loving hand and call thee
    From all the thousand forms of woe
    That in this vale of tears below,
      Thou ever hast endurèd.

    'Tis true, 'tis call'd death's agony,
      But yet it is no dying;
    The death of death is Christ, for He
      Prevents it from destroying,
    That though it puts forth all its pow'r,
    No hair it hurteth in the hour
      When I from hence am taken.

    The sting of death in sin doth lie,
      And in our evil doing;
    Poor child of Adam! eagerly
      This path was I pursuing.
    In Christ's blood sin is wash'd away,
    Forgiven are we now for aye,
      Ne'er fall in condemnation.

    My sin is gone, and I am clean,
      Whoever would deprive me,
    Henceforth is life eternal mine;
      The thought may never grieve me
    Of sin's dread wages earn'd by me;
    Who's reconcil'd, must ever be,
      Unhurt by opposition.

    Now God's free grace I with me take,
      And all His joy and gladness,
    On this last journey that I make,
      And know no grief nor sadness.
    The foe becomes to me a sheep,
    His ire becomes a blessèd sleep,
      Of quiet rest the pillow.

    Thou Jesus! O thou sweetest Friend,
      My light and life art ever!
    Thou holdest me, dost me defend,
      The foe can move Thee never.
    In Thee I am, Thou art in me,
    As we are here, we'll ever be,
      Nought here or there can part us.

    My body down to rest doth lie,
      Fatigued with life's sad story;
    The soul then mounteth up on high,
      With chosen ones in glory
    It mingles, and keeps joyfully,
    The endless year of Jubilee
      With all the holy angels.

    Oh! Highest Prince of great and small,
      May that bless'd day be nearing;
    When Thou shalt by Thy trumpet call,
      And all the dead be hearing.
    Again shall soul and body be
    One, and Thy joy shall taste and see,
      Thy Father's kingdom enter.

    If 'tis Thy will, O Lord, appear,
      To peace and bliss to take me
    For ever, Thee may I be near,
      How joyful would it make me!
    Be open'd wide--of death, thou gate!
    That to so bliss'd place and state
      Through thee I may pass over.


  THE BEREAVED FATHER COMFORTS HIMSELF CONCERNING HIS NOW SAINTED SON.


    Mine art thou still, and mine shalt be,
      Who will be this denying?
    Not only thou belong'st to me,
      The Lord of Life undying
    The greatest right hath aye in thee;
    He taketh, He demands from me
    Thee, O my son, my treasure,
    My heart's delight and pleasure!

    If wish avail'd, my soul's sweet star!
      My free choice would I make thee,
    Than earth's fair treasures rather far,
      I evermore would take thee.
    Would say to thee, Abide with me,
    The joy of all my dwelling be,
    I ever more shall love thee,
    Till death itself remove me.

    Thus saith my heart, and meaneth well,
      But God doth mean still better;
    Great love doth in my bosom dwell,
      In God there dwelleth greater.
    I am a father, nothing more,
    Of fathers God's the crown and pow'r,
    The fountain who is giving
    Their being to all living.

    I long and yearn for my dear son;
      God, by whom he was given,
    Wills he should stand beside His throne,
      Should live with Him in heaven.
    I say, Alas! my light is gone!
    God saith, "I welcome thee, my son,
    I'd have thee ever near me,
    With endless joys would cheer thee!"

    O lovely word! O sweet decree!
      More holy than we ever
    Can think; with God no ill can be,
      Mischance, or sickness never,
    No care, no want, no oversight,
    With God no sorrow e'er can blight;
    Whom God cares for and loveth
    No trouble ever moveth.

    We men much thought and time expend
      On our dear ones' adorning;
    Our thoughts and efforts ever bend,
      Are planning night and morning
    To gain for them a happy place;
    And yet how seldom 'tis the case
    They reach the destination
    We had in contemplation.

    How oft a young and hopeful one
      From virtue's path far roameth,
    By him through ill example's done
      What Christians ne'er becometh.
    Then God's just anger doth he earn,
    On earth he meeteth scoffs and scorn,
    His father's heart he filleth
    With pain that nothing stilleth.

    Now such can never be my case,
      My son is safely yonder,
    Appeareth now before God's face,
      Doth in Christ's garden wander,
    Is fill'd with joy, is ever bless'd,
    And from heart-sorrow doth he rest,
    Sees, hears the hosts so glorious
    Who here are watching o'er us.

    He angels yonder hears and sees,
      Part in their songs he taketh,
    And knows all wisdom's mysteries;
      His high discourse he maketh
    What none of us can ever know
    With all our searching here below,
    To none on earth 'tis given,
    Reserv'd it is for Heaven.

    Ah! could I even draw so near,
      Could it to me be given
    The faintest sounds of praise to hear
      That fill the courts of Heaven,
    When prais'd is the thrice holy One,
    Who thee hath sanctified, my son!
    Joy would my heart be swelling,
    Tears from mine eyes be welling.

    Would I then say, Stay with me here,
      Henceforth I'll murmur never;
    Alas! my son! wert thou but near!
      No, but come quickly hither
    Thou fiery car, and take me where
    My child and all the blessèd are,
    Who speak of things so glorious,
    O'er every ill victorious.

    Now be it so, I'd have it so,
      I'll never more deplore thee;
    Thou liv'st, pure joys thy heart o'erflow,
      Bright suns shine ever o'er thee,
    The suns of endless joy and rest.
    Live then, and be for ever bless'd,
    I shall, when God wills, yonder
    In bliss hereafter wander.


                        BY THE BIER OF A FRIEND.


    On thy bier how calm thou'rt sleeping
      Yet thou livest, oh our crown!
    Watch eternal art thou keeping,
      Standing near thy Saviour's throne.
      Endless joy thy portion now!
      Why should tears so freely flow?
      What should thus in sorrow sink us?
      Up! aright let us bethink us!

    Grudge we to our friends their pleasure;
      When they laugh, we laugh again;
    Bitter tears shed without measure,
      When we see them sunk in pain.
      When we see them conq'rors come,
      From the cross triumphant home;
      When is o'er life's toil and anguish,
      Then no more in grief we languish.

    Noble heart! in peace now rest thee,
      Thou hast vanquish'd every foe,
    All afflictions that oppress'd thee,
      Overwhelm'd thy heart with woe;
      All the toil and misery,
      All care and anxiety,
      All that made thee sleep in sorrow,
      Wake in anguish on the morrow.

    God who sendeth all temptations,
      Knows the burden each can bear;
    He appoints all tribulations,
      Who in loving, gracious care,
      Sent thee every trial sore
      That thou now hast triumphed o'er,
      Who hath strength enough to bear it,
      Must in larger measure share it.

    Hadst thou been at heart a craven,
      Shrinking from the chilly blast,
    Loving most the quiet haven,
      With no cloud the sky o'ercast,
      God, the giver of all good,
      Never such a grievous load
      Of affliction had ordain'd thee,
      As dishearten'd oft and pain'd thee.

    Triumph now, for thou, victorious
      By the pow'r of God most high,
    Sonlike in thy strength so glorious,
      Walk'st amid the Company
      Of the city fair and new,
      Which the Lord hath built for you;
      With the angels join'st in singing,
      Sweetest songs from heart up-springing.

    Jesus bids thee cease from weeping
      Wipes the tear-drop from thine eye;
    Free thy heart from sorrow keeping
      All thy need doth He supply.
      In thy cup now running o'er
      Wishest thou but one thing more,
      That thy friends who here still wander
      Were thy bliss now sharing yonder.

    To the realms we'll come so glorious,
      Out of sorrow into joy;
    Thee with myriad saints victorious
      See in bliss without alloy.
      Oh! how bless'd and fair 'twill be,
      When we all shall dwell with Thee;
      When is o'er life's chequer'd story,
      And we reign in endless glory.


                            OF THE LAST DAY.


    The time is very near
    When, Lord, Thou wilt be here
    The signs whereof Thou'st spoken
    Thine advent should betoken,
    We've seen them oft fulfilling
    In number beyond telling.

    What shall I do then, Lord?
    But rest upon Thy word,
    The promise Thou hast given
    That Thou wilt come from heaven,
    Me from the grave deliver
    And from all woe for ever.

    Ah! Jesus Christ, how fair
    Wilt be my portion there!
    The welcome Thou'lt address me,
    Thy glances, how they'll bless me,
    When I the earth forsaking,
    My flight to Thee am taking.

    Ah! what will be the word
    Thou'lt speak, my Shepherd Lord!
    What will be then Thy greeting,
    Me and my brethren meeting?
    Thy members Thou wilt own us,
    And near Thyself enthrone us.

    And in that blessèd hour,
    How shall I have the pow'r
    Mine eyelids dry of keeping,
    How tears of joy from weeping
    Refrain, that flowing over
    My cheeks, like floods would cover?

    And what a beauteous light
    Will from Thy face so bright
    Beam on me, then in heaven,
    When sight of Thee is given,
    Thy goodness then me filling,
    Joy will my breast be swelling.

    I'll see then and adore
    Thy body bruisèd sore,
    Whereon our faith is founded,
    The prints of nails that wounded
    Thy hands and feet be greeting,
    Thy gaze with rapture meeting.

    Thou, Lord, alone dost know
    The joys so pure that flow
    In life's unfailing river
    In paradise for ever,
    Thou can'st portray, and show them:
    By faith alone I know them.

    What I've believ'd stands sure,
    Remaineth aye secure;
    My part the wealth surpasseth;
    The richest here amasseth;
    All other wealth decayeth
    My portion ever stayeth.

    My God, my fairest Part!
    How will my bounding heart
    With joy be overflowing,
    Praise evermore renewing,
    When through the door of heaven
    By Thee is entrance given?

    Thou'lt say, "Come, taste and see,
    Oh! child, belov'd by me,
    Come, taste the gifts so precious
    I and my Father gracious
    Have to bestow, come hither,
    In pleasure bask for ever."

    Alas! thou world so poor!
    Of wealth, what is thy store?
    Mean is it to be holden,
    Compar'd with all the golden
    Crowns and thrones Jesus placeth
    For whom He loves and graceth.

    Here is the angel's home,
    Bless'd spirits hither come,
    Here nought is heard but singing,
    Nought seen but joy up-springing,
    No cross, no death, no sorrow,
    No parting on the morrow.

    Hold! hold! my sense so weak!
    What dost thou think and speak,
    What's fathomless, art sounding?
    What's measureless, art bounding?
    Here must man's wit be bending
    The eloquent be ending.

    Lord! I delight in Thee,
    Thou ne'er shalt go from me,
    Thy hand in bounty giveth
    More than my heart conceiveth,
    Or I can e'er be counting,
    So high Thy mercy's mounting.

    How sad, O Lord, am I,
    Until I from on high
    See Thee in glory hither
    Come, Thine own to deliver,
    Wert Thou but now revealing
    Thyself! my wish fulfilling!

    The time is known to Thee;
    It best becometh me
    To be prepar'd for going,
    And all things so be doing,
    That every moment even
    My heart may be in Heaven.

    This grant, Lord, and me bless.
    That so Thy truth and grace
    May keep me ever waking,
    That Thy day not o'ertaking
    Me unawares, affright me,
    But may, O Lord! delight me.


                                  FROM THE REVELATION OF JOHN.--CHAP. VII.


    By John was seen a wondrous sight,
    A noble light,
    A picture very glorious:
    A multitude stood 'fore him there
    All bright and fair,
    On heav'nly plain victorious;
    Their heart and mood
    Were full of good,
    That mortal man
    With gold ne'er can
    Procure, so high 'tis o'er us.

    Palm branches in their hands they bore,
    They stood before
    The Lamb's throne, 'fore the Saviour;
    Praise from their lips did ever flow,
    Their robes like snow,
    Their song still higher ever,
    So sweetly rang;
    Glad thanks they sang,
    And in their song
    The holy throng
    Of angels joinèd ever.

    "Who," said the wond'ring John, "are they
    In white array,
    Whom now I see before me?"
    "They are," said one from out the crowd
    That round him stood,
    One of the elders hoary,
    "They're men, my son,
    Who fought and won
    The fight of faith,
    Despis'd the scath,
    Attain'd the prize of glory.

    "They're those who on the earth below,
    Long, long ago,
    Pass'd through great tribulation;
    Who for the honour of their Lord
    And of His word,
    All grief and all vexation,
    From blame all free
    But patiently,
    Though smarting sore
    By God's help bore,
    O'ercame with exultation.

    "They wash'd their robes and made them white
    (Their hearts were right),
    In faith's bath them renewing,
    And they resisted evermore
    With all their pow'r
    Hell's art, it quite subduing,
    Did aye deride
    Earth's pomp and pride,
    Chose Jesu's blood
    As their chief good,
    All other good eschewing.

    "And therefore with their doings, they
    Stand there for aye,
    Where God's fair temple's standing,
    The temple where they night and day
    Praise God for aye,
    His glorious name commending.
    There do they live
    With nought to grieve,
    From toil all free
    Joys taste and see,
    That never know an ending.

    "There in His dwelling sitteth God
    And spreads abroad
    His goodness as a cover,
    There with bliss manifold is bless'd
    In quiet rest,
    The wearied whose life's over;
    What pleasure gives,
    The heart relieves,
    The longing stills,
    And the eye fills,
    In full bloom stands there ever.

    "No thirst, nor hunger there, no need;
    The heav'nly bread
    All wants aye satisfieth;
    And shineth there the sun no more
    In too great pow'r,
    Its light pure joy supplieth;
    Heav'n's sun so bright
    And heart's delight,
    Is our great Lord
    The living Word,
    Who no good thing denieth."

    The Lamb His flock will ever feed
    E'en as they need,
    In pastures never wasting;
    He will them to the fountain bring,
    Whence ever spring
    Streams of life everlasting;
    And certainly
    Ne'er rest will He,
    Till wash'd away
    All tears for aye
    Are, and His bliss we're tasting.


                                 LONDON:
    PRINTED BY W. CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.






End of Project Gutenberg's Paul Gerhardt's Spiritual Songs, by Paul Gerhardt

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAUL GERHARDT'S SPIRITUAL SONGS ***

***** This file should be named 30362-8.txt or 30362-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/3/6/30362/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, based on page images provided
by Google Books, with rough OCR by the Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
